letter is dated April 4, 1861. "More Letters", I. page 183.)

The next letter, written about six months later, reveals the remarkable
fact that the illustrious naturalist who had anticipated Edward Forbes
in the explanation of arctic forms on alpine heights ("I was forestalled
in only one important point, which my vanity has always made me regret,
namely, the explanation by means of the Glacial period of the presence
of the same species of plants and of some few animals on distant
mountain summits and in the arctic regions. This view pleased me so much
that I wrote it out in extenso, and I believe that it was read by Hooker
some years before E. Forbes published his celebrated memoir on the
subject. In the very few points in which we differed, I still think
that I was in the right. I have never, of course, alluded in print to
my having independently worked out this view." "Autobiography, Life and
Letters", I. page 88.), had also anticipated H.W. Bates in the theory
of Mimicry: "What a capital paper yours will be on mimetic resemblances!
You will make quite a new subject of it. I had thought of such cases
as a difficulty; and once, when corresponding with Dr Collingwood, I
thought of your explanation; but I drove it from my mind, for I felt
that I had not knowledge to judge one way or the other." (The letter is
dated Sept. 25, 1861: "More Letters", I. page 197.)

Bates read his paper before the Linnean Society, Nov. 21, 1861, and
Darwin's impressions on hearing it were conveyed in a letter to
the author dated Dec. 3: "Under a general point of view, I am quite
convinced (Hooker and Huxley took the same view some months ago) that
a philosophic view of nature can solely be driven into naturalists by
treating special subjects as you have done. Under a special point of
view, I think you have solved one of the most perplexing problems which
could be given to solve." ("Life and Letters", II. page 378.) The memoir
appeared in the following year, and after reading it Darwin wrote
as follows, Nov. 20, 1862: "... In my opinion it is one of the most
remarkable and admirable papers I ever read in my life... I am rejoiced
that I passed over the whole subject in the "Origin", for I should have
made a precious mess of it. You have most clearly stated and solved a
wonderful problem... Your paper is too good to be largely appreciated by
the mob of naturalists without souls; but, rely on it, that it will
have LASTING value, and I cordially congratulate you on your first great
work. You will find, I should think, that Wallace will fully appreciate
it." ("Life and Letters", II. pages 391-393.) Four days later, Nov. 24,
Darwin wrote to Hooker on the same subject: "I have now finished his
paper...' it seems to me admirable. To my mind the act of segregation of
varieties into species was never so plainly brought forward, and there
are heaps of capital miscellaneous observations." ("More Letters", I.
page 214.)

Darwin was here referring to the tendency of similar varieties of the
same species to pair together, and on Nov. 25 he wrote to Bates asking
for fuller information on this subject. ("More Letters", I. page 215.
See also parts of Darwin's letter to Bates in "Life and Letters", II.
page 392.) If Bates's opinion were well founded, sexual selection would
bear a most important part in the establishment of such species. (See
Poulton, "Essays on Evolution", 1908, pages 65, 85-88.) It must be
admitted, however, that the evidence is as yet quite insufficient to
establish this conclusion. It is interesting to observe how Darwin
at once fixed on the part of Bates's memoir which seemed to bear upon
sexual selection. A review of Bates's theory of Mimicry was contributed
by Darwin to the "Natural History Review" (New Ser. Vol. III. 1863, page
219.) and an account of it is to be found in the "Origin" (Edition
1872, pages 375-378.) and in "The Descent of Man". (Edition 1874, pages
323-325.)

Darwin continually writes of the value of hypothesis as the inspiration
of inquiry. We find an example in his letter to Bates, Nov. 22, 1860:
"I have an old belief that a good observer really means a good theorist,
and I fully expect to find your observations most valuable." ("More
Letters", I. page 176.) Darwin's letter refers to many problems upon
which Bates had theorised and observed, but as regards Mimicry itself
the hypothesis was thought out after the return of the letter from the
Amazons, when he no longer had the opportunity of testing it by the
observation of living Nature. It is by no means improbable that, had
he been able to apply this test, Bates would have recognised that his
division of butterfly resemblances into two classes,--one due to
the theory of mimicry, the other to the influence of local
conditions,--could not be sustained.

Fritz Muller's contributions to the problem of Mimicry were all made
in S.E. Brazil, and numbers of them were communicated, with other
observations on natural history, to Darwin, and by him sent to Professor
R. Meldola who published many of the facts. Darwin's letters to Meldola
(Poulton, "Charles Darwin and the theory of Natural Selection", London,
1896, pages 199-218.) contain abundant proofs of his interest in
Muller's work upon Mimicry. One deeply interesting letter (Loc. cit.
pages 201, 202.) dated Jan. 23, 1872, proves that Fritz Muller before
he originated the theory of Common Warning Colours (Synaposematic
Resemblance or Mullerian Mimicry), which will ever be associated with
his name, had conceived the idea of the production of mimetic likeness
by sexual selection.

Darwin's letter to Meldola shows that he was by no means inclined to
dismiss the suggestion as worthless, although he considered it daring.
"You will also see in this letter a strange speculation, which I should
not dare to publish, about the appreciation of certain colours being
developed in those species which frequently behold other forms similarly
ornamented. I do not feel at all sure that this view is as incredible as
it may at first appear. Similar ideas have passed through my mind
when considering the dull colours of all the organisms which inhabit
dull-coloured regions, such as Patagonia and the Galapagos Is." A little
later, on April 5, he wrote to Professor August Weismann on the same
subject: "It may be suspected that even the habit of viewing differently
coloured surrounding objects would influence their taste, and
Fritz Muller even goes so far as to believe that the sight of gaudy
butterflies might influence the taste of distinct species." ("Life and
Letters", III. page 157.)

This remarkable suggestion affords interesting evidence that F. Muller
was not satisfied with the sufficiency of Bates's theory. Nor is
this surprising when we think of the numbers of abundant conspicuous
butterflies which he saw exhibiting mimetic likenesses. The common
instances in his locality, and indeed everywhere in tropical America,
were anything but the hard-pressed struggling forms assumed by the
theory of Bates. They belonged to the groups which were themselves
mimicked by other butterflies. Fritz Muller's suggestion also shows
that he did not accept Bates's alternative explanation of a superficial
likeness between models themselves, based on some unknown influence of
local physico-chemical forces. At the same time Muller's own suggestion
was subject to this apparently fatal objection, that the sexual
selection he invoked would tend to produce resemblances in the males
rather than the females, while it is well known that when the sexes
differ the females are almost invariably more perfectly mimetic than the
males and in a high proportion of cases are mimetic while the males are
non-mimetic.

The difficulty was met several years later by Fritz Muller's well-known
theory, published in 1879 ("Kosmos", May 1879, page 100.), and
immediately translated by Meldola and brought before the Entomological
Society. ("Proc. Ent. Soc. Lond." 1879, page xx.) Darwin's letter to
Meldola dated June 6, 1879, shows "that the first introduction of this
new and most suggestive hypothesis into this country was due to the
direct influence of Darwin himself, who brought it before the notice
of the one man who was likely to appreciate it at its true value and to
find the means for its presentation to English naturalists." ("Charles
Darwin and the Theory of Natural Selection", page 214.) Of the
hypothesis itself Darwin wrote "F. Muller's view of the mutual
protection was quite new to me." (Ibid. page 213.) The hypothesis of
Mullerian mimicry was at first strongly opposed. Bates himself could
never make up his mind to accept it. As the Fellows were walking out
of the meeting at which Professor Meldola explained the hypothesis, an
eminent entomologist, now deceased, was heard to say to Bates: "It's a
case of save me from my friends!" The new ideas encountered and still
encounter to a great extent the difficulty that the theory of Bates had
so completely penetrated the literature of natural history. The present
writer has observed that naturalists who have not thoroughly absorbed
the older hypothesis are usually far more impressed by the newer
one than are those whose allegiance has already been rendered. The
acceptance of Natural Selection itself was at first hindered by
similar causes, as Darwin clearly recognised: "If you argue about the
non-acceptance of Natural Selection, it seems to me a very striking fact
that the Newtonian theory of gravitation, which seems to every one now
so certain and plain, was rejected by a man so extraordinarily able as
Leibnitz. The truth will not penetrate a preoccupied mind." (To Sir J.
Hooker, July 28, 1868, "More Letters", I. page 305. See also the letter
to A.R. Wallace, April 30, 1868, in "More Letters" II. page 77, lines
6-8 from top.)

There are many naturalists, especially students of insects, who appear
to entertain an inveterate hostility to any theory of mimicry. Some of
them are eager investigators in the fascinating field of geographical
distribution, so essential for the study of Mimicry itself. The changes
of pattern undergone by a species of Erebia as we follow it over
different parts of the mountain ranges of Europe is indeed a most
interesting inquiry, but not more so than the differences between e.g.
the Acraea johnstoni of S.E. Rhodesia and of Kilimanjaro. A naturalist
who is interested by the Erebia should be equally interested by the
Acraea; and so he would be if the student of mimicry did not also
record that the characteristics which distinguish the northern from
the southern individuals of the African species correspond with the
presence, in the north but not in the south, of certain entirely
different butterflies. That this additional information should so
greatly weaken, in certain minds, the appeal of a favourite study, is a
psychological problem of no little interest. This curious antagonism is
I believe confined to a few students of insects. Those naturalists who,
standing rather farther off, are able to see the bearings of the subject
more clearly, will usually admit the general support yielded by an
ever-growing mass of observations to the theories of Mimicry propounded
by H.W. Bates and Fritz Muller. In like manner natural selection itself
was in the early days often best understood and most readily accepted by
those who were not naturalists. Thus Darwin wrote to D.T. Ansted, Oct.
27, 1860: "I am often in despair in making the generality of NATURALISTS
even comprehend me. Intelligent men who are not naturalists and have not
a bigoted idea of the term species, show more clearness of mind." ("More
Letters", I. page 175.)

Even before the "Origin" appeared Darwin anticipated the first results
upon the mind of naturalists. He wrote to Asa Gray, Dec. 21, 1859: "I
have made up my mind to be well abused; but I think it of importance
that my notions should be read by intelligent men, accustomed to
scientific argument, though NOT naturalists. It may seem absurd, but
I think such men will drag after them those naturalists who have too
firmly fixed in their heads that a species is an entity." ("Life and
Letters" II. page 245.)

Mimicry was not only one of the first great departments of zoological
knowledge to be studied under the inspiration of natural Selection,
it is still and will always remain one of the most interesting
and important of subjects in relation to this theory as well as to
evolution. In mimicry we investigate the effect of environment in its
simplest form: we trace the effects of the pattern of a single species
upon that of another far removed from it in the scale of classification.
When there is reason to believe that the model is an invader from
another region and has only recently become an element in the
environment of the species native to its second home, the problem gains
a special interest and fascination. Although we are chiefly dealing with
the fleeting and changeable element of colour we expect to find and we
do find evidence of a comparatively rapid evolution. The invasion of
a fresh model is for certain species an unusually sudden change in the
forces of the environment and in some instances we have grounds for the
belief that the mimetic response has not been long delayed.

MIMICRY AND SEX.

Ever since Wallace's classical memoir on mimicry in the Malayan
Swallowtail butterflies, those naturalists who have written on the
subject have followed his interpretation of the marked prevalence of
mimetic resemblance in the female sex as compared with the male. They
have believed with Wallace that the greater dangers of the female, with
slower flight and often alighting for oviposition, have been in part
met by the high development of this special mode of protection. The fact
cannot be doubted. It is extremely common for a non-mimetic male to be
accompanied by a beautifully mimetic female and often by two or three
different forms of female, each mimicking a different model. The male
of a polymorphic mimetic female is, in fact, usually non-mimetic (e.g.
Papilio dardanus = merope), or if a mimic (e.g. the Nymphaline genus
Euripus), resembles a very different model. On the other hand a
non-mimetic female accompanied by a mimetic male is excessively rare. An
example is afforded by the Oriental Nymphaline, Cethosia, in which the
males of some species are rough mimics of the brown Danaines. In some
of the orb-weaving spiders the males mimic ants, while the much larger
females are non-mimetic. When both sexes mimic, it is very common in
butterflies and is also known in moths, for the females to be better and
often far better mimics than the males.

Although still believing that Wallace's hypothesis in large part
accounts for the facts briefly summarised above, the present writer has
recently been led to doubt whether it offers a complete explanation.
Mimicry in the male, even though less beneficial to the species than
mimicry in the female, would still surely be advantageous. Why then is
it so often entirely restricted to the female? While the attempt to find
an answer to this question was haunting me, I re-read a letter
written by Darwin to Wallace, April 15, 1868, containing the following
sentences: "When female butterflies are more brilliant than their males
you believe that they have in most cases, or in all cases, been rendered
brilliant so as to mimic some other species, and thus escape danger. But
can you account for the males not having been rendered equally brilliant
and equally protected? Although it may be most for the welfare of
the species that the female should be protected, yet it would be some
advantage, certainly no disadvantage, for the unfortunate male to enjoy
an equal immunity from danger. For my part, I should say that the female
alone had happened to vary in the right manner, and that the beneficial
variations had been transmitted to the same sex alone. Believing in
this, I can see no improbability (but from analogy of domestic animals
a strong probability) that variations leading to beauty must often have
occurred in the males alone, and been transmitted to that sex alone.
Thus I should account in many cases for the greater beauty of the male
over the female, without the need of the protective principle." ("More
Letters", II. pages 73, 74. On the same subject--"the gay-coloured
females of Pieris" (Perrhybris (Mylothris) pyrrha of Brazil), Darwin
wrote to Wallace, May 5, 1868, as follows: "I believe I quite follow you
in believing that the colours are wholly due to mimicry; and I further
believe that the male is not brilliant from not having received through
inheritance colour from the female, and from not himself having varied;
in short, that he has not been influenced by selection." It should be
noted that the male of this species does exhibit a mimetic pattern on
the under surface. "More Letters" II. page 78.)

The consideration of the facts of mimicry thus led Darwin to the
conclusion that the female happens to vary in the right manner more
commonly than the male, while the secondary sexual characters of males
supported the conviction "that from some unknown cause such characters
(viz. new characters arising in one sex and transmitted to it alone)
apparently appear oftener in the male than in the female." (Letter from
Darwin to Wallace, May 5, 1867, "More Letters", II. Page 61.)

Comparing these conflicting arguments we are led to believe that the
first is the stronger. Mimicry in the male would be no disadvantage but
an advantage, and when it appears would be and is taken advantage of
by selection. The secondary sexual characters of males would be no
advantage but a disadvantage to females, and, as Wallace thinks, are
withheld from this sex by selection. It is indeed possible that mimicry
has been hindered and often prevented from passing to the males by
sexual selection. We know that Darwin was much impressed ("Descent of
Man", page 325.) by Thomas Belt's daring and brilliant suggestion that
the white patches which exist, although ordinarily concealed, on the
wings of mimetic males of certain Pierinae (Dismorphia), have been
preserved by preferential mating. He supposed this result to have been
brought about by the females exhibiting a deep-seated preference for
males that displayed the chief ancestral colour, inherited from periods
before any mimetic pattern had been evolved in the species. But it has
always appeared to me that Belt's deeply interesting suggestion requires
much solid evidence and repeated confirmation before it can be accepted
as a valid interpretation of the facts. In the present state of our
knowledge, at any rate of insects and especially of Lepidoptera, it is
probable that the female is more apt to vary than the male and that an
important element in the interpretation of prevalent female mimicry is
provided by this fact.

In order adequately to discuss the question of mimicry and sex it would
be necessary to analyse the whole of the facts, so far as they are known
in butterflies. On the present occasion it is only possible to state the
inferences which have been drawn from general impressions,--inferences
which it is believed will be sustained by future inquiry.

(1) Mimicry may occasionally arise in one sex because the differences
which distinguish it from the other sex happen to be such as to afford a
starting-point for the resemblance. Here the male is at no disadvantage
as compared with the female, and the rarity of mimicry in the male
alone (e.g. Cethosia) is evidence that the great predominance of female
mimicry is not to be thus explained.

(2) The tendency of the female to dimorphism and polymorphism has been
of great importance in determining this predominance. Thus if the female
appear in two different forms and the male in only one it will be twice
as probable that she will happen to possess a sufficient foundation for
the evolution of mimicry.

(3) The appearance of melanic or partially melanic forms in the female
has been of very great service, providing as it does a change of
ground-colour. Thus the mimicry of the black generally red-marked
American "Aristolochia swallowtails" (Pharmacophagus) by the females of
Papilio swallowtails was probably begun in this way.

(4) It is probably incorrect to assume with Haase that mimicry always
arose in the female and was later acquired by the male. Both sexes of
the third section of swallowtails (Cosmodesmus) mimic Pharmacophagus in
America, far more perfectly than do the females of Papilio. But this is
not due to Cosmodesmus presenting us with a later stage of history begun
in Papilio; for in Africa Cosmodesmus is still mimetic (of Danainae) in
both sexes although the resemblances attained are imperfect, while
many African species of Papilio have non-mimetic males with beautifully
mimetic females. The explanation is probably to be sought in the fact
that the females of Papilio are more variable and more often tend to
become dimorphic than those of Cosmodesmus, while the latter group has
more often happened to possess a sufficient foundation for the origin of
the resemblance in patterns which, from the start, were common to male
and female.

(5) In very variable species with sexes alike, mimicry can be rapidly
evolved in both sexes out of very small beginnings. Thus the reddish
marks which are common in many individuals of Limenitis arthemis were
almost certainly the starting-point for the evolution of the beautifully
mimetic L. archippus. Nevertheless in such cases, although there is
no reason to suspect any greater variability, the female is commonly a
somewhat better mimic than the male and often a very much better mimic.
Wallace's principle seems here to supply the obvious interpretation.

(6) When the difference between the patterns of the model and presumed
ancestor of the mimic is very great, the female is often alone mimetic;
when the difference is comparatively small, both sexes are commonly
mimetic. The Nymphaline genus Hypolimnas is a good example. In
Hypolimnas itself the females mimic Danainae with patterns very
different from those preserved by the non-mimetic males: in the
sub-genus Euralia, both sexes resemble the black and white Ethiopian
Danaines with patterns not very dissimilar from that which we infer to
have existed in the non-mimetic ancestor.

(7) Although a melanic form or other large variation may be of the
utmost importance in facilitating the start of a mimetic likeness, it is
impossible to explain the evolution of any detailed resemblance in
this manner. And even the large colour variation itself may well be
the expression of a minute and "continuous" change in the chemical and
physical constitution of pigments.

SEXUAL SELECTION (EPIGAMIC CHARACTERS).

We do not know the date at which the idea of Sexual Selection arose in
Darwin's mind, but it was probably not many years after the sudden flash
of insight which, in October 1838, gave to him the theory of Natural
Selection. An excellent account of Sexual Selection occupies the
concluding paragraph of Part I. of Darwin's Section of the Joint Essay
on Natural Selection, read July 1st, 1858, before the Linnean Society.
("Journ. Proc. Linn. Soc." Vol. III. 1859, page 50.) The principles are
so clearly and sufficiently stated in these brief sentences that it
is appropriate to quote the whole: "Besides this natural means of
selection, by which those individuals are preserved, whether in their
egg, or larval, or mature state, which are best adapted to the place
they fill in nature, there is a second agency at work in most unisexual
animals, tending to produce the same effect, namely, the struggle of the
males for the females. These struggles are generally decided by the law
of battle, but in the case of birds, apparently, by the charms of their
song, by their beauty or their power of courtship, as in the dancing
rock-thrush of Guiana. The most vigorous and healthy males, implying
perfect adaptation, must generally gain the victory in their contests.
This kind of selection, however, is less rigorous than the other; it
does not require the death of the less successful, but gives to them
fewer descendants. The struggle falls, moreover, at a time of year when
food is generally abundant, and perhaps the effect chiefly produced
would be the modification of the secondary sexual characters, which are
not related to the power of obtaining food, or to defence from enemies,
but to fighting with or rivalling other males. The result of this
struggle amongst the males may be compared in some respects to that
produced by those agriculturists who pay less attention to the careful
selection of all their young animals, and more to the occasional use of
a choice mate."

A full exposition of Sexual Selection appeared in the "The Descent of
Man" in 1871, and in the greatly augmented second edition, in 1874.
It has been remarked that the two subjects, "The Descent of Man and
Selection in Relation to Sex", seem to fuse somewhat imperfectly into
the single work of which they form the title. The reason for their
association is clearly shown in a letter to Wallace, dated May 28, 1864:
"... I suspect that a sort of sexual selection has been the most powerful
means of changing the races of man." ("More Letters", II. page 33.)

Darwin, as we know from his Autobiography ("Life and Letters", I. page
94.), was always greatly interested in this hypothesis, and it has been
shown in the preceding pages that he was inclined to look favourably
upon it as an interpretation of many appearances usually explained by
Natural Selection. Hence Sexual Selection, incidentally discussed in
other sections of the present essay, need not be considered at any
length, in the section specially allotted to it.

Although so interested in the subject and notwithstanding his conviction
that the hypothesis was sound, Darwin was quite aware that it was
probably the most vulnerable part of the "Origin". Thus he wrote to H.W.
Bates, April 4, 1861: "If I had to cut up myself in a review I would
have (worried?) and quizzed sexual selection; therefore, though I am
fully convinced that it is largely true, you may imagine how pleased I
am at what you say on your belief." ("More Letters", I. page 183.)

The existence of sound-producing organs in the males of insects was,
Darwin considered, the strongest evidence in favour of the operation
of sexual selection in this group. ("Life and Letters", III. pages 94,
138.) Such a conclusion has received strong support in recent years by
the numerous careful observations of Dr F.A. Dixey ("Proc. Ent. Soc.
Lond." 1904, page lvi; 1905, pages xxxvii, liv; 1906, page ii.) and Dr
G.B. Longstaff ("Proc. Ent. Soc. Lond." 1905, page xxxv; "Trans. Ent.
Soc. Lond." 1905, page 136; 1908, page 607.) on the scents of male
butterflies. The experience of these naturalists abundantly confirms and
extends the account given by Fritz Muller ("Jen. Zeit." Vol. XI. 1877,
page 99; "Trans. Ent. Soc. Lond." 1878, page 211.) of the scents
of certain Brazilian butterflies. It is a remarkable fact that the
apparently epigamic scents of male butterflies should be pleasing to
man while the apparently aposematic scents in both sexes of species with
warning colours should be displeasing to him. But the former is far more
surprising than the latter. It is not perhaps astonishing that a scent
which is ex hypothesi unpleasant to an insect-eating Vertebrate should
be displeasing to the human sense; but it is certainly wonderful that an
odour which is ex hypothesi agreeable to a female butterfly should also
be agreeable to man.

Entirely new light upon the seasonal appearance of epigamic characters
is shed by the recent researches of C.W. Beebe ("The American
Naturalist", Vol. XLII. No. 493, Jan. 1908, page 34.), who caused the
scarlet tanager (Piranga erythromelas) and the bobolink (Dolichonyx
oryzivorus) to retain their breeding plumage through the whole year by
means of fattening food, dim illumination, and reduced activity. Gradual
restoration to the light and the addition of meal-worms to the diet
invariably brought back the spring song, even in the middle of winter.
A sudden alteration of temperature, either higher or lower, caused the
birds nearly to stop feeding, and one tanager lost weight rapidly and in
two weeks moulted into the olive-green winter plumage. After a year, and
at the beginning of the normal breeding season, "individual tanagers
and bobolinks were gradually brought under normal conditions and
activities," and in every case moulted from nuptial plumage to nuptial
plumage. "The dull colours of the winter season had been skipped." The
author justly claims to have established "that the sequence of plumage
in these birds is not in any way predestined through inheritance...,
but that it may be interrupted by certain factors in the environmental
complex."




XVI. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF PLANTS. By Sir William Thiselton-Dyer,
K.C.M.G., C.I.E. Sc.D., F.R.S.

The publication of "The Origin of Species" placed the study of Botanical
Geography on an entirely new basis. It is only necessary to study the
monumental "Geographie Botanique raisonnee" of Alphonse De Candolle,
published four years earlier (1855), to realise how profound and
far-reaching was the change. After a masterly and exhaustive discussion
of all available data De Candolle in his final conclusions could only
arrive at a deadlock. It is sufficient to quote a few sentences:--

"L'opinion de Lamarck est aujourd'hui abandonee par tous les
naturalistes qui ont etudie sagement les modifications possibles des
etres organises...

"Et si l'on s'ecarte des exagerations de Lamarck, si l'on suppose un
premier type de chaque genre, de chaque famille tout au moins, on se
trouve encore a l'egard de l'origine de ces types en presence de la
grande question de la creation.

"Le seul parti a prendre est donc d'envisager les etres organises comme
existant depuis certaines epoques, avec leurs qualites particulieres."
(Vol. II. page 1107.)

Reviewing the position fourteen years afterwards, Bentham
remarked:--"These views, generally received by the great majority of
naturalists at the time De Candolle wrote, and still maintained by a
few, must, if adhered to, check all further enquiry into any connection
of facts with causes," and he added, "there is little doubt but that if
De Candolle were to revise his work, he would follow the example of
so many other eminent naturalists, and... insist that the present
geographical distribution of plants was in most instances a derivative
one, altered from a very different former distribution." ("Pres. Addr."
(1869) "Proc. Linn. Soc." 1868-69, page lxviii.)

Writing to Asa Gray in 1856, Darwin gave a brief preliminary account
of his ideas as to the origin of species, and said that geographical
distribution must be one of the tests of their validity. ("Life and
Letters", II. page 78.) What is of supreme interest is that it was also
their starting-point. He tells us:--"When I visited, during the voyage
of H.M.S. "Beagle", the Galapagos Archipelago,... I fancied myself
brought near to the very act of creation. I often asked myself how these
many peculiar animals and plants had been produced: the simplest answer
seemed to be that the inhabitants of the several islands had descended
from each other, undergoing modification in the course of their
descent." ("The Variation of Animals and Plants" (2nd edition), 1890, I.
pages 9, 10.) We need not be surprised then, that in writing in 1845
to Sir Joseph Hooker, he speaks of "that grand subject, that almost
keystone of the laws of creation, Geographical Distribution." ("Life and
Letters", I. page 336.)

Yet De Candolle was, as Bentham saw, unconsciously feeling his way,
like Lyell, towards evolution, without being able to grasp it. They both
strove to explain phenomena by means of agencies which they saw actually
at work. If De Candolle gave up the ultimate problem as insoluble:--"La
creation ou premiere formation des etres organises echappe, par sa
nature et par son anciennete, a nos moyens d'observation" (Loc. cit.
page 1106.), he steadily endeavoured to minimise its scope. At least
half of his great work is devoted to the researches by which he
extricated himself from a belief in species having had a multiple
origin, the view which had been held by successive naturalists from
Gmelin to Agassiz. To account for the obvious fact that species
constantly occupy dissevered areas, De Candolle made a minute study of
their means of transport. This was found to dispose of the vast majority
of cases, and the remainder he accounted for by geographical change.
(Loc. cit. page 1116.)

But Darwin strenuously objected to invoking geographical change as a
solution of every difficulty. He had apparently long satisfied himself
as to the "permanence of continents and great oceans." Dana, he tells us
"was, I believe, the first man who maintained" this ("Life and Letters",
III. page 247. Dana says:--"The continents and oceans had their general
outline or form defined in earliest time," "Manual of Geology", revised
edition. Philadelphia, 1869, page 732. I have no access to an earlier
edition.), but he had himself probably arrived at it independently.
Modern physical research tends to confirm it. The earth's centre of
gravity, as pointed out by Pratt from the existence of the Pacific
Ocean, does not coincide with its centre of figure, and it has been
conjectured that the Pacific Ocean dates its origin from the separation
of the moon from the earth.

The conjecture appears to be unnecessary. Love shows that "the force
that keeps the Pacific Ocean on one side of the earth is gravity,
directed more towards the centre of gravity than the centre of the
figure." ("Report of the 77th Meeting of the British Association"
(Leicester, 1907), London, 1908, page 431.) I can only summarise the
conclusions of a technical but masterly discussion. "The broad general
features of the distribution of continent and ocean can be regarded
as the consequences of simple causes of a dynamical character," and
finally, "As regards the contour of the great ocean basins, we seem
to be justified in saying that the earth is approximately an oblate
spheroid, but more nearly an ellipsoid with three unequal axes, having
its surface furrowed according to the formula for a certain spherical
harmonic of the third degree" (Ibid. page 436.), and he shows that this
furrowed surface must be produced "if the density is greater in one
hemispheroid than in the other, so that the position of the centre of
gravity is eccentric." (Ibid. page 431.) Such a modelling of the earth's
surface can only be referred to a primitive period of plasticity. If
the furrows account for the great ocean basins, the disposition of the
continents seems equally to follow. Sir George Darwin has pointed out
that they necessarily "arise from a supposed primitive viscosity or
plasticity of the earth's mass. For during this course of evolution the
earth's mass must have suffered a screwing motion, so that the polar
regions have travelled a little from west to east relatively to the
equator. This affords a possible explanation of the north and south
trend of our great continents." ("Encycl. Brit." (9th edition), Vol.
XXIII. "Tides", page 379.)

It would be trespassing on the province of the geologist to pursue the
subject at any length. But as Wallace ("Island Life" (2nd edition),
1895, page 103.), who has admirably vindicated Darwin's position, points
out, the "question of the permanence of our continents... lies at the
root of all our inquiries into the great changes of the earth and its
inhabitants." But he proceeds: "The very same evidence which has been
adduced to prove the GENERAL stability and permanence of our continental
areas also goes to prove that they have been subjected to wonderful
and repeated changes in DETAIL." (Loc. cit. page 101.) Darwin of course
would have admitted this, for with a happy expression he insisted
to Lyell (1856) that "the skeletons, at least, of our continents are
ancient." ("More Letters", II. page 135.) It is impossible not to
admire the courage and tenacity with which he carried on the conflict
single-handed. But he failed to convince Lyell. For we still find
him maintaining in the last edition of the "Principles": "Continents
therefore, although permanent for whole geological epochs, shift their
positions entirely in the course of ages." (Lyell's "Principles of
Geology" (11th edition), London, 1872, I. page 258.)

Evidence, however, steadily accumulates in Darwin's support. His
position still remains inexpugnable that it is not permissible to invoke
geographical change to explain difficulties in distribution without
valid geological and physical support. Writing to Mellard Reade, who in
1878 had said, "While believing that the ocean-depths are of enormous
age, it is impossible to reject other evidences that they have once
been land," he pointed out "the statement from the 'Challenger' that all
sediment is deposited within one or two hundred miles from the shores."
("More Letters", II. page 146.) The following year Sir Archibald Geikie
("Geographical Evolution", "Proc. R. Geogr. Soc." 1879, page 427.)
informed the Royal Geographical Society that "No part of the results
obtained by the 'Challenger' expedition has a profounder interest for
geologists and geographers than the proof which they furnish that the
floor of the ocean basins has no real analogy among the sedimentary
formations which form most of the framework of the land."

Nor has Darwin's earlier argument ever been upset. "The fact which
I pointed out many years ago, that all oceanic islands are volcanic
(except St Paul's, and now that is viewed by some as the nucleus of an
ancient volcano), seem to me a strong argument that no continent ever
occupied the great oceans." ("More Letters", II. page 146.)

Dr Guppy, who devoted several years to geological and botanical
investigations in the Pacific, found himself forced to similar
conclusions. "It may be at once observed," he says, "that my belief in
the general principle that islands have always been islands has not
been shaken," and he entirely rejects "the hypothesis of a Pacific
continent." He comes back, in full view of the problems on the spot,
to the position from which, as has been seen, Darwin started: "If the
distribution of a particular group of plants or animals does not seem to
accord with the present arrangement of the land, it is by far the safest
plan, even after exhausting all likely modes of explanation, not to
invoke the intervention of geographical changes; and I scarcely think
that our knowledge of any one group of organisms is ever sufficiently
precise to justify a recourse to hypothetical alterations in the present
relations of land and sea." ("Observations of a Naturalist in the
Pacific between 1896 and 1899", London, 1903, I. page 380.) Wallace
clinches the matter when he finds "almost the whole of the vast areas of
the Atlantic, Pacific, Indian, and Southern Oceans, without a solitary
relic of the great islands or continents supposed to have sunk beneath
their waves." ("Island Life", page 105.)

Writing to Wallace (1876), Darwin warmly approves the former's "protest
against sinking imaginary continents in a quite reckless manner, as
was stated by Forbes, followed, alas, by Hooker, and caricatured by
Wollaston and (Andrew) Murray." ("Life and Letters", III. page 230.)
The transport question thus became of enormously enhanced importance. We
need not be surprised then at his writing to Lyell in 1856:--"I cannot
avoid thinking that Forbes's 'Atlantis' was an ill-service to science,
as checking a close study of means of dissemination" (Ibid. II. page
78.), and Darwin spared no pains to extend our knowledge of them. He
implores Hooker, ten years later, to "admit how little is known on the
subject," and summarises with some satisfaction what he had himself
achieved:--"Remember how recently you and others thought that salt
water would soon kill seeds... Remember that no one knew that seeds would
remain for many hours in the crops of birds and retain their vitality;
that fish eat seeds, and that when the fish are devoured by birds the
seeds can germinate, etc. Remember that every year many birds are blown
to Madeira and to the Bermudas. Remember that dust is blown 1000 miles
across the Atlantic." ("More Letters", I. page 483.)

It has always been the fashion to minimise Darwin's conclusions, and
these have not escaped objection. The advocatus diaboli has a useful
function in science. But in attacking Darwin his brief is generally
found to be founded on a slender basis of facts. Thus Winge and Knud
Andersen have examined many thousands of migratory birds and found "that
their crops and stomachs were always empty. They never observed any
seeds adhering to the feathers, beaks or feet of the birds." (R.F.
Scharff, "European Animals", page 64, London, 1907.) The most
considerable investigation of the problem of Plant Dispersal since
Darwin is that of Guppy. He gives a striking illustration of how easily
an observer may be led into error by relying on negative evidence.

"When Ekstam published, in 1895, the results of his observations on the
plants of Nova Zembla, he observed that he possessed no data to show
whether swimming and wading birds fed on berries; and he attached all
importance to dispersal by winds. On subsequently visiting Spitzbergen
he must have been at first inclined, therefore, to the opinion
of Nathorst, who, having found only a solitary species of bird (a
snow-sparrow) in that region, naturally concluded that birds had been
of no importance as agents in the plant-stocking. However, Ekstam's
opportunities were greater, and he tells us that in the craws of six
specimens of Lagopus hyperboreus shot in Spitzbergen in August he found
represented almost 25 per cent. of the usual phanerogamic flora of that
region in the form of fruits, seeds, bulbils, flower-buds, leaf-buds,
etc... "

"The result of Ekstam's observations in Spitzbergen was to lead him to
attach a very considerable importance in plant dispersal to the agency
of birds; and when in explanation of the Scandinavian elements in the
Spitzbergen flora he had to choose between a former land connection and
the agency of birds, he preferred the bird." (Guppy, op. cit. II. pages
511, 512.)

Darwin objected to "continental extensions" on geological grounds,
but he also objected to Lyell that they do not "account for all the
phenomena of distribution on islands" ("Life and Letters", II. page
77.), such for example as the absence of Acacias and Banksias in New
Zealand. He agreed with De Candolle that "it is poor work putting
together the merely POSSIBLE means of distribution." But he also
agreed with him that they were the only practicable door of escape from
multiple origins. If they would not work then "every one who believes
in single centres will have to admit continental extensions" (Ibid. II.
page 82.), and that he regarded as a mere counsel of despair:--"to make
continents, as easily as a cook does pancakes." (Ibid. II. page 74.)

The question of multiple origins however presented itself in another
shape where the solution was much more difficult. The problem, as
stated by Darwin, is this:--"The identity of many plants and animals,
on mountain-summits, separated from each other by hundreds of miles of
lowlands... without the apparent possibility of their having migrated
from one point to the other." He continues, "even as long ago as 1747,
such facts led Gmelin to conclude that the same species must have been
independently created at several distinct points; and we might have
remained in this same belief, had not Agassiz and others called vivid
attention to the Glacial period, which affords... a simple explanation of
the facts." ("Origin of Species" (6th edition) page 330.)

The "simple explanation" was substantially given by E. Forbes in 1846.
It is scarcely too much to say that it belongs to the same class of
fertile and far-reaching ideas as "natural selection" itself. It is
an extraordinary instance, if one were wanted at all, of Darwin's
magnanimity and intense modesty that though he had arrived at the theory
himself, he acquiesced in Forbes receiving the well-merited credit.
"I have never," he says, "of course alluded in print to my having
independently worked out this view." But he would have been more than
human if he had not added:--"I was forestalled in... one important point,
which my vanity has always made me regret." ("Life and Letters", I. page
88.)

Darwin, however, by applying the theory to trans-tropical migration,
went far beyond Forbes. The first enunciation to this is apparently
contained in a letter to Asa Gray in 1858. The whole is too long
to quote, but the pith is contained in one paragraph. "There is a
considerable body of geological evidence that during the Glacial epoch
the whole world was colder; I inferred that,... from erratic boulder
phenomena carefully observed by me on both the east and west coast of
South America. Now I am so bold as to believe that at the height of
the Glacial epoch, AND WHEN ALL TROPICAL PRODUCTIONS MUST HAVE BEEN
CONSIDERABLY DISTRESSED, several temperate forms slowly travelled into
the heart of the Tropics, and even reached the southern hemisphere; and
some few southern forms penetrated in a reverse direction northward."
("Life and Letters", II. page 136.) Here again it is clear that though
he credits Agassiz with having called vivid attention to the Glacial
period, he had himself much earlier grasped the idea of periods of
refrigeration.

Putting aside the fact, which has only been made known to us since
Darwin's death, that he had anticipated Forbes, it is clear that he gave
the theory a generality of which the latter had no conception. This is
pointed out by Hooker in his classical paper "On the Distribution of
Arctic Plants" (1860). "The theory of a southern migration of northern
types being due to the cold epochs preceding and during the glacial,
originated, I believe, with the late Edward Forbes; the extended one,
of the trans-tropical migration, is Mr Darwin's." ("Linn. Trans."
XXIII. page 253. The attempt appears to have been made to claim for Heer
priority in what I may term for short the arctic-alpine theory (Scharff,
"European Animals", page 128). I find no suggestion of his having hit
upon it in his correspondence with Darwin or Hooker. Nor am I aware
of any reference to his having done so in his later publications. I
am indebted to his biographer, Professor Schroter, of Zurich, for an
examination of his earlier papers with an equally negative result.)
Assuming that local races have derived from a common ancestor, Hooker's
great paper placed the fact of the migration on an impregnable basis.
And, as he pointed out, Darwin has shown that "such an explanation meets
the difficulty of accounting for the restriction of so many American and
Asiatic arctic types to their own peculiar longitudinal zones, and for
what is a far greater difficulty, the representation of the same arctic
genera by most closely allied species in different longitudes."

The facts of botanical geography were vital to Darwin's argument. He
had to show that they admitted of explanation without assuming multiple
origins for species, which would be fatal to the theory of Descent. He
had therefore to strengthen and extend De Candolle's work as to means
of transport. He refused to supplement them by hypothetical geographical
changes for which there was no independent evidence: this was simply to
attempt to explain ignotum per ignotius. He found a real and, as it has
turned out, a far-reaching solution in climatic change due to cosmical
causes which compelled the migration of species as a condition of their
existence. The logical force of the argument consists in dispensing with
any violent assumption, and in showing that the principle of descent is
adequate to explain the ascertained facts.

It does not, I think, detract from the merit of Darwin's conclusions
that the tendency of modern research has been to show that the effects
of the Glacial period were less simple, more localised and less
general than he perhaps supposed. He admitted that "equatorial
refrigeration... must have been small." ("More Letters", I. page 177.) It
may prove possible to dispense with it altogether. One cannot but regret
that as he wrote to Bates:--"the sketch in the 'Origin' gives a very
meagre account of my fuller MS. essay on this subject." (Loc. cit.)
Wallace fully accepted "the effect of the Glacial epoch in bringing
about the present distribution of Alpine and Arctic plants in the
NORTHERN HEMISPHERE," but rejected "the lowering of the temperature of
the tropical regions during the Glacial period" in order to account for
their presence in the SOUTHERN hemisphere. ("More Letters", II. page 25
(footnote 1).) The divergence however does not lie very deep. Wallace
attaches more importance to ordinary means of transport. "If plants can
pass in considerable numbers and variety over wide seas and oceans, it
must be yet more easy for them to traverse continuous areas of land,
wherever mountain-chains offer suitable stations." ("Island Life" (2nd
edition), London, 1895, page 512.) And he argues that such periodical
changes of climate, of which the Glacial period may be taken as a type,
would facilitate if not stimulate the process. (Loc. cit. page 518.)

It is interesting to remark that Darwin drew from the facts of plant
distribution one of his most ingenious arguments in support of this
theory. (See "More Letters", I. page 424.) He tells us, "I was led to
anticipate that the species of the larger genera in each country would
oftener present varieties, than the species of the smaller genera."
("Origin", page 44.) He argues "where, if we may use the expression, the
manufactory of species has been active, we ought generally to find the
manufactory still in action." (Ibid. page 45.) This proved to be the
case. But the labour imposed upon him in the study was immense. He
tabulated local floras "belting the whole northern hemisphere" ("More
Letters", I. page 107.), besides voluminous works such as De Candolle's
"Prodromus". The results scarcely fill a couple of pages. This is a good
illustration of the enormous pains which he took to base any statement
on a secure foundation of evidence, and for this the world, till the
publication of his letters, could not do him justice. He was a great
admirer of Herbert Spencer, whose "prodigality of original thought"
astonished him. "But," he says, "the reflection constantly recurred to
me that each suggestion, to be of real value to service, would require
years of work." (Ibid. II. page 235.)

At last the ground was cleared and we are led to the final conclusion.
"If the difficulties be not insuperable in admitting that in the long
course of time all the individuals of the same species belonging to
the same genus, have proceeded from some one source; then all the grand
leading facts of geographical distribution are explicable on the
theory of migration, together with subsequent modification and the
multiplication of new forms." ("Origin", page 360.) In this single
sentence Darwin has stated a theory which, as his son F. Darwin has said
with justice, has "revolutionized botanical geography." ("The Botanical
Work of Darwin", "Ann. Bot." 1899, page xi.) It explains how physical
barriers separate and form botanical regions; how allied species become
concentrated in the same areas; how, under similar physical conditions,
plants may be essentially dissimilar, showing that descent and not the
surroundings is the controlling factor; how insular floras have acquired
their peculiarities; in short how the most various and apparently
uncorrelated problems fall easily and inevitably into line.

The argument from plant distribution was in fact irresistible. A proof,
if one were wanted, was the immediate conversion of what Hooker called
"the stern keen intellect" ("More Letters", I. page 134.) of Bentham, by
general consent the leading botanical systematist at the time. It is a
striking historical fact that a paper of his own had been set down for
reading at the Linnean Society on the same day as Darwin's, but had to
give way. In this he advocated the fixity of species. He withdrew it
after hearing Darwin's. We can hardly realise now the momentous effect
on the scientific thought of the day of the announcement of the new
theory. Years afterwards (1882) Bentham, notwithstanding his habitual
restraint, could not write of it without emotion. "I was forced, however
reluctantly, to give up my long-cherished convictions, the results of
much labour and study." The revelation came without preparation. Darwin,
he wrote, "never made any communications to me in relation to his
views and labours." But, he adds, "I... fully adopted his theories and
conclusions, notwithstanding the severe pain and disappointment they
at first occasioned me." ("Life and Letters", II. page 294.) Scientific
history can have few incidents more worthy. I do not know what is most
striking in the story, the pathos or the moral dignity of Bentham's
attitude.

Darwin necessarily restricted himself in the "Origin" to establishing
the general principles which would account for the facts of
distribution, as a part of his larger argument, without attempting
to illustrate them in particular cases. This he appears to have
contemplated doing in a separate work. But writing to Hooker in 1868
he said:--"I shall to the day of my death keep up my full interest
in Geographical Distribution, but I doubt whether I shall ever have
strength to come in any fuller detail than in the "Origin" to this grand
subject." ("More Letters", II. page 7.) This must be always a matter for
regret. But we may gather some indication of his later speculations from
the letters, the careful publication of which by F. Darwin has rendered
a service to science, the value of which it is difficult to exaggerate.
They admit us to the workshop, where we see a great theory, as it were,
in the making. The later ideas that they contain were not it is true
public property at the time. But they were communicated to the leading
biologists of the day and indirectly have had a large influence.

If Darwin laid the foundation, the present fabric of Botanical Geography
must be credited to Hooker. It was a happy partnership. The far-seeing,
generalising power of the one was supplied with data and checked in
conclusions by the vast detailed knowledge of the other. It may be
permitted to quote Darwin's generous acknowledgment when writing the
"Origin":--"I never did pick any one's pocket, but whilst writing my
present chapter I keep on feeling (even when differing most from you)
just as if I were stealing from you, so much do I owe to your writings
and conversation, so much more than mere acknowledgements show." ("Life
and Letters", II. page 148 (footnote).) Fourteen years before he had
written to Hooker: "I know I shall live to see you the first authority
in Europe on... Geographical Distribution." (Ibid. I. page 336.) We owe
it to Hooker that no one now undertakes the flora of a country without
indicating the range of the species it contains. Bentham tells us:
"After De Candolle, independently of the great works of Darwin... the
first important addition to the science of geographical botany was that
made by Hooker in his "Introductory Essay to the Flora of Tasmania",
which, though contemporaneous only with the "Origin of Species", was
drawn up with a general knowledge of his friend's observations and
views." (Pres. Addr. (1869), "Proc. Linn. Soc." 1868-69, page lxxiv.) It
cannot be doubted that this and the great memoir on the "Distribution of
Arctic Plants" were only less epoch-making than the "Origin" itself, and
must have supplied a powerful support to the general theory of organic
evolution.

Darwin always asserted his "entire ignorance of Botany." ("More
Letters", I. page 400.) But this was only part of his constant
half-humorous self-depreciation. He had been a pupil of Henslow, and it
is evident that he had a good working knowledge of systematic botany. He
could find his way about in the literature and always cites the names of
plants with scrupulous accuracy. It was because he felt the want of
such a work for his own researches that he urged the preparation of
the "Index Kewensis", and undertook to defray the expense. It has been
thought singular that he should have been elected a "correspondant"
of the Academie des Sciences in the section of Botany, but it is not
surprising that his work in Geographical Botany made the botanists
anxious to claim him. His heart went with them. "It has always pleased
me," he tells us, "to exalt plants in the scale of organised beings."
("Life and Letters", I. page 98.) And he declares that he finds "any
proposition more easily tested in botanical works (Ibid. II. page 99.)
than in zoological."

In the "Introductory Essay" Hooker dwelt on the "continuous current of
vegetation from Scandinavia to Tasmania" ("Introductory Essay to the
Flora of Tasmania", London, 1859. Reprinted from the "Botany of the
Antarctic Expedition", Part III., "Flora of Tasmania", Vol I. page
ciii.), but finds little evidence of one in the reverse direction.
"In the New World, Arctic, Scandinavian, and North American genera and
species are continuously extended from the north to the south temperate
and even Antarctic zones; but scarcely one Antarctic species, or even
genus advances north beyond the Gulf of Mexico" (page civ.). Hooker
considered that this negatived "the idea that the Southern and Northern
Floras have had common origin within comparatively modern geological
epochs." (Loc. cit.) This is no doubt a correct conclusion. But it is
difficult to explain on Darwin's view alone, of alternating cold in the
two hemispheres, the preponderant migration from the north to the south.
He suggests, therefore, that it "is due to the greater extent of land
in the north and to the northern forms... having... been advanced through
natural selection and competition to a higher stage of perfection or
dominating power." ("Origin of Species" (6th edition), page 340; cf.
also "Life and Letters", II. page 142.) The present state of the Flora
of New Zealand affords a striking illustration of the correctness of
this view. It is poor in species, numbering only some 1400, of which
three-fourths are endemic. They seem however quite unable to resist the
invasion of new comers and already 600 species of foreign origin have
succeeded in establishing themselves.

If we accept the general configuration of the earth's surface as
permanent a continuous and progressive dispersal of species from the
centre to the circumference, i.e. southwards, seems inevitable. If an
observer were placed above a point in St George's Channel from which
one half of the globe was visible he would see the greatest possible
quantity of land spread out in a sort of stellate figure. The maritime
supremacy of the English race has perhaps flowed from the central
position of its home. That such a disposition would facilitate a
centrifugal migration of land organisms is at any rate obvious, and
fluctuating conditions of climate operating from the pole would supply
an effective means of propulsion. As these became more rigorous animals
at any rate would move southwards to escape them. It would be equally
the case with plants if no insuperable obstacle interposed. This implies
a mobility in plants, notwithstanding what we know of means of transport
which is at first sight paradoxical. Bentham has stated this in a
striking way: "Fixed and immovable as is the individual plant, there is
no class in which the race is endowed with greater facilities for the
widest dispersion... Plants cast away their offspring in a dormant state,
ready to be carried to any distance by those external agencies which we
may deem fortuitous, but without which many a race might perish from the
exhaustion of the limited spot of soil in which it is rooted." (Pres.
Addr.(1869), "Proc. Linn. Soc." 1868-69, pages lxvi, lxvii.)

I have quoted this passage from Bentham because it emphasises a point
which Darwin for his purpose did not find it necessary to dwell upon,
though he no doubt assumed it. Dispersal to a distance is, so to speak,
an accidental incident in the life of a species. Lepidium Draba, a
native of South-eastern Europe, owes its prevalence in the Isle of
Thanet to the disastrous Walcheren expedition; the straw-stuffing of the
mattresses of the fever-stricken soldiers who were landed there was used
by a farmer for manure. Sir Joseph Hooker ("Royal Institution Lecture",
April 12, 1878.) tells us that landing on Lord Auckland's Island, which
was uninhabited, "the first evidence I met with of its having been
previously visited by man was the English chickweed; and this I traced
to a mound that marked the grave of a British sailor, and that was
covered with the plant, doubtless the offspring of seed that had adhered
to the spade or mattock with which the grave had been dug."

Some migration from the spot where the individuals of a species
have germinated is an essential provision against extinction. Their
descendants otherwise would be liable to suppression by more vigorous
competitors. But they would eventually be extinguished inevitably,
as pointed out by Bentham, by the exhaustion of at any rate some one
necessary constituent of the soil. Gilbert showed by actual analysis
that the production of a "fairy ring" is simply due to the using up
by the fungi of the available nitrogen in the enclosed area which
continually enlarges as they seek a fresh supply on the outside margin.
Anyone who cultivates a garden can easily verify the fact that every
plant has some adaptation for varying degrees of seed-dispersal. It
cannot be doubted that slow but persistent terrestrial migration has
played an enormous part in bringing about existing plant-distribution,
or that climatic changes would intensify the effect because they would
force the abandonment of a former area and the occupation of a new one.
We are compelled to admit that as an incident of the Glacial period a
whole flora may have moved down and up a mountain side, while only some
of its constituent species would be able to take advantage of means of
long-distance transport.

I have dwelt on the importance of what I may call short-distance
dispersal as a necessary condition of plant life, because I think it
suggests the solution of a difficulty which leads Guppy to a conclusion
with which I am unable to agree. But the work which he has done taken as
a whole appears to me so admirable that I do so with the utmost respect.
He points out, as Bentham had already done, that long-distance dispersal
is fortuitous. And being so it cannot have been provided for by
previous adaptation. He says (Guppy, op. cit. II. page 99.): "It is not
conceivable that an organism can be adapted to conditions outside
its environment." To this we must agree; but, it may be asked, do the
general means of plant dispersal violate so obvious a principle? He
proceeds: "The great variety of the modes of dispersal of seeds is in
itself an indication that the dispersing agencies avail themselves in a
hap-hazard fashion of characters and capacities that have been developed
in other connections." (Loc. cit. page 102.) "Their utility in these
respects is an accident in the plant's life." (Loc. cit. page 100.) He
attributes this utility to a "determining agency," an influence which
constantly reappears in various shapes in the literature of Evolution
and is ultra-scientific in the sense that it bars the way to the search
for material causes. He goes so far as to doubt whether fleshy fruits
are an adaptation for the dispersal of their contained seeds. (Loc. cit.
page 102.) Writing as I am from a hillside which is covered by hawthorn
bushes sown by birds, I confess I can feel little doubt on the subject
myself. The essential fact which Guppy brings out is that long-distance
unlike short-distance dispersal is not universal and purposeful, but
selective and in that sense accidental. But it is not difficult to see
how under favouring conditions one must merge into the other.

Guppy has raised one novel point which can only be briefly referred to
but which is of extreme interest. There are grounds for thinking that
flowers and insects have mutually reacted upon one another in their
evolution. Guppy suggests that something of the same kind may be true
of birds. I must content myself with the quotation of a single sentence.
"With the secular drying of the globe and the consequent differentiation
of climate is to be connected the suspension to a great extent of the
agency of birds as plant dispersers in later ages, not only in the
Pacific Islands but all over the tropics. The changes of climate, birds
and plants have gone on together, the range of the bird being controlled
by the climate, and the distribution of the plant being largely
dependent on the bird." (Loc.cit. II. page 221.)

Darwin was clearly prepared to go further than Hooker in accounting for
the southern flora by dispersion from the north. Thus he says: "We must,
I suppose, admit that every yard of land has been successively covered
with a beech-forest between the Caucasus and Japan." ("More Letters",
II. page 9.) Hooker accounted for the dissevered condition of the
southern flora by geographical change, but this Darwin could not admit.
He suggested to Hooker that the Australian and Cape floras might have
had a point of connection through Abyssinia (Ibid. I. page 447.), an
idea which was promptly snuffed out. Similarly he remarked to Bentham
(1869): "I suppose you think that the Restiaceae, Proteaceae, etc., etc.
once extended over the whole world, leaving fragments in the south."
(Ibid. I. page 380.) Eventually he conjectured "that there must have
been a Tertiary Antarctic continent, from which various forms radiated
to the southern extremities of our present continents." ("Life and
Letters", III. page 231.) But characteristically he could not admit any
land connections and trusted to "floating ice for transporting seed."
("More Letters", I. page 116.) I am far from saying that this theory is
not deserving of serious attention, though there seems to be no positive
evidence to support it, and it immediately raises the difficulty how did
such a continent come to be stocked?

We must, however, agree with Hooker that the common origin of the
northern and southern floras must be referred to a remote past. That
Darwin had this in his mind at the time of the publication of the
"Origin" is clear from a letter to Hooker. "The view which I should have
looked at as perhaps most probable (though it hardly differs from yours)
is that the whole world during the Secondary ages was inhabited by
marsupials, araucarias (Mem.--Fossil wood of this nature in South
America), Banksia, etc.; and that these were supplanted and exterminated
in the greater area of the north, but were left alive in the south."
(Ibid. I. page 453.) Remembering that Araucaria, unlike Banksia, belongs
to the earlier Jurassic not to the angiospermous flora, this view is a
germinal idea of the widest generality.

The extraordinary congestion in species of the peninsulas of the Old
World points to the long-continued action of a migration southwards.
Each is in fact a cul-de-sac into which they have poured and from which
there is no escape. On the other hand the high degree of specialisation
in the southern floras and the little power the species possess of
holding their own in competition or in adaptation to new conditions
point to long-continued isolation. "An island... will prevent free
immigration and competition, hence a greater number of ancient forms
will survive." (Ibid. I. page 481.) But variability is itself subject to
variation. The nemesis of a high degree of protected specialisation is
the loss of adaptability. (See Lyell, "The Geological Evidences of the
Antiquity of Man", London, 1863, page 446.) It is probable that many
elements of the southern flora are doomed: there is, for example, reason
to think that the singular Stapelieae of S. Africa are a disappearing
group. The tree Lobelias which linger in the mountains of Central
Africa, in Tropical America and in the Sandwich Islands have the aspect
of extreme antiquity. I may add a further striking illustration from
Professor Seward: "The tall, graceful fronds of Matonia pectinata,
forming miniature forests on the slopes of Mount Ophir and other
districts in the Malay Peninsula in association with Dipteris conjugata
and Dipteris lobbiana, represent a phase of Mesozoic life which survives
'Like a dim picture of the drowned past.'" ("Report of the 73rd Meeting
of the British Assoc." (Southport, 1903), London, 1904, page 844.)

The Matonineae are ferns with an unusually complex vascular system and
were abundant "in the northern hemisphere during the earlier part of the
Mesozoic era."

It was fortunate for science that Wallace took up the task which his
colleague had abandoned. Writing to him on the publication of his
"Geographical Distribution of Animals" Darwin said: "I feel sure
that you have laid a broad and safe foundation for all future work on
Distribution. How interesting it will be to see hereafter plants treated
in strict relation to your views." ("More Letters", II. page 12.) This
hope was fulfilled in "Island Life". I may quote a passage from it which
admirably summarises the contrast between the northern and the southern
floras.

"Instead of the enormous northern area, in which highly organised
and dominant groups of plants have been developed gifted with
great colonising and aggressive powers, we have in the south three
comparatively small and detached areas, in which rich floras have
been developed with SPECIAL adaptations to soil, climate, and organic
environment, but comparatively impotent and inferior beyond their own
domain." (Wallace, "Island Life", pages 527, 528.)

It will be noticed that in the summary I have attempted to give of the
history of the subject, efforts have been concentrated on bringing into
relation the temperate floras of the northern and southern hemispheres,
but no account has been taken of the rich tropical vegetation which
belts the world and little to account for the original starting-point
of existing vegetation generally. It must be remembered on the one hand
that our detailed knowledge of the floras of the tropics is still very
incomplete and far inferior to that of temperate regions; on the other
hand palaeontological discoveries have put the problem in an entirely
new light. Well might Darwin, writing to Heer in 1875, say: "Many
as have been the wonderful discoveries in Geology during the last
half-century, I think none have exceeded in interest your results with
respect to the plants which formerly existed in the arctic regions."
("More Letters", II. page 240.)

As early as 1848 Debey had described from the Upper Cretaceous rocks of
Aix-la-Chapelle Flowering plants of as high a degree of development
as those now existing. The fact was commented upon by Hooker ("Introd.
Essay to the Flora of Tasmania", page xx.), but its full significance
seems to have been scarcely appreciated. For it implied not merely that
their evolution must have taken place but the foundations of existing
distribution must have been laid in a preceding age. We now know
from the discoveries of the last fifty years that the remains of the
Neocomian flora occur over an area extending through 30 deg of latitude.
The conclusion is irresistible that within this was its centre of
distribution and probably of origin.

Darwin was immensely impressed with the outburst on the world of a
fully fledged angiospermous vegetation. He warmly approved the brilliant
theory of Saporta that this happened "as soon (as) flower-frequenting
insects were developed and favoured intercrossing." ("More Letters", II.
page 21.) Writing to him in 1877 he says: "Your idea that dicotyledonous
plants were not developed in force until sucking insects had been
evolved seems to me a splendid one. I am surprised that the idea never
occurred to me, but this is always the case when one first hears a
new and simple explanation of some mysterious phenomenon." ("Life
and Letters", III. page 285. Substantially the same idea had
occurred earlier to F.W.A. Miquel. Remarking that "sucking insects
(Haustellata)... perform in nature the important duty of maintaining the
existence of the vegetable kingdom, at least as far as the higher orders
are concerned," he points our that "the appearance in great numbers of
haustellate insects occurs at and after the Cretaceous epoch, when
the plants with pollen and closed carpels (Angiosperms) are found, and
acquire little by little the preponderance in the vegetable kingdom."
"Archives Neerlandaises", III. (1868). English translation in "Journ. of
Bot." 1869, page 101.)

Even with this help the abruptness still remains an almost insoluble
problem, though a forecast of floral structure is now recognised in some
Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous plants. But the gap between this and the
structural complexity and diversity of angiosperms is enormous. Darwin
thought that the evolution might have been accomplished during a period
of prolonged isolation. Writing to Hooker (1881) he says: "Nothing is
more extraordinary in the history of the Vegetable Kingdom, as it seems
to me, than the APPARENTLY very sudden or abrupt development of the
higher plants. I have sometimes speculated whether there did not exist
somewhere during long ages an extremely isolated continent, perhaps near
the South Pole." ("Life and Letters", III. page 248.)

The present trend of evidence is, however, all in favour of a northern
origin for flowering plants, and we can only appeal to the imperfection
of the geological record as a last resource to extricate us from the
difficulty of tracing the process. But Darwin's instinct that at some
time or other the southern hemisphere had played an important part in
the evolution of the vegetable kingdom did not mislead him. Nothing
probably would have given him greater satisfaction than the masterly
summary in which Seward has brought together the evidence for the origin
of the Glossopteris flora in Gondwana land.

"A vast continental area, of which remnants are preserved in Australia,
South Africa and South America... A tract of enormous extent occupying
an area, part of which has since given place to a southern ocean, while
detached masses persist as portions of more modern continents, which
have enabled us to read in their fossil plants and ice-scratched
boulders the records of a lost continent, in which the Mesozoic
vegetation of the northern continent had its birth." ("Encycl. Brit."
(10th edition 1902), Vol. XXXI. ("Palaeobotany; Mesozoic"), page 422.)
Darwin would probably have demurred on physical grounds to the extent
of the continent, and preferred to account for the transoceanic
distribution of its flora by the same means which must have accomplished
it on land.

It must in fairness be added that Guppy's later views give some support
to the conjectural existence of the "lost continent." "The distribution
of the genus Dammara" (Agathis) led him to modify his earlier
conclusions. He tells us:--"In my volume on the geology of Vanua Levu
it was shown that the Tertiary period was an age of submergence in the
Western Pacific, and a disbelief in any previous continental condition
was expressed. My later view is more in accordance with that of
Wichmann, who, on geological grounds, contended that the islands of the
Western Pacific were in a continental condition during the Palaeozoic
and Mesozoic periods, and that their submergence and subsequent
emergence took place in Tertiary times." (Guppy, op. cit. II. page 304.)

The weight of the geological evidence I am unable to scrutinise. But
though I must admit the possibility of some unconscious bias in my
own mind on the subject, I am impressed with the fact that the known
distribution of the Glossopteris flora in the southern hemisphere is
precisely paralleled by that of Proteaceae and Restiaceae in it at the
present time. It is not unreasonable to suppose that both phenomena,
so similar, may admit of the same explanation. I confess it would not
surprise me if fresh discoveries in the distribution of the Glossopteris
flora were to point to the possibility of its also having migrated
southwards from a centre of origin in the northern hemisphere.

Darwin, however, remained sceptical "about the travelling of plants
from the north EXCEPT DURING THE TERTIARY PERIOD." But he added, "such
speculations seem to me hardly scientific, seeing how little we know
of the old floras." ("Life and Letters", III. page 247.) That in later
geological times the south has been the grave of the weakened offspring
of the aggressive north can hardly be doubted. But if we look to the
Glossopteris flora for the ancestry of Angiosperms during the Secondary
period, Darwin's prevision might be justified, though he has given us no
clue as to how he arrived at it.

It may be true that technically Darwin was not a botanist. But in two
pages of the "Origin" he has given us a masterly explanation of "the
relationship, with very little identity, between the productions of
North America and Europe." (Pages 333, 334.) He showed that this could
be accounted for by their migration southwards from a common area, and
he told Wallace that he "doubted much whether the now called Palaearctic
and Neartic regions ought to be separated." ("Life and Letters", III.
page 230.) Catkin-bearing deciduous trees had long been seen to justify
Darwin's doubt: oaks, chestnuts, beeches, hazels, hornbeams, birches,
alders, willows and poplars are common both to the Old and New World.
Newton found that the separate regions could not be sustained for birds,
and he is now usually followed in uniting them as the Holartic. One
feels inclined to say in reading the two pages, as Lord Kelvin did to
a correspondent who asked for some further development of one of his
papers, It is all there. We have only to apply the principle to previous
geological ages to understand why the flora of the Southern United
States preserves a Cretaceous facies. Applying it still further we can
understand why, when the northern hemisphere gradually cooled through
the Tertiary period, the plants of the Eocene "suggest a comparison of
the climate and forests with those of the Malay Archipelago and Tropical
America." (Clement Reid, "Encycl. Brit." (10th edition), Vol. XXXI.
("Palaeobotany; Tertiary"), page 435.) Writing to Asa Gray in 1856
with respect to the United States flora, Darwin said that "nothing has
surprised me more than the greater generic and specific affinity with
East Asia than with West America." ("More Letters", I. page 434.) The
recent discoveries of a Tulip tree and a Sassafras in China afford fresh
illustrations. A few years later Asa Gray found the explanation in
both areas being centres of preservation of the Cretaceous flora from
a common origin. It is interesting to note that the paper in which this
was enunciated at once established his reputation.

In Europe the latitudinal range of the great mountain chains gave the
Miocene flora no chance of escape during the Glacial period, and the
Mediterranean appears to have equally intercepted the flow of alpine
plants to the Atlas. (John Ball in Appendix G, page 438, in "Journal of
a Tour in Morocco and the Great Atlas", J.D. Hooker and J. Ball, London,
1878.) In Southern Europe the myrtle, the laurel, the fig and the
dwarf-palm are the sole representatives of as many great tropical
families. Another great tropical family, the Gesneraceae has left single
representatives from the Pyrenees to the Balkans; and in the former
a diminutive yam still lingers. These are only illustrations of the
evidence which constantly accumulates and which finds no rational
explanation except that which Darwin has given to it.

The theory of southward migration is the key to the interpretation of
the geographical distribution of plants. It derived enormous support
from the researches of Heer and has now become an accepted commonplace.
Saporta in 1888 described the vegetable kingdom as "emigrant pour suivre
une direction determinee et marcher du nord au sud, a la recherche
de regions et de stations plus favorables, mieux appropriees aux
adaptations acquises, a meme que la temperature terrestre perd ses
conditions premieres." ("Origine Paleontologique des arbres", Paris,
1888, page 28.) If, as is so often the case, the theory now seems to be
a priori inevitable, the historian of science will not omit to record
that the first germ sprang from the brain of Darwin.

In attempting this sketch of Darwin's influence on Geographical
Distribution, I have found it impossible to treat it from an external
point of view. His interest in it was unflagging; all I could say became
necessarily a record of that interest and could not be detached from it.
He was in more or less intimate touch with everyone who was working
at it. In reading the letters we move amongst great names. With an
extraordinary charm of persuasive correspondence he was constantly
suggesting, criticising and stimulating. It is hardly an exaggeration
to say that from the quiet of his study at Down he was founding and
directing a wide-world school.

POSTSCRIPTUM.

Since this essay was put in type Dr Ernst's striking account of the "New
Flora of the Volcanic Island of Krakatau" (Cambridge, 1909.) has reached
me. All botanists must feel a debt of gratitude to Prof. Seward for
his admirable translation of a memoir which in its original form
is practically unprocurable and to the liberality of the Cambridge
University Press for its publication. In the preceding pages I have
traced the laborious research by which the methods of Plant Dispersal
were established by Darwin. In the island of Krakatau nature has
supplied a crucial experiment which, if it had occurred earlier, would
have at once secured conviction of their efficiency. A quarter of a
century ago every trace of organic life in the island was "destroyed
and buried under a thick covering of glowing stones." Now, it is "again
covered with a mantle of green, the growth being in places so
luxuriant that it is necessary to cut one's way laboriously through the
vegetation." (Op. cit. page 4.) Ernst traces minutely how this has been
brought about by the combined action of wind, birds and sea currents,
as means of transport. The process will continue, and he concludes:--"At
last after a long interval the vegetation on the desolated island will
again acquire that wealth of variety and luxuriance which we see in the
fullest development which Nature has reached in the primaeval forest
in the tropics." (Op. cit. page 72.) The possibility of such a result
revealed itself to the insight of Darwin with little encouragement or
support from contemporary opinion.

One of the most remarkable facts established by Ernst is that this has
not been accomplished by the transport of seeds alone. "Tree stems and
branches played an important part in the colonisation of Krakatau by
plants and animals. Large piles of floating trees, stems, branches and
bamboos are met with everywhere on the beach above high-water mark and
often carried a considerable distance inland. Some of the animals on the
island, such as the fat Iguana (Varanus salvator) which suns itself in
the beds of streams, may have travelled on floating wood, possibly also
the ancestors of the numerous ants, but certainly plants." (Op. cit.
page 56.) Darwin actually had a prevision of this. Writing to Hooker he
says:--"Would it not be a prodigy if an unstocked island did not in the
course of ages receive colonists from coasts whence the currents flow,
trees are drifted and birds are driven by gales?" ("More Letters", I.
page 483.) And ten years earlier:--"I must believe in the... whole
plant or branch being washed into the sea; with floods and slips and
earthquakes; this must continually be happening." ("Life and Letters",
II. pages 56, 57.) If we give to "continually" a cosmic measure, can the
fact be doubted? All this, in the light of our present knowledge, is too
obvious to us to admit of discussion. But it seems to me nothing less
than pathetic to see how in the teeth of the obsession as to continental
extension, Darwin fought single-handed for what we now know to be the
truth.

Guppy's heart failed him when he had to deal with the isolated case of
Agathis which alone seemed inexplicable by known means of transport. But
when we remember that it is a relic of the pre-Angiospermous flora, and
is of Araucarian ancestry, it cannot be said that the impossibility,
in so prolonged a history, of the bodily transference of cone-bearing
branches or even of trees, compels us as a last resort to fall back on
continental extension to account for its existing distribution.

When Darwin was in the Galapagos Archipelago, he tells us that he
fancied himself "brought near to the very act of creation." He saw
how new species might arise from a common stock. Krakatau shows us an
earlier stage and how by simple agencies, continually at work, that
stock might be supplied. It also shows us how the mixed and casual
elements of a new colony enter into competition for the ground and
become mutually adjusted. The study of Plant Distribution from a
Darwinian standpoint has opened up a new field of research in Ecology.
The means of transport supply the materials for a flora, but their
ultimate fate depends on their equipment for the "struggle for
existence." The whole subject can no longer be regarded as a mere
statistical inquiry which has seemed doubtless to many of somewhat arid
interest. The fate of every element of the earth's vegetation has sooner
or later depended on its ability to travel and to hold its own under
new conditions. And the means by which it has secured success is an
each case a biological problem which demands and will reward the most
attentive study. This is the lesson which Darwin has bequeathed to us.
It is summed up in the concluding paragraph of the "Origin" ("Origin of
Species" (6th edition), page 429.):--"It is interesting to contemplate a
tangled bank, clothed with many plants of many kinds, with birds singing
on the bushes, with various insects flitting about, and with worms
crawling through the damp earth, and to reflect that these elaborately
constructed forms, so different from each other, and dependent upon
each other in so complex a manner, have all been produced by laws acting
around us."




XVII. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS. By Hans Gadow, M.A., Ph.D.,
F.R.S.

Strickland Curator and Lecturer on Zoology in the University of
Cambridge.


The first general ideas about geographical distribution may be found
in some of the brilliant speculations contained in Buffon's "Histoire
Naturelle". The first special treatise on the subject was however
written in 1777 by E.A.W. Zimmermann, Professor of Natural Science
at Brunswick, whose large volume, "Specimen Zoologiae Geographicae
Quadrupedum"..., deals in a statistical way with the mammals; important
features of the large accompanying map of the world are the ranges
of mountains and the names of hundreds of genera indicating their
geographical range. In a second work he laid special stress on
domesticated animals with reference to the spreading of the various
races of Mankind.

In the following year appeared the "Philosophia Entomologica" by J.C.
Fabricius, who was the first to divide the world into eight regions. In
1803 G.R. Treviranus ("Biologie oder Philosophie der lebenden Natur",
Vol. II. Gottingen, 1803.) devoted a long chapter of his great work on
"Biologie" to a philosophical and coherent treatment of the distribution
of the whole animal kingdom. Remarkable progress was made in 1810 by F.
Tiedemann ("Anatomie und Naturgeschichte der Vogel". Heidelberg, 1810.)
of Heidelberg. Few, if any, of the many subsequent Ornithologists seem
to have appreciated, or known of, the ingenious way in which Tiedemann
marshalled his statistics in order to arrive at general conclusions.
There are, for instance, long lists of birds arranged in accordance
with their occurrence in one or more continents: by correlating the
distribution of the birds with their food he concludes "that the
countries of the East Indian flora have no vegetable feeders in common
with America," and "that it is probably due to the great peculiarity of
the African flora that Africa has few phytophagous kinds in common with
other countries, whilst zoophagous birds have a far more independent,
often cosmopolitan, distribution." There are also remarkable chapters
on the influence of environment, distribution, and migration, upon the
structure of the Birds! In short, this anatomist dealt with some of the
fundamental causes of distribution.

Whilst Tiedemann restricted himself to Birds, A. Desmoulins in 1822
wrote a short but most suggestive paper on the Vertebrata, omitting
the birds; he combated the view recently proposed by the entomologist
Latreille that temperature was the main factor in distribution. Some of
his ten main conclusions show a peculiar mixture of evolutionary ideas
coupled with the conception of the stability of species: whilst each
species must have started from but one creative centre, there may be
several "analogous centres of creation" so far as genera and families
are concerned. Countries with different faunas, but lying within the
same climatic zones, are proof of the effective and permanent existence
of barriers preventing an exchange between the original creative
centres.

The first book dealing with the "geography and classification" of the
whole animal kingdom was written by W. Swainson ("A Treatise on
the Geography and Classification of Animals", Lardner's "Cabinet
Cyclopaedia" London, 1835.) in 1835. He saw in the five races of Man
the clue to the mapping of the world into as many "true zoological
divisions," and he reconciled the five continents with his mystical
quinary circles.

Lyell's "Principles of Geology" should have marked a new epoch, since
in his "Elements" he treats of the past history of the globe and the
distribution of animals in time, and in his "Principles" of their
distribution in space in connection with the actual changes undergone by
the surface of the world. But as the sub-title of his great work "Modern
changes of the Earth and its inhabitants" indicates, he restricted
himself to comparatively minor changes, and, emphatically believing
in the permanency of the great oceans, his numerous and careful
interpretations of the effect of the geological changes upon the
dispersal of animals did after all advance the problem but little.

Hitherto the marine faunas had been neglected. This was remedied by E.
Forbes, who established nine homozoic zones, based mainly on the study
of the mollusca, the determining factors being to a great extent
the isotherms of the sea, whilst the 25 provinces were given by the
configuration of the land. He was followed by J.D. Dana, who, taking
principally the Crustacea as a basis, and as leading factors the mean
temperatures of the coldest and of the warmest months, established
five latitudinal zones. By using these as divisors into an American,
Afro-European, Oriental, Arctic and Antarctic realm, most of which were
limited by an eastern and western land-boundary, he arrived at about
threescore provinces.

In 1853 appeared L.K. Schmarda's ("Die geographische Verbreitung der
Thiere", Wien, 1853.) two volumes, embracing the whole subject. Various
centres of creation being, according to him, still traceable, he formed
the hypothesis that these centres were originally islands, which later
became enlarged and joined together to form the great continents, so
that the original faunas could overlap and mix whilst still remaining
pure at their respective centres. After devoting many chapters to the
possible physical causes and modes of dispersal, he divided the land
into 21 realms which he shortly characterises, e.g. Australia as the
only country inhabited by marsupials, monotremes and meliphagous birds.
Ten main marine divisions were diagnosed in a similar way. Although some
of these realms were not badly selected from the point of view of being
applicable to more than one class of animals, they were obviously too
numerous for general purposes, and this drawback was overcome, in 1857,
by P.L. Sclater. ("On the general Geographical Distribution of the
members of the class Aves", "Proc. Linn. Soc." (Zoology II. 1858, pages
130-145.)) Starting with the idea, that "each species must have been
created within and over the geographical area, which it now occupies,"
he concluded "that the most natural primary ontological divisions of the
Earth's surface" were those six regions, which since their adoption
by Wallace in his epoch-making work, have become classical. Broadly
speaking, these six regions are equivalent to the great masses of land;
they are convenient terms for geographical facts, especially since the
Palaearctic region expresses the unity of Europe with the bulk of Asia.
Sclater further brigaded the regions of the Old World as Palaeogaea and
the two Americas as Neogaea, a fundamental mistake, justifiable to a
certain extent only since he based his regions mainly upon the present
distribution of the Passerine birds.

Unfortunately these six regions are not of equal value. The Indian
countries and the Ethiopian region (Africa south of the Sahara) are
obviously nothing but the tropical, southern continuations or appendages
of one greater complex. Further, the great eastern mass of land is so
intimately connected with North America that this continent has much
more in common with Europe and Asia than with South America. Therefore,
instead of dividing the world longitudinally as Sclater had done,
Huxley, in 1868 ("On the classification and distribution of the
Alectoromorphae and Heteromorphae", "Proc. Zool. Soc." 1868, page
294.), gave weighty reasons for dividing it transversely. Accordingly
he established two primary divisions, Arctogaea or the North world in
a wider sense, comprising Sclater's Indian, African, Palaearctic and
Neartic regions; and Notogaea, the Southern world, which he divided
into (1) Austro-Columbia (an unfortunate substitute for the neotropical
region), (2) Australasia, and (3) New Zealand, the number of big regions
thus being reduced to three but for the separation of New Zealand upon
rather negative characters. Sclater was the first to accept these four
great regions and showed, in 1874 ("The geographical distribution of
Mammals", "Manchester Science Lectures", 1874.), that they were well
borne out by the present distribution of the Mammals.

Although applicable to various other groups of animals, for instance to
the tailless Amphibia and to Birds (Huxley himself had been led to found
his two fundamental divisions on the distribution of the Gallinaceous
birds), the combination of South America with Australia was gradually
found to be too sweeping a measure. The obvious and satisfactory
solution was provided by W.T. Blanford (Anniversary address (Geological
Society, 1889), "Proc. Geol. Soc." 1889-90, page 67; "Quart. Journ."
XLVI 1890.), who in 1890 recognised three main divisions, namely
Australian, South American, and the rest, for which the already existing
terms (although used partly in a new sense, as proposed by an anonymous
writer in "Natural Science", III. page 289) "Notogaea," "Neogaea" and
"Arctogaea" have been gladly accepted by a number of English writers.

After this historical survey of the search for larger and largest or
fundamental centres of animal creation, which resulted in the mapping
of the world into zoological regions and realms of after all doubtful
value, we have to return to the year 1858. The eleventh and twelfth
chapters of "The Origin of Species" (1859), dealing with "Geographical
Distribution," are based upon a great amount of observation, experiment
and reading. As Darwin's main problem was the origin of species,
nature's way of making species by gradual changes from others previously
existing, he had to dispose of the view, held universally, of the
independent creation of each species and at the same time to insist upon
a single centre of creation for each species; and in order to emphasise
his main point, the theory of descent, he had to disallow convergent, or
as they were then called, analogous forms. To appreciate the difficulty
of his position we have to take the standpoint of fifty years ago, when
the immutability of the species was an axiom and each was supposed to
have been created within or over the geographical area which it now
occupies. If he once admitted that a species could arise from many
individuals instead of from one pair, there was no way of shutting the
door against the possibility that these individuals may have been so
numerous that they occupied a very large district, even so large that
it had become as discontinuous as the distribution of many a species
actually is. Such a concession would at once be taken as an admission of
multiple, independent, origin instead of descent in Darwin's sense.

For the so-called multiple, independently repeated creation of species
as an explanation of their very wide and often quite discontinuous
distribution, he substituted colonisation from the nearest and readiest
source together with subsequent modification and better adaptation to
their new home.

He was the first seriously to call attention to the many accidental
means, "which more properly should be called occasional means of
distribution," especially to oceanic islands. His specific, even
individual, centres of creation made migrations all the more necessary,
but their extent was sadly baulked by the prevailing dogma of the
permanency of the oceans. Any number of small changes ("many islands
having existed as halting places, of which not a wreck now remains"
("The Origin of Species" (1st edition), page 396.).) were conceded
freely, but few, if any, great enough to permit migration of truly
terrestrial creatures. The only means of getting across the gaps was by
the principle of the "flotsam and jetsam," a theory which Darwin took
over from Lyell and further elaborated so as to make it applicable to
many kinds of plants and animals, but sadly deficient, often grotesque,
in the case of most terrestrial creatures.

Another very fertile source was Darwin's strong insistence upon the
great influence which the last glacial epoch must have had upon the
distribution of animals and plants. Why was the migration of northern
creatures southwards of far-reaching and most significant importance?
More northerners have established themselves in southern lands than
vice versa, because there is such a great mass of land in the north
and greater continents imply greater intensity of selection. "The
productions of real islands have everywhere largely yielded to
continental forms." (Ibid. page 380.)... "The Alpine forms have almost
everywhere largely yielded to the more dominant forms generated in the
larger areas and more efficient workshops of the North."

Let us now pass in rapid survey the influence of the publication of "The
Origin of Species" upon the study of Geographical Distribution in its
wider sense.

Hitherto the following thought ran through the minds of most writers:
Wherever we examine two or more widely separated countries their
respective faunas are very different, but where two faunas can come into
contact with each other, they intermingle. Consequently these faunas
represent centres of creation, whence the component creatures have
spread peripherally so far as existing boundaries allowed them to do so.
This is of course the fundamental idea of "regions." There is not one
of the numerous writers who considered the possibility that these
intermediate belts might represent not a mixture of species but
transitional forms, the result of changes undergone by the most
peripheral migrants in adaptation to their new surroundings. The usual
standpoint was also that of Pucheran ("Note sur l'equateur zoologique",
"Rev. et Mag. de Zoologie", 1855; also several other papers, ibid. 1865,
1866, and 1867.) in 1855. But what a change within the next ten years!
Pucheran explains the agreement in coloration between the desert and
its fauna as "une harmonie post-etablie"; the Sahara, formerly a marine
basin, was peopled by immigrants from the neighbouring countries, and
these new animals adapted themselves to the new environment. He also
discusses, among other similar questions, the Isthmus of Panama with
regard to its having once been a strait. From the same author may be
quoted the following passage as a strong proof of the new influence:
"By the radiation of the contemporaneous faunas, each from one centre,
whence as the various parts of the world successively were formed and
became habitable, they spread and became modified according to the local
physical conditions."

The "multiple" origin of each species as advocated by Sclater and
Murray, although giving the species a broader basis, suffered from the
same difficulties. There was only one alternative to the old
orthodox view of independent creation, namely the bold acceptance of
land-connections to an extent for which geological and palaeontological
science was not yet ripe. Those who shrank from either view, gave up
the problem as mysterious and beyond the human intellect. This was the
expressed opinion of men like Swainson, Lyell and Humboldt. Only Darwin
had the courage to say that the problem was not insoluble. If we admit
"that in the long course of time the individuals of the same species,
and likewise of allied species, have proceeded from some one source;
then I think all the grand leading facts of geographical distribution
are explicable on the theory of migration... together with subsequent
modification and the multiplication of new forms." We can thus
understand how it is that in some countries the inhabitants "are linked
to the extinct beings which formerly inhabited the same continent."
We can see why two areas, having nearly the same physical conditions,
should often be inhabited by very different forms of life,... and "we can
see why in two areas, however distant from each other, there should be a
correlation, in the presence of identical species... and of distinct but
representative species." ("The Origin of Species" (1st edition), pages
408, 409.)

Darwin's reluctance to assume great geological changes, such as a
land-connection of Europe with North America, is easily explained by the
fact that he restricted himself to the distribution of the present and
comparatively recent species. "I do not believe that it will ever be
proved that within the recent period continents which are now quite
separate, have been continuously, or almost continuously, united with
each other, and with the many existing oceanic islands." (Ibid. page
357.) Again, "believing... that our continents have long remained in
nearly the same relative position, though subjected to large, but
partial oscillations of level," that means to say within the period of
existing species, or "within the recent period." (Ibid. page. 370.) The
difficulty was to a great extent one of his own making. Whilst almost
everybody else believed in the immutability of the species, which
implies an enormous age, logically since the dawn of creation, to him
the actually existing species as the latest results of evolution, were
necessarily something very new, so young that only the very latest of
the geological epochs could have affected them. It has since come to
our knowledge that a great number of terrestrial "recent" species, even
those of the higher classes of Vertebrates, date much farther back than
had been thought possible. Many of them reach well into the Miocene, a
time since which the world seems to have assumed the main outlines of
the present continents.

In the year 1866 appeared A. Murray's work on the "Geographical
Distribution of Mammals", a book which has perhaps received less
recognition than it deserves. His treatment of the general introductory
questions marks a considerable advance of our problem, although, and
partly because, he did not entirely agree with Darwin's views as laid
down in the first edition of "The Origin of Species", which after all
was the great impulse given to Murray's work. Like Forbes he did not
shrink from assuming enormous changes in the configuration of the
continents and oceans because the theory of descent, with its necessary
postulate of great migrations, required them. He stated, for instance,
"that a Miocene Atlantis sufficiently explains the common distribution
of animals and plants in Europe and America up to the glacial epoch."
And next he considers how, and by what changes, the rehabilitation and
distribution of these lands themselves were effected subsequent to
that period. Further, he deserves credit for having cleared up a
misunderstanding of the idea of specific centres of creation. Whilst for
instance Schmarda assumed without hesitation that the same species,
if occurring at places separated by great distances, or apparently
insurmountable barriers, had been there created independently (multiple
centres), Lyell and Darwin held that each species had only one single
centre, and with this view most of us agree, but their starting point
was to them represented by one individual, or rather one single pair.
According to Murray, on the other hand, this centre of a species is
formed by all the individuals of a species, all of which equally undergo
those changes which new conditions may impose upon them. In this respect
a new species has a multiple origin, but this in a sense very different
from that which was upheld by L. Agassiz. As Murray himself puts it: "To
my multiple origin, communication and direct derivation is essential.
The species is compounded of many influences brought together through
many individuals, and distilled by Nature into one species; and, being
once established it may roam and spread wherever it finds the conditions
of life not materially different from those of its original centre."
(Murray, "The Geographical Distribution of Mammals", page 14. London,
1866.) This declaration fairly agrees with more modern views, and
it must be borne in mind that the application of the single-centre
principle to the genera, families and larger groups in the search for
descent inevitably leads to one creative centre for the whole animal
kingdom, a condition as unwarrantable as the myth of Adam and Eve being
the first representatives of Mankind.

It looks as if it had required almost ten years for "The Origin
of Species" to show its full effect, since the year 1868 marks the
publication of Haeckel's "Naturliche Schoepfungsgeschichte" in addition
to other great works. The terms "Oecology" (the relation of organisms
to their environment) and "Chorology" (their distribution in space) had
been given us in his "Generelle Morphologie" in 1866. The fourteenth
chapter of the "History of Creation" is devoted to the distribution of
organisms, their chorology, with the emphatic assertion that "not
until Darwin can chorology be spoken of as a separate science, since
he supplied the acting causes for the elucidation of the hitherto
accumulated mass of facts." A map (a "hypothetical sketch") shows the
monophyletic origin and the routes of distribution of Man.

Natural Selection may be all-mighty, all-sufficient, but it requires
time, so much that the countless aeons required for the evolution of the
present fauna were soon felt to be one of the most serious drawbacks of
the theory. Therefore every help to ease and shorten this process should
have been welcomed. In 1868 M. Wagner (The first to formulate clearly
the fundamental idea of a theory of migration and its importance in
the origin of new species was L. von Buch, who in his "Physikalische
Beschreibung der Canarischen Inseln", written in 1825, wrote as follows:
"Upon the continents the individuals of the genera by spreading far,
form, through differences of the locality, food and soil, varieties
which finally become constant as new species, since owing to the
distances they could never be crossed with other varieties and thus
be brought back to the main type. Next they may again, perhaps upon
different roads, return to the old home where they find the old
type likewise changed, both having become so different that they can
interbreed no longer. Not so upon islands, where the individuals shut
up in narrow valleys or within narrow districts, can always meet one
another and thereby destroy every new attempt towards the fixing of a
new variety." Clearly von Buch explains here why island types remain
fixed, and why these types themselves have become so different from
their continental congeners.--Actually von Buch is aware of a most
important point, the difference in the process of development which
exists between a new species b, which is the result of an ancestral
species a having itself changed into b and thereby vanished itself, and
a new species c which arose through separation out of the same ancestral
a, which itself persists as such unaltered. Von Buch's prophetic view
seems to have escaped Lyell's and even Wagner's notice.) came to the
rescue with his "Darwin'sche Theorie und das Migrations-Gesetz der
Organismen". (Leipzig, 1868.) He shows that migration, i.e. change of
locality, implies new environmental conditions (never mind whether
these be new stimuli to variation, or only acting as their selectors or
censors), and moreover secures separation from the original stock and
thus eliminates or lessens the reactionary dangers of panmixia. Darwin
accepted Wagner's theory as "advantageous." Through the heated polemics
of the more ardent selectionists Wagner's theory came to grow into an
alternative instead of a help to the theory of selectional evolution.
Separation is now rightly considered a most important factor by modern
students of geographical distribution.

For the same year, 1868, we have to mention Huxley, whose Arctogaea and
Notogaea are nothing less than the reconstructed main masses of land
of the Mesozoic period. Beyond doubt the configuration of land at that
remote period has left recognisable traces in the present continents,
but whether they can account for the distribution of such a much later
group as the Gallinaceous birds is more than questionable. In any case
he took for his text a large natural group of birds, cosmopolitan as
a whole, but with a striking distribution. The Peristeropodes, or
pigeon-footed division, are restricted to the Australian and Neotropical
regions, in distinction to the Alectoropodes (with the hallux inserted
at a level above the front toes) which inhabit the whole of the
Arctogaea, only a few members having spread into the South World.
Further, as Asia alone has its Pheasants and allies, so is Africa
characterised by its Guinea-fowls and relations, America has the Turkey
as an endemic genus, and the Grouse tribe in a wider sense has its
centre in the holarctic region: a splendid object lesson of descent,
world-wide spreading and subsequent differentiation. Huxley, by the way,
was the first--at least in private talk--to state that it will be for
the morphologist, the well-trained anatomist, to give the casting vote
in questions of geographical distribution, since he alone can determine
whether we have to deal with homologous, or analogous, convergent,
representative forms.

It seems late to introduce Wallace's name in 1876, the year of the
publication of his standard work. ("The Geographical Distribution of
Animals", 2 vols. London, 1876.) We cannot do better than quote the
author's own words, expressing the hope that his "book should bear a
similar relation to the eleventh and twelfth chapters of the "Origin of
Species" as Darwin's "Animals and Plants under Domestication" does to
the first chapter of that work," and to add that he has amply succeeded.
Pleading for a few primary centres he accepts Sclater's six regions and
does not follow Huxley's courageous changes which Sclater himself had
accepted in 1874. Holding the view of the permanence of the oceans he
accounts for the colonisation of outlying islands by further elaborating
the views of Lyell and Darwin, especially in his fascinating "Island
Life", with remarkable chapters on the Ice Age, Climate and Time and
other fundamental factors. His method of arriving at the degree
of relationship of the faunas of the various regions is eminently
statistical. Long lists of genera determine by their numbers the
affinity and hence the source of colonisation. In order to make sure
of his material he performed the laborious task of evolving a new
classification of the host of Passerine birds. This statistical method
has been followed by many authors, who, relying more upon quantity than
quality, have obscured the fact that the key to the present distribution
lies in the past changes of the earth's surface. However, with Wallace
begins the modern study of the geographical distribution of animals and
the sudden interest taken in this subject by an ever widening circle of
enthusiasts far beyond the professional brotherhood.

A considerable literature has since grown up, almost bewildering in its
range, diversity of aims and style of procedure. It is a chaos, with
many paths leading into the maze, but as yet very few take us to a
position commanding a view of the whole intricate terrain with its
impenetrable tangle and pitfalls.

One line of research, not initiated but greatly influenced by Wallace's
works, became so prominent as to almost constitute a period which may
be characterised as that of the search by specialists for either the
justification or the amending of his regions. As class after class of
animals was brought up to reveal the secret of the true regions, some
authors saw in their different results nothing but the faultiness of
previously established regions; others looked upon eventual agreements
as their final corroboration, especially when for instance such diverse
groups as mammals and scorpions could, with some ingenuity, be made to
harmonise. But the obvious result of all these efforts was the growing
knowledge that almost every class seemed to follow principles of its
own. The regions tallied neither in extent nor in numbers, although
most of them gravitated more and more towards three centres, namely
Australia, South America and the rest of the world. Still zoologists
persisted in the search, and the various modes and capabilities of
dispersal of the respective groups were thought sufficient explanation
of the divergent results in trying to bring the mapping of the world
under one scheme.

Contemporary literature is full of devices for the mechanical dispersal
of animals. Marine currents, warm and cold, were favoured all the
more since they showed the probable original homes of the creatures in
question. If these could not stand sea-water, they floated upon logs or
icebergs, or they were blown across by storms; fishes were lifted over
barriers by waterspouts, and there is on record even an hypothetical
land tortoise, full of eggs, which colonised an oceanic island after a
perilous sea voyage upon a tree trunk. Accidents will happen, and beyond
doubt many freaks of discontinuous distribution have to be accounted
for by some such means. But whilst sufficient for the scanty settlers of
true oceanic islands, they cannot be held seriously to account for the
rich fauna of a large continent, over which palaeontology shows us that
the immigrants have passed like waves. It should also be borne in mind
that there is a great difference between flotsam and jetsam. A current
is an extension of the same medium and the animals in it may suffer no
change during even a long voyage, since they may be brought from one
litoral to another where they will still be in the same or but slightly
altered environment. But the jetsam is in the position of a passenger
who has been carried off by the wrong train. Almost every year some
American land birds arrive at our western coasts and none of them have
gained a permanent footing although such visits must have taken place
since prehistoric times. It was therefore argued that only those groups
of animals should be used for locating and defining regions which were
absolutely bound to the soil. This method likewise gave results not
reconcilable with each other, even when the distribution of fossils
was taken into account, but it pointed to the absolute necessity of
searching for former land-connections regardless of their extent and the
present depths to which they may have sunk.

That the key to the present distribution lies in the past had been felt
long ago, but at last it was appreciated that the various classes of
animals and plants have appeared in successive geological epochs and
also at many places remote from each other. The key to the distribution
of any group lies in the configuration of land and water of that epoch
in which it made its first appearance. Although this sounds like a
platitude, it has frequently been ignored. If, for argument's sake,
Amphibia were evolved somewhere upon the great southern land-mass of
Carboniferous times (supposed by some to have stretched from South
America across Africa to Australia), the distribution of this developing
class must have proceeded upon lines altogether different from that of
the mammals which dated perhaps from lower Triassic times, when the old
south continental belt was already broken up. The broad lines of this
distribution could never coincide with that of the other, older class,
no matter whether the original mammalian centre was in the Afro-Indian,
Australian, or Brazilian portion. If all the various groups of animals
had come into existence at the same time and at the same place, then it
would be possible, with sufficient geological data, to construct a map
showing the generalised results applicable to the whole animal kingdom.
But the premises are wrong. Whatever regions we may seek to establish
applicable to all classes, we are necessarily mixing up several
principles, namely geological, historical, i.e. evolutionary, with
present day statistical facts. We might as well attempt one compound
picture representing a chick's growth into an adult bird and a child's
growth into manhood.

In short there are no general regions, not even for each class
separately, unless this class be one which is confined to a
comparatively short geological period. Most of the great classes have
far too long a history and have evolved many successive main groups.
Let us take the mammals. Marsupials live now in Australia and in both
Americas, because they already existed in Mesozoic times; Ungulata
existed at one time or other all over the world except in Australia,
because they are post-Cretaceous; Insectivores, although as old as any
Placentalia, are cosmopolitan excepting South America and Australia;
Stags and Bears, as examples of comparatively recent Arctogaeans, are
found everywhere with the exception of Ethiopia and Australia. Each of
these groups teaches a valuable historical lesson, but when these are
combined into the establishment of a few mammalian "realms," they mean
nothing but statistical majorities. If there is one at all, Australia is
such a realm backed against the rest of the world, but as certainly it
is not a mammalian creative centre!

Well then, if the idea of generally applicable regions is a mare's nest,
as was the search for the Holy Grail, what is the object of the study
of geographical distribution? It is nothing less than the history of the
evolution of life in space and time in the widest sense. The attempt to
account for the present distribution of any group of organisms involves
the aid of every branch of science. It bids fair to become a history of
the world. It started in a mild, statistical way, restricting itself to
the present fauna and flora and to the present configuration of land
and water. Next came Oceanography concerned with the depths of the seas,
their currents and temperatures; then enquiries into climatic changes,
culminating in irreconcilable astronomical hypotheses as to glacial
epochs; theories about changes of the level of the seas, mainly from the
point of view of the physicist and astronomer. Then came more and more
to the front the importance of the geological record, hand in hand with
the palaeontological data and the search for the natural affinities, the
genetic system of the organisms. Now and then it almost seems as if the
biologists had done their share by supplying the problems and that the
physicists and geologists would settle them, but in reality it is not
so. The biologists not only set the problems, they alone can check the
offered solutions. The mere fact of palms having flourished in Miocene
Spitzbergen led to an hypothetical shifting of the axis of the world
rather than to the assumption, by way of explanation, that the palms
themselves might have changed their nature. One of the most valuable
aids in geological research, often the only means for reconstructing the
face of the earth in by-gone periods, is afforded by fossils, but only
the morphologist can pronounce as to their trustworthiness as witnesses,
because of the danger of mistaking analogous for homologous forms. This
difficulty applies equally to living groups, and it is so important that
a few instances may not be amiss.

There is undeniable similarity between the faunas of Madagascar and
South America. This was supported by the Centetidae and Dendrobatidae,
two entire "families," as also by other facts. The value of the
Insectivores, Solenodon in Cuba, Centetes in Madagascar, has been much
lessened by their recognition as an extremely ancient group and as a
case of convergence, but if they are no longer put into the same
family, this amendment is really to a great extent due to their widely
discontinuous distribution. The only systematic difference of the
Dendrobatidae from the Ranidae is the absence of teeth, morphologically
a very unimportant character, and it is now agreed, on the strength of
their distribution, that these little arboreal, conspicuously coloured
frogs, Dendrobates in South America, Mantella in Madagascar, do not form
a natural group, although a third genus, Cardioglossa in West Africa,
seems also to belong to them. If these creatures lived all on the
same continent, we should unhesitatingly look upon them as forming a
well-defined, natural little group. On the other hand the Aglossa, with
their three very divergent genera, namely Pipa in South America, Xenopus
and Hymenochirus in Africa, are so well characterised as one ancient
group that we use their distribution unhesitatingly as a hint of a
former connection between the two continents. We are indeed arguing in
vicious circles. The Ratitae as such are absolutely worthless since they
are a most heterogeneous assembly, and there are untold groups, of
the artificiality of which many a zoo-geographer had not the slightest
suspicion when he took his statistical material, the genera and
families, from some systematic catalogues or similar lists. A lamentable
instance is that of certain flightless Rails, recently extinct or
sub-fossil, on the isalnds of Mauritius, Rodriguez and Chatham. Being
flightless they have been used in support of a former huge Antarctic
continent, instead of ruling them out of court as Rails which, each in
its island, have lost the power of flight, a process which must have
taken place so recently that it is difficult, upon morphological
grounds, to justify their separation into Aphanapteryx in Mauritius,
Erythromachus in Rodriguez and Diaphorapteryx on Chatham Island.
Morphologically they may well form but one genus, since they have sprung
from the same stock and have developed upon the same lines; they are
therefore monogenetic: but since we know that they have become what they
are independently of each other (now unlike any other Rails), they are
polygenetic and therefore could not form one genus in the old Darwinian
sense. Further, they are not a case of convergence, since their ancestry
is not divergent but leads into the same stratum.

THE RECONSTRUCTION OF THE GEOGRAPHY OF SUCCESSIVE EPOCHS.

A promising method is the study by the specialist of a large, widely
distributed group of animals from an evolutionary point of view.
Good examples of this method are afforded by A.E. Ortmann's ("The
geographical distribution of Freshwater Decapods and its bearing upon
ancient geography", "Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc." Vol. 41, 1902.) exhaustive
paper and by A.W. Grabau's "Phylogeny of Fusus and its Allies"
("Smithsonian Misc. Coll." 44, 1904.) After many important groups of
animals have been treated in this way--as yet sparingly attempted--the
results as to hypothetical land-connections etc. are sure to be
corrective and supplementary, and their problems will be solved, since
they are not imaginary.

The same problems are attacked, in the reverse way, by starting with the
whole fauna of a country and thence, so to speak, letting the research
radiate. Some groups will be considered as autochthonous, others as
immigrants, and the directions followed by them will be inquired into;
the search may lead far and in various directions, and by comparison of
results, by making compound maps, certain routes will assume definite
shape, and if they lead across straits and seas they are warrants to
search for land-connections in the past. (A fair sample of this method
is C.H. Eigenmann's "The Freshwater Fishes of South and Middle America",
"Popular Science Monthly", Vol. 68, 1906.) There are now not a few maps
purporting to show the outlines of land and water at various epochs.
Many of these attempts do not tally with each other, owing to the
lamentable deficiencies of geological and fossil data, but the bolder
the hypothetical outlines are drawn, the better, and this is preferable
to the insertion of bays and similar detail which give such maps a
fallacious look of certainty where none exists. Moreover it must be
borne in mind that, when we draw a broad continental belt across an
ocean, this belt need never have existed in its entirety at any one
time. The features of dispersal, intended to be explained by it, would
be accomplished just as well by an unknown number of islands which have
joined into larger complexes while elsewhere they subsided again:
like pontoon-bridges which may be opened anywhere, or like a series
of superimposed dissolving views of land and sea-scapes. Hence the
reconstructed maps of Europe, the only continent tolerably known, show
a considerable number of islands in puzzling changes, while elsewhere,
e.g. in Asia, we have to be satisfied with sweeping generalisations.

At present about half-a-dozen big connections are engaging our
attention, leaving as comparatively settled the extent and the duration
of such minor "bridges" as that between Africa and Madagascar, Tasmania
and Australia, the Antilles and Central America, Europe and North
Africa. (Not a few of those who are fascinated by, and satisfied with,
the statistical aspect of distribution still have a strong dislike to
the use of "bridges" if these lead over deep seas, and they get
over present discontinuous occurrences by a former "universal or
sub-universal distribution" of their groups.) This is indeed an easy
method of cutting the knot, but in reality they shunt the question only
a stage or two back, never troubling to explain how their groups managed
to attain to that sub-universal range; or do they still suppose that the
whole world was originally one paradise where everything lived side by
side, until sin and strife and glacial epochs left nothing but scattered
survivors?

The permanence of the great ocean-basins had become a dogma since it
was found that a universal elevation of the land to the extent of 100
fathoms would produce but little changes, and when it was shown that
even the 1000 fathom-line followed the great masses of land rather
closely, and still leaving the great basins (although transgression
of the sea to the same extent would change the map of the world beyond
recognition), by general consent one mile was allowed as the utmost
speculative limit of subsidence. Naturally two or three miles, the
average depth of the oceans, seems enormous, and yet such a difference
in level is as nothing in comparison with the size of the Earth. On
a clay model globe ten feet in diameter an ocean bed three miles deep
would scarcely be detected, and the highest mountains would be smaller
than the unavoidable grains in the glazed surface of our model. There
are but few countries which have not be submerged at some time or
other.

CONNECTION OF SOUTH EASTERN ASIA WITH AUSTRALIA. Neumayr's
Sino-Australian continent during mid-Mesozoic times was probably a
much changing Archipelago, with final separations subsequent to the
Cretaceous period. Henceforth Australasia was left to its own fate, but
for a possible connection with the antarctic continent.

AFRICA, MADAGASCAR, INDIA. The "Lemuria" of Sclater and Haeckel cannot
have been more than a broad bridge in Jurassic times; whether it was
ever available for the Lemurs themselves must depend upon the time of
its duration, the more recent the better, but it is difficult to show
that it lasted into the Miocene.

AFRICA AND SOUTH AMERICA. Since the opposite coasts show an entire
absence of marine fossils and deposits during the Mesozoic period,
whilst further north and south such are known to exist and are mostly
identical on either side, Neumayr suggested the existence of a great
Afro-Son American mass of land during the Jurassic epoch. Such land
is almost a necessity and is supported by many facts; it would easily
explain the distribution of numerous groups of terrestrial creatures.
Moreover to the north of this hypothetical land, somewhere across
from the Antilles and Guiana to North Africa and South Western Europe,
existed an almost identical fauna of Corals and Molluscs, indicating
either a coast-line or a series of islands interrupted by shallow seas,
just as one would expect if, and when, a Brazil-Ethiopian mass of land
were breaking up. Lastly from Central America to the Mediterranean
stretches one of the Tertiary tectonic lines of the geologists. Here
also the great question is how long this continent lasted. Apparently
the South Atlantic began to encroach from the south so that by the
later Cretaceous epoch the land was reduced to a comparatively narrow
Brazil-West Africa, remnants of which persisted certainly into the early
Tertiary, until the South Atlantic joined across the equator with the
Atlantic portion of the "Thetys," leaving what remained of South America
isolated from the rest of the world.

ANTARCTIC CONNECTIONS. Patagonia and Argentina seem to have joined
Antartica during the Cretaceous epoch, and this South Georgian bridge
had broken down again by mid-Tertiary times when South America became
consolidated. The Antarctic continent, presuming that it existed, seems
also to have been joined, by way of Tasmania, with Australia,
also during the Cretaceous epoch, and it is assumed that the great
Australia-Antarctic-Patagonian land was severed first to the south of
Tasmania and then at the South Georgian bridge. No connection, and
this is important, is indicated between Antarctica and either Africa or
Madagascar.

So far we have followed what may be called the vicissitudes of the great
Permo-Carboniferous Gondwana land in its fullest imaginary extent,
an enormous equatorial and south temperate belt from South America to
Africa, South India and Australia, which seems to have provided the
foundation of the present Southern continents, two of which temporarily
joined Antarctica, of which however we know nothing except that it
exists now.

Let us next consider the Arctic and periarctic lands. Unfortunately very
little is known about the region within the arctic circle. If it was all
land, or more likely great changing archipelagoes, faunistic exchange
between North America, Europe and Siberia would present no difficulties,
but there is one connection which engages much attention, namely a land
where now lies the North temperate and Northern part of the Atlantic
ocean. How far south did it ever extend and what is the latest date of
a direct practicable communication, say from North Western Europe
to Greenland? Connections, perhaps often interrupted, e.g. between
Greenland and Labrador, at another time between Greenland and
Scandinavia, seem to have existed at least since the Permo-Carboniferous
epoch. If they existed also in late Cretaceous and in Tertiary times,
they would of course easily explain exchanges which we know to have
repeatedly taken place between America and Europe, but they are not
proved thereby, since most of these exchanges can almost as easily
have occurred across the polar regions, and others still more easily by
repeated junction of Siberia with Alaska.

Let us now describe a hypothetical case based on the supposition of
connecting bridges. Not to work in a circle, we select an important
group which has not served as a basis for the reconstruction of bridges;
and it must be a group which we feel justified in assuming to be old
enough to have availed itself of ancient land-connections.

The occurrence of one species of Peripatus in the whole of Australia,
Tasmania and New Zealand (the latter being joined to Australia by way of
New Britain in Cretaceous times but not later) puts the genus back
into this epoch, no unsatisfactory assumption to the morphologist. The
apparent absence of Peripatus in Madagascar indicates that it did not
come from the east into Africa, that it was neither Afro-Indian, nor
Afro-Australian; nor can it have started in South America. We therefore
assume as its creative centre Australia or Malaya in the Cretaceous
epoch, whence its occurrence in Sumatra, Malay Peninsula, New Britain,
New Zealand and Australia is easily explained. Then extension across
Antarctica to Patagonia and Chile, whence it could spread into the rest
of South America as this became consolidated in early Tertiary times.
For getting to the Antilles and into Mexico it would have to wait until
the Miocene, but long before that time it could arrive in Africa, there
surviving as a Congolese and a Cape species. This story is unsupported
by a single fossil. Peripatus may have been "sub-universal" all over
greater Gondwana land in Carboniferous times, and then its absence from
Madagascar would be difficult to explain, but the migrations suggested
above amount to little considering that the distance from Tasmania to
South America could be covered in far less time than that represented by
the whole of the Eocene epoch alone.

There is yet another field, essentially the domain of geographical
distribution, the cultivation of which promises fair to throw much light
upon Nature's way of making species. This is the study of the organisms
with regard to their environment. Instead of revealing pedigrees or
of showing how and when the creatures got to a certain locality, it
investigates how they behaved to meet the ever changing conditions of
their habitats. There is a facies, characteristic of, and often peculiar
to, the fauna of tropical moist forests, another of deserts, of high
mountains, of underground life and so forth; these same facies are
stamped upon whole associations of animals and plants, although these
may be--and in widely separated countries generally are--drawn from
totally different families of their respective orders. It does not go to
the root of the matter to say that these facies have been brought about
by the extermination of all the others which did not happen to fit into
their particular environment. One might almost say that tropical moist
forests must have arboreal frogs and that these are made out of whatever
suitable material happened to be available; in Australia and South
America Hylidae, in Africa Ranidae, since there Hylas are absent. The
deserts must have lizards capable of standing the glare, the great
changes of temperature, of running over or burrowing into the loose
sand. When as in America Iguanids are available, some of these are thus
modified, while in Africa and Asia the Agamids are drawn upon. Both in
the Damara and in the Transcaspian deserts, a Gecko has been turned into
a runner upon sand!

We cannot assume that at various epochs deserts, and at others moist
forests were continuous all over the world. The different facies and
associations were developed at various times and places. Are we to
suppose that, wherever tropical forests came into existence, amongst
the stock of humivagous lizards were always some which presented those
nascent variations which made them keep step with the similarly nascent
forests, the overwhelming rest being eliminated? This principle would
imply that the same stratum of lizards always had variations ready to
fit any changed environment, forests and deserts, rocks and swamps.
The study of Ecology indicates a different procedure, a great, almost
boundless plasticity of the organism, not in the sense of an exuberant
moulding force, but of a readiness to be moulded, and of this the
"variations" are the visible outcome. In most cases identical facies
are produced by heterogeneous convergences and these may seem to be but
superficial, affecting only what some authors are pleased to call the
physiological characters; but environment presumably affects first those
parts by which the organism comes into contact with it most directly,
and if the internal structures remain unchanged, it is not because these
are less easily modified but because they are not directly affected.
When they are affected, they too change deeply enough.

That the plasticity should react so quickly--indeed this very quickness
seems to have initiated our mistaking the variations called forth for
something performed--and to the point, is itself the outcome of the long
training which protoplasm has undergone since its creation.

In Nature's workshop he does not succeed who has ready an arsenal of
tools for every conceivable emergency, but he who can make a tool at the
spur of the moment. The ordeal of the practical test is Charles Darwin's
glorious conception of Natural Selection.




XVIII. DARWIN AND GEOLOGY. By J.W. Judd, C.B., LL.D., F.R.S.


(Mr Francis Darwin has related how his father occasionally came up from
Down to spend a few days with his brother Erasmus in London, and,
after his brother's death, with his daughter, Mrs Litchfield. On these
occasions, it was his habit to arrange meetings with Huxley, to talk
over zoological questions, with Hooker, to discuss botanical problems,
and with Lyell to hold conversations on geology. After the death of
Lyell, Darwin, knowing my close intimacy with his friend during his
later years, used to ask me to meet him when he came to town, and "talk
geology." The "talks" took place sometimes at Jermyn Street Museum, at
other times in the Royal College of Science, South Kensington; but
more frequently, after having lunch with him, at his brother's or his
daughter's house. On several occasions, however, I had the pleasure of
visiting him at Down. In the postscript of a letter (of April 15, 1880)
arranging one of these visits, he writes: "Since poor, dear Lyell's
death, I rarely have the pleasure of geological talk with anyone.")

In one of the very interesting conversations which I had with Charles
Darwin during the last seven years of his life, he asked me in a very
pointed manner if I were able to recall the circumstances, accidental or
otherwise, which had led me to devote myself to geological studies. He
informed me that he was making similar inquiries of other friends, and I
gathered from what he said that he contemplated at that time a study
of the causes producing SCIENTIFIC BIAS in individual minds. I have
no means of knowing how far this project ever assumed anything like
concrete form, but certain it is that Darwin himself often indulged
in the processes of mental introspection and analysis; and he has
thus fortunately left us--in his fragments of autobiography and in his
correspondence--the materials from which may be reconstructed a fairly
complete history of his own mental development.

There are two perfectly distinct inquiries which we have to undertake
in connection with the development of Darwin's ideas on the subject of
evolution:

FIRST. How, when, and under what conditions was Darwin led to a
conviction that species were not immutable, but were derived from
pre-existing forms?

SECONDLY. By what lines of reasoning and research was he brought to
regard "natural selection" as a vera causa in the process of evolution?

It is the first of these inquiries which specially interests the
geologist; though geology undoubtedly played a part--and by no means an
insignificant part--in respect to the second inquiry.

When, indeed, the history comes to be written of that great revolution
of thought in the nineteenth century, by which the doctrine of
evolution, from being the dream of poets and visionaries, gradually grew
to be the accepted creed of naturalists, the paramount influence exerted
by the infant science of geology--and especially that resulting from
the publication of Lyell's epoch-making work, the "Principles of
Geology"--cannot fail to be regarded as one of the leading factors.
Herbert Spencer in his "Autobiography" bears testimony to the effect
produced on his mind by the recently published "Principles", when, at
the age of twenty, he had already begun to speculate on the subject
of evolution (Herbert Spencer's "Autobiography", London, 1904, Vol. I.
pages 175-177.); and Alfred Russel Wallace is scarcely less emphatic
concerning the part played by Lyell's teaching in his scientific
education. (See "My Life; a record of Events and Opinions", London,
1905, Vol. I. page 355, etc. Also his review of Lyell's "Principles"
in "Quarterly Review" (Vol. 126), 1869, pages 359-394. See also "The
Darwin-Wallace Celebration by the Linnean Society" (1909), page 118.)
Huxley wrote in 1887 "I owe more than I can tell to the careful study
of the "Principles of Geology" in my young days." ("Science and Pseudo
Science"; "Collected Essays", London, 1902, Vol. V. page 101.) As for
Charles Darwin, he never tired--either in his published writings, his
private correspondence or his most intimate conversations--of ascribing
the awakening of his enthusiasm and the direction of his energies
towards the elucidation of the problem of development to the "Principles
of Geology" and the personal influence of its author. Huxley has well
expressed what the author of the "Origin of Species" so constantly
insisted upon, in the statements "Darwin's greatest work is the outcome
of the unflinching application to Biology of the leading idea and the
method applied in the "Principles" to Geology ("Proc. Roy. Soc." Vol.
XLIV. (1888), page viii.; "Collected Essays" II. page 268, 1902.), and
"Lyell, for others, as for myself, was the chief agent in smoothing the
road for Darwin." ("Life and Letters of Charles Darwin" II. page 190.)

We propose therefore to consider, first, what Darwin owed to geology and
its cultivators, and in the second place how he was able in the end so
fully to pay a great debt which he never failed to acknowledge. Thanks
to the invaluable materials contained in the "Life and Letters of
Charles Darwin" (3 vols.) published by Mr Francis Darwin in 1887; and to
"More Letters of Charles Darwin" (2 vols.) issued by the same author,
in conjunction with Professor A.C. Seward, in 1903, we are permitted to
follow the various movements in Darwin's mind, and are able to record
the story almost entirely in his own words. (The first of these works
is indicated in the following pages by the letters "L.L."; the second by
"M.L.")

From the point of view of the geologist, Darwin's life naturally divides
itself into four periods. In the first, covering twenty-two years,
various influences were at work militating, now for and now against,
his adoption of a geological career; in the second period--the five
memorable years of the voyage of the "Beagle"--the ardent sportsman with
some natural-history tastes, gradually became the most enthusiastic and
enlightened of geologists; in the third period, lasting ten years, the
valuable geological recruit devoted nearly all his energies and time
to geological study and discussion and to preparing for publication the
numerous observations made by him during the voyage; the fourth period,
which covers the latter half of his life, found Darwin gradually drawn
more and more from geological to biological studies, though always
retaining the deepest interest in the progress and fortunes of his "old
love." But geologists gladly recognise the fact that Darwin immeasurably
better served their science by this biological work, than he could
possibly have done by confining himself to purely geological questions.

From his earliest childhood, Darwin was a collector, though up to the
time when, at eight years of age, he went to a preparatory school,
seals, franks and similar trifles appear to have been the only objects
of his quest. But a stone, which one of his schoolfellows at that time
gave to him, seems to have attracted his attention and set him seeking
for pebbles and minerals; as the result of this newly acquired taste, he
says (writing in 1838) "I distinctly recollect the desire I had of being
able to know something about every pebble in front of the hall door--it
was my earliest and only geological aspiration at that time." ("M.L."
I. page 3.) He further suspects that while at Mr Case's school "I do
not remember any mental pursuits except those of collecting stones,"
etc... "I was born a naturalist." ("M.L." I. page 4.)

The court-yard in front of the hall door at the Mount House, Darwin's
birthplace and the home of his childhood, is surrounded by beds or
rockeries on which lie a number of pebbles. Some of these pebbles (in
quite recent times as I am informed) have been collected to form a
"cobbled" space in front of the gate in the outer wall, which fronts the
hall door; and a similar "cobbled area," there is reason to believe, may
have existed in Darwin's childhood before the door itself. The pebbles,
which were obtained from a neighbouring gravel-pit, being derived from
the glacial drift, exhibit very striking differences in colour and form.
It was probably this circumstance which awakened in the child his
love of observation and speculation. It is certainly remarkable that
"aspirations" of the kind should have arisen in the mind of a child of 9
or 10!

When he went to Shrewsbury School, he relates "I continued collecting
minerals with much zeal, but quite unscientifically,--all that I cared
about was a new-NAMED mineral, and I hardly attempted to classify them."
("L.L." I. page 34.)

There has stood from very early times in Darwin's native town of
Shrewsbury, a very notable boulder which has probably marked a boundary
and is known as the "Bell-stone"--giving its name to a house and street.
Darwin tells us in his "Autobiography" that while he was at Shrewsbury
School at the age of 13 or 14 "an old Mr Cotton in Shropshire, who knew
a good deal about rocks" pointed out to me "... the 'bell-stone'; he told
me that there was no rock of the same kind nearer than Cumberland or
Scotland, and he solemnly assured me that the world would come to an end
before anyone would be able to explain how this stone came where it
now lay"! Darwin adds "This produced a deep impression on me, and I
meditated over this wonderful stone." ("L.L." I. page 41.)

The "bell-stone" has now, owing to the necessities of building, been
removed a short distance from its original site, and is carefully
preserved within the walls of a bank. It is a block of irregular shape 3
feet long and 2 feet wide, and about 1 foot thick, weighing probably not
less than one-third of a ton. By the courtesy of the directors of the
National Provincial Bank of England, I have been able to make a minute
examination of it, and Professors Bonney and Watts, with Mr Harker and
Mr Fearnsides have given me their valuable assistance. The rock is a
much altered andesite and was probably derived from the Arenig district
in North Wales, or possibly from a point nearer the Welsh Border. (I
am greatly indebted to the Managers of the Bank at Shrewsbury for kind
assistance in the examination of this interesting memorial: and Mr
H.T. Beddoes, the Curator of the Shrewsbury Museum, has given me some
archaeological information concerning the stone. Mr Richard Cotton was
a good local naturalist, a Fellow both of the Geological and Linnean
Societies; and to the officers of these societies I am indebted for
information concerning him. He died in 1839, and although he does not
appear to have published any scientific papers, he did far more for
science by influencing the career of the school boy!) It was of course
brought to where Shrewsbury now stands by the agency of a glacier--as
Darwin afterwards learnt.

We can well believe from the perusal of these reminiscences that,
at this time, Darwin's mind was, as he himself says, "prepared for a
philosophical treatment of the subject" of Geology. ("L.L." I. page 41.)
When at the age of 16, however, he was entered as a medical student at
Edinburgh University, he not only did not get any encouragement of
his scientific tastes, but was positively repelled by the ordinary
instruction given there. Dr Hope's lectures on Chemistry, it is true,
interested the boy, who with his brother Erasmus had made a laboratory
in the toolhouse, and was nicknamed "Gas" by his schoolfellows, while
undergoing solemn and public reprimand from Dr Butler at Shrewsbury
School for thus wasting his time. ("L.L." I. page 35.) But most of
the other Edinburgh lectures were "intolerably dull," "as dull as the
professors" themselves, "something fearful to remember." In after life
the memory of these lectures was like a nightmare to him. He speaks in
1840 of Jameson's lectures as something "I... for my sins experienced!"
("L.L." I. page 340.) Darwin especially signalises these lectures on
Geology and Zoology, which he attended in his second year, as being
worst of all "incredibly dull. The sole effect they produced on me was
the determination never so long as I lived to read a book on Geology, or
in any way to study the science!" ("L.L." I. page 41.)

The misfortune was that Edinburgh at that time had become the cockpit in
which the barren conflict between "Neptunism" and "Plutonism" was being
waged with blind fury and theological bitterness. Jameson and his
pupils, on the one hand, and the friends and disciples of Hutton, on the
other, went to the wildest extremes in opposing each other's peculiar
tenets. Darwin tells us that he actually heard Jameson "in a field
lecture at Salisbury Craigs, discoursing on a trap-dyke, with
amygdaloidal margins and the strata indurated on each side, with
volcanic rocks all around us, say that it was a fissure filled with
sediment from above, adding with a sneer that there were men who
maintained that it had been injected from beneath in a molten
condition." ("L.L." I. pages 41-42.) "When I think of this lecture,"
added Darwin, "I do not wonder that I determined never to attend to
Geology." (This was written in 1876 and Darwin had in the summer of 1839
revisited and carefully studied the locality ("L.L." I. page 290.) It is
probable that most of Jameson's teaching was of the same controversial
and unilluminating character as this field-lecture at Salisbury Craigs.

There can be no doubt that, while at Edinburgh, Darwin must have become
acquainted with the doctrines of the Huttonian School. Though so young,
he mixed freely with the scientific society of the city, Macgillivray,
Grant, Leonard Horner, Coldstream, Ainsworth and others being among
his acquaintances, while he attended and even read papers at the local
scientific societies. It is to be feared, however, that what Darwin
would hear most of, as characteristic of the Huttonian teaching, would
be assertions that chalk-flints were intrusions of molten silica, that
fossil wood and other petrifactions had been impregnated with fused
materials, that heat--but never water--was always the agent by which
the induration and crystallisation of rock-materials (even siliceous
conglomerate, limestone and rock-salt) had been effected! These
extravagant "anti-Wernerian" views the young student might well regard
as not one whit less absurd and repellant than the doctrine of the
"aqueous precipitation" of basalt. There is no evidence that Darwin,
even if he ever heard of them, was in any way impressed, in his early
career, by the suggestive passages in Hutton and Playfair, to which
Lyell afterwards called attention, and which foreshadowed the main
principles of Uniformitarianism.

As a matter of fact, I believe that the influence of Hutton and Playfair
in the development of a philosophical theory of geology has been very
greatly exaggerated by later writers on the subject. Just as Wells
and Matthew anticipated the views of Darwin on Natural Selection,
but without producing any real influence on the course of biological
thought, so Hutton and Playfair adumbrated doctrines which only became
the basis of vivifying theory in the hands of Lyell. Alfred Russel
Wallace has very justly remarked that when Lyell wrote the "Principles
of Geology", "the doctrines of Hutton and Playfair, so much in advance
of their age, seemed to be utterly forgotten." ("Quarterly Review", Vol.
CXXVI. (1869), page 363.) In proof of this it is only necessary to
point to the works of the great masters of English geology, who preceded
Lyell, in which the works of Hutton and his followers are scarcely ever
mentioned. This is true even of the "Researches in Theoretical Geology"
and the other works of the sagacious De la Beche. (Of the strength
and persistence of the prejudice felt against Lyell's views by his
contemporaries, I had a striking illustration some little time after
Lyell's death. One of the old geologists who in the early years of the
century had done really good work in connection with the Geological
Society expressed a hope that I was not "one of those who had been
carried away by poor Lyell's fads." My surprise was indeed great when
further conversation showed me that the whole of the "Principles" were
included in the "fads"!) Darwin himself possessed a copy of Playfair's
"Illustrations of the Huttonian Theory", and occasionally quotes it;
but I have met with only one reference to Hutton, and that a somewhat
enigmatical one, in all Darwin's writings. In a letter to Lyell in 1841,
when his mind was much exercised concerning glacial questions, he says
"What a grand new feature all this ice work is in Geology! How old
Hutton would have stared!" ("M.L." II. page 149.)

As a consequence of the influences brought to bear on his mind during
his two years' residence in Edinburgh, Darwin, who had entered that
University with strong geological aspirations, left it and proceeded to
Cambridge with a pronounced distaste for the whole subject. The result
of this was that, during his career as an under-graduate, he neglected
all the opportunities for geological study. During that important period
of life, when he was between eighteen and twenty years of age, Darwin
spent his time in riding, shooting and beetle-hunting, pursuits which
were undoubtedly an admirable preparation for his future work as an
explorer; but in none of his letters of this period does he even mention
geology. He says, however, "I was so sickened with lectures at
Edinburgh that I did not even attend Sedgwick's eloquent and interesting
lectures." ("L.L." I. page 48.)

It was only after passing his examination, and when he went up to spend
two extra terms at Cambridge, that geology again began to attract his
attention. The reading of Sir John Herschel's "Introduction to the Study
of Natural Philosophy", and of Humboldt's "Personal Narrative", a
copy of which last had been given to him by his good friend and mentor
Henslow, roused his dormant enthusiasm for science, and awakened in his
mind a passionate desire for travel. And it was from Henslow, whom
he had accompanied in his excursions, but without imbibing any marked
taste, at that time, for botany, that the advice came to think of and to
"begin the study of geology." ("L.L." I. page 56.) This was in 1831, and
in the summer vacation of that year we find him back again at Shrewsbury
"working like a tiger" at geology and endeavouring to make a map
and section of Shropshire--work which he says was not "as easy as I
expected." ("L.L." I. page 189.) No better field for geological studies
could possibly be found than Darwin's native county.

Writing to Henslow at this time, and referring to a form of the
instrument devised by his friend, Darwin says: "I am very glad to say I
think the clinometer will answer admirably. I put all the tables in my
bedroom at every conceivable angle and direction. I will venture to say
that I have measured them as accurately as any geologist going could
do." But he adds: "I have been working at so many things that I have
not got on much with geology. I suspect the first expedition I take,
clinometer and hammer in hand, will send me back very little wiser and
a good deal more puzzled than when I started." ("L.L." I. page 189.)
Valuable aid was, however, at hand, for at this time Sedgwick, to whom
Darwin had been introduced by the ever-helpful Henslow, was making one
of his expeditions into Wales, and consented to accept the young student
as his companion during the geological tour. ("L.L." I. page 56.) We
find Darwin looking forward to this privilege with the keenest interest.
("L.L." I. page 189.)

When at the beginning of August (1831), Sedgwick arrived at his father's
house in Shrewsbury, where he spent a night, Darwin began to receive his
first and only instruction as a field-geologist. The journey they took
together led them through Llangollen, Conway, Bangor, and Capel Curig,
at which latter place they parted after spending many hours in examining
the rocks at Cwm Idwal with extreme care, seeking for fossils but
without success. Sedgwick's mode of instruction was admirable--he from
time to time sent the pupil off on a line parallel to his own, "telling
me to bring back specimens of the rocks and to mark the stratification
on a map." ("L.L." I. page 57.) On his return to Shrewsbury, Darwin
wrote to Henslow, "My trip with Sedgwick answered most perfectly,"
("L.L." I. page 195.), and in the following year he wrote again from
South America to the same friend, "Tell Professor Sedgwick he does not
know how much I am indebted to him for the Welsh expedition; it has
given me an interest in Geology which I would not give up for any
consideration. I do not think I ever spent a more delightful three weeks
than pounding the north-west mountains." ("L.L." I. pages 237-8.)

It would be a mistake, however, to suppose that at this time Darwin
had acquired anything like the affection for geological study, which
he afterwards developed. After parting with Sedgwick, he walked in a
straight line by compass and map across the mountains to Barmouth to
visit a reading party there, but taking care to return to Shropshire
before September 1st, in order to be ready for the shooting. For as
he candidly tells us, "I should have thought myself mad to give up the
first days of partridge-shooting for geology or any other science!"
("L.L." I. page 58.)

Any regret we may be disposed to feel that Darwin did not use his
opportunities at Edinburgh and Cambridge to obtain systematic and
practical instruction in mineralogy and geology, will be mitigated,
however, when we reflect on the danger which he would run of being
indoctrinated with the crude "catastrophic" views of geology, which were
at that time prevalent in all the centres of learning.

Writing to Henslow in the summer of 1831, Darwin says "As yet I have
only indulged in hypotheses, but they are such powerful ones that I
suppose, if they were put into action but for one day, the world would
come to an end." ("L.L." I. page 189.)

May we not read in this passage an indication that the self-taught
geologist had, even at this early stage, begun to feel a distrust for
the prevalent catastrophism, and that his mind was becoming a field in
which the seeds which Lyell was afterwards to sow would "fall on good
ground"?

The second period of Darwin's geological career--the five years spent
by him on board the "Beagle"--was the one in which by far the most
important stage in his mental development was accomplished. He left
England a healthy, vigorous and enthusiastic collector; he returned five
years later with unique experiences, the germs of great ideas, and
a knowledge which placed him at once in the foremost ranks of the
geologists of that day. Huxley has well said that "Darwin found on board
the "Beagle" that which neither the pedagogues of Shrewsbury, nor the
professoriate of Edinburgh, nor the tutors of Cambridge had managed
to give him." ("Proc. Roy. Soc." Vol. XLIV. (1888), page IX.) Darwin
himself wrote, referring to the date at which the voyage was expected to
begin: "My second life will then commence, and it shall be as a birthday
for the rest of my life." ("L.L." I. page 214.); and looking back on the
voyage after forty years, he wrote; "The voyage of the 'Beagle' has been
by far the most important event in my life, and has determined my whole
career;... I have always felt that I owe to the voyage the first real
training or education of my mind; I was led to attend closely to several
branches of natural history, and thus my powers of observation were
improved, though they were always fairly developed." ("L.L." I. page
61.)

Referring to these general studies in natural history, however, Darwin
adds a very significant remark: "The investigation of the geology of
the places visited was far more important, as reasoning here comes into
play. On first examining a new district nothing can appear more hopeless
than the chaos of rocks; but by recording the stratification and nature
of the rocks and fossils at many points, always reasoning and predicting
what will be found elsewhere, light soon begins to dawn on the district,
and the structure of the whole becomes more or less intelligible."
("L.L." I. page 62.)

The famous voyage began amid doubts, discouragements and
disappointments. Fearful of heart-disease, sad at parting from home
and friends, depressed by sea-sickness, the young explorer, after being
twice driven back by baffling winds, reached the great object of
his ambition, the island of Teneriffe, only to find that, owing to
quarantine regulations, landing was out of the question.

But soon this inauspicious opening of the voyage was forgotten. Henslow
had advised his pupil to take with him the first volume of Lyell's
"Principles of Geology", then just published--but cautioned him (as
nearly all the leaders in geological science at that day would certainly
have done) "on no account to accept the views therein advocated."
("L.L." I. page 73.) It is probable that the days of waiting, discomfort
and sea-sickness at the beginning of the voyage were relieved by the
reading of this volume. For he says that when he landed, three weeks
after setting sail from Plymouth, in St Jago, the largest of the Cape de
Verde Islands, the volume had already been "studied attentively; and
the book was of the highest service to me in many ways... " His first
original geological work, he declares, "showed me clearly the wonderful
superiority of Lyell's manner of treating geology, compared with that
of any other author, whose works I had with me or ever afterwards read."
("L.L." I. page 62.)

At St Jago Darwin first experienced the joy of making new discoveries,
and his delight was unbounded. Writing to his father he says,
"Geologising in a volcanic country is most delightful; besides the
interest attached to itself, it leads you into most beautiful and
retired spots." ("L.L." I. page 228.) To Henslow he wrote of St Jago:
"Here we spent three most delightful weeks... St Jago is singularly
barren, and produces few plants or insects, so that my hammer was my
usual companion, and in its company most delightful hours I spent." "The
geology was pre-eminently interesting, and I believe quite new; there
are some facts on a large scale of upraised coast (which is an excellent
epoch for all the volcanic rocks to date from), that would interest Mr
Lyell." ("L.L." I. page 235.) After more than forty years the memory of
this, his first geological work, seems as fresh as ever, and he wrote in
1876, "The geology of St Jago is very striking, yet simple: a stream
of lava formerly flowed over the bed of the sea, formed of triturated
recent shells and corals, which it has baked into a hard white rock.
Since then the whole island has been upheaved. But the line of white
rock revealed to me a new and important fact, namely, that there had
been afterwards subsidence round the craters, which had since been in
action, and had poured forth lava." ("L.L." I. page 65.)

It was at this time, probably, that Darwin made his first attempt at
drawing a sketch-map and section to illustrate the observations he had
made (see his "Volcanic Islands", pages 1 and 9). His first important
geological discovery, that of the subsidence of strata around volcanic
vents (which has since been confirmed by Mr Heaphy in New Zealand and
other authors) awakened an intense enthusiasm, and he writes: "It then
first dawned on me that I might perhaps write a book on the geology of
the various countries visited, and this made me thrill with delight.
That was a memorable hour to me, and how distinctly I can call to mind
the low cliff of lava beneath which I rested, with the sun glaring hot,
a few strange desert plants growing near, and with living corals in the
tidal pools at my feet." ("L.L." I. page 66.)

But it was when the "Beagle", after touching at St Paul's rock and
Tristan d'Acunha (for a sufficient time only to collect specimens),
reached the shores of South America, that Darwin's real work began; and
he was able, while the marine surveys were in progress, to make many
extensive journeys on land. His letters at this time show that geology
had become his chief delight, and such exclamations as "Geology carries
the day," "I find in Geology a never failing interest," etc. abound in
his correspondence.

Darwin's time was divided between the study of the great deposits of red
mud--the Pampean formation--with its interesting fossil bones and shells
affording proofs of slow and constant movements of the land, and the
underlying masses of metamorphic and plutonic rocks. Writing to Henslow
in March, 1834, he says: "I am quite charmed with Geology, but, like
the wise animal between two bundles of hay, I do not know which to
like best; the old crystalline groups of rocks, or the softer and
fossiliferous beds. When puzzling about stratification, etc., I
feel inclined to cry 'a fig for your big oysters, and your bigger
megatheriums.' But then when digging out some fine bones, I wonder how
any man can tire his arms with hammering granite." ("L.L." I. page
249.) We are told by Darwin that he loved to reason about and attempt to
predict the nature of the rocks in each new district before he arrived
at it.

This love of guessing as to the geology of a district he was about to
visit is amusingly expressed by him in a letter (of May, 1832) to his
cousin and old college-friend, Fox. After alluding to the beetles he
had been collecting--a taste his friend had in common with himself--he
writes of geology that "It is like the pleasure of gambling. Speculating
on first arriving, what the rocks may be, I often mentally cry out 3 to
1 tertiary against primitive; but the latter have hitherto won all the
bets." ("L.L." I. page 233.)

Not the least important of the educational results of the voyage to
Darwin was the acquirement by him of those habits of industry and method
which enabled him in after life to accomplish so much--in spite of
constant failures of health. From the outset, he daily undertook
and resolutely accomplished, in spite of sea-sickness and other
distractions, four important tasks. In the first place he regularly
wrote up the pages of his Journal, in which, paying great attention to
literary style and composition, he recorded only matters that would be
of general interest, such as remarks on scenery and vegetation, on the
peculiarities and habits of animals, and on the characters, avocations
and political institutions of the various races of men with whom he was
brought in contact. It was the freshness of these observations that gave
his "Narrative" so much charm. Only in those cases in which his ideas
had become fully crystallised, did he attempt to deal with scientific
matters in this journal. His second task was to write in voluminous
note-books facts concerning animals and plants, collected on sea or
land, which could not be well made out from specimens preserved in
spirit; but he tells us that, owing to want of skill in dissecting and
drawing, much of the time spent in this work was entirely thrown away,
"a great pile of MS. which I made during the voyage has proved almost
useless." ("L.L." I. page 62.) Huxley confirmed this judgment on his
biological work, declaring that "all his zeal and industry resulted, for
the most part, in a vast accumulation of useless manuscript." ("Proc.
Roy. Soc." Vol. XLIV. (1888), page IX.) Darwin's third task was of a
very different character and of infinitely greater value. It consisted
in writing notes of his journeys on land--the notes being devoted to
the geology of the districts visited by him. These formed the basis, not
only of a number of geological papers published on his return, but also
of the three important volumes forming "The Geology of the voyage of the
'Beagle'". On July 24th, 1834, when little more than half of the voyage
had been completed, Darwin wrote to Henslow, "My notes are becoming
bulky. I have about 600 small quarto pages full; about half of this is
Geology." ("M.L." I. page 14.) The last, and certainly not the least
important of all his duties, consisted in numbering, cataloguing, and
packing his specimens for despatch to Henslow, who had undertaken the
care of them. In his letters he often expresses the greatest solicitude
lest the value of these specimens should be impaired by the removal of
the numbers corresponding to his manuscript lists. Science owes much
to Henslow's patient care of the collections sent to him by Darwin. The
latter wrote in Henslow's biography, "During the five years' voyage,
he regularly corresponded with me and guided my efforts; he received,
opened, and took care of all the specimens sent home in many large
boxes." ("Life of Henslow", by L. Jenyns (Blomefield), London, 1862,
page 53.)

Darwin's geological specimens are now very appropriately lodged for the
most part in the Sedgwick Museum, Cambridge, his original Catalogue with
subsequent annotations being preserved with them. From an examination of
these catalogues and specimens we are able to form a fair notion of
the work done by Darwin in his little cabin in the "Beagle", in the
intervals between his land journeys.

Besides writing up his notes, it is evident that he was able to
accomplish a considerable amount of study of his specimens, before they
were packed up for despatch to Henslow. Besides hand-magnifiers and
a microscope, Darwin had an equipment for blowpipe-analysis, a
contact-goniometer and magnet; and these were in constant use by him.
His small library of reference (now included in the Collection of books
placed by Mr F. Darwin in the Botany School at Cambridge ("Catalogue
of the Library of Charles Darwin now in the Botany School, Cambridge".
Compiled by H.W. Rutherford; with an introduction by Francis Darwin.
Cambridge, 1908.)) appears to have been admirably selected, and in all
probability contained (in addition to a good many works relating to
South America) a fair number of excellent books of reference. Among
those relating to mineralogy, he possessed the manuals of Phillips,
Alexander Brongniart, Beudant, von Kobell and Jameson: all the
"Cristallographie" of Brochant de Villers and, for blowpipe work, Dr
Children's translation of the book of Berzelius on the subject. In
addition to these, he had Henry's "Experimental Chemistry" and Ure's
"Dictionary" (of Chemistry). A work, he evidently often employed, was P.
Syme's book on "Werner's Nomenclature of Colours"; while, for Petrology,
he used Macculloch's "Geological Classification of Rocks". How
diligently and well he employed his instruments and books is shown by
the valuable observations recorded in the annotated Catalogues drawn up
on board ship.

These catalogues have on the right-hand pages numbers and descriptions
of the specimens, and on the opposite pages notes on the specimens--the
result of experiments made at the time and written in a very small hand.
Of the subsequently made pencil notes, I shall have to speak later.
(I am greatly indebted to my friend Mr A. Harker, F.R.S., for his
assistance in examining these specimens and catalogues. He has also
arranged the specimens in the Sedgwick Museum, so as to make reference
to them easy. The specimens from Ascension and a few others are however
in the Museum at Jermyn Street.)

It is a question of great interest to determine the period and the
occasion of Darwin's first awakening to the great problem of the
transmutation of species. He tells us himself that his grandfather's
"Zoonomia" had been read by him "but without producing any effect," and
that his friend Grant's rhapsodies on Lamarck and his views on evolution
only gave rise to "astonishment." ("L.L." I. page 38.)

Huxley, who had probably never seen the privately printed volume of
letters to Henslow, expressed the opinion that Darwin could not have
perceived the important bearing of his discovery of bones in the Pampean
Formation, until they had been studied in England, and their analogies
pronounced upon by competent comparative anatomists. And this seemed to
be confirmed by Darwin's own entry in his pocket-book for 1837, "In
July opened first notebook on Transmutation of Species. Had been greatly
struck from about the month of previous March on character of South
American fossils... " ("L.L." I. page 276.)

The second volume of Lyell's "Principles of Geology" was published in
January, 1832, and Darwin's copy (like that of the other two volumes,
in a sadly dilapidated condition from constant use) has in it the
inscription, "Charles Darwin, Monte Video. Nov. 1832." As everyone
knows, Darwin in dedicating the second edition of his Journal of the
Voyage to Lyell declared, "the chief part of whatever scientific merit
this journal and the other works of the author may possess, has been
derived from studying the well-known and admirable 'Principles of
Geology'".

In the first chapter of this second volume of the "Principles", Lyell
insists on the importance of the species question to the geologist,
but goes on to point out the difficulty of accepting the only
serious attempt at a transmutation theory which had up to that time
appeared--that of Lamarck. In subsequent chapters he discusses the
questions of the modification and variability of species, of hybridity,
and of the geographical distribution of plants and animals. He then
gives vivid pictures of the struggle for existence, ever going
on between various species, and of the causes which lead to their
extinction--not by overwhelming catastrophes, but by the silent and
almost unobserved action of natural causes. This leads him to consider
theories with regard to the introduction of new species, and, rejecting
the fanciful notions of "centres or foci of creation," he argues
strongly in favour of the view, as most reconcileable with observed
facts, that "each species may have had its origin in a single pair, or
individual, where an individual was sufficient, and species may have
been created in succession at such times and in such places as to enable
them to multiply and endure for an appointed period, and occupy an
appointed space on the globe." ("Principles of Geology", Vol. II. (1st
edition 1832), page 124. We now know, as has been so well pointed out
by Huxley, that Lyell, as early as 1827, was prepared to accept the
doctrine of the transmutation of species. In that year he wrote to
Mantell, "What changes species may really undergo! How impossible will
it be to distinguish and lay down a line, beyond which some of the
so-called extinct species may have never passed into recent ones"
(Lyell's "Life and Letters" Vol. I. page 168). To Sir John Herschel in
1836, he wrote, "In regard to the origination of new species, I am
very glad to find that you think it probable that it may be carried on
through the intervention of intermediate causes. I left this rather to
be inferred, not thinking it worth while to offend a certain class of
persons by embodying in words what would only be a speculation" (Ibid.
page 467). He expressed the same views to Whewell in 1837 (Ibid. Vol.
II. page 5.), and to Sedgwick (Ibid. Vol. II. page 36) to whom he says,
of "the theory, that the creation of new species is going on at the
present day"--"I really entertain it," but "I have studiously avoided
laying the doctrine down dogmatically as capable of proof" (see Huxley
in "L.L." II. pages 190-195.))

After pointing out how impossible it would be for a naturalist to prove
that a newly DISCOVERED species was really newly CREATED (Mr F. Darwin
has pointed out that his father (like Lyell) often used the term
"Creation" in speaking of the origin of new species ("L.L." II. chapter
1.)), Lyell argued that no satisfactory evidence OF THE WAY in which
these new forms were created, had as yet been discovered, but that he
entertained the hope of a possible solution of the problem being found
in the study of the geological record.

It is not difficult, in reading these chapters of Lyell's great work,
to realise what an effect they would have on the mind of Darwin, as
new facts were collected and fresh observations concerning extinct and
recent forms were made in his travels. We are not surprised to find him
writing home, "I am become a zealous disciple of Mr Lyell's views, as
known in his admirable book. Geologising in South America, I am tempted
to carry parts to a greater extent even than he does." ("L.L." I. page
263.)

Lyell's anticipation that the study of the geological record might
afford a clue to the discovery of how new species originate was
remarkably fulfilled, within a few months, by Darwin's discovery of
fossil bones in the red Pampean mud.

It is very true that, as Huxley remarked, Darwin's knowledge of
comparative anatomy must have been, at that time, slight; but that he
recognised the remarkable resemblances between the extinct and existing
mammals of South America is proved beyond all question by a passage in
his letter to Henslow, written November 24th, 1832: "I have been very
lucky with fossil bones; I have fragments of at least six
distinct animals... I found a large surface of osseous polygonal
plates... Immediately I saw them I thought they must belong to an
enormous armadillo, living species of which genus are so abundant here,"
and he goes on to say that he has "the lower jaw of some large animal
which, from the molar teeth, I should think belonged to the Edentata."
("M.L." I. pages 11, 12. See "Extracts of Letters addressed to Prof.
Henslow by C. Darwin" (1835), page 7.)

Having found this important clue, Darwin followed it up with
characteristic perseverance. In his quest for more fossil bones he was
indefatigable. Mr Francis Darwin tells us, "I have often heard him speak
of the despair with which he had to break off the projecting extremity
of a huge, partly excavated bone, when the boat waiting for him would
wait no longer." ("L.L." I. page 276 (footnote).) Writing to Haeckel in
1864, Darwin says: "I shall never forget my astonishment when I dug
out a gigantic piece of armour, like that of the living armadillo."
(Haeckel, "History of Creation", Vol. I. page 134, London, 1876.)

In a letter to Henslow in 1834 Darwin says: "I have just got scent
of some fossil bones... what they may be I do not know, but if gold or
galloping will get them they shall be mine." ("M.L." I. page 15.)

Darwin also showed his sense of the importance of the discovery of these
bones by his solicitude about their safe arrival and custody. From the
Falkland Isles (March, 1834), he writes to Henslow: "I have been alarmed
by your expression 'cleaning all the bones' as I am afraid the printed
numbers will be lost: the reason I am so anxious they should not be, is,
that a part were found in a gravel with recent shells, but others in a
very different bed. Now with these latter there were bones of an Agouti,
a genus of animals, I believe, peculiar to America, and it would
be curious to prove that some one of the genus co-existed with the
Megatherium: such and many other points depend on the numbers being
carefully preserved." ("Extracts from Letters etc.", pages 13-14.) In
the abstract of the notes read to the Geological Society in 1835, we
read: "In the gravel of Patagonia he (Darwin) also found many bones of
the Megatherium and of five or six other species of quadrupeds, among
which he has detected the bones of a species of Agouti. He also met with
several examples of the polygonal plates, etc." ("Proc. Geol. Soc." Vol.
II. pages 211-212.)

Darwin's own recollections entirely bear out the conclusion that he
fully recognised, WHILE IN SOUTH AMERICA, the wonderful significance
of the resemblances between the extinct and recent mammalian faunas. He
wrote in his "Autobiography": "During the voyage of the 'Beagle' I had
been deeply impressed by discovering in the Pampean formation
great fossil animals covered with armour like that on the existing
armadillos." ("L.L." I. page 82.)

The impression made on Darwin's mind by the discovery of these fossil
bones, was doubtless deepened as, in his progress southward from Brazil
to Patagonia, he found similar species of Edentate animals everywhere
replacing one another among the living forms, while, whenever fossils
occurred, they also were seen to belong to the same remarkable group of
animals. (While Darwin was making these observations in South America,
a similar generalisation to that at which he arrived was being reached,
quite independently and almost simultaneously, with respect to the
fossil and recent mammals of Australia. In the year 1831, Clift gave
to Jameson a list of bones occurring in the caves and breccias of
Australia, and in publishing this list the latter referred to the fact
that the forms belonged to marsupials, similar to those of the
existing Australian fauna. But he also stated that, as a skull had been
identified (doubtless erroneously) as having belonged to a hippopotamus,
other mammals than marsupials must have spread over the island in late
Tertiary times. It is not necessary to point out that this paper was
quite unknown to Darwin while in South America. Lyell first noticed it
in the third edition of his "Principles", which was published in May,
1834 (see "Edinb. New Phil. Journ." Vol. X. (1831), pages 394-6, and
Lyell's "Principles" (3rd edition), Vol. III. page 421). Darwin referred
to this discovery in 1839 (see his "Journal", page 210.))

That the passage in Darwin's pocket-book for 1837 can only refer to an
AWAKENING of Darwin's interest in the subject--probably resulting from
a sight of the bones when they were being unpacked--I think there
cannot be the smallest doubt; AND WE MAY THEREFORE CONFIDENTLY FIX UPON
NOVEMBER, 1832, AS THE DATE AT WHICH DARWIN COMMENCED THAT LONG SERIES
OF OBSERVATIONS AND REASONINGS WHICH EVENTUALLY CULMINATED IN THE
PREPARATION OF THE "ORIGIN OF SPECIES". Equally certain is it, that it
was his geological work that led Darwin into those paths of research
which in the end conducted him to his great discoveries. I quite agree
with the view expressed by Mr F. Darwin and Professor Seward, that
Darwin, like Lyell, "thought it 'almost useless' to try to prove the
truth of evolution until the cause of change was discovered" ("M.L."
I. page 38.), and that possibly he may at times have vacillated in his
opinions, but I believe there is evidence that, from the date mentioned,
the "species question" was always more or less present in Darwin's mind.
(Although we admit with Huxley that Darwin's training in comparative
anatomy was very small, yet it may be remembered that he was a medical
student for two years, and, if he hated the lectures, he enjoyed the
society of naturalists. He had with him in the little "Beagle" library a
fair number of zoological books, including works on Osteology by Cuvier,
Desmarest and Lesson, as well as two French Encyclopaedias of Natural
History. As a sportsman, he would obtain specimens of recent mammals in
South America, and would thus have opportunities of studying their teeth
and general anatomy. Keen observer, as he undoubtedly was, we need not
then be surprised that he was able to make out the resemblances between
the recent and fossil forms.)

It is clear that, as time went on, Darwin became more and more absorbed
in his geological work. One very significant fact was that the once
ardent sportsman, when he found that shooting the necessary game and
zoological specimens interfered with his work with the hammer, gave up
his gun to his servant. ("L.L." I. page 63.) There is clear evidence
that Darwin gradually became aware how futile were his attempts to add
to zoological knowledge by dissection and drawing, while he felt ever
increasing satisfaction with his geological work.

The voyage fortunately extended to a much longer period (five years)
than the two originally intended, but after being absent nearly three
years, Darwin wrote to his sister in November, 1834, "Hurrah! hurrah!
it is fixed that the 'Beagle' shall not go one mile south of Cape
Tres Montes (about 200 miles south of Chiloe), and from that point to
Valparaiso will be finished in about five months. We shall examine the
Chonos Archipelago, entirely unknown, and the curious inland sea behind
Chiloe. For me it is glorious. Cape Tres Montes is the most southern
point where there is much geological interest, as there the modern beds
end. The Captain then talks of crossing the Pacific; but I think we
shall persuade him to finish the coast of Peru, where the climate
is delightful, the country hideously sterile, but abounding with the
highest interest to the geologist... I have long been grieved and most
sorry at the interminable length of the voyage (though I never would
have quitted it)... I could not make up my mind to return. I could not
give up all the geological castles in the air I had been building up for
the last two years." ("L.L." I. pages 257-58.)

In April, 1835, he wrote to another sister: "I returned a week ago from
my excursion across the Andes to Mendoza. Since leaving England I have
never made so successful a journey... how deeply I have enjoyed it; it
was something more than enjoyment; I cannot express the delight which I
felt at such a famous winding-up of all my geology in South America. I
literally could hardly sleep at nights for thinking over my day's work.
The scenery was so new, and so majestic; everything at an elevation
of 12,000 feet bears so different an aspect from that in the lower
country... To a geologist, also, there are such manifest proofs of
excessive violence; the strata of the highest pinnacles are tossed about
like the crust of a broken pie." ("L.L." I. pages 259-60.)

Darwin anticipated with intense pleasure his visit to the Galapagos
Islands. On July 12th, 1835, he wrote to Henslow: "In a few days' time
the "Beagle" will sail for the Galapagos Islands. I look forward with
joy and interest to this, both as being somewhat nearer to England and
for the sake of having a good look at an active volcano. Although
we have seen lava in abundance, I have never yet beheld the crater."
("M.L." I. page 26.) He could little anticipate, as he wrote these
lines, the important aid in the solution of the "species question" that
would ever after make his visit to the Galapagos Islands so memorable.
In 1832, as we have seen, the great discovery of the relations of living
to extinct mammals in the same area had dawned upon his mind; in 1835
he was to find a second key for opening up the great mystery, by
recognising the variations of similar types in adjoining islands among
the Galapagos.

The final chapter in the second volume of the "Principles" had aroused
in Darwin's mind a desire to study coral-reefs, which was gratified
during his voyage across the Pacific and Indian Oceans. His theory on
the subject was suggested about the end of 1834 or the beginning of
1835, as he himself tells us, before he had seen a coral-reef,
and resulted from his work during two years in which he had "been
incessantly attending to the effects on the shores of South America of
the intermittent elevation of the land, together with denudation and the
deposition of sediment." ("L.L." I. page 70.)

On arriving at the Cape of Good Hope in July, 1836, Darwin was greatly
gratified by hearing that Sedgwick had spoken to his father in high
terms of praise concerning the work done by him in South America.
Referring to the news from home, when he reached Bahia once more, on the
return voyage (August, 1836), he says: "The desert, volcanic rocks, and
wild sea of Ascension... suddenly wore a pleasing aspect, and I set to
work with a good-will at my old work of Geology." ("L.L." I. page 265.)
Writing fifty years later, he says: "I clambered over the mountains of
Ascension with a bounding step and made the volcanic rocks resound under
my geological hammer!" ("L.L." I. page 66.)

That his determination was now fixed to devote his own labours to the
task of working out the geological results of the voyage, and that
he was prepared to leave to more practised hands the study of his
biological collections, is clear from the letters he sent home at this
time. From St Helena he wrote to Henslow asking that he would propose
him as a Fellow of the Geological Society; and his Certificate, in
Henslow's handwriting, is dated September 8th, 1836, being signed from
personal knowledge by Henslow and Sedgwick. He was proposed on November
2nd and elected November 30th, being formally admitted to the Society
by Lyell, who was then President, on January 4th, 1837, on which date he
also read his first paper. Darwin did not become a Fellow of the Linnean
Society till eighteen years later (in 1854).

An estimate of the value and importance of Darwin's geological
discoveries during the voyage of the "Beagle" can best be made when
considering the various memoirs and books in which the author
described them. He was too cautious to allow himself to write his first
impressions in his Journal, and wisely waited till he could study his
specimens under better conditions and with help from others on his
return. The extracts published from his correspondence with Henslow and
others, while he was still abroad, showed, nevertheless, how great was
the mass of observation, how suggestive and pregnant with results were
the reasonings of the young geologist.

Two sets of these extracts from Darwin's letters to Henslow were
printed while he was still abroad. The first of these was the series of
"Geological Notes made during a survey of the East and West Coasts of
South America, in the years 1832, 1833, 1834 and 1835, with an account
of a transverse section of the Cordilleras of the Andes between
Valparaiso and Mendoza". Professor Sedgwick, who read these notes to
the Geological Society on November 18th, 1835, stated that "they were
extracted from a series of letters (addressed to Professor Henslow),
containing a great mass of information connected with almost every
branch of natural history," and that he (Sedgwick) had made a selection
of the remarks which he thought would be more especially interesting to
the Geological Society. An abstract of three pages was published in the
"Proceedings of the Geological Society" (Vol. II. pages 210-12.), but so
unknown was the author at this time that he was described as F. Darwin,
Esq., of St John's College, Cambridge! Almost simultaneously (on
November 16th, 1835) a second set of extracts from these letters--this
time of a general character--were read to the Philosophical Society at
Cambridge, and these excited so much interest that they were privately
printed in pamphlet form for circulation among the members.

Many expeditions and "scientific missions" have been despatched to
various parts of the world since the return of the "Beagle" in 1836, but
it is doubtful whether any, even the most richly endowed of them, has
brought back such stores of new information and fresh discoveries as
did that little "ten-gun brig"--certainly no cabin or laboratory was the
birth-place of ideas of such fruitful character as was that narrow end
of a chart-room, where the solitary naturalist could climb into his
hammock and indulge in meditation.

The third and most active portion of Darwin's career as a geologist was
the period which followed his return to England at the end of 1836. His
immediate admission to the Geological Society, at the beginning of 1837,
coincided with an important crisis in the history of geological science.

The band of enthusiasts who nearly thirty years before had inaugurated
the Geological Society--weary of the fruitless conflicts between
"Neptunists" and "Plutonists"--had determined to eschew theory and
confine their labours to the collection of facts, their publications to
the careful record of observations. Greenough, the actual founder of the
Society, was an ardent Wernerian, and nearly all his fellow-workers had
come, more or less directly, under the Wernerian teaching. Macculloch
alone gave valuable support to the Huttonian doctrines, so far as they
related to the influence of igneous activity--but the most important
portion of the now celebrated "Theory of the Earth"--that dealing with
the competency of existing agencies to account for changes in past
geological times--was ignored by all alike. Macculloch's influence on
the development of geology, which might have had far-reaching effects,
was to a great extent neutralised by his peculiarities of mind and
temper; and, after a stormy and troublous career, he retired from the
society in 1832. In all the writings of the great pioneers in English
geology, Hutton and his splendid generalisation are scarcely ever
referred to. The great doctrines of Uniformitarianism, which he had
foreshadowed, were completely ignored, and only his extravagances of
"anti-Wernerianism" seem to have been remembered.

When between 1830 and 1832, Lyell, taking up the almost forgotten ideas
of Hutton, von Hoff and Prevost, published that bold challenge to
the Catastrophists--the "Principles of Geology"--he was met with the
strongest opposition, not only from the outside world, which was amused
by his "absurdities" and shocked by his "impiety"--but not less from
his fellow-workers and friends in the Geological Society. For Lyell's
numerous original observations, and his diligent collection of facts his
contemporaries had nothing but admiration, and they cheerfully admitted
him to the highest offices in the society, but they met his reasonings
on geological theory with vehement opposition and his conclusions with
coldness and contempt.

There is, indeed, a very striking parallelism between the reception of
the "Principles of Geology" by Lyell's contemporaries and the manner in
which the "Origin of Species" was met a quarter of a century later, as
is so vividly described by Huxley. ("L.L." II. pages 179-204.) Among
Lyell's fellow-geologists, two only--G. Poulett Scrope and John Herschel
(Both Lyell and Darwin fully realised the value of the support of these
two friends. Scrope in his appreciative reviews of the "Principles"
justly pointed out what was the weakest point, the inadequate
recognition of sub-aerial as compared with marine denudation. Darwin
also admitted that Scrope had to a great extent forestalled him in his
theory of Foliation. Herschel from the first insisted that the leading
idea of the "Principles" must be applied to organic as well as to
inorganic nature and must explain the appearance of new species (see
Lyell's "Life and Letters", Vol. I. page 467). Darwin tells us that
Herschel's "Introduction to the Study of Natural Philosophy" with
Humboldt's "Personal Narrative" "stirred up in me a burning zeal" in
his undergraduate days. I once heard Lyell exclaim with fervour "If
ever there was a heaven-born genius it was John Herschel!")--declared
themselves from the first his strong supporters. Scrope in two
luminous articles in the "Quarterly Review" did for Lyell what Huxley
accomplished for Darwin in his famous review in the "Times"; but Scrope
unfortunately was at that time immersed in the stormy sea of politics,
and devoted his great powers of exposition to the preparation of
fugitive pamphlets. Herschel, like Scrope, was unable to support
Lyell at the Geological Society, owing to his absence on the important
astronomical mission to the Cape.

It thus came about that, in the frequent conflicts of opinion within the
walls of the Geological Society, Lyell had to bear the brunt of battle
for Uniformitarianism quite alone, and it is to be feared that he found
himself sadly overmatched when opposed by the eloquence of Sedgwick, the
sarcasm of Buckland, and the dead weight of incredulity on the part of
Greenough, Conybeare, Murchison and other members of the band of pioneer
workers. As time went on there is evidence that the opposition of De la
Beche and Whewell somewhat relaxed; the brilliant "Paddy" Fitton (as his
friends called him) was sometimes found in alliance with Lyell, but was
characteristically apt to turn his weapon, as occasion served, on friend
or foe alike; the amiable John Phillips "sat upon the fence." Only when
a new generation arose--including Jukes, Ramsay, Forbes and Hooker--did
Lyell find his teachings received with anything like favour.

We can well understand, then, how Lyell would welcome such a recruit as
young Darwin--a man who had declared himself more Lyellian than Lyell,
and who brought to his support facts and observations gleaned from so
wide a field.

The first meeting of Lyell and Darwin was characteristic of the two men.
Darwin at once explained to Lyell that, with respect to the origin of
coral-reefs, he had arrived at views directly opposed to those published
by "his master." To give up his own theory, cost Lyell, as he told
Herschel, a "pang at first," but he was at once convinced of the
immeasurable superiority of Darwin's theory. I have heard members
of Lyell's family tell of the state of wild excitement and sustained
enthusiasm, which lasted for days with Lyell after this interview, and
his letters to Herschel, Whewell and others show his pleasure at the new
light thrown upon the subject and his impatience to have the matter laid
before the Geological Society.

Writing forty years afterwards, Darwin, speaking of the time of the
return of the "Beagle", says: "I saw a great deal of Lyell. One of his
chief characteristics was his sympathy with the work of others, and
I was as much astonished as delighted at the interest which he
showed when, on my return to England, I explained to him my views on
coral-reefs. This encouraged me greatly, and his advice and example had
much influence on me." ("L.L." I. page 68.) Darwin further states that
he saw more of Lyell at this time than of any other scientific man, and
at his request sent his first communication to the Geological Society.
("L.L." I. page 67.)

"Mr Lonsdale" (the able curator of the Geological Society), Darwin wrote
to Henslow, "with whom I had much interesting conversation," "gave me a
most cordial reception," and he adds, "If I was not much more inclined
for geology than the other branches of Natural History, I am sure Mr
Lyell's and Lonsdale's kindness ought to fix me. You cannot conceive
anything more thoroughly good-natured than the heart-and-soul manner in
which he put himself in my place and thought what would be best to do."
("L.L." I. page 275.)

Within a few days of Darwin's arrival in London we find Lyell writing to
Owen as follows:

"Mrs Lyell and I expect a few friends here on Saturday next, 29th
(October), to an early tea party at eight o'clock, and it will give us
great pleasure if you can join it. Among others you will meet Mr Charles
Darwin, whom I believe you have seen, just returned from South America,
where he has laboured for zoologists as well as for hammer-bearers.
I have also asked your friend Broderip." ("The Life of Richard Owen",
London, 1894, Vol. I. page 102.) It would probably be on this occasion
that the services of Owen were secured for the work on the fossil bones
sent home by Darwin.

On November 2nd, we find Lyell introducing Darwin as his guest at the
Geological Society Club; on December 14th, Lyell and Stokes proposed
Darwin as a member of the Club; between that date and May 3rd of the
following year, when his election to the Club took place, he was several
times dining as a guest.

On January 4th, 1837, as we have already seen, Darwin was formally
admitted to the Geological Society, and on the same evening he read
his first paper (I have already pointed out that the notes read at the
Geological Society on Nov. 18, 1835 were extracts made by Sedgwick from
letters sent to Henslow, and not a paper sent home for publication by
Darwin.) before the Society, "Observations of proofs of recent elevation
on the coast of Chili, made during the Survey of H.M.S. "Beagle",
commanded by Captain FitzRoy, R.N." By C. Darwin, F.G.S. This paper was
preceded by one on the same subject by Mr A. Caldcleugh, and the reading
of a letter and other communications from the Foreign Office also
relating to the earthquakes in Chili.

At the meeting of the Council of the Geological Society on February 1st,
Darwin was nominated as a member of the new Council, and he was elected
on February 17th.

The meeting of the Geological Society on April 19th was devoted to the
reading by Owen of his paper on Toxodon, perhaps the most remarkable
of the fossil mammals found by Darwin in South America; and at the
next meeting, on May 3rd, Darwin himself read "A Sketch of the Deposits
containing extinct Mammalia in the neighbourhood of the Plata". The
next following meeting, on May 17th, was devoted to Darwin's Coral-reef
paper, entitled "On certain areas of elevation and subsidence in
the Pacific and Indian Oceans, as deduced from the study of Coral
Formations". Neither of these three early papers of Darwin were
published in the Transactions of the Geological Society, but the
minutes of the Council show that they were "withdrawn by the author by
permission of the Council."

Darwin's activity during this session led to some rather alarming
effects upon his health, and he was induced to take a holiday in
Staffordshire and the Isle of Wight. He was not idle, however, for a
remark of his uncle, Mr Wedgwood, led him to make those interesting
observations on the work done by earthworms, that resulted in his
preparing a short memoir on the subject, and this paper, "On the
Formation of Mould", was read at the Society on November 1st, 1837,
being the first of Darwin's papers published in full; it appeared in
Vol. V. of the "Geological Transactions", pages 505-510.

During this session, Darwin attended nearly all the Council meetings,
and took such an active part in the work of the Society that it is not
surprising to find that he was now requested to accept the position of
Secretary. After some hesitation, in which he urged his inexperience
and want of knowledge of foreign languages, he consented to accept the
appointment. ("L.L." I. page 285.)

At the anniversary meeting on February 16th, 1838, the Wollaston Medal
was given to Owen in recognition of his services in describing the
fossil mammals sent home by Darwin. In his address, the President,
Professor Whewell, dwelt at length on the great value of the papers
which Darwin had laid before the Society during the preceding session.

On March 7th, Darwin read before the Society the most important perhaps
of all his geological papers, "On the Connexion of certain Volcanic
Phenomena in South America, and on the Formation of Mountain-Chains and
Volcanoes as the effect of Continental Elevations". In this paper he
boldly attacked the tenets of the Catastrophists. It is evident that
Darwin at this time, taking advantage of the temporary improvement in
his health, was throwing himself into the breach of Uniformitarianism
with the greatest ardour. Lyell wrote to Sedgwick on April 21st, 1837,
"Darwin is a glorious addition to any society of geologists, and is
working hard and making way, both in his book and in our discussions."
("The Life and Letters of the Reverend Adam Sedgwick", Vol. I. page 484,
Cambridge, 1890.)

We have unfortunately few records of the animated debates which took
place at this time between the old and new schools of geologists. I have
often heard Lyell tell how Lockhart would bring down a party of friends
from the Athenaeum Club to Somerset House on Geological nights, not, as
he carefully explained, that "he cared for geology, but because he liked
to while the fellows fight." But it fortunately happens that a few days
after this last of Darwin's great field-days, at the Geological Society,
Lyell, in a friendly letter to his father-in-law, Leonard Horner, wrote
a very lively account of the proceedings while his impressions were
still fresh; and this gives us an excellent idea of the character of
these discussions.

Neither Sedgwick nor Buckland were present on this occasion, but we can
imagine how they would have chastised their two "erring pupils"--more
in sorrow than in anger--had they been there. Greenough, too, was
absent--possibly unwilling to countenance even by his presence such
outrageous doctrines.

Darwin, after describing the great earthquakes which he had experienced
in South America, and the evidence of their connection with volcanic
outbursts, proceeded to show that earthquakes originated in fractures,
gradually formed in the earth's crust, and were accompanied by movements
of the land on either side of the fracture. In conclusion he boldly
advanced the view "that continental elevations, and the action of
volcanoes, are phenomena now in progress, caused by some great but slow
change in the interior of the earth; and, therefore, that it might
be anticipated, that the formation of mountain chains is likewise in
progress: and at a rate which may be judged of by either actions, but
most clearly by the growth of volcanoes." ("Proc. Geol. Soc." Vol. II.
pages 654-60.)

Lyell's account ("Life, Letters and Journals of Sir Charles Lyell,
Bart.", edited by his sister-in-law, Mrs Lyell, Vol. II. pages 40,
41 (Letter to Leonard Horner, 1838), 2 vols. London, 1881.) of the
discussion was as follows: "In support of my heretical notions," Darwin
"opened upon De la Beche, Phillips and others his whole battery of the
earthquakes and volcanoes of the Andes, and argued that spaces at least
a thousand miles long were simultaneously subject to earthquakes and
volcanic eruptions, and that the elevation of the Pampas, Patagonia,
etc., all depended on a common cause; also that the greater the
contortions of strata in a mountain chain, the smaller must have been
each separate and individual movement of that long series which was
necessary to upheave the chain. Had they been more violent, he
contended that the subterraneous fluid matter would have gushed out and
overflowed, and the strata would have been blown up and annihilated. (It
is interesting to compare this with what Darwin wrote to Henslow
seven years earlier.) He therefore introduces a cooling of one small
underground injection, and then the pumping in of other lava, or
porphyry, or granite, into the previously consolidated and first-formed
mass of igneous rock. (Ideas somewhat similar to this suggestion have
recently been revived by Dr See ("Proc. Am. Phil. Soc." Vol. XLVII.
1908, page 262.).) When he had done his description of the reiterated
strokes of his volcanic pump, De la Beche gave us a long oration about
the impossibility of strata of the Alps, etc., remaining flexible
for such a time as they must have done, if they were to be tilted,
convoluted, or overturned by gradual small shoves. He never, however,
explained his theory of original flexibility, and therefore I am as
unable as ever to comprehend why flexiblility is a quality so limited in
time.

"Phillips then got up and pronounced a panegyric upon the "Principles
of Geology", and although he still differed, thought the actual cause
doctrine had been so well put, that it had advanced the science and
formed a date or era, and that for centuries the two opposite doctrines
would divide geologists, some contending for greater pristine forces,
others satisfied, like Lyell and Darwin, with the same intensity as
nature now employs.

"Fitton quizzed Phillips a little for the warmth of his eulogy, saying
that he (Fitton) and others, who had Mr Lyell always with them, were in
the habit of admiring and quarrelling with him every day, as one
might do with a sister or cousin, whom one would only kiss and embrace
fervently after a long absence. This seemed to be Mr Phillips' case,
coming up occasionally from the provinces. Fitton then finished this
drollery by charging me with not having done justice to Hutton, who he
said was for gradual elevation.

"I replied, that most of the critics had attacked me for overrating
Hutton, and that Playfair understood him as I did.

"Whewell concluded by considering Hopkins' mathematical calculations, to
which Darwin had often referred. He also said that we ought not to try
and make out what Hutton would have taught and thought, if he had known
the facts which we now know."

It may be necessary to point out, in explanation of the above narrative,
that while it was perfectly clear from Hutton's rather obscure and
involved writings that he advocated slow and gradual change on
the earth's surface, his frequent references to violent action and
earthquakes led many--including Playfair, Lyell and Whewell--to believe
that he held the changes going on in the earth's interior to be of
a catastrophic nature. Fitton, however, maintained that Hutton was
consistently uniformitarian. Before the idea of the actual "flowing" of
solid bodies under intense pressure had been grasped by geologists,
De la Beche, like Playfair before him, maintained that the bending
and folding of rocks must have been effected before their complete
consolidation.

In concluding his account of this memorable discussion, Lyell adds: "I
was much struck with the different tone in which my gradual causes
was treated by all, even including De la Beche, from that which they
experienced in the same room four years ago, when Buckland, De la
Beche(?), Sedgwick, Whewell, and some others treated them with as much
ridicule as was consistent with politeness in my presence."

This important paper was, in spite of its theoretical character,
published in full in the "Transactions of the Geological Society" (Ser.
2, Vol. V. pages 601-630). It did not however appear till 1840, and
possibly some changes may have been made in it during the long interval
between reading and printing. During the year 1839, Darwin continued his
regular attendance at the Council meetings, but there is no record of
any discussions in which he may have taken part, and he contributed
no papers himself to the Society. At the beginning of 1840, he was
re-elected for the third time as Secretary, but the results of failing
health are indicated by the circumstance that, only at one meeting early
in the session, was he able to attend the Council. At the beginning of
the next session (Feb. 1841) Bunbury succeeded him as Secretary,
Darwin still remaining on the Council. It may be regarded as a striking
indication of the esteem in which he was held by his fellow geologists,
that Darwin remained on the Council for 14 consecutive years down to
1849, though his attendances were in some years very few. In 1843 and
1844 he was a Vice-president, but after his retirement at the beginning
of 1850, he never again accepted re-nomination. He continued, however,
to contribute papers to the Society, as we shall see, down to the end of
1862.

Although Darwin early became a member of the Geological Dining Club, it
is to be feared that he scarcely found himself in a congenial atmosphere
at those somewhat hilarious gatherings, where the hardy wielders of the
hammer not only drank port--and plenty of it--but wound up their
meal with a mixture of Scotch ale and soda water, a drink which, as
reminiscent of the "field," was regarded as especially appropriate to
geologists. Even after the meetings, which followed the dinners,
they reassembled for suppers, at which geological dainties, like
"pterodactyle pie" figured in the bill of fare, and fines of bumpers
were inflicted on those who talked the "ologies."

After being present at a fair number of meetings in 1837 and 1838,
Darwin's attendances at the Club fell off to two in 1839, and by 1841
he had ceased to be a member. In a letter to Lyell on Dec. 2nd, 1841,
Leonard Horner wrote that the day before "At the Council, I had the
satisfaction of seeing Darwin again in his place and looking well. He
tried the last evening meeting, but found it too much, but I hope before
the end of the season he will find himself equal to that also. I hail
Darwin's recovery as a vast gain to science." Darwin's probably last
attendance, this time as a guest, was in 1851, when Horner again
wrote to Lyell, "Charles Darwin was at the Geological Society's Club
yesterday, where he had not been for ten years--remarkably well, and
grown quite stout." ("Memoirs of Leonard Horner" (privately printed),
Vol. II. pages 39 and 195.)

It may be interesting to note that at the somewhat less lively dining
Club--the Philosophical--in the founding of which his friends Lyell and
Hooker had taken so active a part, Darwin found himself more at home,
and he was a frequent attendant--in spite of his residence being at
Down--from 1853 to 1864. He even made contributions on scientific
questions after these dinners. In a letter to Hooker he states that he
was deeply interested in the reforms of the Royal Society, which the
Club was founded to promote. He says also that he had arranged to come
to town every Club day "and then my head, I think, will allow me on an
average to go to every other meeting. But it is grievous how often any
change knocks me up." ("L.L." II. pages 42, 43.)

Of the years 1837 and 1838 Darwin himself says they were "the most
active ones which I ever spent, though I was occasionally unwell, and
so lost some time... I also went a little into society." ("L.L." I. pages
67, 68.) But of the four years from 1839 to 1842 he has to confess sadly
"I did less scientific work, though I worked as hard as I could, than
during any other equal length of time in my life. This was owing to
frequently recurring unwellness, and to one long and serious illness."
("L.L." I. page 69.)

Darwin's work at the Geological Society did not by any means engage the
whole of his energies, during the active years 1837 and 1838. In June of
the latter year, leaving town in somewhat bad health, he found himself
at Edinburgh again, and engaged in examining the Salisbury Craigs, in a
very different spirit to that excited by Jameson's discourse. ("L.L."
I. page 290.) Proceeding to the Highlands he then had eight days of hard
work at the famous "Parallel Roads of Glen Roy", being favoured with
glorious weather.

He says of the writing of the paper on the subject--the only memoir
contributed by Darwin to the Royal Society, to which he had been
recently elected--that it was "one of the most difficult and instructive
tasks I was ever engaged on." The paper extends to 40 quarto pages
and is illustrated by two plates. Though it is full of the records
of careful observation and acute reasoning, yet the theory of marine
beaches which he propounded was, as he candidly admitted in after years
("M.L." II page 188.), altogether wrong. The alternative lake-theory he
found himself unable to accept at the time, for he could not understand
how barriers could be formed at successive levels across the valleys;
and until the following year, when the existence of great glaciers
in the district was proved by the researches of Agassiz, Buckland and
others, the difficulty appeared to him an insuperable one. Although
Darwin said of this paper in after years that it "was a great failure
and I am ashamed of it"--yet he retained his interest in the question
ever afterwards, and he says "my error has been a good lesson to me
never to trust in science to the principle of exclusion." ("M.L." II.
pages 171-93.)

Although Darwin had not realised in 1838 that large parts of the British
Islands had been occupied by great glaciers, he had by no means failed
while in South America to recognise the importance of ice-action. His
observations, as recorded in his Journal, on glaciers coming down to
the sea-level, on the west coast of South America, in a latitude
corresponding to a much lower one than that of the British Islands,
profoundly interested geologists; and the same work contains many
valuable notes on the boulders and unstratified beds in South America in
which they were included.

But in 1840 Agassiz read his startling paper on the evidence of the
former existence of glaciers in the British Islands, and this was
followed by Buckland's memoir on the same subject. On April 14, 1841,
Darwin contributed to the Geological Society his important paper "On the
Distribution of Erratic Boulders and the Contemporaneous Unstratified
Deposits of South America", a paper full of suggestiveness for those
studying the glacial deposits of this country. It was published in the
"Transactions" in 1842.

The description of traces of glacial action in North Wales, by Buckland,
appears to have greatly excited the interest of Darwin. With Sedgwick he
had, in 1831, worked at the stratigraphy of that district, but neither
of them had noticed the very interesting surface features. ("L.L." I.
page 58.) Darwin was able to make a journey to North Wales in June,
1842 (alas! it was his last effort in field-geology) and as a result
he published his most able and convincing paper on the subject in the
September number of the "Philosophical Magazine" for 1842. Thus the
mystery of the bell-stone was at last solved and Darwin, writing many
years afterwards, said "I felt the keenest delight when I first read of
the action of icebergs in transporting boulders, and I gloried in the
progress of Geology." ("L.L." I. page 41.) To the "Geographical Journal"
he had sent in 1839 a note "On a Rock seen on an Iceberg in 16 deg S.
Latitude." For the subject of ice-action, indeed, Darwin retained the
greatest interest to the end of his life. ("M.L." II. pages 148-71.)

In 1846, Darwin read two papers to the Geological Society "On the
dust which falls on vessels in the Atlantic, and On the Geology of the
Falkland Islands"; in 1848 he contributed a note on the transport of
boulders from lower to higher levels; and in 1862 another note on the
thickness of the Pampean formation, as shown by recent borings at Buenos
Ayres. An account of the "British Fossil Lepadidae" read in 1850, was
withdrawn by him.

At the end of 1836 Darwin had settled himself in lodgings in Fitzwilliam
Street, Cambridge, and devoted three months to the work of unpacking his
specimens and studying his collection of rocks. The pencilled notes on
the Manuscript Catalogue in the Sedgwick Museum enable us to realise
his mode of work, and the diligence with which it was carried on. The
letters M and H, indicate the assistance he received from time to
time from Professor Miller, the crystallographer, and from his friend
Henslow. Miller not only measured many of the crystals submitted to him,
but evidently taught Darwin to use the reflecting goniometer himself
with considerable success. The "book of measurements" in which the
records were kept, appears to have been lost, but the pencilled notes
in the catalogue show how thoroughly the work was done. The letter R
attached to some of the numbers in the catalogue evidently refers to the
fact that they were submitted to Mr Trenham Reeks (who analysed some of
his specimens) at the Geological Survey quarters in Craig's Court. This
was at a later date when Darwin was writing the "Volcanic Islands" and
"South America".

It was about the month of March, 1837, that Darwin completed this work
upon his rocks, and also the unpacking and distribution of his fossil
bones and other specimens. We have seen that November, 1832, must
certainly be regarded as the date when he FIRST realised the important
fact that the fossil mammals of the Pampean formation were all closely
related to the existing forms in South America; while October, 1835,
was, as undoubtedly, the date when the study of the birds and other
forms of life in the several islands of the Galapagos Islands gave
him his SECOND impulse towards abandoning the prevalent view of the
immutability of species. When then in his pocket-book for 1837 Darwin
wrote the often quoted passage: "In July opened first note-book on
Transmutation of Species. Had been greatly struck from about the month
of previous March on character of South American fossils, and species on
Galapagos Archipelago. These facts (especially latter), origin of all my
views" ("L.L." I. page 276.), it is clear that he must refer, not to
his first inception of the idea of evolution, but to the flood of
recollections, the reawakening of his interest in the subject, which
could not fail to result from the sight of his specimens and the
reference to his notes.

Except during the summer vacation, when he was visiting his father and
uncle, and with the latter making his first observations upon the work
of earthworms, Darwin was busy with his arrangements for the publication
of the five volumes of the "Zoology of the 'Beagle'" and in getting the
necessary financial aid from the government for the preparation of the
plates. He was at the same time preparing his "Journal" for publication.
During the years 1837 to 1843, Darwin worked intermittently on the
volumes of Zoology, all of which he edited, while he wrote introductions
to those by Owen and Waterhouse and supplied notes to the others.

Although Darwin says of his Journal that the preparation of the book
"was not hard work, as my MS. Journal had been written with care." Yet
from the time that he settled at 36, Great Marlborough Street in March,
1837, to the following November he was occupied with this book. He tells
us that the account of his scientific observations was added at this
time. The work was not published till March, 1839, when it appeared
as the third volume of the "Narrative of the Surveying Voyages of H.M.
Ships 'Adventure' and 'Beagle' between the years 1826 and 1836". The
book was probably a long time in the press, for there are no less than
20 pages of addenda in small print. Even in this, its first form, the
work is remarkable for its freshness and charm, and excited a great
amount of attention and interest. In addition to matters treated of in
greater detail in his other works, there are many geological notes of
extreme value in this volume, such as his account of lightning tubes, of
the organisms found in dust, and of the obsidian bombs of Australia.

Having thus got out of hand a number of preliminary duties, Darwin was
ready to set to work upon the three volumes which were designed by him
to constitute "The Geology of the Voyage of the 'Beagle'". The first of
these was to be on "The Structure and Distribution of Coral-reefs". He
commenced the writing of the book on October 5, 1838, and the last proof
was corrected on May 6, 1842. Allowing for the frequent interruptions
through illness, Darwin estimated that it cost him twenty months of hard
work.

Darwin has related how his theory of Coral-reefs which was begun in a
more "deductive spirit" than any of his other work, for in 1834 or 1835
it "was thought out on the west coast of South America, before I had
seen a true coral-reef." ("L.L." I. page 70.) The final chapter in
Lyell's second volume of the "Principles" was devoted to the subject
of Coral-reefs, and a theory was suggested to account for the peculiar
phenomena of "atolls." Darwin at once saw the difficulty of accepting
the view that the numerous and diverse atolls all represent submerged
volcanic craters. His own work had for two years been devoted to the
evidence of land movements over great areas in South America, and thus
he was led to announce his theory of subsidence to account for barrier
and encircling reefs as well as atolls.

Fortunately, during his voyage across the Pacific and Indian Oceans, in
his visit to Australia and his twelve days' hard work at Keeling Island,
he had opportunities for putting his theory to the test of observation.

On his return to England, Darwin appears to have been greatly surprised
at the amount of interest that his new theory excited. Urged by Lyell,
he read to the Geological Society a paper on the subject, as we have
seen, with as little delay as possible, but this paper was "withdrawn by
permission of the Council." An abstract of three pages however appeared
in the "Proceedings of the Geological Society". (Vol. II. pages 552-554
(May 31, 1837).) A full account of the observations and the theory was
given in the "Journal" (1839) in the 40 pages devoted to Keeling
Island in particular and to Coral formations generally. ("Journal" (1st
edition), pages 439-69.)

It will be readily understood what an amount of labour the book on
Coral reefs cost Darwin when we reflect on the number of charts, sailing
directions, narratives of voyages and other works which, with the
friendly assistance of the authorities at the Admiralty, he had
to consult before he could draw up his sketch of the nature and
distribution of the reefs, and this was necessary before the theory, in
all its important bearings, could be clearly enunciated. Very pleasing
is it to read how Darwin, although arriving at a different conclusion to
Lyell, shows, by quoting a very suggestive passage in the "Principles"
(1st edition Vol. II. page 296.), how the latter only just missed the
true solution. This passage is cited, both in the "Journal" and the
volume on Coral-reefs. Lyell, as we have seen, received the new theory
not merely ungrudgingly, but with the utmost enthusiasm.

In 1849 Darwin was gratified by receiving the support of Dana, after his
prolonged investigation in connection with the U.S. Exploring Expedition
("M.L." II. pages 226-8.), and in 1874 he prepared a second edition of
his book, in which some objections which had been raised to the theory
were answered. A third edition, edited by Professor Bonney, appeared in
1880, and a fourth (a reprint of the first edition, with introduction by
myself) in 1890.

Although Professor Semper, in his account of the Pelew Islands, had
suggested difficulties in the acceptance of Darwin's theory, it was
not till after the return of the "Challenger" expedition in 1875 that a
rival theory was propounded, and somewhat heated discussions were raised
as to the respective merits of the two theories. While geologists have,
nearly without exception, strongly supported Darwin's views, the notes
of dissent have come almost entirely from zoologists. At the height
of the controversy unfounded charges of unfairness were made against
Darwin's supporters and the authorities of the Geological Society, but
this unpleasant subject has been disposed of, once for all, by Huxley.
("Essays upon some Controverted Questions", London, 1892, pages 314-328
and 623-625.)

Darwin's final and very characteristic utterance on the coral-reef
controversy is found in a letter which he wrote to Professor Alexander
Agassiz, May 5th, 1881: less than a year before his death: "If I am
wrong, the sooner I am knocked on the head and annihilated so much the
better. It still seems to me a marvellous thing that there should not
have been much, and long-continued, subsidence in the beds of the great
oceans. I wish that some doubly rich millionaire would take it into his
head to have borings made in some of the Pacific and Indian atolls, and
bring home cores for slicing from a depth of 500 or 600 feet." ("L.L."
III. page 184.)

Though the "doubly rich millionaire" has not been forthcoming, the
energy, in England, of Professor Sollas, and in New South Wales of
Professor Anderson Stuart served to set on foot a project, which, aided
at first by the British Association for the Advancement of Science, and
afterwards taken up jointly by the Royal Society, the New South
Wales Government, and the Admiralty, has led to the most definite and
conclusive results.

The Committee appointed by the Royal Society to carry out the
undertaking included representatives of all the views that had been
put forward on the subject. The place for the experiment was, with the
consent of every member of the Committee, selected by the late Admiral
Sir W.J. Wharton--who was not himself an adherent of Darwin's views--and
no one has ventured to suggest that his selection, the splendid atoll of
Funafuti, was not a most judicious one.

By the pluck and perseverance of Professor Sollas in the preliminary
expedition, and of Professor T. Edgeworth David and his pupils, in
subsequent investigations of the island, the rather difficult piece
of work was brought to a highly satisfactory conclusion. The New South
Wales Government lent boring apparatus and workmen, and the Admiralty
carried the expedition to its destination in a surveying ship which,
under Captain (now Admiral) A. Mostyn Field, made the most complete
survey of the atoll and its surrounding seas that has ever been
undertaken in the case of a coral formation.

After some failures and many interruptions, the boring was carried to
the depth of 1114 feet, and the cores obtained were sent to England.
Here the examination of the materials was fortunately undertaken by
a zoologist of the highest repute, Dr G.J. Hinde--who has a wide
experience in the study of organisms by sections--and he was aided at
all points by specialists in the British Museum of Natural History
and by other naturalists. Nor were the chemical and other problems
neglected.

The verdict arrived at, after this most exhaustive study of a series of
cores obtained from depths twice as great as that thought necessary by
Darwin, was as follows:--"The whole of the cores are found to be built
up of those organisms which are seen forming coral-reefs near the
surface of the ocean--many of them evidently in situ; and not the
slightest indication could be detected, by chemical or microscopic
means, which suggested the proximity of non-calcareous rocks, even in
the lowest portions brought up."

But this was not all. Professor David succeeded in obtaining the aid
of a very skilful engineer from Australia, while the Admiralty allowed
Commander F.C.D. Sturdee to take a surveying ship into the lagoon
for further investigations. By very ingenious methods, and with great
perseverance, two borings were put down in the midst of the lagoon to
the depth of nearly 200 feet. The bottom of the lagoon, at the depth of
101 1/2 feet from sea-level, was found to be covered with remains of the
calcareous, green sea-weed Halimeda, mingled with many foraminifera; but
at a depth of 163 feet from the surface of the lagoon the boring tools
encountered great masses of coral, which were proved from the fragments
brought up to belong to species that live within AT MOST 120 feet from
the surface of the ocean, as admitted by all zoologists. ("The Atoll
of Funafuti; Report of the Coral Reef Committee of the Royal Society",
London, 1904.)

Darwin's theory, as is well known, is based on the fact that the
temperature of the ocean at any considerable depth does not permit of
the existence and luxuriant growth of the organisms that form the reefs.
He himself estimated this limit of depth to be from 120 to 130 feet;
Dana, as an extreme, 150 feet; while the recent very prolonged and
successful investigations of Professor Alexander Agassiz in the Pacific
and Indian Oceans lead him also to assign a limiting depth of 150 feet;
the EFFECTIVE, REEF-FORMING CORALS, however, flourishing at a much
smaller depth. Mr Stanley Gardiner gives for the most important
reef-forming corals depths between 30 and 90 feet, while a few are found
as low as 120 feet or even 180 feet.

It will thus be seen that the verdict of Funafuti is clearly and
unmistakeably in favour of Darwin's theory. It is true that some
zoologists find a difficulty in realising a slow sinking of parts of the
ocean floor, and have suggested new and alternative explanations: but
geologists generally, accepting the proofs of slow upheaval in
some areas--as shown by the admirable researches of Alexander
Agassiz--consider that it is absolutely necessary to admit that this
elevation is balanced by subsidence in other areas. If atolls and
barrier-reefs did not exist we should indeed be at a great loss to frame
a theory to account for their absence.

After finishing his book on Coral-reefs, Darwin made his summer
excursion to North Wales, and prepared his important memoir on the
glaciers of that district: but by October (1842) we find him fairly
settled at work upon the second volume of his "Geology of the
'Beagle'--Geological Observations on the Volcanic Islands, visited
during the Voyage of H.M.S. 'Beagle'". The whole of the year 1843 was
devoted to this work, but he tells his friend Fox that he could "manage
only a couple of hours per day, and that not very regularly." ("L.L." I.
page 321.) Darwin's work on the various volcanic islands examined by
him had given him the most intense pleasure, but the work of writing
the book by the aid of his notes and specimens he found "uphill
work," especially as he feared the book would not be read, "even by
geologists." (Loc. cit.)

As a matter of fact the work is full of the most interesting
observations and valuable suggestions, and the three editions (or
reprints) which have appeared have proved a most valuable addition to
geological literature. It is not necessary to refer to the novel and
often very striking discoveries described in this well-known work. The
subsidence beneath volcanic vents, the enormous denudation of volcanic
cones reducing them to "basal wrecks," the effects of solfatarric action
and the formation of various minerals in the cavities of rocks--all
of these subjects find admirable illustration from his graphic
descriptions. One of the most important discussions in this volume is
that dealing with the "lamination" of lavas as especially well seen in
the rocks of Ascension. Like Scrope, Darwin recognised the close analogy
between the structure of these rocks and those of metamorphic origin--a
subject which he followed out in the volume "Geological Observations on
South America".

Of course in these days, since the application of the microscope to the
study of rocks in thin sections, Darwin's nomenclature and descriptions
of the petrological characters of the lavas appear to us somewhat crude.
But it happened that the "Challenger" visited most of the volcanic
islands described by Darwin, and the specimens brought home were
examined by the eminent petrologist Professor Renard. Renard was so
struck with the work done by Darwin, under disadvantageous conditions,
that he undertook a translation of Darwin's work into French, and I
cannot better indicate the manner in which the book is regarded by
geologists than by quoting a passage from Renard's preface. Referring
to his own work in studying the rocks brought home by the "Challenger"
(Renard's descriptions of these rocks are contained in the "Challenger
Reports". Mr Harker is supplementing these descriptions by a series of
petrological memoirs on Darwin's specimens, the first of which appeared
in the "Geological Magazine" for March, 1907.), he says:

"Je dus, en me livrant a ces recherches, suivre ligne par ligne les
divers chapitres des "Observations geologiques" consacrees aux iles de
l'Atlantique, oblige que j'etais de comparer d'une maniere suivie les
resultats auxquels j'etais conduit avec ceux de Darwin, qui servaient
de controle a mes constatations. Je ne tardai pas a eprouver une vive
admiration pour ce chercheur qui, sans autre appareil que la loupe,
sans autre reaction que quelques essais pyrognostiques, plus rarement
quelques mesures au goniometre, parvenait a discerner la nature des
agregats mineralogiques les plue complexes et les plus varies. Ce
coup d'oeil qui savait embrasser de si vastes horizons, penetre ici
profondement tous les details lithologiques. Avec quelle surete
et quelle exactitude la structure et la composition des roches ne
sont'elles pas determinees, l'origne de ces masses minerales deduite et
confirmee par l'etude comparee des manifestations volcaniques d'autres
regions; avec quelle science les relations entre les faits qu'il
decouvre et ceux signales ailleurs par ses devanciers ne sont'elles pas
etablies, et comme voici ebranlees les hypotheses regnantes, admises
sans preuves, celles, par exemple, des crateres de soulevement et de la
differenciation radicale des phenomenes plutoniques et volcaniques!
Ce qui acheve de donner a ce livre un incomparable merite, ce sont les
idees nouvelles qui s'y trouvent en germe et jetees la comme au
hasard ainsi qu'un superflu d'abondance intellectuelle inepuisable."
("Observations Geologiques sur les Iles Volcaniques... ", Paris, 1902,
pages vi., vii.)

While engaged in his study of banded lavas, Darwin was struck with the
analogy of their structure with that of glacier ice, and a note on the
subject, in the form of a letter addressed to Professor J.D. Forbes, was
published in the "Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh". (Vol.
II. (1844-5), pages 17, 18.)

From April, 1832, to September, 1835, Darwin had been occupied in
examining the coast or making inland journeys in the interior of the
South American continent. Thus while eighteen months were devoted, at
the beginning and end of the voyage to the study of volcanic islands
and coral-reefs, no less than three and a half years were given to South
American geology. The heavy task of dealing with the notes and specimens
accumulated during that long period was left by Darwin to the last.
Finishing the "Volcanic Islands" on February 14th, 1844, he, in July of
the same year, commenced the preparation of two important works which
engaged him till near the end of the year 1846. The first was his
"Geological Observations on South America", the second a recast of his
"Journal", published under the short title of "A Naturalist's Voyage
round the World".

The first of these works contains an immense amount of information
collected by the author under great difficulties and not unfrequently
at considerable risk to life and health. No sooner had Darwin landed
in South America than two sets of phenomena powerfully arrested his
attention. The first of these was the occurrence of great masses of red
mud containing bones and shells, which afforded striking evidence that
the whole continent had shared in a series of slow and gradual but
often interrupted movements. The second related to the great masses of
crystalline rocks which, underlying the muds, cover so great a part of
the continent. Darwin, almost as soon as he landed, was struck by
the circumstance that the direction, as shown by his compass, of
the prominent features of these great crystalline rock-masses--their
cleavage, master-joints, foliation and pegmatite veins--was the same as
the orientation described by Humboldt (whose works he had so carefully
studied) on the west of the same great continent.

The first five chapters of the book on South America were devoted to
formations of recent date and to the evidence collected on the east and
west coasts of the continent in regard to those grand earth-movements,
some of which could be shown to have been accompanied by
earthquake-shocks. The fossil bones, which had given him the first hint
concerning the mutability of species, had by this time been studied and
described by comparative anatomists, and Darwin was able to elaborate
much more fully the important conclusion that the existing fauna of
South America has a close analogy with that of the period immediately
preceding our own.

The remaining three chapters of the book dealt with the metamorphic and
plutonic rocks, and in them Darwin announced his important conclusions
concerning the relations of cleavage and foliation, and on the close
analogy of the latter structure with the banding found in rock-masses
of igneous origin. With respect to the first of these conclusions, he
received the powerful support of Daniel Sharpe, who in the years
1852 and 1854 published two papers on the structure of the Scottish
Highlands, supplying striking confirmation of the correctness of
Darwin's views. Although Darwin's and Sharpe's conclusions were
contested by Murchison and other geologists, they are now universally
accepted. In his theory concerning the origin of foliation, Darwin had
been to some extent anticipated by Scrope, but he supplied many facts
and illustrations leading to the gradual acceptance of a doctrine which,
when first enunciated, was treated with neglect, if not with contempt.

The whole of this volume on South American geology is crowded with the
records of patient observations and suggestions of the greatest value;
but, as Darwin himself saw, it was a book for the working geologist and
"caviare to the general." Its author, indeed, frequently expressed
his sense of the "dryness" of the book; he even says "I long hesitated
whether I would publish it or not," and he wrote to Leonard Horner "I am
astonished that you should have had the courage to go right through my
book." ("M.L." II. page 221.)

Fortunately the second book, on which Darwin was engaged at this time,
was of a very different character. His "Journal", almost as he had
written it on board ship, with facts and observations fresh in his mind,
had been published in 1839 and attracted much attention. In 1845, he
says, "I took much pains in correcting a new edition," and the work
which was commenced in April, 1845, was not finished till August of
that year. The volume contains a history of the voyage with "a sketch
of those observations in Natural History and Geology, which I think will
possess some interest for the general reader." It is not necessary
to speak of the merits of this scientific classic. It became a
great favourite with the general public--having passed through many
editions--it was, moreover, translated into a number of different
languages. Darwin was much gratified by these evidences of popularity,
and naively remarks in his "Autobiography", "The success of this my
first literary child tickles my vanity more than that of any of my other
books" ("L.L." I. page 80.)--and this was written after the "Origin of
Species" had become famous!

In Darwin's letters there are many evidences that his labours during
these ten years devoted to the working out of the geological results
of the voyage often made many demands on his patience and indomitable
courage. Most geologists have experience of the contrast between the
pleasures felt when wielding the hammer in the field, and the duller
labour of plying the pen in the study. But in Darwin's case, innumerable
interruptions from sickness and other causes, and the oft-deferred hope
of reaching the end of his task were not the only causes operating to
make the work irksome. The great project, which was destined to become
the crowning achievement of his life, was now gradually assuming more
definite shape, and absorbing more of his time and energies.

Nevertheless, during all this period, Darwin so far regarded his
geological pursuits as his PROPER "work," that attention to other
matters was always spoken of by him as "indulging in idleness." If at
the end of this period the world had sustained the great misfortune of
losing Darwin by death before the age of forty--and several times that
event seemed only too probable--he might have been remembered only as
a very able geologist of most advanced views, and a traveller who had
written a scientific narrative of more than ordinary excellence!

The completion of the "Geology of the 'Beagle'" and the preparation of
a revised narrative of the voyage mark the termination of that period of
fifteen years of Darwin's life during which geological studies were
his principal occupation. Henceforth, though his interest in geological
questions remained ever keen, biological problems engaged more and more
of his attention to the partial exclusion of geology.

The eight years from October, 1846, to October, 1854, were mainly
devoted to the preparation of his two important monographs on the recent
and fossil Cirripedia. Apart from the value of his description of the
fossil forms, this work of Darwin's had an important influence on the
progress of geological science. Up to that time a practice had prevailed
for the student of a particular geological formation to take up the
description of the plant and animal remains in it--often without
having anything more than a rudimentary knowledge of the living forms
corresponding to them. Darwin in his monograph gave a very admirable
illustration of the enormous advantage to be gained--alike for biology
and geology--by undertaking the study of the living and fossil forms
of a natural group of organisms in connection with one another. Of the
advantage of these eight years of work to Darwin himself, in preparing
for the great task lying before him, Huxley has expressed a very strong
opinion indeed. ("L.L." II. pages 247-48.)

But during these eight years of "species work," Darwin found
opportunities for not a few excursions into the field of geology. He
occasionally attended the Geological Society, and, as we have already
seen, read several papers there during this period. His friend, Dr
Hooker, then acting as botanist to the Geological Survey, was engaged
in studying the Carboniferous flora, and many discussions on Palaezoic
plants and on the origin of coal took place at this period. On this last
subject he felt the deepest interest and told Hooker, "I shall never
rest easy in Down churchyard without the problem be solved by some one
before I die." ("M.L." I. pages 63, 64.)

As at all times, conversations and letters with Lyell on every branch of
geological science continued with unabated vigour, and in spite of the
absorbing character of the work on the Cirripedes, time was found for
all. In 1849 his friend Herschel induced him to supply a chapter of
forty pages on Geology to the Admiralty "Manual of Scientific Inquiry"
which he was editing. This is Darwin's single contribution to books of
an "educational" kind. It is remarkable for its clearness and simplicity
and attention to minute details. It may be read by the student of
Darwin's life with much interest, for the directions he gives to an
explorer are without doubt those which he, as a self-taught geologist,
proved to be serviceable during his life on the "Beagle".

On the completion of the Cirripede volumes, in 1854, Darwin was able to
grapple with the immense pile of MS. notes which he had accumulated
on the species question. The first sketch of 35 pages (1842), had been
enlarged in 1844 into one of 230 pages ([The first draft of the "Origin"
is being prepared for Press by Mr Francis Darwin and will be published
by the Cambridge University Press this year (1909). A.C.S.]); but in
1856 was commenced the work (never to be completed) which was designed
on a scale three or four times more extensive than that on which the
"Origin of Species" was in the end written.

In drawing up those two masterly chapters of the "Origin", "On
the Imperfection of the Geological Record," and "On the Geological
Succession of Organic Beings", Darwin had need of all the experience and
knowledge he had been gathering during thirty years, the first half
of which had been almost wholly devoted to geological study. The most
enlightened geologists of the day found much that was new, and still
more that was startling from the manner of its presentation, in these
wonderful essays. Of Darwin's own sense of the importance of the
geological evidence in any presentation of his theory a striking proof
will be found in a passage of the touching letter to his wife, enjoining
the publication of his sketch of 1844. "In case of my sudden death,"
he wrote, "... the editor must be a geologist as well as a naturalist."
("L.L." II. pages 16, 17.)

In spite of the numerous and valuable palaeontological discoveries made
since the publication of "The Origin of Species", the importance of the
first of these two geological chapters is as great as ever. It still
remains true that "Those who believe that the geological record is in
any degree perfect, will at once reject the theory"--as indeed they must
reject any theory of evolution. The striking passage with which Darwin
concludes this chapter--in which he compares the record of the rocks
to the much mutilated volumes of a human history--remains as apt an
illustration as it did when first written.

And the second geological chapter, on the Succession of Organic
Beings--though it has been strengthened in a thousand ways, by the
discoveries concerning the pedigrees of the horse, the elephant and
many other aberrant types, though new light has been thrown even on the
origin of great groups like the mammals, and the gymnosperms, though
not a few fresh links have been discovered in the chains of evidence,
concerning the order of appearance of new forms of life--we would
not wish to have re-written. Only the same line of argument could be
adopted, though with innumerable fresh illustrations. Those who reject
the reasonings of this chapter, neither would they be persuaded if a
long and complete succession of "ancestral forms" could rise from the
dead and pass in procession before them.

Among the geological discussions, which so frequently occupied Darwin's
attention during the later years of his life, there was one concerning
which his attitude seemed somewhat remarkable--I allude to his views
on "the permanence of Continents and Ocean-basins." In a letter to Mr
Mellard Reade, written at the end of 1880, he wrote: "On the whole, I
lean to the side that the continents have since Cambrian times occupied
approximately their present positions. But, as I have said, the question
seems a difficult one, and the more it is discussed the better." ("M.L."
II. page 147.) Since this was written, the important contribution to the
subject by the late Dr W.T. Blanford (himself, like Darwin, a naturalist
and geologist) has appeared in an address to the Geological Society in
1890; and many discoveries, like that of Dr Woolnough in Fiji, have
led to considerable qualifications of the generalisation that all the
islands in the great ocean are wholly of volcanic or coral origin.

I remember once expressing surprise to Darwin that, after the views
which he had originated concerning the existence of areas of elevation
and others of subsidence in the Pacific Ocean, and in face of the
admitted difficulty of accounting for the distribution of certain
terrestrial animals and plants, if the land and sea areas had been
permanent in position, he still maintained that theory. Looking at me
with a whimsical smile, he said: "I have seen many of my old friends
make fools of themselves, by putting forward new theoretical views or
revising old ones, AFTER THEY WERE SIXTY YEARS OF AGE; so, long ago,
I determined that on reaching that age I would write nothing more of a
speculative character."

Though Darwin's letters and conversations on geology during these later
years were the chief manifestations of the interest he preserved in his
"old love," as he continued to call it, yet in the sunset of that active
life a gleam of the old enthusiasm for geology broke forth once more.
There can be no doubt that Darwin's inability to occupy himself with
field-work proved an insuperable difficulty to any attempt on his part
to resume active geological research. But, as is shown by the series of
charming volumes on plant-life, Darwin had found compensation in making
patient and persevering experiment take the place of enterprising and
exact observation; and there was one direction in which he could indulge
the "old love" by employment of the new faculty.

We have seen that the earliest memoir written by Darwin, which was
published in full, was a paper "On the Formation of Mould" which was
read at the Geological Society on November 1st, 1837, but did not appear
in the "Transactions" of the Society till 1840, where it occupied four
and a half quarto pages, including some supplementary matter, obtained
later, and a woodcut. This little paper was confined to observations
made in his uncle's fields in Staffordshire, where burnt clay, cinders,
and sand were found to be buried under a layer of black earth, evidently
brought from below by earthworms, and to a recital of similar facts from
Scotland obtained through the agency of Lyell. The subsequent history
of Darwin's work on this question affords a striking example of the
tenacity of purpose with which he continued his enquiries on any subject
that interested him.

In 1842, as soon as he was settled at Down, he began a series of
observations on a foot-path and in his fields, that continued with
intermissions during his whole life, and he extended his enquiries from
time to time to the neighbouring parks of Knole and Holwood. In 1844
we find him making a communication to the "Gardener's Chronicle" on the
subject. About 1870, his attention to the question was stimulated by the
circumstance that his niece (Miss L. Wedgwood) undertook to collect and
weigh the worm-casts thrown up, during a whole year, on measured
squares selected for the purpose, at Leith Hill Place. He also obtained
information from Professor Ramsay concerning observations made by him on
a pavement near his house in 1871. Darwin at this time began to realise
the great importance of the action of worms to the archaeologist. At
an earlier date he appears to have obtained some information concerning
articles found buried on the battle-field of Shrewsbury, and the old
Roman town of Uriconium, near his early home; between 1871 and 1878 Mr
(afterwards Lord) Farrer carried on a series of investigations at the
Roman Villa discovered on his land at Abinger; Darwin's son William
examined for his father the evidence at Beaulieu Abbey, Brading,
Stonehenge and other localities in the neighbourhood of his home; his
sons Francis and Horace were enlisted to make similar enquiries at
Chideock and Silchester; while Francis Galton contributed facts noticed
in his walks in Hyde Park. By correspondence with Fritz Muller and Dr
Ernst, Darwin obtained information concerning the worm-casts found in
South America; from Dr Kreft those of Australia; and from Mr Scott
and Dr (afterwards Sir George) King, those of India; the last-named
correspondent also supplied him with much valuable information obtained
in the South of Europe. Help too was obtained from the memoirs on
Earthworms published by Perrier in 1874 and van Hensen in 1877, while
Professor Ray Lankester supplied important facts with regard to their
anatomy.

When therefore the series of interesting monographs on plant-life had
been completed, Darwin set to work in bringing the information that he
had gradually accumulated during forty-four years to bear on the subject
of his early paper. He also utilised the skill and ingenuity he had
acquired in botanical work to aid in the elucidation of many of the
difficulties that presented themselves. I well remember a visit which
I paid to Down at this period. At the side of the little study stood
flower-pots containing earth with worms, and, without interrupting
our conversation, Darwin would from time to time lift the glass plate
covering a pot to watch what was going on. Occasionally, with a humorous
smile, he would murmur something about a book in another room, and slip
away; returning shortly, without the book but with unmistakeable signs
of having visited the snuff-jar outside. After working about a year at
the worms, he was able at the end of 1881 to publish the charming little
book--"The Formation of Vegetable Mould through the Action of Worms,
with Observations on their Habits". This was the last of his books, and
its reception by reviewers and the public alike afforded the patient old
worker no little gratification. Darwin's scientific career, which had
begun with geological research, most appropriately ended with a return
to it.

It has been impossible to sketch the origin and influence of Darwin's
geological work without, at almost every step, referring to the part
played by Lyell and the "Principles of Geology". Haeckel, in the
chapters on Lyell and Darwin in his "History of Creation", and Huxley in
his striking essay "On the Reception of the Origin of Species" ("L.L."
II. pages 179-204.) have both strongly insisted on the fact that the
"Origin" of Darwin was a necessary corollary to the "Principles" of
Lyell.

It is true that, in an earlier essay, Huxley had spoken of the doctrine
of Uniformitarianism as being, in a certain sense, opposed to that of
Evolution (Huxley's Address to the Geological Society, 1869. "Collected
Essays", Vol. VIII. page 305, London, 1896.); but in his later years he
took up a very different and more logical position, and maintained
that "Consistent uniformitarianism postulates evolution as much in the
organic as in the inorganic world. The origin of a new species by other
than ordinary agencies would be a vastly greater 'catastrophe' than
any of those which Lyell success fully eliminated from sober geological
speculation." ("L.L." II. page 190.)

Huxley's admiration for the "Principles of Geology", and his conviction
of the greatness of the revolution of thought brought about by Lyell,
was almost as marked as in the case of Darwin himself. (See his Essay
on "Science and Pseudo Science". "Collected Essays", Vol. V. page 90,
London, 1902.) He felt, however, as many others have done, that in one
respect the very success of Lyell's masterpiece has been the reason why
its originality and influence have not been so fully recognised as they
deserved to be. Written as the book was before its author had arrived at
the age of thirty, no less than eleven editions of the "Principles"
were called for in his lifetime. With the most scrupulous care, Lyell,
devoting all his time and energies to the task of collecting and sifting
all evidence bearing on the subjects of his work, revised and re-revised
it; and as in each edition, eliminations, modifications, corrections,
and additions were made, the book, while it increased in value as a
storehouse of facts, lost much of its freshness, vigour and charm as a
piece of connected reasoning.

Darwin undoubtedly realised this when he wrote concerning the
"Principles", "the first edition, my old true love, which I never
deserted for the later editions." ("M.L." II. page 222.) Huxley once
told me that when, in later life, he read the first edition, he was both
surprised and delighted, feeling as if it were a new book to him. (I
have before me a letter which illustrates this feeling on Huxley's
part. He had lamented to me that he did not possess a copy of the first
edition of the "Principles", when, shortly afterwards, I picked up a
dilapidated copy on a bookstall; this I had bound and sent to my old
teacher and colleague. His reply is characteristic:

October 8, 1884.

My Dear Judd,

You could not have made me a more agreeable present than the copy of the
first edition of Lyell, which I find on my table. I have never been able
to meet with the book, and your copy is, as the old woman said of her
Bible, "the best of books in the best of bindings."

Ever yours sincerely,

T.H. Huxley.

(I cannot refrain from relating an incident which very strikingly
exemplifies the affection for one another felt by Lyell and Huxley. In
his last illness, when confined to his bed, Lyell heard that Huxley was
to lecture at the Royal Institution on the "Results of the 'Challenger'
expedition": he begged me to attend the lecture and bring him an account
of it. Happening to mention this to Huxley, he at once undertook to
go to Lyell in my place, and he did so on the morning following his
lecture. I shall never forget the look of gratitude on the face of the
invalid when he told me, shortly afterwards, how Huxley had sat by his
bedside and "repeated the whole lecture to him.")

Darwin's generous nature seems often to have made him experience a fear
lest he should do less than justice to his "dear old master," and to the
influence that the "Principles of Geology" had in moulding his mind. In
1845 he wrote to Lyell, "I have long wished, not so much for your sake,
as for my own feelings of honesty, to acknowledge more plainly than by
mere reference, how much I geologically owe you. Those authors, however,
who like you, educate people's minds as well as teach them special
facts, can never, I should think, have full justice done them except by
posterity, for the mind thus insensibly improved can hardly perceive
its own upward ascent." ("L.L." I. pages 337-8.) In another letter, to
Leonard Horner, he says: "I always feel as if my books came half out of
Lyell's brain, and that I never acknowledge this sufficiently." ("M.L."
II. page 117.) Darwin's own most favourite book, the "Narrative of the
Voyage", was dedicated to Lyell in glowing terms; and in the "Origin of
Species" he wrote of "Lyell's grand work on the "Principles of
Geology", which the future historian will recognise as having produced a
revolution in Natural Science." "What glorious good that work has done"
he fervently exclaims on another occasion. ("L.L." I. page 342.)

To the very end of his life, as all who were in the habit of talking
with Darwin can testify, this sense of his indebtedness to Lyell
remained with him. In his "Autobiography", written in 1876, the year
after Lyell's death, he spoke in the warmest terms of the value to him
of the "Principles" while on the voyage and of the aid afforded to him
by Lyell on his return to England. ("L.L." I. page 62.) But the year
before his own death, Darwin felt constrained to return to the subject
and to place on record a final appreciation--one as honourable to the
writer as it is to his lost friend:

"I saw more of Lyell than of any other man, both before and after
my marriage. His mind was characterised, as it appeared to me, by
clearness, caution, sound judgment, and a good deal of originality. When
I made any remark to him on Geology, he never rested until he saw the
whole case clearly, and often made me see it more clearly than I had
done before. He would advance all possible objections to my suggestion,
and even after these were exhausted would remain long dubious. A second
characteristic was his hearty sympathy with the work of other scientific
men... His delight in science was ardent, and he felt the
keenest interest in the future progress of mankind. He was very
kind-hearted... His candour was highly remarkable. He exhibited this by
becoming a convert to the Descent theory, though he had gained much fame
by opposing Lamarck's views, and this after he had grown old."

"THE SCIENCE OF GEOLOGY IS ENORMOUSLY INDEBTED TO LYELL--MORE SO, AS I
BELIEVE, THAN TO ANY OTHER MAN WHO EVER LIVED." ("L.L." I. pages 71-2
(the italics are mine.))

Those who knew Lyell intimately will recognise the truth of the portrait
drawn by his dearest friend, and I believe that posterity will endorse
Darwin's deliberate verdict concerning the value of his labours.

It was my own good fortune, to be brought into close contact with these
two great men during the later years of their life, and I may perhaps be
permitted to put on record the impressions made upon me during friendly
intercourse with both.

In some respects, there was an extraordinary resemblance in their modes
and habits of thought, between Lyell and Darwin; and this likeness was
also seen in their modesty, their deference to the opinion of younger
men, their enthusiasm for science, their freedom from petty jealousies
and their righteous indignation for what was mean and unworthy in
others. But yet there was a difference. Both Lyell and Darwin were
cautious, but perhaps Lyell carried his caution to the verge of
timidity. I think Darwin possessed, and Lyell lacked, what I can only
describe by the theological term, "faith--the substance of things hoped
for, the evidence of things not seen." Both had been constrained to feel
that the immutability of species could not be maintained. Both,
too, recognised the fact that it would be useless to proclaim this
conviction, unless prepared with a satisfactory alternative to what
Huxley called "the Miltonic hypothesis." But Darwin's conviction was so
far vital and operative that it sustained him while working unceasingly
for twenty-two years in collecting evidence bearing on the question,
till at last he was in the position of being able to justify that
conviction to others.

And yet Lyell's attitude--and that of Hooker, which was very
similar--proved of inestimable service to science, as Darwin often
acknowledged. One of the greatest merits of the "Origin of Species" is
that so many difficulties and objections are anticipated and fairly met;
and this was to a great extent the result of the persistent and very
candid--if always friendly--criticism of Lyell and Hooker.

I think the divergence of mental attitude in Lyell and Darwin must
be attributed to a difference in temperament, the evidence of which
sometimes appears in a very striking manner in their correspondence.
Thus in 1838, while they were in the thick of the fight with
the Catastrophists of the Geological Society, Lyell wrote
characteristically: "I really find, when bringing up my Preliminary
Essays in "Principles" to the science of the present day, so far as I
know it, that the great outline, and even most of the details, stand
so uninjured, and in many cases they are so much strengthened by new
discoveries, especially by yours, that we may begin to hope that
the great principles there insisted on will stand the test of new
discoveries." (Lyell's "Life, Letters and Journals", Vol. II. page 44.)
To which the more youthful and impetuous Darwin replies: "BEGIN TO HOPE:
why the POSSIBILITY of a doubt has never crossed my mind for many a day.
This may be very unphilosophical, but my geological salvation is staked
on it... it makes me quite indignant that you should talk of HOPING."
("L.L." I. page 296.)

It was not only Darwin's "geological salvation" that was at stake, when
he surrendered himself to his enthusiasm for an idea. To his firm faith
in the doctrine of continuity we owe the "Origin of Species"; and while
Darwin became the "Paul" of evolution, Lyell long remained the "doubting
Thomas."

Many must have felt like H.C. Watson when he wrote: "How could Sir
C. Lyell... for thirty years read, write, and think, on the subject of
species AND THEIR SUCCESSION, and yet constantly look down the wrong
road!" ("L.L." II. page 227.) Huxley attributed this hesitation of Lyell
to his "profound antipathy" to the doctrine of the "pithecoid origin of
man." ("L.L." II. page 193.) Without denying that this had considerable
influence (and those who knew Lyell and his great devotion to his wife
and her memory, are aware that he and she felt much stronger convictions
concerning such subjects as the immortality of the soul than Darwin
was able to confess to) yet I think Darwin had divined the real
characteristics of his friend's mind, when he wrote: "He would advance
all possible objections... AND EVEN AFTER THESE WERE EXHAUSTED, WOULD
REMAIN LONG DUBIOUS."

Very touching indeed was the friendship maintained to the end between
these two leaders of thought--free as their intercourse was from any
smallest trace of self-seeking or jealousy. When in 1874 I spent some
time with Lyell in his Forfarshire home, a communication from Darwin was
always an event which made a "red-letter day," as Lyell used to say;
and he gave me many indications in his conversation of how strongly he
relied upon the opinion of Darwin--more indeed than on the judgment
of any other man--this confidence not being confined to questions of
science, but extending to those of morals, politics, and religion.

I have heard those who knew Lyell only slightly, speak of his manners
as cold and reserved. His complete absorption in his scientific work,
coupled with extreme short-sightedness, almost in the end amounting to
blindness, may have permitted those having but a casual acquaintance
with him to accept such a view. But those privileged to know him
intimately recognised the nobleness of his character and can realise
the justice and force of Hooker's words when he heard of his death: "My
loved, my best friend, for well nigh forty years of my life. The most
generous sharer of my own and my family's hopes, joys and sorrows, whose
affection for me was truly that of a father and brother combined."

But the strongest of all testimonies to the grandeur of Lyell's
character is the lifelong devotion to him of such a man as Darwin.
Before the two met, we find Darwin constantly writing of facts and
observations that he thinks "will interest Mr Lyell"; and when they came
together the mutual esteem rapidly ripened into the warmest affection.
Both having the advantage of a moderate independence, permitting of an
entire devotion of their lives to scientific research, they had much in
common, and the elder man--who had already achieved both scientific and
literary distinction--was able to give good advice and friendly help
to the younger one. The warmth of their friendship comes out very
strikingly in their correspondence. When Darwin first conceived the idea
of writing a book on the "species question," soon after his return from
the voyage, it was "by following the example of Lyell in Geology" that
he hoped to succeed ("L.L." I. page 83.); when in 1844, Darwin had
finished his first sketch of the work, and, fearing that his life might
not be spared to complete his great undertaking, committed the care of
it in a touching letter to his wife, it was his friend Lyell whom he
named as her adviser and the possible editor of the book ("L.L." II.
pages 17-18.); it was Lyell who, in 1856, induced Darwin to lay the
foundations of a treatise ("L.L." I. page 84.) for which the author
himself selected the "Principles" as his model; and when the dilemma
arose from the receipt of Wallace's essay, it was to Lyell jointly with
Hooker that Darwin turned, not in vain, for advice and help.

During the later years of his life, I never heard Darwin allude to his
lost friend--and he did so very often--without coupling his name
with some term of affection. For a brief period, it is true, Lyell's
excessive caution when the "Origin" was published, seemed to try even
the patience of Darwin; but when "the master" was at last able to
declare himself fully convinced, he was the occasion of more rejoicing
on the part of Darwin, than any other convert to his views. The latter
was never tired of talking of Lyell's "magnanimity" and asserted that,
"To have maintained in the position of a master, one side of a question
for thirty years, and then deliberately give it up, is a fact to which I
much doubt whether the records of science offer a parallel." ("L.L." II.
pages 229-30.)

Of Darwin himself, I can safely affirm that I never knew anyone who
had met him, even for the briefest period, who was not charmed by his
personality. Who could forget the hearty hand-grip at meeting, the
gentle and lingering pressure of the palm at parting, and above all
that winning smile which transformed his countenance--so as to make
portraits, and even photographs, seem ever afterwards unsatisfying!
Looking back, one is indeed tempted to forget the profoundness of the
philosopher, in recollection of the loveableness of the man.




XIX. DARWIN'S WORK ON THE MOVEMENTS OF PLANTS. By Francis Darwin,

Honorary Fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge.


My father's interest in plants was of two kinds, which may be roughly
distinguished as EVOLUTIONARY and PHYSIOLOGICAL. Thus in his purely
evolutionary work, for instance in "The Origin of Species" and in his
book on "Variation under Domestication", plants as well as animals
served as material for his generalisations. He was largely dependent
on the work of others for the facts used in the evolutionary work, and
despised himself for belonging to the "blessed gang" of compilers. And
he correspondingly rejoiced in the employment of his wonderful power of
observation in the physiological problems which occupied so much of his
later life. But inasmuch as he felt evolution to be his life's work, he
regarded himself as something of an idler in observing climbing plants,
insectivorous plants, orchids, etc. In this physiological work he was
to a large extent urged on by his passionate desire to understand the
machinery of all living things. But though it is true that he worked
at physiological problems in the naturalist's spirit of curiosity, yet
there was always present to him the bearing of his facts on the problem
of evolution. His interests, physiological and evolutionary, were indeed
so interwoven that they cannot be sharply separated. Thus his original
interest in the fertilisation of flowers was evolutionary. "I was
led" ("Life and Letters", I. page 90.), he says, "to attend to the
cross-fertilisation of flowers by the aid of insects, from having come
to the conclusion in my speculations on the origin of species, that
crossing played an important part in keeping specific forms constant."
In the same way the value of his experimental work on heterostyled
plants crystalised out in his mind into the conclusion that the product
of illegitimate unions are equivalent to hybrids--a conclusion of the
greatest interest from an evolutionary point of view. And again his work
"Cross and Self Fertilisation" may be condensed to a point of view
of great importance in reference to the meaning and origin of sexual
reproduction. (See Professor Goebel's article in the present volume.)

The whole of his physiological work may be looked at as an illustration
of the potency of his theory as an "instrument for the extension of the
realm of natural knowledge." (Huxley in Darwin's "Life and Letters." II.
page 204.)

His doctrine of natural selection gave, as is well known, an impulse
to the investigation of the use of organs--and thus created the great
school of what is known in Germany as Biology--a department of science
for which no English word exists except the rather vague term Natural
History. This was especially the case in floral biology, and it is
interesting to see with what hesitation he at first expressed the value
of his book on Orchids ("Life and Letters", III. page 254.), "It will
perhaps serve to illustrate how Natural History may be worked under the
belief of the modification of species" (1861). And in 1862 he speaks
(Loc. cit.) more definitely of the relation of his work to natural
selection: "I can show the meaning of some of the apparently meaningless
ridges (and) horns; who will now venture to say that this or that
structure is useless?" It is the fashion now to minimise the value of
this class of work, and we even find it said by a modern writer that to
inquire into the ends subserved by organs is not a scientific problem.
Those who take this view surely forget that the structure of all living
things is, as a whole, adaptive, and that a knowledge of how the
present forms come to be what they are includes a knowledge of why
they survived. They forget that the SUMMATION of variations on which
divergence depends is under the rule of the environment considered as
a selective force. They forget that the scientific study of the
interdependence of organisms is only possible through a knowledge of the
machinery of the units. And that, therefore, the investigation of such
widely interesting subjects as extinction and distribution must include
a knowledge of function. It is only those who follow this line of
work who get to see the importance of minute points of structure and
understand as my father did even in 1842, as shown in his sketch of the
"Origin" (Now being prepared for publication.), that every grain of sand
counts for something in the balance. Much that is confidently stated
about the uselessness of different organs would never have been
written if the naturalist spirit were commoner nowadays. This spirit
is strikingly shown in my father's work on the movements of plants. The
circumstance that botanists had not, as a class, realised the interest
of the subject accounts for the fact that he was able to gather such a
rich harvest of results from such a familiar object as a twining plant.
The subject had been investigated by H. von Mohl, Palm, and Dutrochet,
but they failed not only to master the problem but (which here concerns
us) to give the absorbing interest of Darwin's book to what they
discovered.

His work on climbing plants was his first sustained piece of work on the
physiology of movement, and he remarks in 1864: "This has been new sort
of work for me." ("Life and Letters", III. page 315. He had, however,
made a beginning on the movements of Drosera.) He goes on to remark with
something of surprise, "I have been pleased to find what a capital guide
for observations a full conviction of the change of species is."

It was this point of view that enabled him to develop a broad conception
of the power of climbing as an adaptation by means of which plants are
enabled to reach the light. Instead of being compelled to construct a
stem of sufficient strength to stand alone, they succeed in the struggle
by making use of other plants as supports. He showed that the great
class of tendril- and root-climbers which do not depend on twining round
a pole, like a scarlet-runner, but on attaching themselves as they grow
upwards, effect an economy. Thus a Phaseolus has to manufacture a stem
three feet in length to reach a height of two feet above the ground,
whereas a pea "which had ascended to the same height by the aid of its
tendrils, was but little longer than the height reached." ("Climbing
Plants" (2nd edition 1875), page 193.)

Thus he was led on to the belief that TWINING is the more ancient form
of climbing, and that tendril-climbers have been developed from twiners.
In accordance with this view we find LEAF-CLIMBERS, which may be looked
on as incipient tendril-bearers, occurring in the same genera with
simple twiners. (Loc. cit. page 195.) He called attention to the case
of Maurandia semperflorens in which the young flower-stalks revolve
spontaneously and are sensitive to a touch, but neither of these
qualities is of any perceptible value to the species. This forced him to
believe that in other young plants the rudiments of the faculty needed
for twining would be found--a prophecy which he made good in his "Power
of Movement" many years later.

In "Climbing Plants" he did little more than point out the remarkable
fact that the habit of climbing is widely scattered through the
vegetable kingdom. Thus climbers are to be found in 35 out of the 59
Phanerogamic Alliances of Lindley, so that "the conclusion is forced
on our minds that the capacity of revolving (If a twining plant, e.g.
a hop, is observed before it has begun to ascend a pole, it will
be noticed that, owing to the curvature of the stem, the tip is not
vertical but hangs over in a roughly horizontal position. If such a
shoot is watched it will be found that if, for instance, it points
to the north at a given hour, it will be found after a short interval
pointing north-east, then east, and after about two hours it will once
more be looking northward. The curvature of the stem depends on one side
growing quicker than the opposite side, and the revolving movement,
i.e. circumnutation, depends on the region of quickest growth creeping
gradually round the stem from south through west to south again. Other
plants, e.g. Phaseolus, revolve in the opposite direction.), on which
most climbers depend, is inherent, though undeveloped, in almost every
plant in the vegetable kingdom." ("Climbing Plants", page 205.)

In the "Origin" (Edition I. page 427, Edition VI. page 374.) Darwin
speaks of the "apparent paradox, that the very same characters are
analogical when one class or order is compared with another, but give
true affinities when the members of the same class or order are compared
one with another." In this way we might perhaps say that the climbing
of an ivy and a hop are analogical; the resemblance depending on the
adaptive result rather than on community of blood; whereas the relation
between a leaf-climber and a true tendril-bearer reveals descent. This
particular resemblance was one in which my father took especial delight.
He has described an interesting case occurring in the Fumariaceae.
("Climbing Plants", page 195.) "The terminal leaflets of the
leaf-climbing Fumaria officinalis are not smaller than the other
leaflets; those of the leaf-climbing Adlumia cirrhosa are greatly
reduced; those of Corydalis claviculata (a plant which may be
indifferently called a leaf-climber or a tendril-bearer) are either
reduced to microscopical dimensions or have their blades wholly aborted,
so that this plant is actually in a state of transition; and finally in
the Dicentra the tendrils are perfectly characterized."

It is a remarkable fact that the quality which, broadly speaking, forms
the basis of the climbing habit (namely revolving nutation, otherwise
known as circumnutation) subserves two distinct ends. One of these is
the finding of a support, and this is common to twiners and tendrils.
Here the value ends as far as tendril-climbers are concerned, but in
twiners Darwin believed that the act of climbing round a support is a
continuation of the revolving movement (circumnutation). If we imagine a
man swinging a rope round his head and if we suppose the rope to strike
a vertical post, the free end will twine round it. This may serve as
a rough model of twining as explained in the "Movements and Habits
of Climbing Plants". It is on these points--the nature of revolving
nutation and the mechanism of twining--that modern physiologists differ
from Darwin. (See the discussion in Pfeffer's "The Physiology of Plants"
Eng. Tr. (Oxford, 1906), III. page 34, where the literature is given.
Also Jost, "Vorlesungen uber Pflanzenphysiologie", page 562, Jena,
1904.)

Their criticism originated in observations made on a revolving shoot
which is removed from the action of gravity by keeping the plant slowly
rotating about a horizontal axis by means of the instrument known as a
klinostat. Under these conditions circumnutation becomes irregular or
ceases altogether. When the same experiment is made with a plant which
has twined spirally up a stick, the process of climbing is checked and
the last few turns become loosened or actually untwisted. From this
it has been argued that Darwin was wrong in his description of
circumnutation as an automatic change in the region of quickest growth.
When the free end of a revolving shoot points towards the north there
is no doubt that the south side has been elongating more than the north;
after a time it is plain from the shoot hanging over to the east that
the west side of the plant has grown most, and so on. This rhythmic
change of the position of the region of greatest growth Darwin ascribes
to an unknown internal regulating power. Some modern physiologists,
however, attempt to explain the revolving movement as due to a
particular form of sensitiveness to gravitation which it is not
necessary to discuss in detail in this place. It is sufficient for my
purpose to point out that Darwin's explanation of circumnutation is
not universally accepted. Personally I believe that circumnutation is
automatic--is primarily due to internal stimuli. It is however in some
way connected with gravitational sensitiveness, since the movement
normally occurs round a vertical line. It is not unnatural that,
when the plant has no external stimulus by which the vertical can be
recognised, the revolving movement should be upset.

Very much the same may be said of the act of twining, namely that most
physiologists refuse to accept Darwin's view (above referred to) that
twining is the direct result of circumnutation. Everyone must allow
that the two phenomena are in some way connected, since a plant
which circumnutates clockwise, i.e. with the sun, twines in the same
direction, and vice versa. It must also be granted that geotropism has a
bearing on the problem, since all plants twine upwards, and cannot twine
along a horizontal support. But how these two factors are combined, and
whether any (and if so what) other factors contribute, we cannot say.
If we give up Darwin's explanation, we must at the same time say with
Pfeffer that "the causes of twining are... unknown." ("The Physiology of
Plants", Eng. Tr. (Oxford, 1906), III. page 37.)

Let us leave this difficult question and consider some other points made
out in the progress of the work on climbing plants. One result of what
he called his "niggling" ("Life and Letters", III. page 312.) work on
tendrils was the discovery of the delicacy of their sense of touch, and
the rapidity of their movement. Thus in a passion-flower tendril, a bit
of platinum wire weighing 1.2 mg. produced curvature ("Climbing
Plants", page 171.), as did a loop of cotton weighing 2 mg. Pfeffer
("Untersuchungen a.d. Bot. Inst. z. Tubingen", Bd. I. 1881-85, page
506.), however, subsequently found much greater sensitiveness: thus
the tendril of Sicyos angulatus reacted to 0.00025 mg., but this only
occurred when the delicate rider of cottonwool fibre was disturbed by
the wind. The same author expanded and explained in a most interesting
way the meaning of Darwin's observation that tendrils are not stimulated
to movement by drops of water resting on them. Pfeffer showed that
DIRTY water containing minute particles of clay in suspension acts as a
stimulus. He also showed that gelatine acts like pure water; if a smooth
glass rod is coated with a 10 per cent solution of gelatine and is then
applied to a tendril, no movement occurs in spite of the fact that the
gelatine is solid when cold. Pfeffer ("Physiology", Eng. Tr. III.
page 52. Pfeffer has pointed out the resemblance between the contact
irritability of plants and the human sense of touch. Our skin is not
sensitive to uniform pressure such as is produced when the finger
is dipped into mercury (Tubingen "Untersuchungen", I. page 504.)
generalises the result in the statement that the tendril has a special
form of irritability and only reacts to "differences of pressure or
variations of pressure in contiguous... regions." Darwin was especially
interested in such cases of specialised irritability. For instance in
May, 1864, he wrote to Asa Gray ("Life and Letters", III. page 314.)
describing the tendrils of Bignonia capreolata, which "abhor a simple
stick, do not much relish rough bark, but delight in wool or moss."
He received, from Gray, information as to the natural habitat of the
species, and finally concluded that the tendrils "are specially adapted
to climb trees clothed with lichens, mosses, or other such productions."
("Climbing Plants", page 102.)

Tendrils were not the only instance discovered by Darwin of delicacy
of touch in plants. In 1860 he had already begun to observe Sundew
(Drosera), and was full of astonishment at its behaviour. He wrote to
Sir Joseph Hooker ("Life and Letters", III. page 319.): "I have been
working like a madman at Drosera. Here is a fact for you which is
certain as you stand where you are, though you won't believe it, that a
bit of hair 1/78000 of one grain in weight placed on gland, will cause
ONE of the gland-bearing hairs of Drosera to curve inwards." Here again
Pfeffer (Pfeffer in "Untersuchungen a. d. Bot. Inst. z. Tubingen",
I. page 491.) has, as in so many cases, added important facts to my
father's observations. He showed that if the leaf of Drosera is entirely
freed from such vibrations as would reach it if observed on an ordinary
table, it does not react to small weights, so that in fact it was the
vibration of the minute fragment of hair on the gland that produced
movement. We may fancifully see an adaptation to the capture of
insects--to the dancing of a gnat's foot on the sensitive surface.

Darwin was fond of telling how when he demonstrated the sensitiveness
of Drosera to Mr Huxley and (I think) to Sir John Burdon Sanderson, he
could perceive (in spite of their courtesy) that they thought the whole
thing a delusion. And the story ended with his triumph when Mr Huxley
cried out, "It IS moving."

Darwin's work on tendrils has led to some interesting investigations on
the mechanisms by which plants perceive stimuli. Thus Pfeffer (Tubingen
"Untersuchungen" I. page 524.) showed that certain epidermic cells
occurring in tendrils are probably organs of touch. In these cells the
protoplasm burrows as it were into cavities in the thickness of the
external cell-walls and thus comes close to the surface, being separated
from an object touching the tendril merely by a very thin layer of
cell-wall substance. Haberlandt ("Physiologische Pflanzenanatomie",
Edition III. Leipzig, 1904. "Sinnesorgane im Pflanzenreich", Leipzig,
1901, and other publications.) has greatly extended our knowledge of
vegetable structure in relation to mechanical stimulation. He defines a
sense-organ as a contrivance by which the DEFORMATION or forcible change
of form in the protoplasm--on which mechanical stimulation depends--is
rendered rapid and considerable in amplitude ("Sinnesorgane", page 10).
He has shown that in certain papillose and bristle-like contrivances,
plants possess such sense-organs; and moreover that these contrivances
show a remarkable similarity to corresponding sense-organs in animals.

Haberlandt and Nemec ("Ber. d. Deutschen bot. Gesellschaft", XVIII.
1900. See F. Darwin, Presidential Address to Section K, British
Association, 1904.) published independently and simultaneously a
theory of the mechanism by which plants are orientated in relation
to gravitation. And here again we find an arrangement identical in
principle with that by which certain animals recognise the vertical,
namely the pressure of free particles on the irritable wall of a cavity.
In the higher plants, Nemec and Haberlandt believe that special loose
and freely movable starch-grains play the part of the otoliths or
statoliths of the crustacea, while the protoplasm lining the cells in
which they are contained corresponds to the sensitive membrane lining
the otocyst of the animal. What is of special interest in our present
connection is that according to this ingenious theory (The original
conception was due to Noll ("Heterogene Induction", Leipzig, 1892), but
his view differed in essential points from those here given.) the
sense of verticality in a plant is a form of contact-irritability. The
vertical position is distinguished from the horizontal by the fact that,
in the latter case, the loose starch-grains rest on the lateral walls
of the cells instead of on the terminal walls as occurs in the normal
upright position. It should be added that the statolith theory is
still sub judice; personally I cannot doubt that it is in the main a
satisfactory explanation of the facts.

With regard to the RAPIDITY of the reaction of tendrils, Darwin records
("Climbing Plants", page 155. Others have observed movement after about
6".) that a Passion-Flower tendril moved distinctly within 25 seconds of
stimulation. It was this fact, more than any other, that made him doubt
the current explanation, viz. that the movement is due to unequal
growth on the two sides of the tendril. The interesting work of Fitting
(Pringsheim's "Jahrb." XXXVIII. 1903, page 545.) has shown, however,
that the primary cause is not (as Darwin supposed) contraction on the
concave, but an astonishingly rapid increase in growth-rate on the
convex side.

On the last page of "Climbing Plants" Darwin wrote: "It has often been
vaguely asserted that plants are distinguished from animals by not
having the power of movement. It should rather be said that plants
acquire and display this power only when it is of some advantage to
them."

He gradually came to realise the vividness and variety of vegetable
life, and that a plant like an animal has capacities of behaving in
different ways under different circumstances, in a manner that may be
compared to the instinctive movements of animals. This point of view is
expressed in well-known passages in the "Power of Movement". ("The Power
of Movement in Plants", 1880, pages 571-3.) "It is impossible not to be
struck with the resemblance between the... movements of plants and many
of the actions performed unconsciously by the lower animals." And
again, "It is hardly an exaggeration to say that the tip of the
radicle... having the power of directing the movements of the adjoining
parts, acts like the brain of one of the lower animals; the brain being
seated within the anterior end of the body, receiving impressions from
the sense-organs, and directing the several movements."

The conception of a region of perception distinct from a region of
movement is perhaps the most fruitful outcome of his work on the
movements of plants. But many years before its publication, viz. in
1861, he had made out the wonderful fact that in the Orchid Catasetum
("Life and Letters", III. page 268.) the projecting organs or antennae
are sensitive to a touch, and transmit an influence "for more than one
inch INSTANTANEOUSLY," which leads to the explosion or violent ejection
of the pollinia. And as we have already seen a similar transmission of
a stimulus was discovered by him in Sundew in 1860, so that in 1862 he
could write to Hooker ("Life and Letters", III. page 321.): "I cannot
avoid the conclusion, that Drosera possesses matter at least in some
degree analogous in constitution and function to nervous matter." I
propose in what follows to give some account of the observations on
the transmission of stimuli given in the "Power of Movement". It is
impossible within the space at my command to give anything like a
complete account of the matter, and I must necessarily omit all mention
of much interesting work. One well-known experiment consisted in putting
opaque caps on the tips of seedling grasses (e.g. oat and canary-grass)
and then exposing them to light from one side. The difference, in the
amount of curvature towards the light, between the blinded and
unblinded specimens, was so great that it was concluded that the
light-sensitiveness resided exclusively in the tip. The experiment
undoubtedly proves that the sensitiveness is much greater in the tip
than elsewhere, and that there is a transmission of stimulus from the
tip to the region of curvature. But Rothert (Rothert, Cohn's "Beitrage",
VII. 1894.) has conclusively proved that the basal part where the
curvature occurs is also DIRECTLY sensitive to light. He has shown,
however, that in other grasses (Setaria, Panicum) the cotyledon is the
only part which is sensitive, while the hypocotyl, where the movement
occurs, is not directly sensitive.

It was however the question of the localisation of the gravitational
sense in the tip of the seedling root or radicle that aroused most
attention, and it was on this question that a controversy arose which
has continued to the present day.

The experiment on which Darwin's conclusion was based consisted simply
in cutting off the tip, and then comparing the behaviour of roots so
treated with that of normal specimens. An uninjured root when placed
horizontally regains the vertical by means of a sharp downward
curve; not so a decapitated root which continues to grow more or less
horizontally. It was argued that this depends on the loss of an organ
specialised for the perception of gravity, and residing in the tip of
the root; and the experiment (together with certain important variants)
was claimed as evidence of the existence of such an organ.

It was at once objected that the amputation of the tip might check
curvature by interfering with longitudinal growth, on the distribution
of which curvature depends. This objection was met by showing that an
injury, e.g. splitting the root longitudinally (See F. Darwin, "Linnean
Soc. Journal (Bot)." XIX. 1882, page 218.), which does not remove the
tip, but seriously checks growth, does not prevent geotropism. This
was of some interest in another and more general way, in showing that
curvature and longitudinal growth must be placed in different categories
as regards the conditions on which they depend.

Another objection of a much more serious kind was that the amputation
of the tip acts as a shock. It was shown by Rothert (See his excellent
summary of the subject in "Flora" 1894 (Erganzungsband), page 199.) that
the removal of a small part of the cotyledon of Setaria prevents the
plant curving towards the light, and here there is no question of
removing the sense-organ since the greater part of the sensitive
cotyledon is intact. In view of this result it was impossible to rely on
the amputations performed on roots as above described.

At this juncture a new and brilliant method originated in Pfeffer's
laboratory. (See Pfeffer, "Annals of Botany", VIII. 1894, page 317, and
Czapek, Pringsheim's "Jahrb." XXVII. 1895, page 243.) Pfeffer and Czapek
showed that it is possible to bend the root of a lupine so that, for
instance, the supposed sense-organ at the tip is vertical while the
motile region is horizontal. If the motile region is directly sensitive
to gravity the root ought to curve downwards, but this did not occur: on
the contrary it continued to grow horizontally. This is precisely what
should happen if Darwin's theory is the right one: for if the tip is
kept vertical, the sense-organ is in its normal position and receives no
stimulus from gravitation, and therefore can obviously transmit none to
the region of curvature. Unfortunately this method did not convince the
botanical world because some of those who repeated Czapek's experiment
failed to get his results.

Czapek ("Berichte d. Deutsch. bot. Ges." XV. 1897, page 516, and
numerous subsequent papers. English readers should consult Czapek in the
"Annals of Botany", XIX. 1905, page 75.) has devised another interesting
method which throws light on the problem. He shows that roots, which
have been placed in a horizontal position and have therefore been
geotropically stimulated, can be distinguished by a chemical test from
vertical, i.e. unstimulated roots. The chemical change in the root can
be detected before any curvature has occurred and must therefore be a
symptom of stimulation, not of movement. It is particularly interesting
to find that the change in the root, on which Czapek's test depends,
takes place in the tip, i.e. in the region which Darwin held to be the
centre for gravitational sensitiveness.

In 1899 I devised a method (F. Darwin, "Annals of Botany", XIII. 1899,
page 567.) by which I sought to prove that the cotyledon of Setaria is
not only the organ for light-perception, but also for gravitation. If
a seedling is supported horizontally by pushing the apical part
(cotyledon) into a horizontal tube, the cotyledon will, according to
my supposition, be stimulated gravitationally and a stimulus will be
transmitted to the basal part of the stem (hypocotyl) causing it to
bend. But this curvature merely raises the basal end of the seedling,
the sensitive cotyledon remains horizontal, imprisoned in its tube; it
will therefore be continually stimulated and will continue to transmit
influences to the bending region, which should therefore curl up into a
helix or corkscrew-like form,--and this is precisely what occurred.

I have referred to this work principally because the same method was
applied to roots by Massart (Massart, "Mem. Couronnes Acad. R. Belg."
LXII. 1902.) and myself (F. Darwin, "Linnean Soc. Journ." XXXV. 1902,
page 266.) with a similar though less striking result. Although these
researches confirmed Darwin's work on roots, much stress cannot be laid
on them as there are several objections to them, and they are not easily
repeated.

The method which--as far as we can judge at present--seems likely
to solve the problem of the root-tip is most ingenious and is due to
Piccard. (Pringsheim's "Jahrb." XL. 1904, page 94.)

Andrew Knight's celebrated experiment showed that roots react to
centrifugal force precisely as they do to gravity. So that if a bean
root is fixed to a wheel revolving rapidly on a horizontal axis, it
tends to curve away from the centre in the line of a radius of the
wheel. In ordinary demonstrations of Knight's experiment the seed is
generally fixed so that the root is at right angles to a radius, and as
far as convenient from the centre of rotation. Piccard's experiment is
arranged differently. (A seed is depicted below a horizontal dotted
line AA, projecting a root upwards.) The root is oblique to the axis
of rotation, and the extreme tip projects beyond that axis. Line AA
represents the axis of rotation, T is the tip of the root just above the
line AA, and B is the region just below line AA in which curvature takes
place. If the motile region B is directly sensitive to gravitation (and
is the only part which is sensitive) the root will curve (down and away
from the vertical) away from the axis of rotation, just as in Knight's
experiment. But if the tip T is alone sensitive to gravitation the
result will be exactly reversed, the stimulus originating in T and
conveyed to B will produce curvature (up towards the vertical). We may
think of the line AA as a plane dividing two worlds. In the lower one
gravity is of the earthly type and is shown by bodies falling and roots
curving downwards: in the upper world bodies fall upwards and roots
curve in the same direction. The seedling is in the lower world, but its
tip containing the supposed sense-organ is in the strange world where
roots curve upwards. By observing whether the root bends up or down we
can decide whether the impulse to bend originates in the tip or in the
motile region.

Piccard's results showed that both curvatures occurred and he
concluded that the sensitive region is not confined to the tip. (Czapek
(Pringsheim's "Jahrb." XXXV. 1900, page 362) had previously given
reasons for believing that, in the root, there is no sharp line of
separation between the regions of perception and movement.)

Haberlandt (Pringsheim's "Jahrb." XLV. 1908, page 575.) has recently
repeated the experiment with the advantage of better apparatus and more
experience in dealing with plants, and has found as Piccard did that
both the tip and the curving region are sensitive to gravity, but with
the important addition that the sensitiveness of the tip is much greater
than that of the motile region. The case is in fact similar to that of
the oat and canary-grass. In both instances my father and I were wrong
in assuming that the sensitiveness is confined to the tip, yet there
is a concentration of irritability in that region and transmission of
stimulus is as true for geotropism as it is for heliotropism. Thus after
nearly thirty years the controversy of the root-tip has apparently ended
somewhat after the fashion of the quarrels at the "Rainbow" in
"Silas Marner"--"you're both right and you're both wrong." But the
"brain-function" of the root-tip at which eminent people laughed in
early days turns out to be an important part of the truth. (By using
Piccard's method I have succeeded in showing that the gravitational
sensitiveness of the cotyledon of Sorghum is certainly much greater than
the sensitiveness of the hypocotyl--if indeed any such sensitiveness
exists. See Wiesner's "Festschrift", Vienna, 1908.)

Another observation of Darwin's has given rise to much controversy.
("Power of Movement", page 133.) If a minute piece of card is fixed
obliquely to the tip of a root some influence is transmitted to the
region of curvature and the root bends away from the side to which
the card was attached. It was thought at the time that this proved the
root-tip to be sensitive to contact, but this is not necessarily the
case. It seems possible that the curvature is a reaction to the injury
caused by the alcoholic solution of shellac with which the cards were
cemented to the tip. This agrees with the fact given in the "Power of
Movement" that injuring the root-tip on one side, by cutting or burning
it, induced a similar curvature. On the other hand it was shown that
curvature could be produced in roots by cementing cards, not to the
naked surface of the root-tip, but to pieces of gold-beaters skin
applied to the root; gold-beaters skin being by itself almost without
effect. But it must be allowed that, as regards touch, it is not clear
how the addition of shellac and card can increase the degree of contact.
There is however some evidence that very close contact from a solid
body, such as a curved fragment of glass, produces curvature: and this
may conceivably be the explanation of the effect of gold-beaters skin
covered with shellac. But on the whole it is perhaps safer to classify
the shellac experiments with the results of undoubted injury rather than
with those of contact.

Another subject on which a good deal of labour was expended is the sleep
of leaves, or as Darwin called it their NYCTITROPIC movement. He showed
for the first time how widely spread this phenomenon is, and attempted
to give an explanation of the use to the plant of the power of sleeping.
His theory was that by becoming more or less vertical at night the
leaves escape the chilling effect of radiation. Our method of testing
this view was to fix some of the leaves of a sleeping plant so that they
remained horizontal at night and therefore fully exposed to radiation,
while their fellows were partly protected by assuming the nocturnal
position. The experiments showed clearly that the horizontal leaves were
more injured than the sleeping, i.e. more or less vertical, ones. It may
be objected that the danger from cold is very slight in warm countries
where sleeping plants abound. But it is quite possible that a lowering
of the temperature which produces no visible injury may nevertheless
be hurtful by checking the nutritive processes (e.g. translocation of
carbohydrates), which go on at night. Stahl ("Bot. Zeitung", 1897, page
81.) however has ingeniously suggested that the exposure of the leaves
to radiation is not DIRECTLY hurtful because it lowers the temperature
of the leaf, but INDIRECTLY because it leads to the deposition of dew on
the leaf-surface. He gives reasons for believing that dew-covered leaves
are unable to transpire efficiently, and that the absorption of mineral
food-material is correspondingly checked. Stahl's theory is in no way
destructive of Darwin's, and it is possible that nyctitropic leaves are
adapted to avoid the indirect as well as the direct results of cooling
by radiation.

In what has been said I have attempted to give an idea of some of the
discoveries brought before the world in the "Power of Movement" (In 1881
Professor Wiesner published his "Das Bewegungsvermogen der Pflanzen",
a book devoted to the criticism of "The Power of Movement in Plants". A
letter to Wiesner, published in "Life and Letters", III. page 336, shows
Darwin's warm appreciation of his critic's work, and of the spirit in
which it is written.) and of the subsequent history of the problems.
We must now pass on to a consideration of the central thesis of the
book,--the relation of circumnutation to the adaptive curvatures of
plants.

Darwin's view is plainly stated on pages 3-4 of the "Power of Movement".
Speaking of circumnutation he says, "In this universally present
movement we have the basis or groundwork for the acquirement, according
to the requirements of the plant, of the most diversified movements."
He then points out that curvatures such as those towards the light or
towards the centre of the earth can be shown to be exaggerations of
circumnutation in the given directions. He finally points out that
the difficulty of conceiving how the capacities of bending in definite
directions were acquired is diminished by his conception. "We know that
there is always movement in progress, and its amplitude, or direction,
or both, have only to be modified for the good of the plant in relation
with internal or external stimuli."

It may at once be allowed that the view here given has not been accepted
by physiologists. The bare fact that circumnutation is a general
property of plants (other than climbing species) is not generally
rejected. But the botanical world is no nearer to believing in the
theory of reaction built on it.

If we compare the movements of plants with those of the lower animals we
find a certain resemblance between the two. According to Jennings (H.S.
Jennings, "The Behavior of the Lower Animals". Columbia U. Press, N.Y.
1906.) a Paramoecium constantly tends to swerve towards the aboral side
of its body owing to certain peculiarities in the set and power of
its cilia. But the tendency to swim in a circle, thus produced, is
neutralised by the rotation of the creature about its longitudinal
axis. Thus the direction of the swerves IN RELATION TO THE PATH of the
organism is always changing, with the result that the creature moves in
what approximates to a straight line, being however actually a spiral
about the general line of progress. This method of motion is strikingly
like the circumnutation of a plant, the apex of which also describes a
spiral about the general line of growth. A rooted plant obviously cannot
rotate on its axis, but the regular series of curvatures of which its
growth consists correspond to the aberrations of Paramoecium distributed
regularly about its course by means of rotation. (In my address to the
Biological Section of the British Association at Cardiff (1891) I
have attempted to show the connection between circumnutation and
RECTIPETALITY, i.e. the innate capacity of growing in a straight line.)
Just as a plant changes its direction of growth by an exaggeration of
one of the curvature-elements of which circumnutation consists, so
does a Paramoecium change its course by the accentuation of one of
the deviations of which its path is built. Jennings has shown that the
infusoria, etc., react to stimuli by what is known as the "method of
trial." If an organism swims into a region where the temperature is too
high or where an injurious substance is present, it changes its course.
It then moves forward again, and if it is fortunate enough to escape the
influence, it continues to swim in the given direction. If however its
change of direction leads it further into the heated or poisonous region
it repeats the movement until it emerges from its difficulties. Jennings
finds in the movements of the lower organisms an analogue with what
is known as pain in conscious organisms. There is certainly this much
resemblance that a number of quite different sub-injurious agencies
produce in the lower organisms a form of reaction by the help of which
they, in a partly fortuitous way, escape from the threatening element
in their environment. The higher animals are stimulated in a parallel
manner to vague and originally purposeless movements, one of which
removes the discomfort under which they suffer, and the organism finally
learns to perform the appropriate movement without going through the
tentative series of actions.

I am tempted to recognise in circumnutation a similar groundwork of
tentative movements out of which the adaptive ones were originally
selected by a process rudely representative of learning by experience.

It is, however, simpler to confine ourselves to the assumption that
those plants have survived which have acquired through unknown causes
the power of reacting in appropriate ways to the external stimuli of
light, gravity, etc. It is quite possible to conceive this occurring in
plants which have no power of circumnutating--and, as already pointed
out, physiologists do as a fact neglect circumnutation as a factor in
the evolution of movements. Whatever may be the fate of Darwin's theory
of circumnutation there is no doubt that the research he carried out
in support of, and by the light of, this hypothesis has had a powerful
influence in guiding the modern theories of the behaviour of plants.
Pfeffer ("The Physiology of Plants", Eng. Tr. III. page 11.), who more
than any one man has impressed on the world a rational view of the
reactions of plants, has acknowledged in generous words the great value
of Darwin's work in the same direction. The older view was that, for
instance, curvature towards the light is the direct mechanical result of
the difference of illumination on the lighted and shaded surfaces of the
plant. This has been proved to be an incorrect explanation of the
fact, and Darwin by his work on the transmission of stimuli has greatly
contributed to the current belief that stimuli act indirectly. Thus we
now believe that in a root and a stem the mechanism for the perception
of gravitation is identical, but the resulting movements are different
because the motor-irritabilities are dissimilar in the two cases. We
must come back, in fact, to Darwin's comparison of plants to animals.
In both there is perceptive machinery by which they are made delicately
alive to their environment, in both the existing survivors are those
whose internal constitution has enabled them to respond in a beneficial
way to the disturbance originating in their sense-organs.




XX. THE BIOLOGY OF FLOWERS. By K. Goebel, Ph.D.

Professor of Botany in the University of Munich.


There is scarcely any subject to which Darwin devoted so much time and
work as to his researches into the biology of flowers, or, in other
words, to the consideration of the question to what extent the
structural and physiological characters of flowers are correlated with
their function of producing fruits and seeds. We know from his own words
what fascination these studies possessed for him. We repeatedly find,
for example, in his letters expressions such as this:--"Nothing in my
life has ever interested me more than the fertilisation of such plants
as Primula and Lythrum, or again Anacamptis or Listera." ("More Letters
of Charles Darwin", Vol. II. page 419.)

Expressions of this kind coming from a man whose theories exerted an
epoch-making influence, would be unintelligible if his researches into
the biology of flowers had been concerned only with records of isolated
facts, however interesting these might be. We may at once take it
for granted that the investigations were undertaken with the view of
following up important problems of general interest, problems which are
briefly dealt with in this essay.

Darwin published the results of his researches in several papers and in
three larger works, (i) "On the various contrivances by which British
and Foreign Orchids are fertilised by insects" (First edition, London,
1862; second edition, 1877; popular edition, 1904.) (ii) "The effects of
Cross and Self fertilisation in the vegetable kingdom" (First edition,
1876; second edition, 1878). (iii) "The different forms of Flowers on
plants of the same species" (First edition, 1877; second edition, 1880).

Although the influence of his work is considered later, we may here
point out that it was almost without a parallel; not only does it
include a mass of purely scientific observations, but it awakened
interest in very wide circles, as is shown by the fact that we find the
results of Darwin's investigations in floral biology universally quoted
in school books; they are even willingly accepted by those who, as
regards other questions, are opposed to Darwin's views.

The works which we have mentioned are, however, not only of special
interest because of the facts they contribute, but because of the MANNER
in which the facts are expressed. A superficial reader seeking merely
for catch-words will, for instance, probably find the book on cross and
self-fertilisation rather dry because of the numerous details which
it contains: it is, indeed, not easy to compress into a few words the
general conclusions of this volume. But on closer examination, we cannot
be sufficiently grateful to the author for the exactness and objectivity
with which he enables us to participate in the scheme of his researches.
He never tries to persuade us, but only to convince us that his
conclusions are based on facts; he always gives prominence to such facts
as appear to be in opposition to his opinions,--a feature of his work in
accordance with a maxim which he laid down:--"It is a golden rule,
which I try to follow, to put every fact which is opposed to one's
preconceived opinion in the strongest light." ("More Letters", Vol. II.
page 324.)

The result of this method of presentation is that the works mentioned
above represent a collection of most valuable documents even for those
who feel impelled to draw from the data other conclusions than those of
the author. Each investigation is the outcome of a definite question, a
"preconceived opinion," which is either supported by the facts or
must be abandoned. "How odd it is that anyone should not see that all
observation must be for or against some view if it is to be of any
service!" (Ibid. Vol. I. page 195.)

The points of view which Darwin had before him were principally the
following. In the first place the proof that a large number of the
peculiarities in the structure of flowers are not useless, but of the
greatest significance in pollination must be of considerable importance
for the interpretation of adaptations; "The use of each trifling detail
of structure is far from a barren search to those who believe in natural
selection." ("Fertilisation of Orchids" (1st edition), page 351; (2nd
edition 1904) page 286.) Further, if these structural relations are
shown to be useful, they may have been acquired because from the many
variations which have occurred along different lines, those have been
preserved by natural selection "which are beneficial to the organism
under the complex and ever-varying conditions of life." (Ibid. page
351.) But in the case of flowers there is not only the question of
adaptation to fertilisation to be considered. Darwin, indeed,
soon formed the opinion which he has expressed in the following
sentence,--"From my own observations on plants, guided to a certain
extent by the experience of the breeders of animals, I became convinced
many years ago that it is a general law of nature that flowers are
adapted to be crossed, at least occasionally, by pollen from a distinct
plant." ("Cross and Self fertilisation" (1st edition), page 6.)

The experience of animal breeders pointed to the conclusion that
continual in-breeding is injurious. If this is correct, it raises the
question whether the same conclusion holds for plants. As most flowers
are hermaphrodite, plants afford much more favourable material than
animals for an experimental solution of the question, what results
follow from the union of nearly related sexual cells as compared with
those obtained by the introduction of new blood. The answer to this
question must, moreover, possess the greatest significance for the
correct understanding of sexual reproduction in general.

We see, therefore, that the problems which Darwin had before him in his
researches into the biology of flowers were of the greatest importance,
and at the same time that the point of view from which he attacked the
problems was essentially a teleological one.

We may next inquire in what condition he found the biology of flowers at
the time of his first researches, which were undertaken about the year
1838. In his autobiography he writes,--"During the summer of 1839,
and, I believe, during the previous summer, I was led to attend to the
cross-fertilisation of flowers by the aid of insects, from having come
to the conclusion in my speculations on the origin of species, that
crossing played an important part in keeping specific forms constant."
("The Life and Letters of Charles Darwin", Vol. I. page 90, London,
1888.) In 1841 he became acquainted with Sprengel's work: his researches
into the biology of flowers were thus continued for about forty years.

It is obvious that there could only be a biology of flowers after it had
been demonstrated that the formation of seeds and fruit in the flower
is dependent on pollination and subsequent fertilisation. This proof
was supplied at the end of the seventeenth century by R.J. Camerarius
(1665-1721). He showed that normally seeds and fruits are developed only
when the pollen reaches the stigma. The manner in which this happens was
first thoroughly investigated by J.G. Kolreuter (1733-1806 (Kolreuter,
"Vorlaufige Nachricht von einigen das Geschlecht der Planzen
betreffenden Versuchen und Beobachtungen", Leipzig, 1761; with three
supplements, 1763-66. Also, "Mem. de l'acad. St Petersbourg", Vol. XV.
1809.)), the same observer to whom we owe the earliest experiments in
hybridisation of real scientific interest. Kolreuter mentioned that
pollen may be carried from one flower to another partly by wind and
partly by insects. But he held the view, and that was, indeed, the
natural assumption, that self-fertilisation usually occurs in a flower,
in other words that the pollen of a flower reaches the stigma of
the same flower. He demonstrated, however, certain cases in which
cross-pollination occurs, that is in which the pollen of another flower
of the same species is conveyed to the stigma. He was familiar with the
phenomenon, exhibited by numerous flowers, to which Sprengel afterwards
applied the term Dichogamy, expressing the fact that the anthers and
stigmas of a flower often ripen at different times, a peculiarity
which is now recognised as one of the commonest means of ensuring
cross-pollination.

With far greater thoroughness and with astonishing power of observation
C.K. Sprengel (1750-1816) investigated the conditions of pollination of
flowers. Darwin was introduced by that eminent botanist Robert Brown to
Sprengel's then but little appreciated work,--"Das entdeckte Geheimniss
der Natur im Bau und in der Befruchtung der Blumen" (Berlin, 1793); this
is by no means the least service to Botany rendered by Robert Brown.

Sprengel proceeded from a naive teleological point of view. He firmly
believed "that the wise Author of nature had not created a single hair
without a definite purpose." He succeeded in demonstrating a number of
beautiful adaptations in flowers for ensuring pollination; but his work
exercised but little influence on his contemporaries and indeed for a
long time after his death. It was through Darwin that Sprengel's work
first achieved a well deserved though belated fame. Even such botanists
as concerned themselves with researches into the biology of flowers
appear to have formerly attached much less value to Sprengel's work
than it has received since Darwin's time. In illustration of this we may
quote C.F. Gartner whose name is rightly held in the highest esteem as
that of one of the most eminent hybridologists. In his work "Versuche
und Beobachtungen uder die Befruchtungsorgane der vollkommeneren
Gewachse und uber die naturliche und kunstliche Befruchtung durch den
eigenen Pollen" he also deals with flower-pollination. He recognised the
action of the wind, but he believed, in spite of the fact that he
both knew and quoted Kolreuter and Sprengel, that while insects assist
pollination, they do so only occasionally, and he held that insects are
responsible for the conveyance of pollen; thorough investigations
would show "that a very small proportion of the plants included in this
category require this assistance in their native habitat." (Gartner,
"Versucher und Beobachtungen... ", page 335, Stuttgart, 1844.) In the
majority of plants self-pollination occurs.

Seeing that even investigators who had worked for several decades at
fertilisation-phenomena had not advanced the biology of flowers beyond
the initial stage, we cannot be surprised that other botanists followed
to even a less extent the lines laid down by Kolreuter and Sprengel.
This was in part the result of Sprengel's supernatural teleology and in
part due to the fact that his book appeared at a time when other lines
of inquiry exerted a dominating influence.

At the hands of Linnaeus systematic botany reached a vigorous
development, and at the beginning of the nineteenth century the anatomy
and physiology of plants grew from small beginnings to a flourishing
branch of science. Those who concerned themselves with flowers
endeavoured to investigate their development and structure or the most
minute phenomena connected with fertilisation and the formation of the
embryo. No room was left for the extension of the biology of flowers on
the lines marked out by Kolreuter and Sprengel. Darwin was the first to
give new life and a deeper significance to this subject, chiefly
because he took as his starting-point the above-mentioned problems, the
importance of which is at once admitted by all naturalists.

The further development of floral biology by Darwin is in the first
place closely connected with the book on the fertilisation of Orchids.
It is noteworthy that the title includes the sentence,--"and on the good
effects of intercrossing."

The purpose of the book is clearly stated in the introduction:--"The
object of the following work is to show that the contrivances by which
Orchids are fertilised, are as varied and almost as perfect as any of
the most beautiful adaptations in the animal kingdom; and, secondly,
to show that these contrivances have for their main object the
fertilisation of each flower by the pollen of another flower."
("Fertilisation of Orchids", page 1.) Orchids constituted a particularly
suitable family for such researches. Their flowers exhibit a striking
wealth of forms; the question, therefore, whether the great variety
in floral structure bears any relation to fertilisation (In the older
botanical literature the word fertilisation is usually employed in cases
where POLLINATION is really in question: as Darwin used it in this sense
it is so used here.) must in this case possess special interest.

Darwin succeeded in showing that in most of the orchids examined
self-fertilisation is either an impossibility, or, under natural
conditions, occurs only exceptionally. On the other hand these plants
present a series of extraordinarily beautiful and remarkable adaptations
which ensure the transference of pollen by insects from one flower to
another. It is impossible to describe adequately in a few words the
wealth of facts contained in the Orchid book. A few examples may,
however, be quoted in illustration of the delicacy of the observations
and of the perspicuity employed in interpreting the facts.

The majority of orchids differ from other seed plants (with the
exception of the Asclepiads) in having no dust-like pollen. The pollen,
or more correctly, the pollen-tetrads, remain fastened together as
club-shaped pollinia usually borne on a slender pedicel. At the base of
the pedicel is a small viscid disc by which the pollinium is attached
to the head or proboscis of one of the insects which visit the flower.
Darwin demonstrated that in Orchis and other flowers the pedicel of
the pollinium, after its removal from the anther, undergoes a curving
movement. If the pollinium was originally vertical, after a time it
assumed a horizontal position. In the latter position, if the insect
visited another flower, the pollinium would exactly hit the sticky
stigmatic surface and thus effect fertilisation. The relation between
the behaviour of the viscid disc and the secretion of nectar by the
flower is especially remarkable. The flowers possess a spur which in
some species (e.g. Gymnadenia conopsea, Platanthera bifolia, etc.)
contains honey (nectar), which serves as an attractive bait for insects,
but in others (e.g. our native species of Orchis) the spur is empty.
Darwin held the opinion, confirmed by later investigations, that in the
case of flowers without honey the insects must penetrate the wall of the
nectarless spurs in order to obtain a nectar-like substance. The glands
behave differently in the nectar-bearing and in the nectarless flowers.
In the former they are so sticky that they at once adhere to the body of
the insect; in the nectarless flowers firm adherence only occurs after
the viscid disc has hardened. It is, therefore, adaptively of value
that the insects should be detained longer in the nectarless flowers (by
having to bore into the spur),--than in flowers in which the nectar is
freely exposed. "If this relation, on the one hand, between the viscid
matter requiring some little time to set hard, and the nectar being so
lodged that moths are delayed in getting it; and, on the other hand,
between the viscid matter being at first as viscid as ever it will
become, and the nectar lying all ready for rapid suction, be accidental,
it is a fortunate accident for the plant. If not accidental, and I
cannot believe it to be accidental, what a singular case of adaptation!"
("Fertilisation of Orchids" (1st edition), page 53.)

Among exotic orchids Catasetum is particularly remarkable. One and the
same species bears different forms of flowers. The species known as
Catasetum tridentatum has pollinia with very large viscid discs;
on touching one of the two filaments (antennae) which occur on the
gynostemium of the flower the pollinia are shot out to a fairly long
distance (as far as 1 metre) and in such manner that they alight on the
back of the insect, where they are held. The antennae have, moreover,
acquired an importance, from the point of view of the physiology of
stimulation, as stimulus-perceiving organs. Darwin had shown that it is
only a touch on the antennae that causes the explosion, while contact,
blows, wounding, etc. on other places produce no effect. This form of
flower proved to be the male. The second form, formerly regarded as
a distinct species and named Monachanthus viridis, is shown to be the
female flower. The anthers have only rudimentary pollinia and do not
open; there are no antennae, but on the other hand numerous seeds
are produced. Another type of flower, known as Myanthus barbatus, was
regarded by Darwin as a third form: this was afterwards recognised
by Rolfe (Rolfe, R.A. "On the sexual forms of Catasetum with special
reference to the researches of Darwin and others," "Journ. Linn. Soc."
Vol. XXVII. (Botany), 1891, pages 206-225.) as the male flower
of another species, Catasetum barbatum Link, an identification in
accordance with the discovery made by Cruger in Trinidad that it always
remains sterile.

Darwin had noticed that the flowers of Catasetum do not secrete nectar,
and he conjectured that in place of it the insects gnaw a tissue in
the cavity of the labellum which has a "slightly sweet, pleasant and
nutritious taste." This conjecture as well as other conclusions drawn by
Darwin from Catasetum have been confirmed by Cruger--assuredly the best
proof of the acumen with which the wonderful floral structure of this
"most remarkable of the Orchids" was interpretated far from its native
habitat.

As is shown by what we have said about Catasetum, other problems in
addition to those concerned with fertilisation are dealt with in the
Orchid book. This is especially the case in regard to flower morphology.
The scope of flower morphology cannot be more clearly and better
expressed than by these words: "He will see how curiously a flower may
be moulded out of many separate organs--how perfect the cohesion of
primordially distinct parts may become,--how organs may be used for
purposes widely different from their proper function,--how other organs
may be entirely suppressed, or leave mere useless emblems of their
former existence." ("Fertilisation of Orchids", page 289.)

In attempting, from this point of view, to refer the floral structure
of orchids to their original form, Darwin employed a much more thorough
method than that of Robert Brown and others. The result of this was the
production of a considerable literature, especially in France, along
the lines suggested by Darwin's work. This is the so-called anatomical
method, which seeks to draw conclusions as to the morphology of the
flower from the course of the vascular bundles in the several parts. (He
wrote in one of his letters, "... the destiny of the whole human race is
as nothing to the course of vessels of orchids" ("More Letters", Vol.
II. page 275.) Although the interpretation of the orchid flower given
by Darwin has not proved satisfactory in one particular point--the
composition of the labellum--the general results have received universal
assent, namely "that all Orchids owe what they have in common to descent
from some monocotyledonous plant, which, like so many other plants of
the same division, possessed fifteen organs arranged alternately three
within three in five whorls." ("Fertilisation of Orchids" (1st edition),
page 307.) The alterations which their original form has undergone have
persisted so far as they were found to be of use.

We see also that the remarkable adaptations of which we have given some
examples are directed towards cross-fertilisation. In only a few of
the orchids investigated by Darwin--other similar cases have since been
described--was self-fertilisation found to occur regularly or usually.
The former is the case in the Bee Ophrys (Ophrys apifera), the mechanism
of which greatly surprised Darwin. He once remarked to a friend that one
of the things that made him wish to live a few thousand years was his
desire to see the extinction of the Bee Ophrys, an end to which he
believed its self-fertilising habit was leading. ("Life and Letters",
Vol. III. page 276 (footnote).) But, he wrote, "the safest conclusion,
as it seems to me, is, that under certain unknown circumstances, and
perhaps at very long intervals of time, one individual of the Bee Ophrys
is crossed by another." ("Fertilisation of Orchids" page 71.)

If, on the one hand, we remember how much more sure self-fertilisation
would be than cross-fertilisation, and, on the other hand, if we call to
mind the numerous contrivances for cross-fertilisation, the
conclusion is naturally reached that "it is an astonishing fact that
self-fertilisation should not have been an habitual occurrence. It
apparently demonstrates to us that there must be something injurious in
the process. Nature thus tells us, in the most emphatic manner, that she
abhors perpetual self-fertilisation... For may we not further infer as
probable, in accordance with the belief of the vast majority of the
breeders of our domestic productions, that marriage between near
relations is likewise in some way injurious, that some unknown great
good is derived from the union of individuals which have been kept
distinct for many generations?" (Ibid., page 359.)

This view was supported by observations on plants of other families,
e.g. Papilionaceae; it could, however, in the absence of experimental
proof, be regarded only as a "working hypothesis."

All adaptations to cross-pollination might also be of use simply because
they made pollination possible when for any reason self-pollination had
become difficult or impossible. Cross-pollination would, therefore, be
of use, not as such, but merely as a means of pollination in general;
it would to some extent serve as a remedy for a method unsuitable in
itself, such as a modification standing in the way of self-pollination,
and on the other hand as a means of increasing the chance of pollination
in the case of flowers in which self-pollination was possible, but which
might, in accidental circumstances, be prevented. It was, therefore,
very important to obtain experimental proof of the conclusion to which
Darwin was led by the belief of the majority of breeders and by the
evidence of the widespread occurrence of cross-pollination and of the
remarkable adaptations thereto.

This was supplied by the researches which are described in the two other
works named above. The researches on which the conclusions rest had, in
part at least, been previously published in separate papers: this is the
case as regards the heterostyled plants. The discoveries which Darwin
made in the course of his investigations of these plants belong to the
most brilliant in biological science.

The case of Primula is now well known. C.K. Sprengel and others were
familiar with the remarkable fact that different individuals of the
European species of Primula bear differently constructed flowers; some
plants possess flowers in which the styles project beyond the stamens
attached to the corolla-tube (long-styled form), while in others the
stamens are inserted above the stigma which is borne on a short style
(short-styled form). It has been shown by Breitenbach that both forms of
flower may occur on the same plant, though this happens very rarely. An
analogous case is occasionally met with in hybrids, which bear flowers
of different colour on the same plant (e.g. Dianthus caryophyllus).
Darwin showed that the external differences are correlated with others
in the structure of the stigma and in the nature of the pollen.
The long-styled flowers have a spherical stigma provided with large
stigmatic papillae; the pollen grains are oblong and smaller than those
of the short-styled flowers. The number of the seeds produced is smaller
and the ovules larger, probably also fewer in number. The short-styled
flowers have a smooth compressed stigma and a corolla of somewhat
different form; they produce a greater number of seeds.

These different forms of flowers were regarded as merely a case of
variation, until Darwin showed "that these heterostyled plants are
adapted for reciprocal fertilisation; so that the two or three forms,
though all are hermaphrodites, are related to one another almost
like the males and females of ordinary unisexual animals." ("Forms
of Flowers" (1st edition), page 2.) We have here an example of
hermaphrodite flowers which are sexually different. There are essential
differences in the manner in which fertilisation occurs. This may
be effected in four different ways; there are two legitimate and two
illegitimate types of fertilisation. The fertilisation is legitimate
if pollen from the long-styled flowers reaches the stigma of the
short-styled form or if pollen of the short-styled flowers is brought
to the stigma of the long-styled flower, that is the organs of the
same length of the two different kinds of flower react on one
another. Illegitimate fertilisation is represented by the two kinds of
self-fertilisation, also by cross-fertilisation, in which the pollen of
the long-styled form reaches the stigma of the same type of flower and,
similarly, by cross-pollination in the case of the short-styled flowers.

The applicability of the terms legitimate and illegitimate depends, on
the one hand, upon the fact that insects which visit the different forms
of flowers pollinate them in the manner suggested; the pollen of the
short-styled flowers adhere to that part of the insect's body which
touches the stigma of the long-styled flower and vice versa. On the
other hand, it is based also on the fact that experiment shows that
artificial pollination produces a very different result according as
this is legitimate or illegitimate; only the legitimate union ensures
complete fertility, the plants thus produced being stronger than those
which are produced illegitimately.

If we take 100 as the number of flowers which produce seeds as the
result of legitimate fertilisation, we obtain the following numbers from
illegitimate fertilisation:

Primula officinalis (P. veris) (Cowslip)... 69 Primula elatior
(Oxlip).................... 27 Primula acaulis (P. vulgaris)
(Primrose)... 60

Further, the plants produced by the illegitimate method of fertilisation
showed, e.g. in P. officinalis, a decrease in fertility in later
generations, sterile pollen and in the open a feebler growth. (Under
very favourable conditions (in a greenhouse) the fertility of the plants
of the fourth generation increases--a point, which in view of various
theoretical questions, deserves further investigation.) They behave in
fact precisely in the same way as hybrids between species of different
genera. This result is important, "for we thus learn that the difficulty
in sexually uniting two organic forms and the sterility of their
offspring, afford no sure criterion of so-called specific distinctness"
("Forms of Flowers", page 242): the relative or absolute sterility
of the illegitimate unions and that of their illegitimate descendants
depend exclusively on the nature of the sexual elements and on their
inability to combine in a particular manner. This functional difference
of sexual cells is characteristic of the behaviour of hybrids as of the
illegitimate unions of heterostyled plants. The agreement becomes
even closer if we regard the Primula plants bearing different forms of
flowers not as belonging to a systematic entity or "species," but as
including several elementary species. The legitimately produced plants
are thus true hybrids (When Darwin wrote in reference to the different
forms of heterostyled plants, "which all belong to the same species
as certainly as do the two sexes of the same species" ("Cross and
Self fertilisation", page 466), he adopted the term species in a
comprehensive sense. The recent researches of Bateson and Gregory ("On
the inheritance of Heterostylism in Primula"; "Proc. Roy. Soc." Ser. B,
Vol. LXXVI. 1905, page 581) appear to me also to support the view that
the results of illegitimate crossing of heterostyled Primulas correspond
with those of hybridisation. The fact that legitimate pollen effects
fertilisation, even if illegitimate pollen reaches the stigma a short
time previously, also points to this conclusion. Self-pollination in the
case of the short-styled form, for example, is not excluded. In spite
of this, the numerical proportion of the two forms obtained in the open
remains approximately the same as when the pollination was exclusively
legitimate, presumably because legitimate pollen is prepotent.), with
which their behaviour in other respects, as Darwin showed, presents so
close an agreement. This view receives support also from the fact that
descendants of a flower fertilised illegitimately by pollen from another
plant with the same form of flower belong, with few exceptions, to the
same type as that of their parents. The two forms of flower, however,
behave differently in this respect. Among 162 seedlings of the
long-styled illegitimately pollinated plants of Primula officinalis,
including five generations, there were 156 long-styled and only six
short-styled forms, while as the result of legitimate fertilisation
nearly half of the offspring were long-styled and half short-styled. The
short-styled illegitimately pollinated form gave five long-styled
and nine short-styled; the cause of this difference requires further
explanation. The significance of heterostyly, whether or not we now
regard it as an arrangement for the normal production of hybrids, is
comprehensively expressed by Darwin: "We may feel sure that plants have
been rendered heterostyled to ensure cross-fertilisation, for we now
know that a cross between the distinct individuals of the same species
is highly important for the vigour and fertility of the offspring."
("Forms of Flowers", page 258.) If we remember how important the
interpretation of heterostyly has become in all general problems as,
for example, those connected with the conditions of the formation of
hybrids, a fact which was formerly overlooked, we can appreciate how
Darwin was able to say in his autobiography: "I do not think anything in
my scientific life has given me so much satisfaction as making out the
meaning of the structure of these plants." ("Life and Letters", Vol. I.
page 91.)

The remarkable conditions represented in plants with three kinds of
flowers, such as Lythrum and Oxalis, agree in essentials with those
in Primula. These cannot be considered in detail here; it need only be
noted that the investigation of these cases was still more laborious.
In order to establish the relative fertility of the different unions in
Lythrum salicaria 223 different fertilisations were made, each flower
being deprived of its male organs and then dusted with the appropriate
pollen.

In the book containing the account of heterostyled plants other
species are dealt with which, in addition to flowers opening normally
(chasmogamous), also possess flowers which remain closed but are capable
of producing fruit. These cleistogamous flowers afford a striking
example of habitual self-pollination, and H. von Mohl drew special
attention to them as such shortly after the appearance of Darwin's
Orchid book. If it were only a question of producing seed in the
simplest way, cleistogamous flowers would be the most conveniently
constructed. The corolla and frequently other parts of the flower are
reduced; the development of the seed may, therefore, be accomplished
with a smaller expenditure of building material than in chasmogamous
flowers; there is also no loss of pollen, and thus a smaller amount
suffices for fertilisation.

Almost all these plants, as Darwin pointed out, have also chasmogamous
flowers which render cross-fertilisation possible. His view that
cleistogamous flowers are derived from originally chasmogamous flowers
has been confirmed by more recent researches. Conditions of nutrition in
the broader sense are the factors which determine whether chasmogamous
or cleistogamous flowers are produced, assuming, of course, that the
plants in question have the power of developing both forms of flower.
The former may fail to appear for some time, but are eventually
developed under favourable conditions of nourishment. The belief of many
authors that there are plants with only cleistogamous flowers cannot
therefore be accepted as authoritative without thorough experimental
proof, as we are concerned with extra-european plants for which it is
often difficult to provide appropriate conditions in cultivation.

Darwin sees in cleistogamous flowers an adaptation to a good supply of
seeds with a small expenditure of material, while chasmogamous flowers
of the same species are usually cross-fertilised and "their offspring
will thus be invigorated, as we may infer from a wide-spread analogy."
("Forms of Flowers" (1st edition), page 341.) Direct proof in support of
this has hitherto been supplied in a few cases only; we shall often
find that the example set by Darwin in solving such problems as these by
laborious experiment has unfortunately been little imitated.

Another chapter of this book treats of the distribution of the sexes in
polygamous, dioecious, and gyno-dioecious plants (the last term, now in
common use, we owe to Darwin). It contains a number of important facts
and discussions and has inspired the experimental researches of Correns
and others.

The most important of Darwin's work on floral biology is, however, that
on cross and self-fertilisation, chiefly because it states the results
of experimental investigations extending over many years. Only
such experiments, as we have pointed out, could determine whether
cross-fertilisation is in itself beneficial, and self-fertilisation
on the other hand injurious; a conclusion which a merely comparative
examination of pollination-mechanisms renders in the highest degree
probable. Later floral biologists have unfortunately almost entirely
confined themselves to observations on floral mechanisms. But there is
little more to be gained by this kind of work than an assumption
long ago made by C.K. Sprengel that "very many flowers have the sexes
separate and probably at least as many hermaphrodite flowers are
dichogamous; it would thus appear that Nature was unwilling that any
flower should be fertilised by its own pollen."

It was an accidental observation which inspired Darwin's experiments on
the effect of cross and self-fertilisation. Plants of Linaria vulgaris
were grown in two adjacent beds; in the one were plants produced by
cross-fertilisation, that is, from seeds obtained after fertilisation
by pollen of another plant of the same species; in the other grew plants
produced by self-fertilisation, that is from seed produced as the result
of pollination of the same flower. The first were obviously superior to
the latter.

Darwin was surprised by this observation, as he had expected a
prejudicial influence of self-fertilisation to manifest itself after
a series of generations: "I always supposed until lately that no
evil effects would be visible until after several generations of
self-fertilisation, but now I see that one generation sometimes suffices
and the existence of dimorphic plants and all the wonderful contrivances
of orchids are quite intelligible to me." ("More Letters", Vol. II. page
373.)

The observations on Linaria and the investigations of the results of
legitimate and illegitimate fertilisation in heterostyled plants were
apparently the beginning of a long series of experiments. These were
concerned with plants of different families and led to results which are
of fundamental importance for a true explanation of sexual reproduction.

The experiments were so arranged that plants were shielded from
insect-visits by a net. Some flowers were then pollinated with their own
pollen, others with pollen from another plant of the same species. The
seeds were germinated on moist sand; two seedlings of the same age, one
from a cross and the other from a self-fertilised flower, were selected
and planted on opposite sides of the same pot. They grew therefore under
identical external conditions; it was thus possible to compare their
peculiarities such as height, weight, fruiting capacity, etc. In other
cases the seedlings were placed near to one another in the open and in
this way their capacity of resisting unfavourable external conditions
was tested. The experiments were in some cases continued to the tenth
generation and the flowers were crossed in different ways. We see,
therefore, that this book also represents an enormous amount of most
careful and patient original work.

The general result obtained is that plants produced as the result of
cross-fertilisation are superior, in the majority of cases, to those
produced as the result of self-fertilisation, in height, resistance to
external injurious influences, and in seed-production.

Ipomoea purpurea may be quoted as an example. If we express the result
of cross-fertilisation by 100, we obtain the following numbers for the
fertilised plants.

     Generation.   Height.    Number of seeds.

     1             100: 76   100: 64
     2             100: 79   -
     3             100: 68   100: 94
     4             100: 86   100: 94
     5             100: 75   100: 89
     6             100: 72   -
     7             100: 81   -
     8             100: 85   -
     9             100: 79   100: 26 (Number of capsules)
     10            100: 54   -


Taking the average, the ratio as regards growth is 100:77. The
considerable superiority of the crossed plants is apparent in the first
generation and is not increased in the following generations; but there
is some fluctuation about the average ratio. The numbers representing
the fertility of crossed and self-fertilised plants are more difficult
to compare with accuracy; the superiority of the crossed plants is
chiefly explained by the fact that they produce a much larger number
of capsules, not because there are on the average more seeds in each
capsule. The ratio of the capsules was, e.g. in the third generation,
100:38, that of the seeds in the capsules 100:94. It is also especially
noteworthy that in the self-fertilised plants the anthers were smaller
and contained a smaller amount of pollen, and in the eighth generation
the reduced fertility showed itself in a form which is often found in
hybrids, that is the first flowers were sterile. (Complete sterility was
not found in any of the plants investigated by Darwin. Others appear
to be more sensitive; Cluer found Zea Mais "almost sterile" after three
generations of self-fertilisation. (Cf. Fruwirth, "Die Zuchtung der
Landwirtschaftlichen Kulturpflanzen", Berlin, 1904, II. page 6.))

The superiority of crossed individuals is not exhibited in the same
way in all plants. For example in Eschscholzia californica the crossed
seedlings do not exceed the self-fertilised in height and vigour,
but the crossing considerably increases the plant's capacity for
flower-production, and the seedlings from such a mother-plant are more
fertile.

The conception implied by the term crossing requires a closer analysis.
As in the majority of plants, a large number of flowers are in bloom
at the same time on one and the same plant, it follows that insects
visiting the flowers often carry pollen from one flower to another of
the same stock. Has this method, which is spoken of as Geitonogamy, the
same influence as crossing with pollen from another plant? The results
of Darwin's experiments with different plants (Ipomoea purpurea,
Digitalis purpurea, Mimulus luteus, Pelargonium, Origanum) were not in
complete agreement; but on the whole they pointed to the conclusion that
Geitonogamy shows no superiority over self-fertilisation (Autogamy).
(Similarly crossing in the case of flowers of Pelargonium zonale, which
belong to plants raised from cuttings from the same parent, shows no
superiority over self-fertilisation.) Darwin, however, considered it
possible that this may sometimes be the case. "The sexual elements
in the flowers on the same plant can rarely have been differentiated,
though this is possible, as flower-buds are in one sense distinct
individuals, sometimes varying and differing from one another in
structure or constitution." ("Cross and Self fertilisation" (1st
edition), page 444.)

As regards the importance of this question from the point of view of
the significance of cross-fertilisation in general, it may be noted
that later observers have definitely discovered a difference between the
results of autogamy and geitonogamy. Gilley and Fruwirth found that in
Brassica Napus, the length and weight of the fruits as also the total
weight of the seeds in a single fruit were less in the case of autogamy
than in geitonogamy. With Sinapis alba a better crop of seeds was
obtained after geitonogamy, and in the Sugar Beet the average weight
of a fruit in the case of a self-fertilised plant was 0.009 gr., from
geitonogamy 0.012 gr., and on cross-fertilisation 0.013 gr.

On the whole, however, the results of geitonogamy show that the
favourable effects of cross-fertilisation do not depend simply on the
fact that the pollen of one flower is conveyed to the stigma of another.
But the plants which are crossed must in some way be different.
If plants of Ipomoea purpurea (and Mimulus luteus) which have been
self-fertilised for seven generations and grown under the same
conditions of cultivation are crossed together, the plants so crossed
would not be superior to the self-fertilised; on the other hand crossing
with a fresh stock at once proves very advantageous. The favourable
effect of crossing is only apparent, therefore, if the parent plants
are grown under different conditions or if they belong to different
varieties. "It is really wonderful what an effect pollen from a distinct
seedling plant, which has been exposed to different conditions of life,
has on the offspring in comparison with pollen from the same flower or
from a distinct individual, but which has been long subjected to the
same conditions. The subject bears on the very principle of life, which
seems almost to require changes in the conditions." ("More Letters",
Vol. II. page 406.)

The fertility--measured by the number or weight of the seeds produced
by an equal number of plants--noticed under different conditions of
fertilisation may be quoted in illustration.


                                  On crossing   On crossing    On self-
                                  with a fresh  plants of the  fertilisation
                                  stock         same stock
  Mimuleus luteus
   (First and ninth generation)       100             4              3

  Eschscholzia californica
   (second generation)                100            45             40

  Dianthus caryophyllus
   (third and fourth generation)      100            45             33

  Petunia violacea                    100            54             46


Crossing under very similar conditions shows, therefore, that the
difference between the sexual cells is smaller and thus the result of
crossing is only slightly superior to that given by self-fertilisation.
Is, then, the favourable result of crossing with a foreign stock to be
attributed to the fact that this belongs to another systematic entity
or to the fact that the plants, though belonging to the same entity
were exposed to different conditions? This is a point on which further
researches must be taken into account, especially since the analysis of
the systematic entities has been much more thorough than formerly. (In
the case of garden plants, as Darwin to a large extent claimed, it
is not easy to say whether two individuals really belong to the same
variety, as they are usually of hybrid origin. In some instances
(Petunia, Iberis) the fresh stock employed by Darwin possessed flowers
differing in colour from those of the plant crossed with it.) We
know that most of Linneaus's species are compound species, frequently
consisting of a very large number of smaller or elementary species
formerly included under the comprehensive term varieties. Hybridisation
has in most cases affected our garden and cultivated plants so that they
do not represent pure species but a mixture of species.

But this consideration has no essential bearing on Darwin's point of
view, according to which the nature of the sexual cells is influenced by
external conditions. Even individuals growing close to one another are
only apparently exposed to identical conditions. Their sexual cells may
therefore be differently influenced and thus give favourable results
on crossing, as "the benefits which so generally follow from a cross
between two plants apparently depend on the two differing somewhat in
constitution or character." As a matter of fact we are familiar with a
large number of cases in which the condition of the reproductive organs
is influenced by external conditions. Darwin has himself demonstrated
this for self-sterile plants, that is plants in which self-fertilisation
produces no result. This self-sterility is affected by climatic
conditions: thus in Brazil Eschscholzia californica is absolutely
sterile to the pollen of its own flowers; the descendants of Brazilian
plants in Darwin's cultures were partially self-fertile in one
generation and in a second generation still more so. If one has any
doubt in this case whether it is a question of the condition of
the style and stigma, which possibly prevents the entrance of the
pollen-tube or even its development, rather than that of the actual
sexual cells, in other cases there is no doubt that an influence is
exerted on the latter.

Janczewski (Janczewski, "Sur les antheres steriles des Groseilliers",
"Bull. de l'acad. des sciences de Cracovie", June, 1908.) has recently
shown that species of Ribes cultivated under unnatural conditions
frequently produce a mixed (i.e. partly useless) or completely sterile
pollen, precisely as happens with hybrids. There are, therefore,
substantial reasons for the conclusion that conditions of life exert an
influence on the sexual cells. "Thus the proposition that the benefit
from cross-fertilisation depends on the plants which are crossed
having been subjected during previous generations to somewhat different
conditions, or to their having varied from some unknown cause as if they
had been thus subjected, is securely fortified on all sides." ("Cross
and Self fertilisation" (1st edition), page 444.)

We thus obtain an insight into the significance of sexuality. If an
occasional and slight alteration in the conditions under which plants
and animals live is beneficial (Reasons for this are given by Darwin
in "Variation under Domestication" (2nd edition), Vol. II. page
127.), crossing between organisms which have been exposed to different
conditions becomes still more advantageous. The entire constitution
is in this way influenced from the beginning, at a time when the whole
organisation is in a highly plastic state. The total life-energy, so
to speak, is increased, a gain which is not produced by asexual
reproduction or by the union of sexual cells of plants which have lived
under the same or only slightly different conditions. All the
wonderful arrangements for cross-fertilisation now appear to be useful
adaptations. Darwin was, however, far from giving undue prominence to
this point of view, though this has been to some extent done by others.
He particularly emphasised the following consideration:--"But we should
always keep in mind that two somewhat opposed ends have to be gained;
the first and more important one being the production of seeds by
any means, and the second, cross-fertilisation." ("Cross and Self
fertilisation" (1st edition), page 371.) Just as in some orchids and
cleistogamic flowers self-pollination regularly occurs, so it may also
occur in other cases. Darwin showed that Pisum sativum and Lathyrus
odoratus belong to plants in which self-pollination is regularly
effected, and that this accounts for the constancy of certain sorts of
these plants, while a variety of form is produced by crossing. Indeed
among his culture plants were some which derived no benefit from
crossing. Thus in the sixth self-fertilised generation of his Ipomoea
cultures the "Hero" made its appearance, a form slightly exceeding its
crossed companion in height; this was in the highest degree self-fertile
and handed on its characteristics to both children and grandchildren.
Similar forms were found in Mimulus luteus and Nicotiana (In Pisum
sativum also the crossing of two individuals of the same variety
produced no advantage; Darwin attributed this to the fact that the
plants had for several generations been self-fertilised and in each
generation cultivated under almost the same conditions. Tschermak
("Ueber kunstliche Kreuzung an Pisum sativum") afterwards recorded the
same result; but he found on crossing different varieties that usually
there was no superiority as regards height over the products of
self-fertilisation, while Darwin found a greater height represented by
the ratios 100:75 and 100:60.), types which, after self-fertilisation,
have an enhanced power of seed-production and of attaining a greater
height than the plants of the corresponding generation which are crossed
together and self-fertilised and grown under the same conditions.
"Some observations made on other plants lead me to suspect that
self-fertilisation is in some respects beneficial; although the benefit
thus derived is as a rule very small compared with that from a cross
with a distinct plant." ("Cross and Self fertilisation", page 350.) We
are as ignorant of the reason why plants behave differently when
crossed and self-fertilised as we are in regard to the nature of the
differentiation of the sexual cells, which determines whether a union of
the sexual cells will prove favourable or unfavourable.

It is impossible to discuss the different results of
cross-fertilisation; one point must, however, be emphasised, because
Darwin attached considerable importance to it. It is inevitable that
pollen of different kinds must reach the stigma. It was known that
pollen of the same "species" is dominant over the pollen of another
species, that, in other words, it is prepotent. Even if the pollen of
the same species reaches the stigma rather later than that of another
species, the latter does not effect fertilisation.

Darwin showed that the fertilising power of the pollen of another
variety or of another individual is greater than that of the plant's
own pollen. ("Cross and Self fertilisation", page 391.) This has
been demonstrated in the case of Mimulus luteus (for the fixed
white-flowering variety) and Iberis umbellata with pollen of another
variety, and observations on cultivated plants, such as cabbage,
horseradish, etc. gave similar results. It is, however, especially
remarkable that pollen of another individual of the same variety may be
prepotent over the plant's own pollen. This results from the superiority
of plants crossed in this manner over self-fertilised plants. "Scarcely
any result from my experiments has surprised me so much as this of the
prepotency of pollen from a distinct individual over each plant's own
pollen, as proved by the greater constitutional vigour of the crossed
seedlings." (Ibid. page 397.) Similarly, in self-fertile plants the
flowers of which have not been deprived of the male organs, pollen
brought to the stigma by the wind or by insects from another plant
effects fertilisation, even if the plant's own pollen has reached the
stigma somewhat earlier.

Have the results of his experimental investigations modified the point
of view from which Darwin entered on his researches, or not? In the
first place the question is, whether or not the opinion expressed in
the Orchid book that there is "Something injurious" connected with
self-fertilisation, has been confirmed. We can, at all events, affirm
that Darwin adhered in essentials to his original position; but
self-fertilisation afterwards assumed a greater importance than it
formerly possessed. Darwin emphasised the fact that "the difference
between the self-fertilised and crossed plants raised by me cannot be
attributed to the superiority of the crossed, but to the inferiority
of the self-fertilised seedlings, due to the injurious effects of
self-fertilisation." (Ibid. page 437.) But he had no doubt that in
favourable circumstances self-fertilised plants were able to persist for
several generations without crossing. An occasional crossing appears to
be useful but not indispensable in all cases; its sporadic occurrence
in plants in which self-pollination habitually occurs is not excluded.
Self-fertilisation is for the most part relatively and not absolutely
injurious and always better than no fertilisation. "Nature abhors
perpetual self-fertilisation" (It is incorrect to say, as a writer has
lately said, that the aphorism expressed by Darwin in 1859 and 1862,
"Nature abhors perpetual self-fertilisation," is not repeated in his
later works. The sentence is repeated in "Cross and Self fertilisation"
(page 8), with the addition, "If the word perpetual had been omitted,
the aphorism would have been false. As it stands, I believe that it is
true, though perhaps rather too strongly expressed.") is, however, a
pregnant expression of the fact that cross-fertilisation is exceedingly
widespread and has been shown in the majority of cases to be beneficial,
and that in those plants in which we find self-pollination regularly
occurring cross-pollination may occasionally take place.

An attempt has been made to express in brief the main results of
Darwin's work on the biology of flowers. We have seen that his object
was to elucidate important general questions, particularly the question
of the significance of sexual reproduction.

It remains to consider what influence his work has had on botanical
science. That this influence has been very considerable, is shown by
a glance at the literature on the biology of flowers published since
Darwin wrote. Before the book on orchids was published there was nothing
but the old and almost forgotten works of Kolreuter and Sprengel with
the exception of a few scattered references. Darwin's investigations
gave the first stimulus to the development of an extensive literature on
floral biology. In Knuth's "Handbuch der Blutenbiologie" ("Handbook
of Flower Pollination", Oxford, 1906) as many as 3792 papers on this
subject are enumerated as having been published before January 1, 1904.
These describe not only the different mechanisms of flowers, but deal
also with a series of remarkable adaptations in the pollinating insects.
As a fertilising rain quickly calls into existence the most varied
assortment of plants on a barren steppe, so activity now reigns in a
field which men formerly left deserted. This development of the biology
of flowers is of importance not only on theoretical grounds but also
from a practical point of view. The rational breeding of plants is
possible only if the flower-biology of the plants in question (i.e. the
question of the possibility of self-pollination, self-sterility, etc.)
is accurately known. And it is also essential for plant-breeders that
they should have "the power of fixing each fleeting variety of colour,
if they will fertilise the flowers of the desired kind with their own
pollen for half-a-dozen generations, and grow the seedlings under the
same conditions." ("Cross and Self fertilisation" (1st edition), page
460.)

But the influence of Darwin on floral biology was not confined to the
development of this branch of Botany. Darwin's activity in this domain
has brought about (as Asa Gray correctly pointed out) the revival of
teleology in Botany and Zoology. Attempts were now made to determine,
not only in the case of flowers but also in vegetative organs, in what
relation the form and function of organs stand to one another and
to what extent their morphological characters exhibit adaptation to
environment. A branch of Botany, which has since been called Ecology
(not a very happy term) has been stimulated to vigorous growth by floral
biology.

While the influence of the work on the biology of flowers was
extraordinarily great, it could not fail to elicit opinions at variance
with Darwin's conclusions. The opposition was based partly on reasons
valueless as counterarguments, partly on problems which have still to
be solved; to some extent also on that tendency against teleological
conceptions which has recently become current. This opposing trend
of thought is due to the fact that many biologists are content with
teleological explanations, unsupported by proof; it is also closely
connected with the fact that many authors estimate the importance of
natural selection less highly than Darwin did. We may describe
the objections which are based on the widespread occurrence of
self-fertilisation and geitonogamy as of little importance. Darwin did
not deny the occurrence of self-fertilisation, even for a long series
of generations; his law states only that "Nature abhors PERPETUAL
self-fertilisation." (It is impossible (as has been attempted) to
express Darwin's point of view in a single sentence, such as H.
Muller's statement of the "Knight-Darwin law." The conditions of life in
organisms are so various and complex that laws, such as are formulated
in physics and chemistry, can hardly be conceived.) An exception to
this rule would therefore occur only in the case of plants in which the
possibility of cross-pollination is excluded. Some of the plants with
cleistogamous flowers might afford examples of such cases. We have
already seen, however, that such a case has not as yet been shown to
occur. Burck believed that he had found an instance in certain
tropical plants (Anonaceae, Myrmecodia) of the complete exclusion of
cross-fertilisation. The flowers of these plants, in which, however,--in
contrast to the cleistogamous flowers--the corolla is well developed,
remain closed and fruit is produced.

Loew (E. Loew, "Bemerkungen zu Burck... ", "Biolog. Centralbl." XXVI.
(1906).) has shown that cases occur in which cross-fertilisation may be
effected even in these "cleistopetalous" flowers: humming birds visit
the permanently closed flowers of certain species of Nidularium and
transport the pollen. The fact that the formation of hybrids may occur
as the result of this shows that pollination may be accomplished.

The existence of plants for which self-pollination is of greater
importance than it is for others is by no means contradictory to
Darwin's view. Self-fertilisation is, for example, of greater importance
for annuals than for perennials as without it seeds might fail to be
produced. Even in the case of annual plants with small inconspicuous
flowers in which self-fertilisation usually occurs, such as Senecio
vulgaris, Capsella bursa-pastoris and Stellaria media, A. Bateson (Anna
Bateson, "The effects of cross-fertilisation on inconspicuous
flowers", "Annals of Botany", Vol. I. 1888, page 255.) found that
cross-fertilisation gave a beneficial result, although only in a slight
degree. If the favourable effects of sexual reproduction, according to
Darwin's view, are correlated with change of environment, it is quite
possible that this is of less importance in plants which die after
ripening their seeds ("hapaxanthic") and which in any case constantly
change their situation. Objections which are based on the proof of the
prevalence of self-fertilisation are not, therefore, pertinent. At first
sight another point of view, which has been more recently urged, appears
to have more weight.

W. Burck (Burck, "Darwin's Kreuzeungsgesetz... ", "Biol. Centralbl".
XXVIII. 1908, page 177.) has expressed the opinion that the beneficial
results of cross-fertilisation demonstrated by Darwin concern only
hybrid plants. These alone become weaker by self-pollination; while
pure species derive no advantage from crossing and no disadvantage from
self-fertilisation. It is certain that some of the plants used by Darwin
were of hybrid origin. (It is questionable if this was always the case.)
This is evident from his statements, which are models of clearness and
precision; he says that his Ipomoea plants "were probably the offspring
of a cross." ("Cross and Self fertilisation" (1st edition), page 55.)
The fixed forms of this plant, such as Hero, which was produced by
self-fertilisation, and a form of Mimulus with white flowers spotted
with red probably resulted from splitting of the hybrids. It is true
that the phenomena observed in self-pollination, e.g. in Ipomoea, agree
with those which are often noticed in hybrids; Darwin himself drew
attention to this.

Let us next call to mind some of the peculiarities connected with
hybridisation. We know that hybrids are often characterized by their
large size, rapidity of growth, earlier production of flowers, wealth of
flower-production and a longer life; hybrids, if crossed with one of the
two parent forms, are usually more fertile than when they are crossed
together or with another hybrid. But the characters which hybrids
exhibit on self-fertilisation are rather variable. The following
instance may be quoted from Gartner: "There are many hybrids which
retain the self-fertility of the first generation during the second
and later generations, but very often in a less degree; a considerable
number, however, become sterile." But the hybrid varieties may be more
fertile in the second generation than in the first, and in some hybrids
the fertility with their own pollen increases in the second, third,
and following generations. (K.F. Gartner, "Versuche uber die
Bastarderzeugung", Stuttgart, 1849, page 149.) As yet it is impossible
to lay down rules of general application for the self-fertility of
hybrids. That the beneficial influence of crossing with a fresh stock
rests on the same ground--a union of sexual cells possessing somewhat
different characters--as the fact that many hybrids are distinguished
by greater luxuriance, wealth of flowers, etc. corresponds entirely
with Darwin's conclusions. It seems to me to follow clearly from
his investigations that there is no essential difference between
cross-fertilisation and hybridisation. The heterostyled plants are
normally dependent on a process corresponding to hybridisation. The view
that specifically distinct species could at best produce sterile hybrids
was always opposed by Darwin. But if the good results of crossing were
EXCLUSIVELY dependent on the fact that we are concerned with hybrids,
there must then be a demonstration of two distinct things. First, that
crossing with a fresh stock belonging to the same systematic entity
or to the same hybrid, but cultivated for a considerable time under
different conditions, shows no superiority over self-fertilisation,
and that in pure species crossing gives no better results than
self-pollination. If this were the case, we should be better able to
understand why in one plant crossing is advantageous while in others,
such as Darwin's Hero and the forms of Mimulus and Nicotiana no
advantage is gained; these would then be pure species. But such a
proof has not been supplied; the inference drawn from cleistogamous and
cleistopetalous plants is not supported by evidence, and the experiments
on geitonogamy and on the advantage of cross-fertilisation in species
which are usually self-fertilised are opposed to this view. There are
still but few researches on this point; Darwin found that in Ononis
minutissima, which produces cleistogamous as well as self-fertile
chasmogamous flowers, the crossed and self-fertilised capsules
produced seed in the proportion of 100:65 and that the average bore the
proportion 100:86. Facts previously mentioned are also applicable to
this case. Further, it is certain that the self-sterility exhibited by
many plants has nothing to do with hybridisation. Between self-sterility
and reduced fertility as the result of self-fertilisation there is
probably no fundamental difference.

It is certain that so difficult a problem as that of the significance
of sexual reproduction requires much more investigation. Darwin was
anything but dogmatic and always ready to alter an opinion when it was
not based on definite proof: he wrote, "But the veil of secrecy is
as yet far from lifted; nor will it be, until we can say why it is
beneficial that the sexual elements should be differentiated to a
certain extent, and why, if the differentiation be carried still
further, injury follows." He has also shown us the way along which
to follow up this problem; it is that of carefully planned and exact
experimental research. It may be that eventually many things will be
viewed in a different light, but Darwin's investigations will always
form the foundation of Floral Biology on which the future may continue
to build.




XXI. MENTAL FACTORS IN EVOLUTION. By C. Lloyd Morgan, LL.D., F.R.S.

In developing his conception of organic evolution Charles Darwin was
of necessity brought into contact with some of the problems of mental
evolution. In "The Origin of Species" he devoted a chapter to "the
diversities of instinct and of the other mental faculties in animals of
the same class." ("Origin of Species" (6th edition), page 205.) When
he passed to the detailed consideration of "The Descent of Man", it
was part of his object to show "that there is no fundamental difference
between man and the higher mammals in their mental faculties." ("Descent
of Man" (2nd edition 1888), Vol. I. page 99; Popular edition page 99.)
"If no organic being excepting man," he said, "had possessed any mental
power, or if his powers had been of a wholly different nature from those
of the lower animals, then we should never have been able to convince
ourselves that our high faculties had been gradually developed." (Ibid.
page 99.) In his discussion of "The Expression of the Emotions" it
was important for his purpose "fully to recognise that actions readily
become associated with other actions and with various states of the
mind." ("The Expression of the Emotions" (2nd edition), page 32.) His
hypothesis of sexual selection is largely dependent upon the exercise
of choice on the part of the female and her preference for "not only the
more attractive but at the same time the more vigorous and victorious
males." ("Descent of Man", Vol. II. page 435.) Mental processes and
physiological processes were for Darwin closely correlated; and he
accepted the conclusion "that the nervous system not only regulates most
of the existing functions of the body, but has indirectly influenced
the progressive development of various bodily structures and of certain
mental qualities." (Ibid. pages 437, 438.)

Throughout his treatment, mental evolution was for Darwin incidental
to and contributory to organic evolution. For specialised research
in comparative and genetic psychology, as an independent field of
investigation, he had neither the time nor the requisite training.
None the less his writings and the spirit of his work have exercised a
profound influence on this department of evolutionary thought. And, for
those who follow Darwin's lead, mental evolution is still in a
measure subservient to organic evolution. Mental processes are the
accompaniments or concomitants of the functional activity of specially
differentiated parts of the organism. They are in some way dependent on
physiological and physical conditions. But though they are not physical
in their nature, and though it is difficult or impossible to conceive
that they are physical in their origin, they are, for Darwin and his
followers, factors in the evolutionary process in its physical or
organic aspect. By the physiologist within his special and well-defined
universe of discourse they may be properly regarded as epiphenomena; but
by the naturalist in his more catholic survey of nature they cannot
be so regarded, and were not so regarded by Darwin. Intelligence has
contributed to evolution of which it is in a sense a product.

The facts of observation or of inference which Darwin accepted are
these: Conscious experience accompanies some of the modes of animal
behaviour; it is concomitant with certain physiological processes; these
processes are the outcome of development in the individual and
evolution in the race; the accompanying mental processes undergo a like
development. Into the subtle philosophical questions which arise out
of the naive acceptance of such a creed it was not Darwin's province
to enter; "I have nothing to do," he said ("Origin of Species" (6th
edition), page 205.), "with the origin of the mental powers, any more
than I have with that of life itself." He dealt with the natural history
of organisms, including not only their structure but their modes of
behaviour; with the natural history of the states of consciousness which
accompany some of their actions; and with the relation of behaviour
to experience. We will endeavour to follow Darwin in his modesty and
candour in making no pretence to give ultimate explanations. But we must
note one of the implications of this self-denying ordinance of science.
Development and evolution imply continuity. For Darwin and his followers
the continuity is organic through physical heredity. Apart from
speculative hypothesis, legitimate enough in its proper place but here
out of court, we know nothing of continuity of mental evolution as such:
consciousness appears afresh in each succeeding generation. Hence it is
that for those who follow Darwin's lead, mental evolution is and must
ever be, within his universe of discourse, subservient to organic
evolution. Only in so far as conscious experience, or its neural
correlate, effects some changes in organic structure can it influence
the course of heredity; and conversely only in so far as changes in
organic structure are transmitted through heredity, is mental evolution
rendered possible. Such is the logical outcome of Darwin's teaching.

Those who abide by the cardinal results of this teaching are bound to
regard all behaviour as the expression of the functional activities
of the living tissues of the organism, and all conscious experience
as correlated with such activities. For the purposes of scientific
treatment, mental processes are one mode of expression of the same
changes of which the physiological processes accompanying behaviour
are another mode of expression. This is simply accepted as a fact
which others may seek to explain. The behaviour itself is the adaptive
application of the energies of the organism; it is called forth by some
form of presentation or stimulation brought to bear on the organism by
the environment. This presentation is always an individual or personal
matter. But in order that the organism may be fitted to respond to the
presentation of the environment it must have undergone in some way
a suitable preparation. According to the theory of evolution this
preparation is primarily racial and is transmitted through heredity.
Darwin's main thesis was that the method of preparation is predominantly
by natural selection. Subordinate to racial preparation, and always
dependent thereon, is individual or personal preparation through
some kind of acquisition; of which the guidance of behaviour through
individually won experience is a typical example. We here introduce
the mental factor because the facts seem to justify the inference. Thus
there are some modes of behaviour which are wholly and solely dependent
upon inherited racial preparation; there are other modes of behaviour
which are also dependent, in part at least, on individual preparation.
In the former case the behaviour is adaptive on the first occurrence
of the appropriate presentation; in the latter case accommodation to
circumstances is only reached after a greater or less amount of acquired
organic modification of structure, often accompanied (as we assume) in
the higher animals by acquired experience. Logically and biologically
the two classes of behaviour are clearly distinguishable: but the
analysis of complex cases of behaviour where the two factors cooperate,
is difficult and requires careful and critical study of life-history.

The foundations of the mental life are laid in the conscious experience
that accompanies those modes of behaviour, dependent entirely on racial
preparation, which may broadly be described as instinctive. In the
eighth chapter of "The Origin of Species" Darwin says ("Origin of
Species" (6th edition), page 205.), "I will not attempt any definition
of instinct... Every one understands what is meant, when it is said
that instinct impels the cuckoo to migrate and to lay her eggs in other
birds' nests. An action, which we ourselves require experience to enable
us to perform, when performed by an animal, more especially by a very
young one, without experience, and when performed by many individuals in
the same way, without their knowing for what purpose it is performed, is
usually said to be instinctive." And in the summary at the close of the
chapter he says ("Origin of Species" (6th edition), page 233.), "I have
endeavoured briefly to show that the mental qualities of our domestic
animals vary, and that the variations are inherited. Still more briefly
I have attempted to show that instincts vary slightly in a state of
nature. No one will dispute that instincts are of the highest importance
to each animal. Therefore there is no real difficulty, under changing
conditions of life, in natural selection accumulating to any extent
slight modifications of instinct which are in any way useful. In many
cases habit or use and disuse have probably come into play."

Into the details of Darwin's treatment there is neither space nor need
to enter. There are some ambiguous passages; but it may be said that for
him, as for his followers to-day, instinctive behaviour is wholly the
result of racial preparation transmitted through organic heredity. For
the performance of the instinctive act no individual preparation under
the guidance of personal experience is necessary. It is true that Darwin
quotes with approval Huber's saying that "a little dose of judgment
or reason often comes into play, even with animals low in the scale of
nature." (Ibid. page 205.) But we may fairly interpret his meaning to be
that in behaviour, which is commonly called instinctive, some element of
intelligent guidance is often combined. If this be conceded the strictly
instinctive performance (or part of the performance) is the outcome of
heredity and due to the direct transmission of parental or ancestral
aptitudes. Hence the instinctive response as such depends entirely on
how the nervous mechanism has been built up through heredity; while
intelligent behaviour, or the intelligent factor in behaviour, depends
also on how the nervous mechanism has been modified and moulded by use
during its development and concurrently with the growth of individual
experience in the customary situations of daily life. Of course it is
essential to the Darwinian thesis that what Sir E. Ray Lankester has
termed "educability," not less than instinct, is hereditary. But it is
also essential to the understanding of this thesis that the differentiae
of the hereditary factors should be clearly grasped.

For Darwin there were two modes of racial preparation, (1) natural
selection, and (2) the establishment of individually acquired habit. He
showed that instincts are subject to hereditary variation; he saw that
instincts are also subject to modification through acquisition in the
course of individual life. He believed that not only the variations but
also, to some extent, the modifications are inherited. He therefore held
that some instincts (the greater number) are due to natural selection
but that others (less numerous) are due, or partly due, to the
inheritance of acquired habits. The latter involve Lamarckian
inheritance, which of late years has been the centre of so much
controversy. It is noteworthy however that Darwin laid especial emphasis
on the fact that many of the most typical and also the most
complex instincts--those of neuter insects--do not admit of such an
interpretation. "I am surprised," he says ("Origin of Species"
(6th edition), page 233.), "that no one has hitherto advanced this
demonstrative case of neuter insects, against the well-known doctrine of
inherited habit, as advanced by Lamarck." None the less Darwin admitted
this doctrine as supplementary to that which was more distinctively his
own--for example in the case of the instincts of domesticated animals.
Still, even in such cases, "it may be doubted," he says (Ibid. pages
210, 211.), "whether any one would have thought of training a dog to
point, had not some one dog naturally shown a tendency in this line... so
that habit and some degree of selection have probably concurred in
civilising by inheritance our dogs." But in the interpretation of the
instincts of domesticated animals, a more recently suggested hypothesis,
that of organic selection (Independently suggested, on somewhat
different lines, by Profs. J. Mark Baldwin, Henry F. Osborn and the
writer.), may be helpful. According to this hypothesis any intelligent
modification of behaviour which is subject to selection is probably
coincident in direction with an inherited tendency to behave in this
fashion. Hence in such behaviour there are two factors: (1) an
incipient variation in the line of such behaviour, and (2) an acquired
modification by which the behaviour is carried further along the same
line. Under natural selection those organisms in which the two factors
cooperate are likely to survive. Under artificial selection they are
deliberately chosen out from among the rest.

Organic selection has been termed a compromise between the more strictly
Darwinian and the Lamarckian principles of interpretation. But it is not
in any sense a compromise. The principle of interpretation of that which
is instinctive and hereditary is wholly Darwinian. It is true that some
of the facts of observation relied upon by Lamarckians are introduced.
For Lamarckians however the modifications which are admittedly factors
in survival, are regarded as the parents of inherited variations; for
believers in organic selection they are only the foster parents or
nurses. It is because organic selection is the direct outcome of and a
natural extension of Darwin's cardinal thesis that some reference to it
here is justifiable. The matter may be put with the utmost brevity as
follows. (1) Variations (V) occur, some of which are in the direction
of increased adaptation (+), others in the direction of decreased
adaptation (-). (2) Acquired modifications (M) also occur. Some of these
are in the direction of increased accommodation to circumstances (+),
while others are in the direction of diminished accommodation (-). Four
major combinations are

     (a)  + V with + M,
     (b)  + V with - M,
     (c)  - V with + M,
     (d)  - V with - M.

Of these (d) must inevitably be eliminated while (a) are selected.
The predominant survival of (a) entails the survival of the adaptive
variations which are inherited. The contributory acquisitions (+M) are
not inherited; but they are none the less factors in determining the
survival of the coincident variations. It is surely abundantly clear
that this is Darwinism and has no tincture of Lamarck's essential
principle, the inheritance of acquired characters.

Whether Darwin himself would have accepted this interpretation of some
at least of the evidence put forward by Lamarckians is unfortunately
a matter of conjecture. The fact remains that in his interpretation
of instinct and in allied questions he accepted the inheritance of
individually acquired modifications of behaviour and structure.

Darwin was chiefly concerned with instinct from the biological rather
than from the psychological point of view. Indeed it must be confessed
that, from the latter standpoint, his conception of instinct as a
"mental faculty" which "impels" an animal to the performance of certain
actions, scarcely affords a satisfactory basis for genetic treatment. To
carry out the spirit of Darwin's teaching it is necessary to link more
closely biological and psychological evolution. The first step towards
this is to interpret the phenomena of instinctive behaviour in terms
of stimulation and response. It may be well to take a particular case.
Swimming on the part of a duckling is, from the biological point
of view, a typical example of instinctive behaviour. Gently lower a
recently hatched bird into water: coordinated movements of the limbs
follow in rhythmical sequence. The behaviour is new to the individual
though it is no doubt closely related to that of walking, which is
no less instinctive. There is a group of stimuli afforded by the
"presentation" which results from partial immersion: upon this
there follows as a complex response an application of the functional
activities in swimming; the sequence of adaptive application on the
appropriate presentation is determined by racial preparation. We know,
it is true, but little of the physiological details of what takes place
in the central nervous system; but in broad outline the nature of the
organic mechanism and the manner of its functioning may at least
be provisionally conjectured in the present state of physiological
knowledge. Similarly in the case of the pecking of newly-hatched chicks;
there is a visual presentation, there is probably a cooperating group of
stimuli from the alimentary tract in need of food, there is an adaptive
application of the activities in a definite mode of behaviour. Like
data are afforded in a great number of cases of instinctive procedure,
sometimes occurring very early in life, not infrequently deferred until
the organism is more fully developed, but all of them dependent upon
racial preparation. No doubt there is some range of variation in the
behaviour, just such variation as the theory of natural selection
demands. But there can be no question that the higher animals inherit
a bodily organisation and a nervous system, the functional working of
which gives rise to those inherited modes of behaviour which are termed
instinctive.

It is to be noted that the term "instinctive" is here employed in the
adjectival form as a descriptive heading under which may be grouped many
and various modes of behaviour due to racial preparation. We speak
of these as inherited; but in strictness what is transmitted through
heredity is the complex of anatomical and physiological conditions under
which, in appropriate circumstances, the organism so behaves. So far the
term "instinctive" has a restricted biological connotation in terms
of behaviour. But the connecting link between biological evolution and
psychological evolution is to be sought,--as Darwin fully realised,--in
the phenomena of instinct, broadly considered. The term "instinctive"
has also a psychological connotation. What is that connotation?

Let us take the case of the swimming duckling or the pecking chick, and
fix our attention on the first instinctive performance. Grant that just
as there is, strictly speaking, no inherited behaviour, but only the
conditions which render such behaviour under appropriate circumstances
possible; so too there is no inherited experience, but only the
conditions which render such experience possible; then the cerebral
conditions in both cases are the same. The biological behaviour-complex,
including the total stimulation and the total response with the
intervening or resultant processes in the sensorium, is accompanied by
an experience-complex including the initial stimulation-consciousness
and resulting response-consciousness. In the experience-complex are
comprised data which in psychological analysis are grouped under the
headings of cognition, affective tone and conation. But the complex is
probably experienced as an unanalysed whole. If then we use the term
"instinctive" so as to comprise all congenital modes of behaviour which
contribute to experience, we are in a position to grasp the view that
the net result in consciousness constitutes what we may term the
primary tissue of experience. To the development of this experience each
instinctive act contributes. The nature and manner of organisation of
this primary tissue of experience are dependent on inherited biological
aptitudes; but they are from the outset onwards subject to secondary
development dependent on acquired aptitudes. Biological values are
supplemented by psychological values in terms of satisfaction or the
reverse.

In our study of instinct we have to select some particular phase of
animal behaviour and isolate it so far as is possible from the life of
which it is a part. But the animal is a going concern, restlessly active
in many ways. Many instinctive performances, as Darwin pointed out
("Origin of Species" (6th edition), page 206.), are serial in their
nature. But the whole of active life is a serial and coordinated
business. The particular instinctive performance is only an episode in
a life-history, and every mode of behaviour is more or less closely
correlated with other modes. This coordination of behaviour is
accompanied by a correlation of the modes of primary experience. We may
classify the instinctive modes of behaviour and their accompanying modes
of instinctive experience under as many heads as may be convenient
for our purposes of interpretation, and label them instincts of
self-preservation, of pugnacity, of acquisition, the reproductive
instincts, the parental instincts, and so forth. An instinct, in this
sense of the term (for example the parental instinct), may be described
as a specialised part of the primary tissue of experience differentiated
in relation to some definite biological end. Under such an instinct
will fall a large number of particular and often well-defined modes of
behaviour, each with its own peculiar mode of experience.

It is no doubt exceedingly difficult as a matter of observation and of
inference securely based thereon to distinguish what is primary from
what is in part due to secondary acquisition--a fact which Darwin fully
appreciated. Animals are educable in different degrees; but where they
are educable they begin to profit by experience from the first. Only,
therefore, on the occasion of the first instinctive act of a given type
can the experience gained be weighed as WHOLLY primary; all subsequent
performance is liable to be in some degree, sometimes more, sometimes
less, modified by the acquired disposition which the initial behaviour
engenders. But the early stages of acquisition are always along the
lines predetermined by instinctive differentiation. It is the task of
comparative psychology to distinguish the primary tissue of experience
from its secondary and acquired modifications. We cannot follow up the
matter in further detail. It must here suffice to suggest that this
conception of instinct as a primary form of experience lends itself
better to natural history treatment than Darwin's conception of an
impelling force, and that it is in line with the main trend of Darwin's
thought.

In a characteristic work,--characteristic in wealth of detail, in
closeness and fidelity of observation, in breadth of outlook, in candour
and modesty,--Darwin dealt with "The Expression of the Emotions in
Man and Animals". Sir Charles Bell in his "Anatomy of Expression" had
contended that many of man's facial muscles had been specially created
for the sole purpose of being instrumental in the expression of his
emotions. Darwin claimed that a natural explanation, consistent with the
doctrine of evolution, could in many cases be given and would in other
cases be afforded by an extension of the principles he advocated. "No
doubt," he said ("Expression of the Emotions", page 13. The passage is
here somewhat condensed.), "as long as man and all other animals are
viewed as independent creations, an effectual stop is put to our natural
desire to investigate as far as possible the causes of Expression.
By this doctrine, anything and everything can be equally well
explained... With mankind, some expressions... can hardly be understood,
except on the belief that man once existed in a much lower and
animal-like condition. The community of certain expressions in distinct
though allied species... is rendered somewhat more intelligible, if we
believe in their descent from a common progenitor. He who admits on
general grounds that the structure and habits of all animals have been
gradually evolved, will look at the whole subject of Expression in a new
and interesting light."

Darwin relied on three principles of explanation. "The first of these
principles is, that movements which are serviceable in gratifying some
desire, or in relieving some sensation, if often repeated, become
so habitual that they are performed, whether or not of any service,
whenever the same desire or sensation is felt, even in a very weak
degree." (Ibid. page 368.) The modes of expression which fall under
this head have become instinctive through the hereditary transmission of
acquired habit. "As far as we can judge, only a few expressive movements
are learnt by each individual; that is, were consciously and voluntarily
performed during the early years of life for some definite object, or in
imitation of others, and then became habitual. The far greater number of
the movements of expression, and all the more important ones, are innate
or inherited; and such cannot be said to depend on the will of the
individual. Nevertheless, all those included under our first principle
were at first voluntarily performed for a definite object,--namely,
to escape some danger, to relieve some distress, or to gratify some
desire." (Ibid. pages 373, 374.)

"Our second principle is that of antithesis. The habit of voluntarily
performing opposite movements under opposite impulses has become firmly
established in us by the practice of our whole lives. Hence, if certain
actions have been regularly performed, in accordance with our first
principle, under a certain frame of mind, there will be a strong and
involuntary tendency to the performance of directly opposite actions,
whether or not these are of any use, under the excitement of an opposite
frame of mind." ("Expression of the Emotions", page 368.) This principle
of antithesis has not been widely accepted. Nor is Darwin's own position
easy to grasp.

"Our third principle," he says (Ibid. page 369.), "is the direct action
of the excited nervous system on the body, independently of the will,
and independently, in large part, of habit. Experience shows that
nerve-force is generated and set free whenever the cerebro-spinal system
is excited. The direction which this nerve-force follows is necessarily
determined by the lines of connection between the nerve-cells, with each
other and with various parts of the body."

Lack of space prevents our following up the details of Darwin's
treatment of expression. Whether we accept or do not accept his three
principles of explanation we must regard his work as a masterpiece of
descriptive analysis, packed full of observations possessing lasting
value. For a further development of the subject it is essential that
the instinctive factors in expression should be more fully distinguished
from those which are individually acquired--a difficult task--and that
the instinctive factors should be rediscussed in the light of modern
doctrines of heredity, with a view to determining whether Lamarckian
inheritance, on which Darwin so largely relied, is necessary for an
interpretation of the facts.

The whole subject as Darwin realised is very complex. Even the term
"expression" has a certain amount of ambiguity. When the emotion is in
full flood the animal fights, flees, or faints. Is this full-tide effect
to be regarded as expression; or are we to restrict the term to the
premonitory or residual effects--the bared canine when the fighting mood
is being roused, the ruffled fur when reminiscent representations of the
object inducing anger cross the mind? Broadly considered both should
be included. The activity of premonitory expression as a means of
communication was recognised by Darwin; he might, perhaps, have
emphasised it more strongly in dealing with the lower animals. Man so
largely relies on a special means of communication, that of language,
that he sometimes fails to realise that for animals with their keen
powers of perception, and dependent as they are on such means of
communication, the more strictly biological means of expression are full
of subtle suggestiveness. Many modes of expression, otherwise useless,
are signs of behaviour that may be anticipated,--signs which stimulate
the appropriate attitude of response. This would not, however, serve to
account for the utility of the organic accompaniments--heart-affection,
respiratory changes, vaso-motor effects and so forth, together
with heightened muscular tone,--on all of which Darwin lays stress
("Expression of the Emotions", pages 65 ff.) under his third principle.
The biological value of all this is, however, of great importance,
though Darwin was hardly in a position to take it fully into account.

Having regard to the instinctive and hereditary factors of emotional
expression we may ask whether Darwin's third principle does not alone
suffice as an explanation. Whether we admit or reject Lamarckian
inheritance it would appear that all hereditary expression must be due
to pre-established connections within the central nervous system and to
a transmitted provision for coordinated response under the appropriate
stimulation. If this be so, Darwin's first and second principles are
subordinate and ancillary to the third, an expression, so far as it is
instinctive or hereditary, being "the direct result of the constitution
of the nervous system."

Darwin accepted the emotions themselves as hereditary or acquired
states of mind and devoted his attention to their expression. But
these emotions themselves are genetic products and as such dependent
on organic conditions. It remained, therefore, for psychologists who
accepted evolution and sought to build on biological foundations to
trace the genesis of these modes of animal and human experience. The
subject has been independently developed by Professors Lange and James
(Cf. William James, "Principles of Psychology", Vol. II. Chap. XXV,
London, 1890.); and some modification of their view is regarded by many
evolutionists as affording the best explanation of the facts. We must
fix our attention on the lower emotions, such as anger or fear, and on
their first occurrence in the life of the individual organism. It is
a matter of observation that if a group of young birds which have been
hatched in an incubator are frightened by an appropriate presentation,
auditory or visual, they instinctively respond in special ways. If we
speak of this response as the expression, we find that there are many
factors. There are certain visible modes of behaviour, crouching at
once, scattering and then crouching, remaining motionless, the braced
muscles sustaining an attitude of arrest, and so forth. There are also
certain visceral or organic effects, such as affections of the heart and
respiration. These can be readily observed by taking the young bird in
the hand. Other effects cannot be readily observed; vaso-motor changes,
affections of the alimentary canal, the skin and so forth. Now the
essence of the James-Lange view, as applied to these congenital effects,
is that though we are justified in speaking of them as effects of the
stimulation, we are not justified, without further evidence, in speaking
of them as effects of the emotional state. May it not rather be that the
emotion as a primary mode of experience is the concomitant of the
net result of the organic situation--the initial presentation, the
instinctive mode of behaviour, the visceral disturbances? According to
this interpretation the primary tissue of experience of the emotional
order, felt as an unanalysed complex, is generated by the stimulation
of the sensorium by afferent or incoming physiological impulses from the
special senses, from the organs concerned in the responsive behaviour,
from the viscera and vaso-motor system.

Some psychologists, however, contend that the emotional experience
is generated in the sensorium prior to, and not subsequent to, the
behaviour-response and the visceral disturbances. It is a direct and not
an indirect outcome of the presentation to the special senses. Be
this as it may, there is a growing tendency to bring into the closest
possible relation, or even to identify, instinct and emotion in their
primary genesis. The central core of all such interpretations is that
instinctive behaviour and experience, its emotional accompaniments, and
its expression, are but different aspects of the outcome of the
same organic occurrences. Such emotions are, therefore, only a
distinguishable aspect of the primary tissue of experience and exhibit
a like differentiation. Here again a biological foundation is laid for a
psychological doctrine of the mental development of the individual.

The intimate relation between emotion as a psychological mode of
experience and expression as a group of organic conditions has an
important bearing on biological interpretation. The emotion, as the
psychological accompaniment of orderly disturbances in the central
nervous system profoundly influences behaviour and often renders it more
vigorous and more effective. The utility of the emotions in the struggle
for existence can, therefore, scarcely be over-estimated. Just as
keenness of perception has survival-value; just as it is obviously
subject to variation; just as it must be enhanced under natural
selection, whether individually acquired increments are inherited
or not; and just as its value lies not only in this or that special
perceptive act but in its importance for life as a whole; so the
vigorous effectiveness of activity has survival-value; it is subject
to variation; it must be enhanced under natural selection; and its
importance lies not only in particular modes of behaviour but in its
value for life as a whole. If emotion and its expression as a congenital
endowment are but different aspects of the same biological occurrence;
and if this is a powerful supplement to vigour effectiveness and
persistency of behaviour, it must on Darwin's principles be subject to
natural selection.

If we include under the expression of the emotions not only the
premonitory symptoms of the initial phases of the organic and mental
state, not only the signs or conditions of half-tide emotion, but the
full-tide manifestation of an emotion which dominates the situation, we
are naturally led on to the consideration of many of the phenomena
which are discussed under the head of sexual selection. The subject
is difficult and complex, and it was treated by Darwin with all the
strength he could summon to the task. It can only be dealt with here
from a special point of view--that which may serve to illustrate the
influence of certain mental factors on the course of evolution. From
this point of view too much stress can scarcely be laid on the dominance
of emotion during the period of courtship and pairing in the more highly
organised animals. It is a period of maximum vigour, maximum activity,
and, correlated with special modes of behaviour and special organic and
visceral accompaniments, a period also of maximum emotional excitement.
The combats of males, their dances and aerial evolutions, their
elaborate behaviour and display, or the flood of song in birds, are
emotional expressions which are at any rate coincident in time with
sexual periodicity. From the combat of the males there follows on
Darwin's principles the elimination of those which are deficient in
bodily vigour, deficient in special structures, offensive or protective,
which contribute to success, deficient in the emotional supplement
of which persistent and whole-hearted fighting is the expression,
and deficient in alertness and skill which are the outcome of the
psychological development of the powers of perception. Few biologists
question that we have here a mode of selection of much importance,
though its influence on psychological evolution often fails to receive
its due emphasis. Mr Wallace ("Darwinism", pages 282, 283, London,
1889.) regards it as "a form of natural selection"; "to it," he says,
"we must impute the development of the exceptional strength, size, and
activity of the male, together with the possession of special offensive
and defensive weapons, and of all other characters which arise from
the development of these or are correlated with them." So far there is
little disagreement among the followers of Darwin--for Mr Wallace,
with fine magnanimity, has always preferred to be ranked as such,
notwithstanding his right, on which a smaller man would have constantly
insisted, to the claim of independent originator of the doctrine of
natural selection. So far with regard to sexual selection Darwin and Mr
Wallace are agreed; so far and no farther. For Darwin, says Mr Wallace
(Ibid. page 283.), "has extended the principle into a totally different
field of action, which has none of that character of constancy and of
inevitable result that attaches to natural selection, including male
rivalry; for by far the larger portion of the phenomena, which he
endeavours to explain by the direct action of sexual selection, can only
be so explained on the hypothesis that the immediate agency is female
choice or preference. It is to this that he imputes the origin of
all secondary sexual characters other than weapons of offence and
defence... In this extension of sexual selection to include the action of
female choice or preference, and in the attempt to give to that choice
such wide-reaching effects, I am unable to follow him more than a very
little way."

Into the details of Mr Wallace's criticisms it is impossible to enter
here. We cannot discuss either the mode of origin of the variations in
structure which have rendered secondary sexual characters possible
or the modes of selection other than sexual which have rendered them,
within narrow limits, specifically constant. Mendelism and mutation
theories may have something to say on the subject when these theories
have been more fully correlated with the basal principles of selection.
It is noteworthy that Mr Wallace says ("Darwinism", pages 283, 284.):
"Besides the acquisition of weapons by the male for the purpose of
fighting with other males, there are some other sexual characters which
may have been produced by natural selection. Such are the various sounds
and odours which are peculiar to the male, and which serve as a call to
the female or as an indication of his presence. These are evidently a
valuable addition to the means of recognition of the two sexes, and
are a further indication that the pairing season has arrived; and the
production, intensification, and differentiation of these sounds and
odours are clearly within the power of natural selection. The same
remark will apply to the peculiar calls of birds, and even to the
singing of the males." Why the same remark should not apply to their
colours and adornments is not obvious. What is obvious is that "means
of recognition" and "indication that the pairing season has arrived" are
dependent on the perceptive powers of the female who recognises and for
whom the indication has meaning. The hypothesis of female preference,
stripped of the aesthetic surplusage which is psychologically both
unnecessary and unproven, is really only different in degree from that
which Mr Wallace admits in principle when he says that it is probable
that the female is pleased or excited by the display.

Let us for our present purpose leave on one side and regard as sub
judice the question whether the specific details of secondary sexual
characters are the outcome of female choice. For us the question is
whether certain psychological accompaniments of the pairing situation
have influenced the course of evolution and whether these psychological
accompaniments are themselves the outcome of evolution. As a matter of
observation, specially differentiated modes of behaviour, often very
elaborate, frequently requiring highly developed skill, and apparently
highly charged with emotional tone, are the precursors of pairing. They
are generally confined to the males, whose fierce combats during the
period of sexual activity are part of the emotional manifestation. It is
inconceivable that they have no biological meaning; and it is difficult
to conceive that they have any other biological end than to evoke in
the generally more passive female the pairing impulse. They are based
on instinctive foundations ingrained in the nervous constitution
through natural (or may we not say sexual?) selection in virtue of
their profound utility. They are called into play by a specialised
presentation such as the sight or the scent of the female at, or a
little in advance of, a critical period of the physiological rhythm.
There is no necessity that the male should have any knowledge of the
end to which his strenuous activity leads up. In presence of the female
there is an elaborate application of all the energies of behaviour,
just because ages of racial preparation have made him biologically and
emotionally what he is--a functionally sexual male that must dance or
sing or go through hereditary movements of display, when the appropriate
stimulation comes. Of course after the first successful courtship
his future behaviour will be in some degree modified by his previous
experience. No doubt during his first courtship he is gaining the
primary data of a peculiarly rich experience, instinctive and emotional.
But the biological foundations of the behaviour of courtship are laid
in the hereditary coordinations. It would seem that in some cases, not
indeed in all, but perhaps especially in those cases in which secondary
sexual behaviour is most highly evolved,--correlative with the ardour
of the male is a certain amount of reluctance in the female. The pairing
act on her part only takes place after prolonged stimulation, for
affording which the behaviour of male courtship is the requisite
presentation. The most vigorous, defiant and mettlesome male is
preferred just because he alone affords a contributory stimulation
adequate to evoke the pairing impulse with its attendant emotional tone.

It is true that this places female preference or choice on a much lower
psychological plane than Darwin in some passages seems to contemplate
where, for example, he says that the female appreciates the display of
the male and places to her credit a taste for the beautiful. But Darwin
himself distinctly states ("Descent of Man" (2nd edition), Vol. II.
pages 136, 137; (Popular edition), pages 642, 643.) that "it is not
probable that she consciously deliberates; but she is most excited or
attracted by the most beautiful, or melodious, or gallant males." The
view here put forward, which has been developed by Prof. Groos ("The
Play of Animals", page 244, London, 1898.), therefore seems to have
Darwin's own sanction. The phenomena are not only biological; there are
psychological elements as well. One can hardly suppose that the female
is unconscious of the male's presence; the final yielding must surely be
accompanied by heightened emotional tone. Whether we call it choice or
not is merely a matter of definition of terms. The behaviour is in part
determined by supplementary psychological values. Prof. Groos regards
the coyness of females as "a most efficient means of preventing the
too early and too frequent yielding to the sexual impulse." (Ibid. page
283.) Be that as it may, it is, in any case, if we grant the facts, a
means through which male sexual behaviour with all its biological and
psychological implications, is raised to a level otherwise perhaps
unattainable by natural means, while in the female it affords
opportunities for the development in the individual and evolution in the
race of what we may follow Darwin in calling appreciation, if we empty
this word of the aesthetic implications which have gathered round it in
the mental life of man.

Regarded from this standpoint sexual selection, broadly considered, has
probably been of great importance. The psychological accompaniments
of the pairing situation have profoundly influenced the course of
biological evolution and are themselves the outcome of that evolution.

Darwin makes only passing reference to those modes of behaviour in
animals which go by the name of play. "Nothing," he says ("Descent of
Man", Vol. II. page 60; (Popular edition), page 566.), "is more common
than for animals to take pleasure in practising whatever instinct they
follow at other times for some real good." This is one of the very
numerous cases in which a hint of the master has served to stimulate
research in his disciples. It was left to Prof. Groos to develop this
subject on evolutionary lines and to elaborate in a masterly manner
Darwin's suggestion. "The utility of play," he says ("The Play of
Animals", page 76.), "is incalculable. This utility consists in the
practice and exercise it affords for some of the more important duties
of life,"--that is to say, for the performance of activities which will
in adult life be essential to survival. He urges (Ibid. page 75.) that
"the play of young animals has its origin in the fact that certain very
important instincts appear at a time when the animal does not seriously
need them." It is, however, questionable whether any instincts appear
at a time when they are not needed. And it is questionable whether
the instinctive and emotional attitude of the play-fight, to take
one example, can be identified with those which accompany fighting in
earnest, though no doubt they are closely related and have some common
factors. It is probable that play, as preparatory behaviour, differs in
biological detail (as it almost certainly does in emotional attributes)
from the earnest of after-life and that it has been evolved through
differentiation and integration of the primary tissue of experience,
as a preparation through which certain essential modes of skill may be
acquired--those animals in which the preparatory play-propensity was
not inherited in due force and requisite amount being subsequently
eliminated in the struggle for existence. In any case there is little
question that Prof. Groos is right in basing the play-propensity on
instinctive foundations. ("The Play of Animals" page 24.) None the less,
as he contends, the essential biological value of play is that it is a
means of training the educable nerve-tissue, of developing that part of
the brain which is modified by experience and which thus acquires new
characters, of elaborating the secondary tissue of experience on the
predetermined lines of instinctive differentiation and thus furthering
the psychological activities which are included under the comprehensive
term "intelligent."

In "The Descent of Man" Darwin dealt at some length with intelligence
and the higher mental faculties. ("Descent of Man" (1st edition),
Chapters II, III, V; (2nd edition), Chapters III, IV, V.) His object, he
says, is to show that there is no fundamental difference between man and
the higher mammals in their mental faculties; that these faculties are
variable and the variations tend to be inherited; and that under natural
selection beneficial variations of all kinds will have been preserved
and injurious ones eliminated.

Darwin was too good an observer and too honest a man to minimise
the "enormous difference" between the level of mental attainment of
civilised man and that reached by any animal. His contention was that
the difference, great as it is, is one of degree and not of kind. He
realised that, in the development of the mental faculties of man,
new factors in evolution have supervened--factors which play but
a subordinate and subsidiary part in animal intelligence.
Intercommunication by means of language, approbation and blame, and
all that arises out of reflective thought, are but foreshadowed in the
mental life of animals. Still he contends that these may be explained
on the doctrine of evolution. He urges (Ibid. Vol. I. pages 70, 71;
(Popular edition), pages 70, 71.)" that man is variable in body
and mind; and that the variations are induced, either directly or
indirectly, by the same general causes, and obey the same general laws,
as with the lower animals." He correlates mental development with
the evolution of the brain. (Ibid. page 81.) "As the various mental
faculties gradually developed themselves, the brain would almost
certainly become larger. No one, I presume, doubts that the large
proportion which the size of man's brain bears to his body, compared to
the same proportion in the gorilla or orang, is closely connected with
his higher mental powers." "With respect to the lower animals," he says
("Descent of Man" (Popular edition), page 82.), "M.E. Lartet ("Comptes
Rendus des Sciences", June 1, 1868.), by comparing the crania of
tertiary and recent mammals belonging to the same groups, has come to
the remarkable conclusion that the brain is generally larger and the
convolutions are more complex in the more recent form."

Sir E. Ray Lankester has sought to express in the simplest terms the
implications of the increase in size of the cerebrum. "In what," he
asks, "does the advantage of a larger cerebral mass consist?" "Man,"
he replies "is born with fewer ready-made tricks of the
nerve-centres--these performances of an inherited nervous mechanism so
often called by the ill-defined term 'instincts'--than are the monkeys
or any other animal. Correlated with the absence of inherited ready-made
mechanism, man has a greater capacity of developing in the course of
his individual growth similar nervous mechanisms (similar to but not
identical with those of 'instinct') than any other animal... The power of
being educated--'educability' as we may term it--is what man possesses
in excess as compared with the apes. I think we are justified in forming
the hypothesis that it is this 'educability' which is the correlative of
the increased size of the cerebrum." There has been natural selection
of the more educable animals, for "the character which we describe as
'educability' can be transmitted, it is a congenital character. But the
RESULTS of education can NOT be transmitted. In each generation they
have to be acquired afresh, and with increased 'educability' they are
more readily acquired and a larger variety of them... The fact is
that there is no community between the mechanisms of instinct and the
mechanisms of intelligence, and that the latter are later in the history
of the evolution of the brain than the former and can only develop in
proportion as the former become feeble and defective." ("Nature", Vol.
LXI. pages 624, 625 (1900).)

In this statement we have a good example of the further development
of views which Darwin foreshadowed but did not thoroughly work out. It
states the biological case clearly and tersely. Plasticity of behaviour
in special accommodation to special circumstances is of survival value;
it depends upon acquired characters; it is correlated with increase in
size and complexity of the cerebrum; under natural selection therefore
the larger and more complex cerebrum as the organ of plastic behaviour
has been the outcome of natural selection. We have thus the biological
foundations for a further development of genetic psychology.

There are diversities of opinion, as Darwin showed, with regard to the
range of instinct in man and the higher animals as contrasted with lower
types. Darwin himself said ("Descent of Man", Vol. I. page 100.) that
"Man, perhaps, has somewhat fewer instincts than those possessed by the
animals which come next to him in the series." On the other hand, Prof.
Wm. James says ("Principles of Psychology," Vol. II. page 289.) that man
is probably the animal with most instincts. The true position is that
man and the higher animals have fewer complete and self-sufficing
instincts than those which stand lower in the scale of mental
evolution, but that they have an equally large or perhaps larger mass of
instinctive raw material which may furnish the stuff to be elaborated
by intelligent processes. There is, perhaps, a greater abundance of
the primary tissue of experience to be refashioned and integrated by
secondary modification; there is probably the same differentiation in
relation to the determining biological ends, but there is at the outset
less differentiation of the particular and specific modes of behaviour.
The specialised instinctive performances and their concomitant
experience-complexes are at the outset more indefinite. Only through
acquired connections, correlated with experience, do they become
definitely organised.

The full working-out of the delicate and subtle relationship of instinct
and educability--that is, of the hereditary and the acquired factors in
the mental life--is the task which lies before genetic and comparative
psychology. They interact throughout the whole of life, and their
interactions are very complex. No one can read the chapters of "The
Descent of Man" which Darwin devotes to a consideration of the mental
characters of man and animals without noticing, on the one hand, how
sedulous he is in his search for hereditary foundations, and, on the
other hand, how fully he realises the importance of acquired habits of
mind. The fact that educability itself has innate tendencies--is in fact
a partially differentiated educability--renders the unravelling of the
factors of mental progress all the more difficult.

In his comparison of the mental powers of men and animals it was
essential that Darwin should lay stress on points of similarity rather
than on points of difference. Seeking to establish a doctrine of
evolution, with its basal concept of continuity of process and community
of character, he was bound to render clear and to emphasise the
contention that the difference in mind between man and the higher
animals, great as it is, is one of degree and not of kind. To this end
Darwin not only recorded a large number of valuable observations of
his own, and collected a considerable body of information from reliable
sources, he presented the whole subject in a new light and showed that
a natural history of mind might be written and that this method of study
offered a wide and rich field for investigation. Of course those who
regarded the study of mind only as a branch of metaphysics smiled at
the philosophical ineptitude of the mere man of science. But the
investigation, on natural history lines, has been prosecuted with a
large measure of success. Much indeed still remains to be done; for
special training is required, and the workers are still few. Promise
for the future is however afforded by the fact that investigation is
prosecuted on experimental lines and that something like organised
methods of research are taking form. There is now but little reliance
on casual observations recorded by those who have not undergone the
necessary discipline in these methods. There is also some change of
emphasis in formulating conclusions. Now that the general evolutionary
thesis is fully and freely accepted by those who carry on such
researches, more stress is laid on the differentiation of the stages of
evolutionary advance than on the fact of their underlying community of
nature. The conceptual intelligence which is especially characteristic
of the higher mental procedure of man is more firmly distinguished
from the perceptual intelligence which he shares with the lower
animals--distinguished now as a higher product of evolution, no longer
as differing in origin or different in kind. Some progress has been
made, on the one hand in rendering an account of intelligent profiting
by experience under the guidance of pleasure and pain in the perceptual
field, on lines predetermined by instinctive differentiation for
biological ends, and on the other hand in elucidating the method of
conceptual thought employed, for example, by the investigator himself in
interpreting the perceptual experience of the lower animals.

Thus there is a growing tendency to realise more fully that there
are two orders of educability--first an educability of the perceptual
intelligence based on the biological foundation of instinct, and
secondly an educability of the conceptual intelligence which
refashions and rearranges the data afforded by previous inheritance
and acquisition. It is in relation to this second and higher order of
educability that the cerebrum of man shows so large an increase of
mass and a yet larger increase of effective surface through its rich
convolutions. It is through educability of this order that the human
child is brought intellectually and affectively into touch with the
ideal constructions by means of which man has endeavoured, with more
or less success, to reach an interpretation of nature, and to guide the
course of the further evolution of his race--ideal constructions which
form part of man's environment.

It formed no part of Darwin's purpose to consider, save in broad
outline, the methods, or to discuss in any fulness of detail the results
of the process by which a differentiation of the mental faculties of
man from those of the lower animals has been brought about--a
differentiation the existence of which he again and again
acknowledges. His purpose was rather to show that, notwithstanding
this differentiation, there is basal community in kind. This must be
remembered in considering his treatment of the biological foundations
on which man's systems of ethics are built. He definitely stated that he
approached the subject "exclusively from the side of natural history."
("Descent of Man", Vol. I. page 149.) His general conclusion is that the
moral sense is fundamentally identical with the social instincts, which
have been developed for the good of the community; and he suggests
that the concept which thus enables us to interpret the biological
ground-plan of morals also enables us to frame a rational ideal of the
moral end. "As the social instincts," he says (Ibid. page 185.), "both
of man and the lower animals have no doubt been developed by nearly the
same steps, it would be advisable, if found practicable, to use the same
definition in both cases, and to take as the standard of morality,
the general good or welfare of the community, rather than the general
happiness." But the kind of community for the good of which the social
instincts of animals and primitive men were biologically developed may
be different from that which is the product of civilisation, as Darwin
no doubt realised. Darwin's contention was that conscience is a social
instinct and has been evolved because it is useful to the tribe in the
struggle for existence against other tribes. On the other hand, J.S.
Mill urged that the moral feelings are not innate but acquired, and Bain
held the same view, believing that the moral sense is acquired by each
individual during his life-time. Darwin, who notes (Ibid. page 150
(footnote).) their opinion with his usual candour, adds that "on the
general theory of evolution this is at least extremely improbable. It
is impossible to enter into the question here: much turns on the exact
connotation of the terms "conscience" and "moral sense," and on the
meaning we attach to the statement that the moral sense is fundamentally
identical with the social instincts."

Presumably the majority of those who approach the subjects discussed in
the third, fourth and fifth chapters of "The Descent of Man" in the full
conviction that mental phenomena, not less than organic phenomena,
have a natural genesis, would, without hesitation, admit that the
intellectual and moral systems of civilised man are ideal constructions,
the products of conceptual thought, and that as such they are, in
their developed form, acquired. The moral sentiments are the emotional
analogues of highly developed concepts. This does not however imply that
they are outside the range of natural history treatment. Even though
it may be desirable to differentiate the moral conduct of men from the
social behaviour of animals (to which some such term as "pre-moral" or
"quasi-moral" may be applied), still the fact remains that, as Darwin
showed, there is abundant evidence of the occurrence of such social
behaviour--social behaviour which, even granted that it is in large part
intelligently acquired, and is itself so far a product of educability,
is of survival value. It makes for that integration without which no
social group could hold together and escape elimination. Furthermore,
even if we grant that such behaviour is intelligently acquired, that
is to say arises through the modification of hereditary instincts and
emotions, the fact remains that only through these instinctive and
emotional data is afforded the primary tissue of the experience which is
susceptible of such modification.

Darwin sought to show, and succeeded in showing, that for the
intellectual and moral life there are instinctive foundations which a
biological treatment alone can disclose. It is true that he did not
in all cases analytically distinguish the foundations from the
superstructure. Even to-day we are scarcely in a position to do so
adequately. But his treatment was of great value in giving an impetus to
further research. This value indeed can scarcely be overestimated.
And when the natural history of the mental operations shall have been
written, the cardinal fact will stand forth, that the instinctive and
emotional foundations are the outcome of biological evolution and have
been ingrained in the race through natural selection. We shall more
clearly realise that educability itself is a product of natural
selection, though the specific results acquired through cerebral
modifications are not transmitted through heredity. It will, perhaps,
also be realised that the instinctive foundations of social behaviour
are, for us, somewhat out of date and have undergone but little change
throughout the progress of civilisation, because natural selection
has long since ceased to be the dominant factor in human progress. The
history of human progress has been mainly the history of man's
higher educability, the products of which he has projected on to his
environment. This educability remains on the average what it was a dozen
generations ago; but the thought-woven tapestry of his surroundings is
refashioned and improved by each succeeding generation. Few men have in
greater measure enriched the thought-environment with which it is the
aim of education to bring educable human beings into vital contact, than
has Charles Darwin. His special field of work was the wide province of
biology; but he did much to help us realise that mental factors have
contributed to organic evolution and that in man, the highest product of
Evolution, they have reached a position of unquestioned supremacy.




XXII. THE INFLUENCE OF THE CONCEPTION OF EVOLUTION ON MODERN PHILOSOPHY.
By H. Hoffding.

Professor of Philosophy in the University of Copenhagen.


I.

It is difficult to draw a sharp line between philosophy and natural
science. The naturalist who introduces a new principle, or demonstrates
a fact which throws a new light on existence, not only renders an
important service to philosophy but is himself a philosopher in the
broader sense of the word. The aim of philosophy in the stricter sense
is to attain points of view from which the fundamental phenomena and
the principles of the special sciences can be seen in their relative
importance and connection. But philosophy in this stricter sense
has always been influenced by philosophy in the broader sense. Greek
philosophy came under the influence of logic and mathematics, modern
philosophy under the influence of natural science. The name of Charles
Darwin stands with those of Galileo, Newton, and Robert Mayer--names
which denote new problems and great alterations in our conception of the
universe.

First of all we must lay stress on Darwin's own personality. His deep
love of truth, his indefatigable inquiry, his wide horizon, and his
steady self-criticism make him a scientific model, even if his results
and theories should eventually come to possess mainly an historical
interest. In the intellectual domain the primary object is to reach
high summits from which wide surveys are possible, to reach them toiling
honestly upwards by way of experience, and then not to turn dizzy when
a summit is gained. Darwinians have sometimes turned dizzy, but Darwin
never. He saw from the first the great importance of his hypothesis, not
only because of its solution of the old problem as to the value of the
concept of species, not only because of the grand picture of natural
evolution which it unrolls, but also because of the life and inspiration
its method would impart to the study of comparative anatomy, of instinct
and of heredity, and finally because of the influence it would exert on
the whole conception of existence. He wrote in his note-book in the
year 1837: "My theory would give zest to recent and fossil comparative
anatomy; it would lead to the study of instinct, heredity, and
mind-heredity, whole (of) metaphysics." ("Life and Letters of Charles
Darwin", Vol. I. page 8.)

We can distinguish four main points in which Darwin's investigations
possess philosophical importance.

The evolution hypothesis is much older than Darwin; it is, indeed, one
of the oldest guessings of human thought. In the eighteenth century it
was put forward by Diderot and Lamettrie and suggested by Kant (1786).
As we shall see later, it was held also by several philosophers in the
first half of the nineteenth century. In his preface to "The Origin of
Species", Darwin mentions the naturalists who were his forerunners.
But he has set forth the hypothesis of evolution in so energetic
and thorough a manner that it perforce attracts the attention of
all thoughtful men in a much higher degree than it did before the
publication of the "Origin".

And further, the importance of his teaching rests on the fact that he,
much more than his predecessors, even than Lamarck, sought a foundation
for his hypothesis in definite facts. Modern science began by
demanding--with Kepler and Newton--evidence of verae causae; this
demand Darwin industriously set himself to satisfy--hence the wealth of
material which he collected by his observations and his experiments.
He not only revived an old hypothesis, but he saw the necessity of
verifying it by facts. Whether the special cause on which he founded the
explanation of the origin of species--Natural Selection--is sufficient,
is now a subject of discussion. He himself had some doubt in regard
to this question, and the criticisms which are directed against his
hypothesis hit Darwinism rather than Darwin. In his indefatigable search
for empirical evidence he is a model even for his antagonists: he has
compelled them to approach the problems of life along other lines than
those which were formerly followed.

Whether the special cause to which Darwin appealed is sufficient or not,
at least to it is probably due the greater part of the influence which
he has exerted on the general trend of thought. "Struggle for existence"
and "natural selection" are principles which have been applied, more or
less, in every department of thought. Recent research, it is true, has
discovered greater empirical discontinuity--leaps, "mutations"--whereas
Darwin believed in the importance of small variations slowly
accumulated. It has also been shown by the experimental method, which
in recent biological work has succeeded Darwin's more historical method,
that types once constituted possess great permanence, the fluctuations
being restricted within clearly defined boundaries. The problem has
become more precise, both as to variation and as to heredity. The inner
conditions of life have in both respects shown a greater independence
than Darwin had supposed in his theory, though he always admitted that
the cause of variation was to him a great enigma, "a most perplexing
problem," and that the struggle for life could only occur where
variation existed. But, at any rate, it was of the greatest importance
that Darwin gave a living impression of the struggle for life which is
everywhere going on, and to which even the highest forms of existence
must be amenable. The philosophical importance of these ideas does not
stand or fall with the answer to the question, whether natural selection
is a sufficient explanation of the origin of species or not: it has
an independent, positive value for everyone who will observe life and
reality with an unbiassed mind.

In accentuating the struggle for life Darwin stands as a
characteristically English thinker: he continues a train of ideas which
Hobbes and Malthus had already begun. Moreover in his critical views as
to the conception of species he had English forerunners; in the middle
ages Occam and Duns Scotus, in the eighteenth century Berkeley and Hume.
In his moral philosophy, as we shall see later, he is an adherent of the
school which is represented by Hutcheson, Hume and Adam Smith. Because
he is no philosopher in the stricter sense of the term, it is of great
interest to see that his attitude of mind is that of the great thinkers
of his nation.

In considering Darwin's influence on philosophy we will begin with an
examination of the attitude of philosophy to the conception of evolution
at the time when "The Origin of Species" appeared. We will then examine
the effects which the theory of evolution, and especially the idea
of the struggle for life, has had, and naturally must have, on the
discussion of philosophical problems.

II.

When "The Origin of Species" appeared fifty years ago Romantic
speculation, Schelling's and Hegel's philosophy, still reigned on the
continent, while in England Positivism, the philosophy of Comte and
Stuart Mill, represented the most important trend of thought. German
speculation had much to say on evolution, it even pretended to be a
philosophy of evolution. But then the word "evolution" was to be taken
in an ideal, not in a real, sense. To speculative thought the forms and
types of nature formed a system of ideas, within which any form could
lead us by continuous transitions to any other. It was a classificatory
system which was regarded as a divine world of thought or images, within
which metamorphoses could go on--a condition comparable with that in
the mind of the poet when one image follows another with imperceptible
changes. Goethe's ideas of evolution, as expressed in his "Metamorphosen
der Pflanzen und der Thiere", belong to this category; it is, therefore,
incorrect to call him a forerunner of Darwin. Schelling and Hegel
held the same idea; Hegel expressly rejected the conception of a real
evolution in time as coarse and materialistic. "Nature," he says, "is
to be considered as a SYSTEM OF STAGES, the one necessarily arising from
the other, and being the nearest truth of that from which it proceeds;
but not in such a way that the one is NATURALLY generated by the other;
on the contrary (their connection lies) in the inner idea which is the
ground of nature. The METAMORPHOSIS can be ascribed only to the notion
as such, because it alone is evolution... It has been a clumsy idea in
the older as well as in the newer philosophy of nature, to regard the
transformation and the transition from one natural form and sphere to
a higher as an outward and actual production." ("Encyclopaedie der
philosophischen Wissenschaften" (4th edition), Berlin, 1845, paragraph
249.)

The only one of the philosophers of Romanticism who believed in a
real, historical evolution, a real production of new species, was Oken.
("Lehrbuch der Naturphilosophie", Jena, 1809.) Danish philosophers, such
as Treschow (1812) and Sibbern (1846), have also broached the idea of
an historical evolution of all living beings from the lowest to the
highest. Schopenhauer's philosophy has a more realistic character than
that of Schelling's and Hegel's, his diametrical opposites, though he
also belongs to the romantic school of thought. His philosophical and
psychological views were greatly influenced by French naturalists and
philosophers, especially by Cabanis and Lamarck. He praises the "ever
memorable Lamarck," because he laid so much stress on the "will to
live." But he repudiates as a "wonderful error" the idea that the
organs of animals should have reached their present perfection through
a development in time, during the course of innumerable generations. It
was, he said, a consequence of the low standard of contemporary French
philosophy, that Lamarck came to the idea of the construction of living
beings in time through succession! ("Ueber den Willen in der Natur" (2nd
edition), Frankfurt a. M., 1854, pages 41-43.)

The positivistic stream of thought was not more in favour of a real
evolution than was the Romantic school. Its aim was to adhere to
positive facts: it looked with suspicion on far-reaching speculation.
Comte laid great stress on the discontinuity found between the different
kingdoms of nature, as well as within each single kingdom. As he
regarded as unscientific every attempt to reduce the number of physical
forces, so he rejected entirely the hypothesis of Lamarck concerning the
evolution of species; the idea of species would in his eyes absolutely
lose its importance if a transition from species to species under the
influence of conditions of life were admitted. His disciples (Littre,
Robin) continued to direct against Darwin the polemics which their
master had employed against Lamarck. Stuart Mill, who, in the theory
of knowledge, represented the empirical or positivistic movement in
philosophy--like his English forerunners from Locke to Hume--founded
his theory of knowledge and morals on the experience of the single
individual. He sympathised with the theory of the original likeness of
all individuals and derived their differences, on which he practically
and theoretically laid much stress, from the influence both of
experience and education, and, generally, of physical and social causes.
He admitted an individual evolution, and, in the human species, an
evolution based on social progress; but no physiological evolution of
species. He was afraid that the hypothesis of heredity would carry us
back to the old theory of "innate" ideas.

Darwin was more empirical than Comte and Mill; experience disclosed to
him a deeper continuity than they could find; closer than before the
nature and fate of the single individual were shown to be interwoven in
the great web binding the life of the species with nature as a whole.
And the continuity which so many idealistic philosophers could find
only in the world of thought, he showed to be present in the world of
reality.

III.

Darwin's energetic renewal of the old idea of evolution had its chief
importance in strengthening the conviction of this real continuity in
the world, of continuity in the series of form and events. It was a
great support for all those who were prepared to base their conception
of life on scientific grounds. Together with the recently discovered law
of the conservation of energy, it helped to produce the great realistic
movement which characterises the last third of the nineteenth century.
After the decline of the Romantic movement people wished to have firmer
ground under their feet and reality now asserted itself in a more
emphatic manner than in the period of Romanticism. It was easy for Hegel
to proclaim that "the real" was "the rational," and that "the
rational" was "the real": reality itself existed for him only in the
interpretation of ideal reason, and if there was anything which could
not be merged in the higher unity of thought, then it was only an
example of the "impotence of nature to hold to the idea." But now
concepts are to be founded on nature and not on any system of categories
too confidently deduced a priori. The new devotion to nature had its
recompense in itself, because the new points of view made us see that
nature could indeed "hold to ideas," though perhaps not to those which
we had cogitated beforehand.

A most important question for philosophers to answer was whether the
new views were compatible with an idealistic conception of life and
existence. Some proclaimed that we have now no need of any philosophy
beyond the principles of the conservation of matter and energy and the
principle of natural evolution: existence should and could be definitely
and completely explained by the laws of material nature. But abler
thinkers saw that the thing was not so simple. They were prepared to
give the new views their just place and to examine what alterations the
old views must undergo in order to be brought into harmony with the new
data.

The realistic character of Darwin's theory was shown not only in the
idea of natural continuity, but also, and not least, in the idea of the
cause whereby organic life advances step by step. This idea--the idea of
the struggle for life--implied that nothing could persist, if it had no
power to maintain itself under the given conditions. Inner value
alone does not decide. Idealism was here put to its hardest trial. In
continuous evolution it could perhaps still find an analogy to the inner
evolution of ideas in the mind; but in the demand for power in order to
struggle with outward conditions Realism seemed to announce itself in
its most brutal form. Every form of Idealism had to ask itself seriously
how it was going to "struggle for life" with this new Realism.

We will now give a short account of the position which leading thinkers
in different countries have taken up in regard to this question.

I. Herbert Spencer was the philosopher whose mind was best prepared by
his own previous thinking to admit the theory of Darwin to a place in
his conception of the world. His criticism of the arguments which had
been put forward against the hypothesis of Lamarck, showed that Spencer,
as a young man, was an adherent to the evolution idea. In his
"Social Statics" (1850) he applied this idea to human life and moral
civilisation. In 1852 he wrote an essay on "The Development Hypothesis",
in which he definitely stated his belief that the differentiation of
species, like the differentiation within a single organism, was the
result of development. In the first edition of his "Psychology" (1855)
he took a step which put him in opposition to the older English school
(from Locke to Mill): he acknowledged "innate ideas" so far as to
admit the tendency of acquired habits to be inherited in the course of
generations, so that the nature and functions of the individual are only
to be understood through its connection with the life of the species.
In 1857, in his essay on "Progress", he propounded the law of
differentiation as a general law of evolution, verified by examples from
all regions of experience, the evolution of species being only one of
these examples. On the effect which the appearance of "The Origin of
Species" had on his mind he writes in his "Autobiography": "Up to
that time... I held that the sole cause of organic evolution is the
inheritance of functionally-produced modifications. The "Origin of
Species" made it clear to me that I was wrong, and that the larger part
of the facts cannot be due to any such cause... To have the theory of
organic evolution justified was of course to get further support for
that theory of evolution at large with which... all my conceptions were
bound up." (Spencer, "Autobiography", Vol. II. page 50, London, 1904.)
Instead of the metaphorical expression "natural selection," Spencer
introduced the term "survival of the fittest," which found favour with
Darwin as well as with Wallace.

In working out his ideas of evolution, Spencer found that
differentiation was not the only form of evolution. In its simplest form
evolution is mainly a concentration, previously scattered elements being
integrated and losing independent movement. Differentiation is only
forthcoming when minor wholes arise within a greater whole. And the
highest form of evolution is reached when there is a harmony between
concentration and differentiation, a harmony which Spencer calls
equilibration and which he defines as a moving equilibrium. At the same
time this definition enables him to illustrate the expression "survival
of the fittest." "Every living organism exhibits such a moving
equilibrium--a balanced set of functions constituting its life; and the
overthrow of this balanced set of functions or moving equilibrium is
what we call death. Some individuals in a species are so constituted
that their moving equilibria are less easily overthrown than those of
other individuals; and these are the fittest which survive, or, in Mr
Darwin's language, they are the select which nature preserves." (Ibid.
page 100.) Not only in the domain of organic life, but in all domains,
the summit of evolution is, according to Spencer, characterised by such
a harmony--by a moving equilibrium.

Spencer's analysis of the concept of evolution, based on a great variety
of examples, has made this concept clearer and more definite than
before. It contains the three elements; integration, differentiation and
equilibration. It is true that a concept which is to be valid for all
domains of experience must have an abstract character, and between the
several domains there is, strictly speaking, only a relation of analogy.
So there is only analogy between psychical and physical evolution. But
this is no serious objection, because general concepts do not express
more than analogies between the phenomena which they represent. Spencer
takes his leading terms from the material world in defining evolution
(in the simplest form) as integration of matter and dissipation of
movement; but as he--not always quite consistently (Cf. my letter
to him, 1876, now printed in Duncan's "Life and Letters of Herbert
Spencer", page 178, London, 1908.)--assumed a correspondence of mind and
matter, he could very well give these terms an indirect importance for
psychical evolution. Spencer has always, in my opinion with full right,
repudiated the ascription of materialism. He is no more a materialist
than Spinoza. In his "Principles of Psychology" (paragraph 63) he
expressed himself very clearly: "Though it seems easier to translate
so-called matter into so-called spirit, than to translate so-called
spirit into so-called matter--which latter is indeed wholly
impossible--yet no translation can carry us beyond our symbols." These
words lead us naturally to a group of thinkers whose starting-point
was psychical evolution. But we have still one aspect of Spencer's
philosophy to mention.

Spencer founded his "laws of evolution" on an inductive basis, but
he was convinced that they could be deduced from the law of the
conservation of energy. Such a deduction is, perhaps, possible for the
more elementary forms of evolution, integration and differentiation; but
it is not possible for the highest form, the equilibration, which is a
harmony of integration and differentiation. Spencer can no more deduce
the necessity for the eventual appearance of "moving equilibria" of
harmonious totalities than Hegel could guarantee the "higher unities"
in which all contradictions should be reconciled. In Spencer's hands the
theory of evolution acquired a more decidedly optimistic character
than in Darwin's; but I shall deal later with the relation of Darwin's
hypothesis to the opposition of optimism and pessimism.

II. While the starting-point of Spencer was biological or cosmological,
psychical evolution being conceived as in analogy with physical, a group
of eminent thinkers--in Germany Wundt, in France Fouillee, in Italy
Ardigo--took, each in his own manner, their starting-point in psychical
evolution as an original fact and as a type of all evolution, the
hypothesis of Darwin coming in as a corroboration and as a special
example. They maintain the continuity of evolution; they find this
character most prominent in psychical evolution, and this is for them a
motive to demand a corresponding continuity in the material, especially
in the organic domain.

To Wundt and Fouillee the concept of will is prominent. They see the
type of all evolution in the transformation of the life of will from
blind impulse to conscious choice; the theories of Lamarck and Darwin
are used to support the view that there is in nature a tendency to
evolution in steady reciprocity with external conditions. The struggle
for life is here only a secondary fact. Its apparent prominence is
explained by the circumstance that the influence of external conditions
is easily made out, while inner conditions can be verified only
through their effects. For Ardigo the evolution of thought was the
starting-point and the type: in the evolution of a scientific hypothesis
we see a progress from the indefinite (indistinto) to the definite
(distinto), and this is a characteristic of all evolution, as Ardigo has
pointed out in a series of works. The opposition between indistinto and
distinto corresponds to Spencer's opposition between homogeneity and
heterogeneity. The hypothesis of the origin of differences of species
from more simple forms is a special example of the general law of
evolution.

In the views of Wundt and Fouillee we find the fundamental idea of
idealism: psychical phenomena as expressions of the innermost nature of
existence. They differ from the older Idealism in the great stress which
they lay on evolution as a real, historical process which is going on
through steady conflict with external conditions. The Romantic dread
of reality is broken. It is beyond doubt that Darwin's emphasis on the
struggle for life as a necessary condition of evolution has been a very
important factor in carrying philosophy back to reality from the heaven
of pure ideas. The philosophy of Ardigo, on the other side, appears
more as a continuation and deepening of positivism, though the Italian
thinker arrived at his point of view independently of French-English
positivism. The idea of continuous evolution is here maintained in
opposition to Comte's and Mill's philosophy of discontinuity. From Wundt
and Fouillee Ardigo differs in conceiving psychical evolution not as an
immediate revelation of the innermost nature of existence, but only as a
single, though the most accessible example, of evolution.

III. To the French philosophers Boutroux and Bergson, evolution proper
is continuous and qualitative, while outer experience and physical
science give us fragments only, sporadic processes and mechanical
combinations. To Bergson, in his recent work "L'Evolution Creatrice",
evolution consists in an elan de vie which to our fragmentary
observation and analytic reflexion appears as broken into a manifold of
elements and processes. The concept of matter in its scientific form
is the result of this breaking asunder, essential for all scientific
reflexion. In these conceptions the strongest opposition between
inner and outer conditions of evolution is expressed: in the domain of
internal conditions spontaneous development of qualitative forms--in the
domain of external conditions discontinuity and mechanical combination.

We see, then, that the theory of evolution has influenced philosophy
in a variety of forms. It has made idealistic thinkers revise their
relation to the real world; it has led positivistic thinkers to find a
closer connection between the facts on which they based their views; it
has made us all open our eyes for new possibilities to arise through
the prima facie inexplicable "spontaneous" variations which are the
condition of all evolution. This last point is one of peculiar interest.
Deeper than speculative philosophy and mechanical science saw in the
days of their triumph, we catch sight of new streams, whose sources and
laws we have still to discover. Most sharply does this appear in the
theory of mutation, which is only a stronger accentuation of a main
point in Darwinism. It is interesting to see that an analogous
problem comes into the foreground in physics through the discovery
of radioactive phenomena, and in psychology through the assumption
of psychical new formations (as held by Boutroux, William James and
Bergson). From this side, Darwin's ideas, as well as the analogous
ideas in other domains, incite us to renewed examination of our first
principles, their rationality and their value. On the other hand,
his theory of the struggle for existence challenges us to examine the
conditions and discuss the outlook as to the persistence of human life
and society and of the values that belong to them. It is not enough to
hope (or fear?) the rising of new forms; we have also to investigate the
possibility of upholding the forms and ideals which have hitherto been
the bases of human life. Darwin has here given his age the most earnest
and most impressive lesson. This side of Darwin's theory is of peculiar
interest to some special philosophical problems to which I now pass.

IV.

Among philosophical problems the problem of knowledge has in the last
century occupied a foremost place. It is natural, then, to ask how
Darwin and the hypothesis whose most eminent representative he is, stand
to this problem.

Darwin started an hypothesis. But every hypothesis is won by inference
from certain presuppositions, and every inference is based on
the general principles of human thought. The evolution hypothesis
presupposes, then, human thought and its principles. And not only
the abstract logical principles are thus presupposed. The evolution
hypothesis purports to be not only a formal arrangement of phenomena,
but to express also the law of a real process. It supposes, then,
that the real data--all that in our knowledge which we do not produce
ourselves, but which we in the main simply receive--are subjected
to laws which are at least analogous to the logical relations of our
thoughts; in other words, it assumes the validity of the principle of
causality. If organic species could arise without cause there would
be no use in framing hypotheses. Only if we assume the principle of
causality, is there a problem to solve.

Though Darwinism has had a great influence on philosophy considered as
a striving after a scientific view of the world, yet here is a point of
view--the epistemological--where philosophy is not only independent but
reaches beyond any result of natural science. Perhaps it will be said:
the powers and functions of organic beings only persist (perhaps also
only arise) when they correspond sufficiently to the conditions under
which the struggle of life is to go on. Human thought itself is, then, a
variation (or a mutation) which has been able to persist and to
survive. Is not, then, the problem of knowledge solved by the evolution
hypothesis? Spencer had given an affirmative answer to this question
before the appearance of "The Origin of Species". For the individual, he
said, there is an a priori, original, basis (or Anlage) for all mental
life; but in the species all powers have developed in reciprocity with
external conditions. Knowledge is here considered from the practical
point of view, as a weapon in the struggle for life, as an "organon"
which has been continuously in use for generations. In recent years the
economic or pragmatic epistemology, as developed by Avenarius and Mach
in Germany, and by James in America, points in the same direction.
Science, it is said, only maintains those principles and presuppositions
which are necessary to the simplest and clearest orientation in
the world of experience. All assumptions which cannot be applied to
experience and to practical work, will successively be eliminated.

In these views a striking and important application is made of the idea
of struggle for life to the development of human thought. Thought must,
as all other things in the world, struggle for life. But this whole
consideration belongs to psychology, not to the theory of knowledge
(epistemology), which is concerned only with the validity of knowledge,
not with its historical origin. Every hypothesis to explain the
origin of knowledge must submit to cross-examination by the theory of
knowledge, because it works with the fundamental forms and principles
of human thought. We cannot go further back than these forms and
principles, which it is the aim of epistemology to ascertain and for
which no further reason can be given. (The present writer, many years
ago, in his "Psychology" (Copenhagen, 1882; English translation London,
1891), criticised the evolutionistic treatment of the problem of
knowledge from the Kantian point of view.)

But there is another side of the problem which is, perhaps, of more
importance and which epistemology generally overlooks. If new variations
can arise, not only in organic but perhaps also in inorganic nature, new
tasks are placed before the human mind. The question is, then, if it has
forms in which there is room for the new matter? We are here touching
a possibility which the great master of epistemology did not bring to
light. Kant supposed confidently that no other matter of knowledge could
stream forth from the dark source which he called "the thing-in-itself,"
than such as could be synthesised in our existing forms of knowledge.
He mentions the possibility of other forms than the human, and warns us
against the dogmatic assumption that the human conception of existence
should be absolutely adequate. But he seems to be quite sure that the
thing-in-itself works constantly, and consequently always gives us only
what our powers can master. This assumption was a consequence of Kant's
rationalistic tendency, but one for which no warrant can be given.
Evolutionism and systematism are opposing tendencies which can never
be absolutely harmonised one with the other. Evolution may at any time
break some form which the system-monger regards as finally established.
Darwin himself felt a great difference in looking at variation as an
evolutionist and as a systematist. When he was working at his evolution
theory, he was very glad to find variations; but they were a hindrance
to him when he worked as a systematist, in preparing his work on
Cirripedia. He says in a letter: "I had thought the same parts of the
same species more resemble (than they do anyhow in Cirripedia) objects
cast in the same mould. Systematic work would be easy were it not
for this confounded variation, which, however, is pleasant to me as a
speculatist, though odious to me as a systematist." ("Life and Letters",
Vol. II. page 37.) He could indeed be angry with variations even as
an evolutionist; but then only because he could not explain them, not
because he could not classify them. "If, as I must think, external
conditions produce little DIRECT effect, what the devil determines each
particular variation?" (Ibid. page 232.) What Darwin experienced in
his particular domain holds good of all knowledge. All knowledge is
systematic, in so far as it strives to put phenomena in quite definite
relations, one to another. But the systematisation can never be
complete. And here Darwin has contributed much to widen the world for
us. He has shown us forces and tendencies in nature which make absolute
systems impossible, at the same time that they give us new objects and
problems. There is still a place for what Lessing called "the unceasing
striving after truth," while "absolute truth" (in the sense of a closed
system) is unattainable so long as life and experience are going on.

There is here a special remark to be made. As we have seen above, recent
research has shown that natural selection or struggle for life is no
explanation of variations. Hugo de Vries distinguishes between partial
and embryonal variations, or between variations and mutations, only the
last-named being heritable, and therefore of importance for the origin
of new species. But the existence of variations is not only of interest
for the problem of the origin of species; it has also a more general
interest. An individual does not lose its importance for knowledge,
because its qualities are not heritable. On the contrary, in higher
beings at least, individual peculiarities will become more and more
independent objects of interest. Knowledge takes account of the
biographies not only of species, but also of individuals: it seeks to
find the law of development of the single individual. (The new science
of Ecology occupies an intermediate position between the biography of
species and the biography of individuals. Compare "Congress of Arts and
Science", St Louis, Vol. V. 1906 (the Reports of Drude and Robinson)
and the work of my colleague E. Warming.) As Leibniz said long ago,
individuality consists in the law of the changes of a being. "La loi du
changement fait l'individualite de chaque substance." Here is a world
which is almost new for science, which till now has mainly occupied
itself with general laws and forms. But these are ultimately only means
to understand the individual phenomena, in whose nature and history
a manifold of laws and forms always cooperate. The importance of this
remark will appear in the sequel.

V.

To many people the Darwinian theory of natural selection or struggle
for existence seemed to change the whole conception of life, and
particularly all the conditions on which the validity of ethical ideas
depends. If only that has persistence which can be adapted to a given
condition, what will then be the fate of our ideals, of our standards
of good and evil? Blind force seems to reign, and the only thing that
counts seems to be the most heedless use of power. Darwinism, it was
said, has proclaimed brutality. No other difference seems permanent save
that between the sound, powerful and happy on the one side, the sick,
feeble and unhappy on the other; and every attempt to alleviate this
difference seems to lead to general enervation. Some of those who
interpreted Darwinism in this manner felt an aesthetic delight in
contemplating the heedlessness and energy of the great struggle for
existence and anticipated the realisation of a higher human type as the
outcome of it: so Nietzsche and his followers. Others recognising the
same consequences in Darwinism regarded these as one of the strongest
objections against it; so Duhring and Kropotkin (in his earlier works).

This interpretation of Darwinism was frequent in the interval between
the two main works of Darwin--"The Origin of Species" and "The Descent
of Man". But even during this interval it was evident to an attentive
reader that Darwin himself did not found his standard of good and evil
on the features of the life of nature he had emphasised so strongly. He
did not justify the ways along which nature reached its ends; he only
pointed them out. The "real" was not to him, as to Hegel, one with
the "rational." Darwin has, indeed, by his whole conception of nature,
rendered a great service to ethics in making the difference between the
life of nature and the ethical life appear in so strong a light. The
ethical problem could now be stated in a sharper form than before. But
this was not the first time that the idea of the struggle for life
was put in relation to the ethical problem. In the seventeenth century
Thomas Hobbes gave the first impulse to the whole modern discussion of
ethical principles in his theory of bellum omnium contra omnes. Men, he
taught, are in the state of nature enemies one of another, and they live
either in fright or in the glory of power. But it was not the opinion
of Hobbes that this made ethics impossible. On the contrary, he found a
standard for virtue and vice in the fact that some qualities and actions
have a tendency to bring us out of the state of war and to secure
peace, while other qualities have a contrary tendency. In the eighteenth
century even Immanuel Kant's ideal ethics had--so far as can be seen--a
similar origin. Shortly before the foundation of his definitive ethics,
Kant wrote his "Idee zu einer allgemeinen Weltgeschichte" (1784),
where--in a way which reminds us of Hobbes, and is prophetic of
Darwin--he describes the forward-driving power of struggle in the human
world. It is here as with the struggle of the trees for light and air,
through which they compete with one another in height. Anxiety about
war can only be allayed by an ordinance which gives everyone his full
liberty under acknowledgment of the equal liberty of others. And such
ordinance and acknowledgment are also attributes of the content of the
moral law, as Kant proclaimed it in the year after the publication
of his essay (1785) (Cf. my "History of Modern Philosophy" (English
translation London, 1900), I. pages 76-79.) Kant really came to his
ethics by the way of evolution, though he afterwards disavowed it.
Similarly the same line of thought may be traced in Hegel though it has
been disguised in the form of speculative dialectics. ("Herrschaft und
Knechtschaft", "Phanomenologie des Geistes", IV. A., Leiden, 1907.) And
in Schopenhauer's theory of the blind will to live and its abrogation by
the ethical feeling, which is founded on universal sympathy, we have a
more individualistic form of the same idea.

It was, then, not entirely a foreign point of view which Darwin
introduced into ethical thought, even if we take no account of the
poetical character of the word "struggle" and of the more direct
adaptation, through the use and non-use of power, which Darwin also
emphasised. In "The Descent of Man" he has devoted a special chapter
("The Descent of Man", Vol. I. Ch. iii.) to a discussion of the origin
of the ethical consciousness. The characteristic expression of this
consciousness he found, just as Kant did, in the idea of "ought"; it was
the origin of this new idea which should be explained. His hypothesis
was that the ethical "ought" has its origin in the social and parental
instincts, which, as well as other instincts (e.g. the instinct of
self-preservation), lie deeper than pleasure and pain. In many species,
not least in the human species, these instincts are fostered by natural
selection; and when the powers of memory and comparison are developed,
so that single acts can be valued according to the claims of the deep
social instinct, then consciousness of duty and remorse are possible.
Blind instinct has developed to conscious ethical will.

As already stated, Darwin, as a moral philosopher belongs to the school
that was founded by Shaftesbury, and was afterwards represented by
Hutcheson, Hume, Adam Smith, Comte and Spencer. His merit is, first,
that he has given this tendency of thought a biological foundation, and
that he has stamped on it a doughty character in showing that ethical
ideas and sentiments, rightly conceived, are forces which are at work in
the struggle for life.

There are still many questions to solve. Not only does the ethical
development within the human species contain features still unexplained
(The works of Westermarck and Hobhouse throw new light on many of these
features.); but we are confronted by the great problem whether after all
a genetic historical theory can be of decisive importance here. To
every consequent ethical consciousness there is a standard of value, a
primordial value which determines the single ethical judgments as their
last presupposition, and the "rightness" of this basis, the "value"
of this value can as little be discussed as the "rationality" of our
logical principles. There is here revealed a possibility of ethical
scepticism which evolutionistic ethics (as well as intuitive or
rationalistic ethics) has overlooked. No demonstration can show that the
results of the ethical development are definitive and universal. We
meet here again with the important opposition of systematisation and
evolution. There will, I think, always be an open question here, though
comparative ethics, of which we have so far only the first attempts, can
do much to throw light on it.

It would carry us too far to discuss all the philosophical works
on ethics, which have been influenced directly or indirectly by
evolutionism. I may, however, here refer to the book of C.M. Williams,
"A Review of the Systems of Ethics founded on the Theory of Evolution"
(New York and London, 1893.), in which, besides Darwin, the following
authors are reviewed: Wallace, Haeckel, Spencer, Fiske, Rolph, Barratt,
Stephen, Carneri, Hoffding, Gizycki, Alexander, Ree. As works which
criticise evolutionistic ethics from an intuitive point of view and
in an instructive way, may be cited: Guyau "La morale anglaise
contemporaine" (Paris, 1879.), and Sorley, "Ethics of Naturalism". I
will only mention some interesting contributions to ethical discussion
which can be found in Darwinism besides the idea of struggle for life.

The attention which Darwin has directed to variations has opened our
eyes to the differences in human nature as well as in nature generally.
There is here a fact of great importance for ethical thought, no matter
from what ultimate premiss it starts. Only from a very abstract point of
view can different individuals be treated in the same manner. The most
eminent ethical thinkers, men such as Jeremy Bentham and Immanuel Kant,
who discussed ethical questions from very opposite standpoints, agreed
in regarding all men as equal in respect of ethical endowment. In regard
to Bentham, Leslie Stephen remarks: "He is determined to be thoroughly
empirical, to take men as he found them. But his utilitarianism supposed
that men's views of happiness and utility were uniform and clear, and
that all that was wanted was to show them the means by which their ends
could be reached." ("English literature and society in the eighteenth
century", London, 1904, page 187.) And Kant supposed that every man
would find the "categorical imperative" in his consciousness, when he
came to sober reflexion, and that all would have the same qualifications
to follow it. But if continual variations, great or small, are going on
in human nature, it is the duty of ethics to make allowance for them,
both in making claims, and in valuing what is done. A new set of ethical
problems have their origin here. (Cf. my paper, "The law of relativity
in Ethics," "International Journal of Ethics", Vol. I. 1891, pages
37-62.) It is an interesting fact that Stuart Mill's book "On Liberty"
appeared in the same year as "The Origin of Species". Though Mill agreed
with Bentham about the original equality of all men's endowments, he
regarded individual differences as a necessary result of physical and
social influences, and he claimed that free play shall be allowed to
differences of character so far as is possible without injury to other
men. It is a condition of individual and social progress that a man's
mode of action should be determined by his own character and not
by tradition and custom, nor by abstract rules. This view was to be
corroborated by the theory of Darwin.

But here we have reached a point of view from which the criticism,
which in recent years has often been directed against Darwin--that
small variations are of no importance in the struggle for life--is of
no weight. From an ethical standpoint, and particularly from the
ethical standpoint of Darwin himself, it is a duty to foster individual
differences that can be valuable, even though they can neither be of
service for physical preservation nor be physically inherited. The
distinction between variation and mutation is here without importance.
It is quite natural that biologists should be particularly interested in
such variations as can be inherited and produce new species. But in the
human world there is not only a physical, but also a mental and social
heredity. When an ideal human character has taken form, then there
is shaped a type, which through imitation and influence can become an
important factor in subsequent development, even if it cannot form a
species in the biological sense of the word. Spiritually strong
men often succumb in the physical struggle for life; but they can
nevertheless be victorious through the typical influence they exert,
perhaps on very distant generations, if the remembrance of them is kept
alive, be it in legendary or in historical form. Their very failure
can show that a type has taken form which is maintained at all risks,
a standard of life which is adhered to in spite of the strongest
opposition. The question "to be or not to be" can be put from
very different levels of being: it has too often been considered a
consequence of Darwinism that this question is only to be put from
the lowest level. When a stage is reached, where ideal (ethical,
intellectual, aesthetic) interests are concerned, the struggle for life
is a struggle for the preservation of this stage. The giving up of a
higher standard of life is a sort of death; for there is not only a
physical, there is also a spiritual, death.

VI.

The Socratic character of Darwin's mind appears in his wariness in
drawing the last consequences of his doctrine, in contrast both with the
audacious theories of so many of his followers and with the consequences
which his antagonists were busy in drawing. Though he, as we have seen,
saw from the beginning that his hypothesis would occasion "a whole of
metaphysics," he was himself very reserved as to the ultimate questions,
and his answers to such questions were extorted from him.

As to the question of optimism and pessimism, Darwin held that though
pain and suffering were very often the ways by which animals were led
to pursue that course of action which is most beneficial to the species,
yet pleasurable feelings were the most habitual guides. "We see this in
the pleasure from exertion, even occasionally from great exertion of the
body or mind, in the pleasure of our daily meals, and especially in the
pleasure derived from sociability, and from loving our families." But
there was to him so much suffering in the world that it was a strong
argument against the existence of an intelligent First Cause. ("Life and
Letters" Vol. I. page 310.)

It seems to me that Darwin was not so clear on another question, that
of the relation between improvement and adaptation. He wrote to Lyell:
"When you contrast natural selection and 'improvement,' you seem always
to overlook... that every step in the natural selection of each species
implies improvement in that species IN RELATION TO ITS CONDITION OF
LIFE... Improvement implies, I suppose, EACH FORM OBTAINING MANY PARTS
OR ORGANS, all excellently adapted for their functions." "All this," he
adds, "seems to me quite compatible with certain forms fitted for simple
conditions, remaining unaltered, or being degraded." (Ibid. Vol. II.
page 177.) But the great question is, if the conditions of life will in
the long run favour "improvement" in the sense of differentiation
(or harmony of differentiation and integration). Many beings are best
adapted to their conditions of life if they have few organs and few
necessities. Pessimism would not only be the consequence, if suffering
outweighed happiness, but also if the most elementary forms of happiness
were predominant, or if there were a tendency to reduce the standard
of life to the simplest possible, the contentment of inertia or stable
equilibrium. There are animals which are very highly differentiated and
active in their young state, but later lose their complex organisation
and concentrate themselves on the one function of nutrition. In the
human world analogies to this sort of adaptation are not wanting. Young
"idealists" very often end as old "Philistines." Adaptation and progress
are not the same.

Another question of great importance in respect to human evolution
is, whether there will be always a possibility for the existence of
an impulse to progress, an impulse to make great claims on life, to be
active and to alter the conditions of life instead of adapting to them
in a passive manner. Many people do not develop because they have
too few necessities, and because they have no power to imagine other
conditions of life than those under which they live. In his remarks
on "the pleasure from exertion" Darwin has a point of contact with
the practical idealism of former times--with the ideas of Lessing and
Goethe, of Condorcet and Fichte. The continual striving which was
the condition of salvation to Faust's soul, is also the condition
of salvation to mankind. There is a holy fire which we ought to keep
burning, if adaptation is really to be improvement. If, as I have
tried to show in my "Philosophy of Religion", the innermost core of all
religion is faith in the persistence of value in the world, and if
the highest values express themselves in the cry "Excelsior!" then the
capital point is, that this cry should always be heard and followed. We
have here a corollary of the theory of evolution in its application to
human life.

Darwin declared himself an agnostic, not only because he could not
harmonise the large amount of suffering in the world with the idea of a
God as its first cause, but also because he "was aware that if we admit
a first cause, the mind still craves to know whence it came and how it
arose." ("Life and Letters", Vol. I. page 306.) He saw, as Kant had
seen before him and expressed in his "Kritik der Urtheilskraft", that we
cannot accept either of the only two possibilities which we are able
to conceive: chance (or brute force) and design. Neither mechanism
nor teleology can give an absolute answer to ultimate questions.
The universe, and especially the organic life in it, can neither be
explained as a mere combination of absolute elements nor as the effect
of a constructing thought. Darwin concluded, as Kant, and before him
Spinoza, that the oppositions and distinctions which our experience
presents, cannot safely be regarded as valid for existence in itself.
And, with Kant and Fichte, he found his stronghold in the conviction
that man has something to do, even if he cannot solve all enigmas. "The
safest conclusion seems to me that the whole subject is beyond the scope
of man's intellect; but man can do his duty." (Ibid. page 307.)

Is this the last word of human thought? Does not the possibility,
that man can do his duty, suppose that the conditions of life allow of
continuous ethical striving, so that there is a certain harmony
between cosmic order and human ideals? Darwin himself has shown how
the consciousness of duty can arise as a natural result of evolution.
Moreover there are lines of evolution which have their end in ethical
idealism, in a kingdom of values, which must struggle for life as all
things in the world must do, but a kingdom which has its firm foundation
in reality.




XXIII. DARWINISM AND SOCIOLOGY. By C. Bougle.

Professor of Social Philosophy in the University of Toulouse and
Deputy-Professor at the Sorbonne, Paris.


How has our conception of social phenomena, and of their history,
been affected by Darwin's conception of Nature and the laws of its
transformations? To what extent and in what particular respects have
the discoveries and hypotheses of the author of "The Origin of Species"
aided the efforts of those who have sought to construct a science of
society?

To such a question it is certainly not easy to give any brief or precise
answer. We find traces of Darwinism almost everywhere. Sociological
systems differing widely from each other have laid claim to its
authority; while, on the other hand, its influence has often made itself
felt only in combination with other influences. The Darwinian thread is
worked into a hundred patterns along with other threads.

To deal with the problem, we must, it seems, first of all distinguish
the more general conclusions in regard to the evolution of living
beings, which are the outcome of Darwinism, from the particular
explanations it offers of the ways and means by which that evolution
is effected. That is to say, we must, as far as possible, estimate
separately the influence of Darwin as an evolutionist and Darwin as a
selectionist.

The nineteenth century, said Cournot, has witnessed a mighty effort to
"reintegrer l'homme dans la nature." From divers quarters there has been
a methodical reaction against the persistent dualism of the Cartesian
tradition, which was itself the unconscious heir of the Christian
tradition. Even the philosophy of the eighteenth century, materialistic
as were for the most part the tendencies of its leaders, seemed to
revere man as a being apart, concerning whom laws might be formulated a
priori. To bring him down from his pedestal there was needed the marked
predominance of positive researches wherein no account was taken of
the "pride of man." There can be no doubt that Darwin has done much to
familiarise us with this attitude. Take for instance the first part
of "The Descent of Man": it is an accumulation of typical facts, all
tending to diminish the distance between us and our brothers, the lower
animals. One might say that the naturalist had here taken as his motto,
"Whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased; and he that shall humble
himself shall be exalted." Homologous structures, the survival in man of
certain organs of animals, the rudiments in the animal of certain
human faculties, a multitude of facts of this sort, led Darwin to the
conclusion that there is no ground for supposing that the "king of the
universe" is exempt from universal laws. Thus belief in the imperium
in imperio has been, as it were, whittled away by the progress of the
naturalistic spirit, itself continually strengthened by the conquests of
the natural sciences. The tendency may, indeed, drag the social sciences
into overstrained analogies, such, for instance, as the assimilation
of societies to organisms. But it will, at least, have had the merit of
helping sociology to shake off the pre-conception that the groups formed
by men are artificial, and that history is completely at the mercy of
chance. Some years before the appearance of "The Origin of Species",
Auguste Comte had pointed out the importance, as regards the unification
of positive knowledge, of the conviction that the social world, the last
refuge of spiritualism, is itself subject to determininism. It cannot be
doubted that the movement of thought which Darwin's discoveries promoted
contributed to the spread of this conviction, by breaking down the
traditional barrier which cut man off from Nature.

But Nature, according to modern naturalists, is no immutable thing: it
is rather perpetual movement, continual progression. Their discoveries
batter a breach directly into the Aristotelian notion of species; they
refuse to see in the animal world a collection of immutable types,
distinct from all eternity, and corresponding, as Cuvier said, to so
many particular thoughts of the Creator. Darwin especially congratulated
himself upon having been able to deal this doctrine the coup de grace:
immutability is, he says, his chief enemy; and he is concerned to
show--therein following up Lyell's work--that everything in the organic
world, as in the inorganic, is explained by insensible but incessant
transformations. "Nature makes no leaps"--"Nature knows no gaps": these
two dicta form, as it were, the two landmarks between which Darwin's
idea of transformation is worked out. That is to say, the development of
Darwinism is calculated to further the application of the philosophy of
Becoming to the study of human institutions.

The progress of the natural sciences thus brings unexpected
reinforcements to the revolution which the progress of historical
discipline had begun. The first attempt to constitute an actual science
of social phenomena--that, namely, of the economists--had resulted in
laws which were called natural, and which were believed to be
eternal and universal, valid for all times and all places. But this
perpetuality, brother, as Knies said, of the immutability of the old
zoology, did not long hold out against the ever swelling tide of the
historical movement. Knowledge of the transformations that had taken
place in language, of the early phases of the family, of religion, of
property, had all favoured the revival of the Heraclitean view: panta
rei. As to the categories of political economy, it was soon to be
recognised, as by Lassalle, that they too are only historical. The
philosophy of history, moreover, gave expression under various forms to
the same tendency. Hegel declares that "all that is real is rational,"
but at the same time he shows that all that is real is ephemeral, and
that for history there is nothing fixed beneath the sun. It is this
sense of universal evolution that Darwin came with fresh authority
to enlarge. It was in the name of biological facts themselves that he
taught us to see only slow metamorphoses in the history of institutions,
and to be always on the outlook for survivals side by side with
rudimentary forms. Anyone who reads "Primitive Culture", by Tylor,--a
writer closely connected with Darwin--will be able to estimate the
services which these cardinal ideas were to render to the social
sciences when the age of comparative research had succeeded to that of a
priori construction.

Let us note, moreover, that the philosophy of Becoming in passing
through the Darwinian biology became, as it were, filtered: it got
rid of those traces of finalism, which, under different forms, it had
preserved through all the systems of German Romanticism. Even in Herbert
Spencer, it has been plausibly argued, one can detect something of that
sort of mystic confidence in forces spontaneously directing life, which
forms the very essence of those systems. But Darwin's observations
were precisely calculated to render such an hypothesis futile. At first
people may have failed to see this; and we call to mind the ponderous
sarcasms of Flourens when he objected to the theory of Natural Selection
that it attributed to nature a power of free choice. "Nature endowed
with will! That was the final error of last century; but the nineteenth
no longer deals in personifications." (P. Flourens, "Examen du Livre
de M. Darwin sur l'Origine des Especes", page 53, Paris, 1864. See also
Huxley, "Criticisms on the 'Origin of Species'", "Collected Essays",
Vol. II, page 102, London, 1902.) In fact Darwin himself put his
readers on their guard against the metaphors he was obliged to use. The
processes by which he explains the survival of the fittest are far from
affording any indication of the design of some transcendent breeder.
Nor, if we look closely, do they even imply immanent effort in the
animal; the sorting out can be brought about mechanically, simply by
the action of the environment. In this connection Huxley could with
good reason maintain that Darwin's originality consisted in showing
how harmonies which hitherto had been taken to imply the agency of
intelligence and will could be explained without any such intervention.
So, when later on, objective sociology declares that, even when
social phenomena are in question, all finalist preconceptions must be
distrusted if a science is to be constituted, it is to Darwin that its
thanks are due; he had long been clearing paths for it which lay
well away from the old familiar road trodden by so many theories of
evolution.

This anti-finalist doctrine, when fully worked out, was, moreover,
calculated to aid in the needful dissociation of two notions: that of
evolution and that of progress. In application to society these had long
been confounded; and, as a consequence, the general idea seemed to be
that only one type of evolution was here possible. Do we not detect
such a view in Comte's sociology, and perhaps even in Herbert Spencer's?
Whoever, indeed, assumes an end for evolution is naturally inclined to
think that only one road leads to that end. But those whose minds the
Darwinian theory has enlightened are aware that the transformations of
living beings depend primarily upon their conditions, and that it is
these conditions which are the agents of selection from among individual
variations. Hence, it immediately follows that transformations are not
necessarily improvements. Here, Darwin's thought hesitated. Logically
his theory proves, as Ray Lankester pointed out, that the struggle for
existence may have as its outcome degeneration as well as amelioration:
evolution may be regressive as well as progressive. Then, too--and this
is especially to be borne in mind--each species takes its good where
it finds it, seeks its own path and survives as best it can. Apply this
notion to society and you arrive at the theory of multilinear evolution.
Divergencies will no longer surprise you. You will be forewarned not to
apply to all civilisations the same measure of progress, and you will
recognise that types of evolution may differ just as social species
themselves differ. Have we not here one of the conceptions which mark
off sociology proper from the old philosophy of history?

But if we are to estimate the influence of Darwinism upon sociological
conceptions, we must not dwell only upon the way in which Darwin
impressed the general notion of evolution upon the minds of thinkers. We
must go into details. We must consider the influence of the particular
theories by which he explained the mechanism of this evolution. The name
of the author of "The Origin of Species" has been especially attached,
as everyone knows, to the doctrines of "natural selection" and of
"struggle for existence," completed by the notion of "individual
variation." These doctrines were turned to account by very different
schools of social philosophy. Pessimistic and optimistic, aristocratic
and democratic, individualistic and socialistic systems were to war
with each other for years by casting scraps of Darwinism at each other's
heads.

It was the spectacle of human contrivance that suggested to Darwin
his conception of natural selection. It was in studying the methods of
pigeon breeders that he divined the processes by which nature, in the
absence of design, obtains analogous results in the differentiation
of types. As soon as the importance of artificial selection in the
transformation of species of animals was understood, reflection
naturally turned to the human species, and the question arose, How far
do men observe, in connection with themselves, those laws of which they
make practical application in the case of animals? Here we come upon one
of the ideas which guided the researches of Galton, Darwin's cousin. The
author of "Inquiries into Human Faculty and its Development" ("Inquiries
into Human Faculty", pages 1, 2, 3 sq., London, 1883.), has often
expressed his surprise that, considering all the precautions taken,
for example, in the breeding of horses, none whatever are taken in the
breeding of the human species. It seems to be forgotten that the species
suffers when the "fittest" are not able to perpetuate their type.
Ritchie, in his "Darwinism and Politics" ("Darwinism and Politics" pages
9, 22, London, 1889.) reminds us of Darwin's remark that the institution
of the peerage might be defended on the ground that peers, owing to the
prestige they enjoy, are enabled to select as wives "the most beautiful
and charming women out of the lower ranks." ("Life and Letters of
Charles Darwin", II. page 385.) But, says Galton, it is as often as not
"heiresses" that they pick out, and birth statistics seem to show that
these are either less robust or less fecund than others. The truth is
that considerations continue to preside over marriage which are entirely
foreign to the improvement of type, much as this is a condition of
general progress. Hence the importance of completing Odin's and De
Candolle's statistics which are designed to show how characters are
incorporated in organisms, how they are transmitted, how lost, and
according to what law eugenic elements depart from the mean or return to
it.

But thinkers do not always content themselves with undertaking merely
the minute researches which the idea of Selection suggests. They are
eager to defend this or that thesis. In the name of this idea certain
social anthropologists have recast the conception of the process of
civilisation, and have affirmed that Social Selection generally works
against the trend of Natural Selection. Vacher de Lapouge--following
up an observation by Broca on the point--enumerates the various
institutions, or customs, such as the celibacy of priests and military
conscription, which cause elimination or sterilisation of the bearers of
certain superior qualities, intellectual or physical. In a more general
way he attacks the democratic movement, a movement, as P. Bourget says,
which is "anti-physical" and contrary to the natural laws of progress;
though it has been inspired "by the dreams of that most visionary of all
centuries, the eighteenth." (V. de Lapouge, "Les Selections sociales",
page 259, Paris, 1896.) The "Equality" which levels down and mixes
(justly condemned, he holds, by the Comte de Gobineau), prevents the
aristocracy of the blond dolichocephales from holding the position and
playing the part which, in the interests of all, should belong to them.
Otto Ammon, in his "Natural Selection in Man", and in "The Social Order
and its Natural Bases" ("Die naturliche Auslese beim Menschen", Jena,
1893; "Die Gesellschaftsordnung und ihre naturlichen Grundlagen".
"Entwurf einer Sozialanthropologie", Jena, 1896.), defended analogous
doctrines in Germany; setting the curve representing frequency of talent
over against that of income, he attempted to show that all democratic
measures which aim at promoting the rise in the social scale of the
talented are useless, if not dangerous; that they only increase the
panmixia, to the great detriment of the species and of society.

Among the aristocratic theories which Darwinism has thus inspired
we must reckon that of Nietzsche. It is well known that in order to
complete his philosophy he added biological studies to his philological;
and more than once in his remarks upon the "Wille zur Macht" he
definitely alludes to Darwin; though it must be confessed that it is
generally in order to proclaim the in sufficiency of the processes by
which Darwin seeks to explain the genesis of species. Nevertheless,
Nietzsche's mind is completely possessed by an ideal of Selection.
He, too, has a horror of panmixia. The naturalists' conception of "the
fittest" is joined by him to that of the "hero" of romance to furnish a
basis for his doctrine of the Superman. Let us hasten to add, moreover,
that at the very moment when support was being sought in the theory of
Selection for the various forms of the aristocratic doctrine, those same
forms were being battered down on another side by means of that very
theory. Attention was drawn to the fact that by virtue of the laws which
Darwin himself had discovered isolation leads to etiolation. There is
a risk that the privilege which withdraws the privileged elements of
Society from competition will cause them to degenerate. In fact, Jacoby
in his "Studies in Selection, in connexion with Heredity in Man",
("Etudes sur la Selection dans ses rapports avec l'heredite chez
l'homme", Paris, page 481, 1881.), concludes that "sterility, mental
debility, premature death and, finally, the extinction of the stock
were not specially and exclusively the fate of sovereign dynasties; all
privileged classes, all families in exclusively elevated positions share
the fate of reigning families, although in a minor degree and in direct
proportion to the loftiness of their social standing. From the mass of
human beings spring individuals, families, races, which tend to raise
themselves above the common level; painfully they climb the rugged
heights, attain the summits of power, of wealth, of intelligence, of
talent, and then, no sooner are they there than they topple down and
disappear in gulfs of mental and physical degeneracy." The demographical
researches of Hansen ("Die drei Bevolkerungsstufen", Munich, 1889.)
(following up and completing Dumont's) tended, indeed, to show that
urban as well as feudal aristocracies, burgher classes as well as noble
castes, were liable to become effete. Hence it might well be concluded
that the democratic movement, operating as it does to break down class
barriers, was promoting instead of impeding human selection.

So we see that, according to the point of view, very different
conclusions have been drawn from the application of the Darwinian idea
of Selection to human society. Darwin's other central idea, closely
bound up with this, that, namely, of the "struggle for existence" also
has been diversely utilised. But discussion has chiefly centered upon
its signification. And while some endeavour to extend its application to
everything, we find others trying to limit its range. The conception of
a "struggle for existence" has in the present day been taken up into
the social sciences from natural science, and adopted. But originally it
descended from social science to natural. Darwin's law is, as he himself
said, only Malthus' law generalised and extended to the animal world: a
growing disproportion between the supply of food and the number of
the living is the fatal order whence arises the necessity of universal
struggle, a struggle which, to the great advantage of the species,
allows only the best equipped individuals to survive. Nature is regarded
by Huxley as an immense arena where all living beings are gladiators.
("Evolution and Ethics", page 200; "Collected Essays", Vol. IX, London,
1894.)

Such a generalisation was well adapted to feed the stream of pessimistic
thought; and it furnished to the apologists of war, in particular, new
arguments, weighted with all the authority which in these days attaches
to scientific deliverances. If people no longer say, as Bonald did, and
Moltke after him, that war is a providential fact, they yet lay stress
on the point that it is a natural fact. To the peace party Dragomirov's
objection is urged that its attempts are contrary to the fundamental
laws of nature, and that no sea wall can hold against breakers that come
with such gathered force.

But in yet another quarter Darwinism was represented as opposed to
philanthropic intervention. The defenders of the orthodox political
economy found in it support for their tenets. Since in the organic world
universal struggle is the condition of progress, it seemed obvious that
free competition must be allowed to reign unchecked in the economic
world. Attempts to curb it were in the highest degree imprudent. The
spirit of Liberalism here seemed in conformity with the trend of nature:
in this respect, at least, contemporary naturalism, offspring of the
discoveries of the nineteenth century, brought reinforcements to the
individualist doctrine, begotten of the speculations of the eighteenth:
but only, it appeared, to turn mankind away for ever from humanitarian
dreams. Would those whom such conclusions repelled be content to oppose
to nature's imperatives only the protests of the heart? There were some
who declared, like Brunetiere, that the laws in question, valid though
they might be for the animal kingdom, were not applicable to the human.
And so a return was made to the classic dualism. This indeed seems to be
the line that Huxley took, when, for instance, he opposed to the cosmic
process an ethical process which was its reverse.

But the number of thinkers whom this antithesis does not satisfy grows
daily. Although the pessimism which claims authorisation from Darwin's
doctrines is repugnant to them, they still are unable to accept the
dualism which leaves a gulf between man and nature. And their endeavour
is to link the two by showing that while Darwin's laws obtain in both
kingdoms, the conditions of their application are not the same: their
forms, and, consequently, their results, vary with the varying mediums
in which the struggle of living beings takes place, with the means
these beings have at disposal, with the ends even which they propose to
themselves.

Here we have the explanation of the fact that among determined opponents
of war partisans of the "struggle for existence" can be found: there are
disciples of Darwin in the peace party. Novicow, for example, admits
the "combat universel" of which Le Dantec ("Les Luttes entre Societies
humaines et leurs phases successives", Paris, 1893,) speaks; but he
remarks that at different stages of evolution, at different stages of
life the same weapons are not necessarily employed. Struggles of brute
force, armed hand to hand conflicts, may have been a necessity in the
early phases of human societies. Nowadays, although competition may
remain inevitable and indispensable, it can assume milder forms.
Economic rivalries, struggles between intellectual influences, suffice
to stimulate progress: the processes which these admit are, in the
actual state of civilisation, the only ones which attain their end
without waste, the only ones logical. From one end to the other of the
ladder of life, struggle is the order of the day; but more and more
as the higher rungs are reached, it takes on characters which are
proportionately more "humane."

Reflections of this kind permit the introduction into the economic order
of limitations to the doctrine of "laisser faire, laisser passer." This
appeals, it is said, to the example of nature where creatures, left to
themselves, struggle without truce and without mercy; but the fact
is forgotten that upon industrial battlefields the conditions are
different. The competitors here are not left simply to their natural
energies: they are variously handicapped. A rich store of artificial
resources exists in which some participate and others do not. The sides
then are unequal; and as a consequence the result of the struggle is
falsified. "In the animal world," said De Laveleye ("Le socialisme
contemporain", page 384 (6th edition), Paris, 1891.), criticising
Spencer, "the fate of each creature is determined by its individual
qualities; whereas in civilised societies a man may obtain the highest
position and the most beautiful wife because he is rich and well-born,
although he may be ugly, idle or improvident; and then it is he who will
perpetuate the species. The wealthy man, ill constituted, incapable,
sickly, enjoys his riches and establishes his stock under the protection
of the laws." Haycraft in England and Jentsch in Germany have strongly
emphasised these "anomalies," which nevertheless are the rule. That is
to say that even from a Darwinian point of view all social reforms
can readily be justified which aim at diminishing, as Wallace said,
inequalities at the start.

But we can go further still. Whence comes the idea that all measures
inspired by the sentiment of solidarity are contrary to Nature's
trend? Observe her carefully, and she will not give lessons only in
individualism. Side by side with the struggle for existence do we not
find in operation what Lanessan calls "association for existence." Long
ago, Espinas had drawn attention to "societies of animals," temporary or
permanent, and to the kind of morality that arose in them. Since then,
naturalists have often insisted upon the importance of various forms
of symbiosis. Kropotkin in "Mutual Aid" has chosen to enumerate many
examples of altruism furnished by animals to mankind. Geddes and Thomson
went so far as to maintain that "Each of the greater steps of progress
is in fact associated with an increased measure of subordination
of individual competition to reproductive or social ends, and of
interspecific competition to co-operative association." (Geddes and
Thomson, "The Evolution of Sex", page 311, London, 1889.) Experience
shows, according to Geddes, that the types which are fittest to surmount
great obstacles are not so much those who engage in the fiercest
competitive struggle for existence, as those who contrive to temper it.
From all these observations there resulted, along with a limitation
of Darwinian pessimism, some encouragement for the aspirations of the
collectivists.

And Darwin himself would, doubtless, have subscribed to these
rectifications. He never insisted, like his rival, Wallace, upon the
necessity of the solitary struggle of creatures in a state of nature,
each for himself and against all. On the contrary, in "The Descent of
Man", he pointed out the serviceableness of the social instincts, and
corroborated Bagehot's statements when the latter, applying laws of
physics to politics, showed the great advantage societies derived from
intercourse and communion. Again, the theory of sexual evolution which
makes the evolution of types depend increasingly upon preferences,
judgments, mental factors, surely offers something to qualify what seems
hard and brutal in the theory of natural selection.

But, as often happens with disciples, the Darwinians had out-Darwined
Darwin. The extravagancies of social Darwinism provoked a useful
reaction; and thus people were led to seek, even in the animal kingdom,
for facts of solidarity which would serve to justify humane effort.

On quite another line, however, an attempt has been made to connect
socialist tendencies with Darwinian principles. Marx and Darwin have
been confronted; and writers have undertaken to show that the work of
the German philosopher fell readily into line with that of the English
naturalist and was a development of it. Such has been the endeavour of
Ferri in Italy and of Woltmann in Germany, not to mention others. The
founders of "scientific socialism" had, moreover, themselves thought of
this reconciliation. They make more than one allusion to Darwin in works
which appeared after 1859. And sometimes they use his theory to define
by contrast their own ideal. They remark that the capitalist system, by
giving free course to individual competition, ends indeed in a bellum
omnium contra omnes; and they make it clear that Darwinism, thus
understood, is as repugnant to them as to Duhring.

But it is at the scientific and not at the moral point of view that they
place themselves when they connect their economic history with
Darwin's work. Thanks to this unifying hypothesis, they claim to have
constructed--as Marx does in his preface to "Das Kapital"--a veritable
natural history of social evolution. Engels speaks in praise of his
friend Marx as having discovered the true mainspring of history hidden
under the veil of idealism and sentimentalism, and as having proclaimed
in the primum vivere the inevitableness of the struggle for existence.
Marx himself, in "Das Kapital", indicated another analogy when he dwelt
upon the importance of a general technology for the explanation of this
psychology:--a history of tools which would be to social organs what
Darwinism is to the organs of animal species. And the very importance
they attach to tools, to apparatus, to machines, abundantly proves that
neither Marx nor Engels were likely to forget the special characters
which mark off the human world from the animal. The former always
remains to a great extent an artificial world. Inventions change the
face of its institutions. New modes of production revolutionise not only
modes of government, but modes even of collective thought. Therefore it
is that the evolution of society is controlled by laws special to it, of
which the spectacle of nature offers no suggestion.

If, however, even in this special sphere, it can still be urged that
the evolution of the material conditions of society is in accord
with Darwin's theory, it is because the influence of the methods of
production is itself to be explained by the incessant strife of the
various classes with each other. So that in the end Marx, like Darwin,
finds the source of all progress in struggle. Both are grandsons of
Heraclitus:--polemos pater panton. It sometimes happens, in these days,
that the doctrine of revolutionary socialism is contrasted as rude and
healthy with what may seem to be the enervating tendency of "solidarist"
philanthropy: the apologists of the doctrine then pride themselves above
all upon their faithfulness to Darwinian principles.

So far we have been mainly concerned to show the use that social
philosophies have made of the Darwinian laws for practical purposes:
in order to orientate society towards their ideals each school tries to
show that the authority of natural science is on its side. But even
in the most objective of theories, those which systematically make
abstraction of all political tendencies in order to study the social
reality in itself, traces of Darwinism are readily to be found.

Let us take for example Durkheim's theory of Division of Labour ("De la
Division du Travail social", Paris, 1893.) The conclusions he
derives from it are that whenever professional specialisation causes
multiplication of distinct branches of activity, we get organic
solidarity--implying differences--substituted for mechanical solidarity,
based upon likenesses. The umbilical cord, as Marx said, which connects
the individual consciousness with the collective consciousness is cut.
The personality becomes more and more emancipated. But on what does this
phenomenon, so big with consequences, itself depend? The author goes to
social morphology for the answer: it is, he says, the growing density
of population which brings with it this increasing differentiation of
activities. But, again, why? Because the greater density, in thrusting
men up against each other, augments the intensity of their competition
for the means of existence; and for the problems which society thus has
to face differentiation of functions presents itself as the gentlest
solution.

Here one sees that the writer borrows directly from Darwin. Competition
is at its maximum between similars, Darwin had declared; different
species, not laying claim to the same food, could more easily coexist.
Here lay the explanation of the fact that upon the same oak hundreds
of different insects might be found. Other things being equal, the same
applies to society. He who finds some unadopted speciality possesses a
means of his own for getting a living. It is by this division of their
manifold tasks that men contrive not to crush each other. Here
we obviously have a Darwinian law serving as intermediary in the
explanation of that progress of division of labour which itself explains
so much in the social evolution.

And we might take another example, at the other end of the series of
sociological systems. G. Tarde is a sociologist with the most pronounced
anti-naturalistic views. He has attempted to show that all application
of the laws of natural science to society is misleading. In his
"Opposition Universelle" he has directly combatted all forms of
sociological Darwinism. According to him the idea that the evolution of
society can be traced on the same plan as the evolution of species is
chimerical. Social evolution is at the mercy of all kinds of inventions,
which by virtue of the laws of imitation modify, through individual to
individual, through neighbourhood to neighbourhood, the general state
of those beliefs and desires which are the only "quantities" whose
variation matters to the sociologist. But, it may be rejoined, that
however psychical the forces may be, they are none the less subject
to Darwinian laws. They compete with each other; they struggle for the
mastery of minds. Between types of ideas, as between organic forms,
selection operates. And though it may be that these types are ushered
into the arena by unexpected discoveries, we yet recognise in the
psychological accidents, which Tarde places at the base of everything,
near relatives of those small accidental variations upon which Darwin
builds. Thus, accepting Tarde's own representations, it is
quite possible to express in Darwinian terms, with the necessary
transpositions, one of the most idealistic sociologies that have ever
been constructed.

These few examples suffice. They enable us to estimate the extent of the
field of influence of Darwinism. It affects sociology not only through
the agency of its advocates but through that of its opponents. The
questionings to which it has given rise have proved no less fruitful
than the solutions it has suggested. In short, few doctrines, in the
history of social philosophy, will have produced on their passage a
finer outcrop of ideas.




XXIV. THE INFLUENCE OF DARWIN UPON RELIGIOUS THOUGHT. By P.N. Waggett,
M.A., S.S.J.E.


I.

The object of this paper is first to point out certain elements of the
Darwinian influence upon Religious thought, and then to show reason
for the conclusion that it has been, from a Christian point of view,
satisfactory. I shall not proceed further to urge that the Christian
apologetic in relation to biology has been successful. A variety of
opinions may be held on this question, without disturbing the conclusion
that the movements of readjustment have been beneficial to those who
remain Christians, and this by making them more Christian and not only
more liberal. The theologians may sometimes have retreated, but there
has been an advance of theology. I know that this account incurs
the charge of optimism. It is not the worst that could be made. The
influence has been limited in personal range, unequal, even divergent,
in operation, and accompanied by the appearance of waste and mischievous
products. The estimate which follows requires for due balance a full
development of many qualifying considerations. For this I lack space,
but I must at least distinguish my view from the popular one that our
difficulties about religion and natural science have come to an end.

Concerning the older questions about origins--the origin of the world,
of species, of man, of reason, conscience, religion--a large measure of
understanding has been reached by some thoughtful men. But meanwhile
new questions have arisen, questions about conduct, regarding both
the reality of morals and the rule of right action for individuals and
societies. And these problems, still far from solution, may also be
traced to the influence of Darwin. For they arise from the renewed
attention to heredity, brought about by the search for the causes of
variation, without which the study of the selection of variations has no
sufficient basis.

Even the existing understanding about origins is very far from
universal. On these points there were always thoughtful men who denied
the necessity of conflict, and there are still thoughtful men who deny
the possibility of a truce.

It must further be remembered that the earlier discussion now, as I hope
to show, producing favourable results, created also for a time grave
damage, not only in the disturbance of faith and the loss of men--a
loss not repaired by a change in the currents of debate--but in what I
believe to be a still more serious respect. I mean the introduction of
a habit of facile and untested hypothesis in religious as in other
departments of thought.

Darwin is not responsible for this, but he is in part the cause of
it. Great ideas are dangerous guests in narrow minds; and thus it has
happened that Darwin--the most patient of scientific workers, in whom
hypothesis waited upon research, or if it provisionally outstepped it
did so only with the most scrupulously careful acknowledgment--has led
smaller and less conscientious men in natural science, in history, and
in theology to an over-eager confidence in probable conjecture and a
loose grip upon the facts of experience. It is not too much to say that
in many quarters the age of materialism was the least matter-of-fact age
conceivable, and the age of science the age which showed least of the
patient temper of inquiry.

I have indicated, as shortly as I could, some losses and dangers which
in a balanced account of Darwin's influence would be discussed at
length.

One other loss must be mentioned. It is a defect in our thought which,
in some quarters, has by itself almost cancelled all the advantages
secured. I mean the exaggerated emphasis on uniformity or continuity;
the unwillingness to rest any part of faith or of our practical
expectation upon anything that from any point of view can be called
exceptional. The high degree of success reached by naturalists in
tracing, or reasonably conjecturing, the small beginnings of great
differences, has led the inconsiderate to believe that anything may in
time become anything else.

It is true that this exaggeration of the belief in uniformity has
produced in turn its own perilous reaction. From refusing to believe
whatever can be called exceptional, some have come to believe whatever
can be called wonderful.

But, on the whole, the discontinuous or highly various character of
experience received for many years too little deliberate attention. The
conception of uniformity which is a necessity of scientific description
has been taken for the substance of history. We have accepted a
postulate of scientific method as if it were a conclusion of scientific
demonstration. In the name of a generalisation which, however just on
the lines of a particular method, is the prize of a difficult exploit of
reflexion, we have discarded the direct impressions of experience;
or, perhaps it is more true to say, we have used for the criticism of
alleged experiences a doctrine of uniformity which is only valid in the
region of abstract science. For every science depends for its advance
upon limitation of attention, upon the selection out of the whole
content of consciousness of that part or aspect which is measurable by
the method of the science. Accordingly there is a science of life which
rightly displays the unity underlying all its manifestations. But there
is another view of life, equally valid, and practically sometimes more
important, which recognises the immediate and lasting effect of
crisis, difference, and revolution. Our ardour for the demonstration
of uniformity of process and of minute continuous change needs to be
balanced by a recognition of the catastrophic element in experience, and
also by a recognition of the exceptional significance for us of events
which may be perfectly regular from an impersonal point of view.

An exorbitant jealousy of miracle, revelation, and ultimate moral
distinctions has been imported from evolutionary science into religious
thought. And it has been a damaging influence, because it has taken
men's attention from facts, and fixed them upon theories.

II.

With this acknowledgment of important drawbacks, requiring many words
for their proper description, I proceed to indicate certain results
of Darwin's doctrine which I believe to be in the long run wholly
beneficial to Christian thought. These are:

The encouragement in theology of that evolutionary method of observation
and study, which has shaped all modern research:

The recoil of Christian apologetics towards the ground of religious
experience, a recoil produced by the pressure of scientific criticism
upon other supports of faith:

The restatement, or the recovery of ancient forms of statement, of the
doctrines of Creation and of divine Design in Nature, consequent upon
the discussion of evolution and of natural selection as its guiding
factor.

(1) The first of these is quite possibly the most important of all.
It was well defined in a notable paper read by Dr Gore, now Bishop of
Birmingham, to the Church Congress at Shrewsbury in 1896. We have learnt
a new caution both in ascribing and in denying significance to items of
evidence, in utterance or in event. There has been, as in art, a study
of values, which secures perspective and solidity in our representation
of facts. On the one hand, a given utterance or event cannot be drawn
into evidence as if all items were of equal consequence, like sovereigns
in a bag. The question whence and whither must be asked, and the
particular thing measured as part of a series. Thus measured it is not
less truly important, but it may be important in a lower degree. On the
other hand, and for exactly the same reason, nothing that is real is
unimportant. The "failures" are not mere mistakes. We see them, in St
Augustine's words, as "scholar's faults which men praise in hope of
fruit."

We cannot safely trace the origin of the evolutionistic method to the
influence of natural science. The view is tenable that theology led the
way. Probably this is a case of alternate and reciprocal debt. Quite
certainly the evolutionist method in theology, in Christian history,
and in the estimate of scripture, has received vast reinforcement
from biology, in which evolution has been the ever present and ever
victorious conception.

(2) The second effect named is the new willingness of Christian thinkers
to take definite account of religious experience. This is related to
Darwin through the general pressure upon religious faith of scientific
criticism. The great advance of our knowledge of organisms has been an
important element in the general advance of science. It has acted,
by the varied requirements of the theory of organisms, upon all other
branches of natural inquiry, and it held for a long time that leading
place in public attention which is now occupied by speculative physics.
Consequently it contributed largely to our present estimation of science
as the supreme judge in all matters of inquiry (F.R. Tennant: "The Being
of God in the light of Physical Science", in "Essays on some theological
questions of the day". London, 1905.), to the supposed destruction of
mystery and the disparagement of metaphysic which marked the last age,
as well as to the just recommendation of scientific method in branches
of learning where the direct acquisitions of natural science had no
place.

Besides this, the new application of the idea of law and mechanical
regularity to the organic world seemed to rob faith of a kind of refuge.
The romantics had, as Berthelot ("Evolutionisme et Platonisme", pages
45, 46, 47. Paris, 1908.) shows, appealed to life to redress the
judgments drawn from mechanism. Now, in Spencer, evolution gave us a
vitalist mechanic or mechanical vitalism, and the appeal seemed cut off.
We may return to this point later when we consider evolution; at
present I only endeavour to indicate that general pressure of scientific
criticism which drove men of faith to seek the grounds of reassurance
in a science of their own; in a method of experiment, of observation,
of hypothesis checked by known facts. It is impossible for me to do more
than glance across the threshold of this subject. But it is necessary to
say that the method is in an elementary stage of revival. The imposing
success that belongs to natural science is absent: we fall short of
the unchallengeable unanimity of the Biologists on fundamentals. The
experimental method with its sure repetitions cannot be applied to our
subject-matter. But we have something like the observational method of
palaeontology and geographical distribution; and in biology there are
still men who think that the large examination of varieties by way
of geography and the search of strata is as truly scientific, uses as
genuinely the logical method of difference, and is as fruitful in sure
conclusions as the quasi-chemical analysis of Mendelian laboratory work,
of which last I desire to express my humble admiration. Religion also
has its observational work in the larger and possibly more arduous
manner.

But the scientific work in religion makes its way through difficulties
and dangers. We are far from having found the formula of its combination
with the historical elements of our apologetic. It is exposed,
therefore, to a damaging fire not only from unspiritualist psychology
and pathology but also from the side of scholastic dogma. It is hard to
admit on equal terms a partner to the old undivided rule of books and
learning. With Charles Lamb, we cry in some distress, "must knowledge
come to me, if it come at all, by some awkward experiment of intuition,
and no longer by this familiar process of reading?" ("Essays of Elia",
"New Year's Eve", page 41; Ainger's edition. London, 1899.) and we are
answered that the old process has an imperishable value, only we have
not yet made clear its connection with other contributions. And all
the work is young, liable to be drawn into unprofitable excursions,
side-tracked by self-deceit and pretence; and it fatally attracts, like
the older mysticism, the curiosity and the expository powers of those
least in sympathy with it, ready writers who, with all the air of
extended research, have been content with narrow grounds for induction.
There is a danger, besides, which accompanies even the most genuine
work of this science and must be provided against by all its serious
students. I mean the danger of unbalanced introspection both for
individuals and for societies; of a preoccupation comparable to our
modern social preoccupation with bodily health; of reflection upon
mental states not accompanied by exercise and growth of the mental
powers; the danger of contemplating will and neglecting work, of
analysing conviction and not criticising evidence.

Still, in spite of dangers and mistakes, the work remains full of
hopeful indications, and, in the best examples (Such an example is given
in Baron F. von Hugel's recently finished book, the result of thirty
years' research: "The Mystical Element of Religion, as studied in
Saint Catherine of Genoa and her Friends". London, 1908.), it is truly
scientific in its determination to know the very truth, to tell what
we think, not what we think we ought to think. (G. Tyrrell, in
"Mediaevalism", has a chapter which is full of the important MORAL
element in a scientific attitude. "The only infallible guardian of truth
is the spirit of truthfulness." "Mediaevalism" page 182, London, 1908.),
truly scientific in its employment of hypothesis and verification, and
in growing conviction of the reality of its subject-matter through the
repeated victories of a mastery which advances, like science, in the
Baconian road of obedience. It is reasonable to hope that progress in
this respect will be more rapid and sure when religious study enlists
more men affected by scientific desire and endowed with scientific
capacity.

The class of investigating minds is a small one, possibly even smaller
than that of reflecting minds. Very few persons at any period are able
to find out anything whatever. There are few observers, few discoverers,
few who even wish to discover truth. In how many societies the problems
of philology which face every person who speaks English are left
unattempted! And if the inquiring or the successfully inquiring class
of minds is small, much smaller, of course, is the class of those
possessing the scientific aptitude in an eminent degree. During the last
age this most distinguished class was to a very great extent absorbed
in the study of phenomena, a study which had fallen into arrears. For
we stood possessed, in rudiment, of means of observation, means for
travelling and acquisition, qualifying men for a larger knowledge than
had yet been attempted. These were now to be directed with new accuracy
and ardour upon the fabric and behaviour of the world of sense. Our
debt to the great masters in physical science who overtook and almost
out-stripped the task cannot be measured; and, under the honourable
leadership of Ruskin, we may all well do penance if we have failed "in
the respect due to their great powers of thought, or in the admiration
due to the far scope of their discovery." ("Queen of the Air", Preface,
page vii. London, 1906.) With what miraculous mental energy and divine
good fortune--as Romans said of their soldiers--did our men of curiosity
face the apparently impenetrable mysteries of nature! And how natural
it was that immense accessions of knowledge, unrelated to the spiritual
facts of life, should discredit Christian faith, by the apparent
superiority of the new work to the feeble and unprogressive knowledge of
Christian believers! The day is coming when men of this mental character
and rank, of this curiosity, this energy and this good fortune in
investigation, will be employed in opening mysteries of a spiritual
nature. They will silence with masterful witness the over-confident
denials of naturalism. They will be in danger of the widespread
recognition which thirty years ago accompanied every utterance of
Huxley, Tyndall, Spencer. They will contribute, in spite of adulation,
to the advance of sober religious and moral science.

And this result will be due to Darwin, first because by raising the
dignity of natural science, he encouraged the development of the
scientific mind; secondly because he gave to religious students the
example of patient and ardent investigation; and thirdly because by the
pressure of naturalistic criticism the religious have been driven to
ascertain the causes of their own convictions, a work in which they were
not without the sympathy of men of science. (The scientific rank of its
writer justifies the insertion of the following letter from the late Sir
John Burdon-Sanderson to me. In the lecture referred to I had described
the methods of Professor Moseley in teaching Biology as affording a
suggestion of the scientific treatment of religion.)

Oxford, April 30, 1902.

Dear Sir,

I feel that I must express to you my thanks for the discourse which I
had the pleasure of listening to yesterday afternoon.

I do not mean to say that I was able to follow all that you said as to
the identity of Method in the two fields of Science and Religion, but I
recognise that the "mysticism" of which you spoke gives us the only way
by which the two fields can be brought into relation.

Among much that was memorable, nothing interested me more than what you
said of Moseley.

No one, I am sure, knew better than you the value of his teaching and in
what that value consisted.

Yours faithfully

J. Burdon-Sanderson. 31-2.)

In leaving the subject of scientific religious inquiry, I will only add
that I do not believe it receives any important help--and certainly
it suffers incidentally much damaging interruption--from the study of
abnormal manifestations or abnormal conditions of personality.

(3) Both of the above effects seem to me of high, perhaps the very
highest, importance to faith and to thought. But, under the third head,
I name two which are more directly traceable to the personal work of
Darwin, and more definitely characteristic of the age in which his
influence was paramount: viz. the influence of the two conceptions of
evolution and natural selection upon the doctrine of creation and of
design respectively.

It is impossible here, though it is necessary for a complete sketch of
the matter, to distinguish the different elements and channels of this
Darwinian influence; in Darwin's own writings, in the vigorous polemic
of Huxley, and strangely enough, but very actually for popular thought,
in the teaching of the definitely anti-Darwinian evolutionist Spencer.

Under the head of the directly and purely Darwinian elements I should
class as preeminent the work of Wallace and of Bates; for no two sets
of facts have done more to fix in ordinary intelligent minds a belief
in organic evolution and in natural selection as its guiding factor
than the facts of geographical distribution and of protective colour and
mimicry. The facts of geology were difficult to grasp and the public and
theologians heard more often of the imperfection than of the extent of
the geological record. The witness of embryology, depending to a great
extent upon microscopic work, was and is beyond the appreciation of
persons occupied in fields of work other than biology.

III.

From the influence in religion of scientific modes of thought we pass
to the influence of particular biological conceptions. The former effect
comes by way of analogy, example, encouragement and challenge; inspiring
or provoking kindred or similar modes of thought in the field of
theology; the latter by a collision of opinions upon matters of fact or
conjecture which seem to concern both science and religion.

In the case of Darwinism the story of this collision is familiar, and
falls under the heads of evolution and natural selection, the doctrine
of descent with modification, and the doctrine of its guidance or
determination by the struggle for existence between related varieties.
These doctrines, though associated and interdependent, and in popular
thought not only combined but confused, must be considered separately.
It is true that the ancient doctrine of Evolution, in spite of the
ingenuity and ardour of Lamarck, remained a dream tantalising the
intellectual ambition of naturalists, until the day when Darwin made it
conceivable by suggesting the machinery of its guidance. And, further,
the idea of natural selection has so effectively opened the door of
research and stimulated observation in a score of principal directions
that, even if the Darwinian explanation became one day much less
convincing than, in spite of recent criticism, it now is, yet its
passing, supposing it to pass, would leave the doctrine of Evolution
immeasurably and permanently strengthened. For in the interests of the
theory of selection, "Fur Darwin," as Muller wrote, facts have been
collected which remain in any case evidence of the reality of descent
with modification.

But still, though thus united in the modern history of convictions,
though united and confused in the collision of biological and
traditional opinion, yet evolution and natural selection must be
separated in theological no less than in biological estimation.
Evolution seemed inconsistent with Creation; natural selection with
Providence and Divine design.

Discussion was maintained about these points for many years and with
much dark heat. It ranged over many particular topics and engaged minds
different in tone, in quality, and in accomplishment. There was at
most times a degree of misconception. Some naturalists attributed to
theologians in general a poverty of thought which belonged really to
men of a particular temper or training. The "timid theism" discerned in
Darwin by so cautious a theologian as Liddon (H.P. Liddon, "The Recovery
of S. Thomas"; a sermon preached in St Paul's, London, on April 23rd,
1882 (the Sunday after Darwin's death).) was supposed by many biologists
to be the necessary foundation of an honest Christianity. It was really
more characteristic of devout NATURALISTS like Philip Henry Gosse,
than of religious believers as such. (Dr Pusey ("Unscience not Science
adverse to Faith" 1878) writes: "The questions as to 'species,' of what
variations the animal world is capable, whether the species be more or
fewer, whether accidental variations may become hereditary... and
the like, naturally fall under the province of science. In all these
questions Mr Darwin's careful observations gained for him a deserved
approbation and confidence.") The study of theologians more considerable
and even more typically conservative than Liddon does not confirm the
description of religious intolerance given in good faith, but in serious
ignorance, by a disputant so acute, so observant and so candid as
Huxley. Something hid from each other's knowledge the devoted pilgrims
in two great ways of thought. The truth may be, that naturalists took
their view of what creation was from Christian men of science who
naturally looked in their own special studies for the supports and
illustrations of their religious belief. Of almost every laborious
student it may be said "Hic ab arte sua non recessit." And both the
believing and the denying naturalists, confining habitual attention to a
part of experience, are apt to affirm and deny with trenchant vigour
and something of a narrow clearness "Qui respiciunt ad pauca, de facili
pronunciant." (Aristotle, in Bacon, quoted by Newman in his "Idea of a
University", page 78. London, 1873.)

Newman says of some secular teachers that "they persuade the world of
what is false by urging upon it what is true." Of some early opponents
of Darwin it might be said by a candid friend that, in all sincerity of
devotion to truth, they tried to persuade the world of what is true
by urging upon it what is false. If naturalists took their version
of orthodoxy from amateurs in theology, some conservative Christians,
instead of learning what evolution meant to its regular exponents,
took their view of it from celebrated persons, not of the front rank in
theology or in thought, but eager to take account of public movements
and able to arrest public attention.

Cleverness and eloquence on both sides certainly had their share in
producing the very great and general disturbance of men's minds in the
early days of Darwinian teaching. But by far the greater part of that
disturbance was due to the practical novelty and the profound importance
of the teaching itself, and to the fact that the controversy about
evolution quickly became much more public than any controversy of equal
seriousness had been for many generations.

We must not think lightly of that great disturbance because it has, in
some real sense, done its work, and because it is impossible in days
of more coolness and light, to recover a full sense of its very real
difficulties.

Those who would know them better should add to the calm records of
Darwin ("Life and Letters" and "More Letters of Charles Darwin".) and to
the story of Huxley's impassioned championship, all that they can learn
of George Romanes. ("Life and Letters", London, 1896. "Thoughts on
Religion", London, 1895. "Candid Examination of Theism", London, 1878.)
For his life was absorbed in this very struggle and reproduced
its stages. It began in a certain assured simplicity of biblical
interpretation; it went on, through the glories and adventures of a
paladin in Darwin's train, to the darkness and dismay of a man who saw
all his most cherished beliefs rendered, as he thought, incredible.
("Never in the history of man has so terrific a calamity befallen the
race as that which all who look may now (viz. in consequence of the
scientific victory of Darwin) behold advancing as a deluge, black with
destruction, resistless in might, uprooting our most cherished hopes,
engulphing our most precious creed, and burying our highest life in
mindless destruction."--"A Candid Examination of Theism", page 51.)
He lived to find the freer faith for which process and purpose are
not irreconcilable, but necessary to one another. His development,
scientific, intellectual and moral, was itself of high significance; and
its record is of unique value to our own generation, so near the age of
that doubt and yet so far from it; certainly still much in need of
the caution and courage by which past endurance prepares men for
new emergencies. We have little enough reason to be sure that in the
discussions awaiting us we shall do as well as our predecessors in
theirs. Remembering their endurance of mental pain, their ardour
in mental labour, the heroic temper and the high sincerity of
controversialists on either side, we may well speak of our fathers in
such words of modesty and self-judgment as Drayton used when he sang the
victors of Agincourt. The progress of biblical study, in the departments
of Introduction and Exegesis, resulting in the recovery of a point
of view anciently tolerated if not prevalent, has altered some of the
conditions of that discussion. In the years near 1858, the witness of
Scripture was adduced both by Christian advocates and their critics as
if unmistakeably irreconcilable with Evolution.

Huxley ("Science and Christian Tradition". London, 1904.) found the path
of the blameless naturalist everywhere blocked by "Moses": the believer
in revelation was generally held to be forced to a choice between
revealed cosmogony and the scientific account of origins. It is not
clear how far the change in Biblical interpretation is due to natural
science, and how far to the vital movements of theological study which
have been quite independent of the controversy about species. It belongs
to a general renewal of Christian movement, the recovery of a heritage.
"Special Creation"--really a biological rather than a theological
conception,--seems in its rigid form to have been a recent element even
in English biblical orthodoxy.

The Middle Ages had no suspicion that religious faith forbad
inquiry into the natural origination of the different forms of life.
Bartholomaeus Anglicus, an English Franciscan of the thirteenth century,
was a mutationist in his way, as Aristotle, "the Philosopher" of
the Christian Schoolmen, had been in his. So late as the seventeenth
century, as we learn not only from early proceedings of the Royal
Society, but from a writer so homely and so regularly pious as
Walton, the variation of species and "spontaneous" generations had no
theological bearing, except as instances of that various wonder of the
world which in devout minds is food for devotion.

It was in the eighteenth century that the harder statement took shape.
Something in the preciseness of that age, its exaltation of law, its
cold passion for a stable and measured universe, its cold denial, its
cold affirmation of the power of God, a God of ice, is the occasion of
that rigidity of religious thought about the living world which Darwin
by accident challenged, or rather by one of those movements of genius
which, Goethe ("No productiveness of the highest kind... is in the power
of anyone."--"Conversations of Goethe with Eckermann and Soret". London,
1850.) declares, are "elevated above all earthly control."

If religious thought in the eighteenth century was aimed at a fixed and
nearly finite world of spirit, it followed in all these respects the
secular and critical lead. ("La philosophie reformatrice du XVIIIe
siecle" (Berthelot, "Evolutionisme et Platonisme", Paris, 1908, page
45.) ramenait la nature et la societe a des mecanismes que la pensee
reflechie peut concevoir et recomposer." In fact, religion in a
mechanical age is condemned if it takes any but a mechanical tone.
Butler's thought was too moving, too vital, too evolutionary, for the
sceptics of his time. In a rationalist, encyclopaedic period, religion
also must give hard outline to its facts, it must be able to display
its secret to any sensible man in the language used by all sensible men.
Milton's prophetic genius furnished the eighteenth century, out of the
depth of the passionate age before it, with the theological tone it was
to need. In spite of the austere magnificence of his devotion, he gives
to smaller souls a dangerous lead. The rigidity of Scripture exegesis
belonged to this stately but imperfectly sensitive mode of thought. It
passed away with the influence of the older rationalists whose precise
denials matched the precise and limited affirmations of the static
orthodoxy.

I shall, then, leave the specially biblical aspect of the
debate--interesting as it is and even useful, as in Huxley's
correspondence with the Duke of Argyll and others in 1892 ("Times",
1892, passim.)--in order to consider without complication the permanent
elements of Christian thought brought into question by the teaching of
evolution.

Such permanent elements are the doctrine of God as Creator of the
universe, and the doctrine of man as spiritual and unique. Upon both the
doctrine of evolution seemed to fall with crushing force.

With regard to Man I leave out, acknowledging a grave omission, the
doctrine of the Fall and of Sin. And I do so because these have not yet,
as I believe, been adequately treated: here the fruitful reaction to the
stimulus of evolution is yet to come. The doctrine of sin, indeed, falls
principally within the scope of that discussion which has followed or
displaced the Darwinian; and without it the Fall cannot be usefully
considered. For the question about the Fall is a question not merely of
origins, but of the interpretation of moral facts whose moral reality
must first be established.

I confine myself therefore to Creation and the dignity of man.

The meaning of evolution, in the most general terms, is that the
differentiation of forms is not essentially separate from their
behaviour and use; that if these are within the scope of study, that is
also; that the world has taken the form we see by movements not unlike
those we now see in progress; that what may be called proximate origins
are continuous in the way of force and matter, continuous in the way of
life, with actual occurrences and actual characteristics. All this has
no revolutionary bearing upon the question of ultimate origins. The
whole is a statement about process. It says nothing to metaphysicians
about cause. It simply brings within the scope of observation or
conjecture that series of changes which has given their special
characters to the different parts of the world we see. In particular,
evolutionary science aspires to the discovery of the process or order
of the appearance of life itself: if it were to achieve its aim it
could say nothing of the cause of this or indeed of the most familiar
occurrences. We should have become spectators or convinced historians of
an event which, in respect of its cause and ultimate meaning, would be
still impenetrable.

With regard to the origin of species, supposing life already
established, biological science has the well founded hopes and the
measure of success with which we are all familiar. All this has, it
would seem, little chance of collision with a consistent theism, a
doctrine which has its own difficulties unconnected with any particular
view of order or process. But when it was stated that species had
arisen by processes through which new species were still being made,
evolutionism came into collision with a statement, traditionally
religious, that species were formed and fixed once for all and long ago.

What is the theological import of such a statement when it is regarded
as essential to belief in God? Simply that God's activity, with respect
to the formation of living creatures, ceased at some point in past time.

"God rested" is made the touchstone of orthodoxy. And when, under the
pressure of the evidences, we found ourselves obliged to acknowledge and
assert the present and persistent power of God, in the maintenance and
in the continued formation of "types," what happened was the abolition
of a time-limit. We were forced only to a bolder claim, to a theistic
language less halting, more consistent, more thorough in its own line,
as well as better qualified to assimilate and modify such schemes as
Von Hartmann's philosophy of the unconscious--a philosophy, by the way,
quite intolerant of a merely mechanical evolution. (See Von Hartmann's
"Wahrheit und Irrthum in Darwinismus". Berlin, 1875.)

Here was not the retrenchment of an extravagant assertion, but the
expansion of one which was faltering and inadequate. The traditional
statement did not need paring down so as to pass the meshes of a new and
exacting criticism. It was itself a net meant to surround and enclose
experience; and we must increase its size and close its mesh to hold
newly disclosed facts of life. The world, which had seemed a fixed
picture or model, gained first perspective and then solidity and
movement. We had a glimpse of organic HISTORY; and Christian thought
became more living and more assured as it met the larger view of life.

However unsatisfactory the new attitude might be to our critics, to
Christians the reform was positive. What was discarded was a limitation,
a negation. The movement was essentially conservative, even actually
reconstructive. For the language disused was a language inconsistent
with the definitions of orthodoxy; it set bounds to the infinite, and by
implication withdrew from the creative rule all such processes as could
be brought within the descriptions of research. It ascribed fixity and
finality to that "creature" in which an apostle taught us to recognise
the birth-struggles of an unexhausted progress. It tended to banish
mystery from the world we see, and to confine it to a remote first age.

In the reformed, the restored, language of religion, Creation became
again not a link in a rational series to complete a circle of the
sciences, but the mysterious and permanent relation between the infinite
and the finite, between the moving changes we know in part, and the
Power, after the fashion of that observation, unknown, which is itself
"unmoved all motion's source." (Hymn of the Church-- Rerum Deus tenax
vigor,  Immotus in te permanens.)

With regard to man it is hardly necessary, even were it possible, to
illustrate the application of this bolder faith. When the record of his
high extraction fell under dispute, we were driven to a contemplation of
the whole of his life, rather than of a part and that part out of sight.
We remembered again, out of Aristotle, that the result of a process
interprets its beginnings. We were obliged to read the title of such
dignity as we may claim, in results and still more in aspirations.

Some men still measure the value of great present facts in life--reason
and virtue and sacrifice--by what a self-disparaged reason can collect
of the meaner rudiments of these noble gifts. Mr Balfour has admirably
displayed the discrepancy, in this view, between the alleged origin and
the alleged authority of reason. Such an argument ought to be used not
to discredit the confident reason, but to illuminate and dignify its
dark beginnings, and to show that at every step in the long course of
growth a Power was at work which is not included in any term or in all
the terms of the series.

I submit that the more men know of actual Christian teaching, its
fidelity to the past, and its sincerity in face of discovery, the more
certainly they will judge that the stimulus of the doctrine of evolution
has produced in the long run vigour as well as flexibility in the
doctrine of Creation and of man.

I pass from Evolution in general to Natural Selection.

The character in religious language which I have for short called
mechanical was not absent in the argument from design as stated before
Darwin. It seemed to have reference to a world conceived as fixed. It
pointed, not to the plastic capacity and energy of living matter, but
to the fixed adaptation of this and that organ to an unchanging place or
function.

Mr Hobhouse has given us the valuable phrase "a niche of organic
opportunity." Such a phrase would have borne a different sense in
non-evolutionary thought. In that thought, the opportunity was
an opportunity for the Creative Power, and Design appeared in the
preparation of the organism to fit the niche. The idea of the niche
and its occupant growing together from simpler to more complex mutual
adjustment was unwelcome to this teleology. If the adaptation was traced
to the influence, through competition, of the environment, the old
teleology lost an illustration and a proof. For the cogency of the proof
in every instance depended upon the absence of explanation. Where the
process of adaptation was discerned, the evidence of Purpose or Design
was weak. It was strong only when the natural antecedents were not
discovered, strongest when they could be declared undiscoverable.

Paley's favourite word is "Contrivance"; and for him contrivance is
most certain where production is most obscure. He points out the
physiological advantage of the valvulae conniventes to man, and the
advantage for teleology of the fact that they cannot have been formed by
"action and pressure." What is not due to pressure may be attributed to
design, and when a "mechanical" process more subtle than pressure was
suggested, the case for design was so far weakened. The cumulative proof
from the multitude of instances began to disappear when, in selection,
a natural sequence was suggested in which all the adaptations might be
reached by the motive power of life, and especially when, as in Darwin's
teaching, there was full recognition of the reactions of life to the
stimulus of circumstance. "The organism fits the niche," said the
teleologist, "because the Creator formed it so as to fit." "The organism
fits the niche," said the naturalist, "because unless it fitted it
could not exist." "It was fitted to survive," said the theologian.
"It survives because it fits," said the selectionist. The two forms of
statement are not incompatible; but the new statement, by provision of
an ideally universal explanation of process, was hostile to a doctrine
of purpose which relied upon evidences always exceptional however
numerous. Science persistently presses on to find the universal
machinery of adaptation in this planet; and whether this be found in
selection, or in direct-effect, or in vital reactions resulting in large
changes, or in a combination of these and other factors, it must always
be opposed to the conception of a Divine Power here and there but not
everywhere active.

For science, the Divine must be constant, operative everywhere and in
every quality and power, in environment and in organism, in stimulus and
in reaction, in variation and in struggle, in hereditary equilibrium,
and in "the unstable state of species"; equally present on both sides of
every strain, in all pressures and in all resistances, in short in
the general wonder of life and the world. And this is exactly what the
Divine Power must be for religious faith.

The point I wish once more to make is that the necessary readjustment of
teleology, so as to make it depend upon the contemplation of the whole
instead of a part, is advantageous quite as much to theology as to
science. For the older view failed in courage. Here again our theism was
not sufficiently theistic.

Where results seemed inevitable, it dared not claim them as God-given.
In the argument from Design it spoke not of God in the sense of
theology, but of a Contriver, immensely, not infinitely wise and good,
working within a world, the scene, rather than the ever dependent
outcome, of His Wisdom; working in such emergencies and opportunities
as occurred, by forces not altogether within His control, towards an end
beyond Himself. It gave us, instead of the awful reverence due to the
Cause of all substance and form, all love and wisdom, a dangerously
detached appreciation of an ingenuity and benevolence meritorious in aim
and often surprisingly successful in contrivance.

The old teleology was more useful to science than to religion, and the
design-naturalists ought to be gratefully remembered by Biologists.
Their search for evidences led them to an eager study of adaptations
and of minute forms, a study such as we have now an incentive to in the
theory of Natural Selection. One hardly meets with the same ardour in
microscopical research until we come to modern workers. But the argument
from Design was never of great importance to faith. Still, to rid it of
this character was worth all the stress and anxiety of the gallant old
war. If Darwin had done nothing else for us, we are to-day deeply in
his debt for this. The world is not less venerable to us now, not less
eloquent of the causing mind, rather much more eloquent and sacred.
But our wonder is not that "the underjaw of the swine works under the
ground" or in any or all of those particular adaptations which Paley
collected with so much skill, but that a purpose transcending, though
resembling, our own purposes, is everywhere manifest; that what we live
in is a whole, mutually sustaining, eventful and beautiful, where the
"dead" forces feed the energies of life, and life sustains a stranger
existence, able in some real measure to contemplate the whole, of which,
mechanically considered, it is a minor product and a rare ingredient.
Here, again, the change was altogether positive. It was not the escape
of a vessel in a storm with loss of spars and rigging, not a shortening
of sail to save the masts and make a port of refuge. It was rather the
emergence from narrow channels to an open sea. We had propelled the
great ship, finding purchase here and there for slow and uncertain
movement. Now, in deep water, we spread large canvas to a favouring
breeze.

The scattered traces of design might be forgotten or obliterated. But
the broad impression of Order became plainer when seen at due distance
and in sufficient range of effect, and the evidence of love and wisdom
in the universe could be trusted more securely for the loss of the
particular calculation of their machinery.

Many other topics of faith are affected by modern biology. In some of
these we have learnt at present only a wise caution, a wise uncertainty.
We stand before the newly unfolded spectacle of suffering, silenced;
with faith not scientifically reassured but still holding fast certain
other clues of conviction. In many important topics we are at a loss.
But in others, and among them those I have mentioned, we have passed
beyond this negative state and find faith positively strengthened and
more fully expressed.

We have gained also a language and a habit of thought more fit for the
great and dark problems that remain, less liable to damaging conflicts,
equipped for more rapid assimilation of knowledge. And by this change
biology itself is a gainer. For, relieved of fruitless encounters with
popular religion, it may advance with surer aim along the path of
really scientific life-study which was reopened for modern men by the
publication of "The Origin of Species".

Charles Darwin regretted that, in following science, he had not done
"more direct good" ("Life and Letters", Vol. III. page 359.) to his
fellow-creatures. He has, in fact, rendered substantial service to
interests bound up with the daily conduct and hopes of common men;
for his work has led to improvements in the preaching of the Christian
faith.




XXV. THE INFLUENCE OF DARWINISM ON THE STUDY OF RELIGIONS. By Jane Ellen
Harrison.

Hon. D.Litt. (Durham), Hon. LL.D. (Aberdeen), Staff Lecturer and
sometime Fellow of Newnham College, Cambridge.

Corresponding member of the German Archaeological Institute.

The title of my paper might well have been "the creation by Darwinism of
the scientific study of Religions," but that I feared to mar my tribute
to a great name by any shadow of exaggeration. Before the publication of
"The Origin of Species" and "The Descent of Man", even in the eighteenth
century, isolated thinkers, notably Hume and Herder, had conjectured
that the orthodox beliefs of their own day were developments from the
cruder superstitions of the past. These were however only particular
speculations of individual sceptics. Religion was not yet generally
regarded as a proper subject for scientific study, with facts to be
collected and theories to be deduced. A Congress of Religions such as
that recently held at Oxford would have savoured of impiety.

In the brief space allotted me I can attempt only two things; first,
and very briefly, I shall try to indicate the normal attitude towards
religion in the early part of the last century; second, and in more
detail, I shall try to make clear what is the outlook of advanced
thinkers to-day. (To be accurate I ought to add "in Europe." I advisedly
omit from consideration the whole immense field of Oriental mysticism,
because it has remained practically untouched by the influence of
Darwinism.) From this second inquiry it will, I hope, be abundantly
manifest that it is the doctrine of evolution that has made this outlook
possible and even necessary.

The ultimate and unchallenged presupposition of the old view was that
religion was a DOCTRINE, a body of supposed truths. It was in fact what
we should now call Theology, and what the ancients called Mythology.
Ritual was scarcely considered at all, and, when considered, it was held
to be a form in which beliefs, already defined and fixed as dogma,
found a natural mode of expression. This, it will be later shown, is
a profound error or rather a most misleading half-truth. Creeds,
doctrines, theology and the like are only a part, and at first the least
important part, of religion.

Further, and the fact is important, this DOGMA, thus supposed to be
the essential content of the "true" religion, was a teleological scheme
complete and unalterable, which had been revealed to man once and for
all by a highly anthropomorphic God, whose existence was assumed. The
duty of man towards this revelation was to accept its doctrines and obey
its precepts. The notion that this revelation had grown bit by bit out
of man's consciousness and that his business was to better it would
have seemed rank blasphemy. Religion, so conceived, left no place for
development. "The Truth" might be learnt, but never critically examined;
being thus avowedly complete and final, it was doomed to stagnation.

The details of this supposed revelation seem almost too naive for
enumeration. As Hume observed, "popular theology has a positive appetite
for absurdity." It is sufficient to recall that "revelation" included
such items as the Creation (It is interesting to note that the very
word "Creator" has nowadays almost passed into the region of mythology.
Instead we have "L'Evolution Creatrice".) of the world out of nothing in
six days; the making of Eve from one of Adam's ribs; the Temptation by
a talking snake; the confusion of tongues at the tower of Babel; the
doctrine of Original Sin; a scheme of salvation which demanded the
Virgin Birth, Vicarious Atonement, and the Resurrection of the material
body. The scheme was unfolded in an infallible Book, or, for one section
of Christians, guarded by the tradition of an infallible Church, and on
the acceptance or refusal of this scheme depended an eternity of weal or
woe. There is not one of these doctrines that has not now been recast,
softened down, mysticised, allegorised into something more conformable
with modern thinking. It is hard for the present generation, unless
their breeding has been singularly archaic, to realise that these
amazing doctrines were literally held and believed to constitute the
very essence of religion; to doubt them was a moral delinquency.

It had not, however, escaped the notice of travellers and missionaries
that savages carried on some sort of practices that seemed to be
religious, and believed in some sort of spirits or demons. Hence, beyond
the confines illuminated by revealed truth, a vague region was assigned
to NATURAL Religion. The original revelation had been kept intact only
by one chosen people, the Jews, by them to be handed on to Christianity.
Outside the borders of this Goshen the world had sunk into the darkness
of Egypt. Where analogies between savage cults and the Christian
religions were observed, they were explained as degradations; the
heathen had somehow wilfully "lost the light." Our business was not to
study but, exclusively, to convert them, to root out superstition and
carry the torch of revelation to "Souls in heathen darkness lying." To
us nowadays it is a commonplace of anthropological research that we
must seek for the beginnings of religion in the religions of primitive
peoples, but in the last century the orthodox mind was convinced that
it possessed a complete and luminous ready-made revelation; the study of
what was held to be a mere degradation seemed idle and superfluous.

But, it may be asked, if, to the orthodox, revealed religion was
sacrosanct and savage religion a thing beneath consideration, why did
not the sceptics show a more liberal spirit, and pursue to their logical
issue the conjectures they had individually hazarded? The reason is
simple and significant. The sceptics too had not worked free from
the presupposition that the essence of religion is dogma. Their
intellectualism, expressive of the whole eighteenth century, was
probably in England strengthened by the Protestant doctrine of an
infallible Book. Hume undoubtedly confused religion with dogmatic
theology. The attention of orthodox and sceptics alike was focussed on
the truth or falsity of certain propositions. Only a few minds of rare
quality were able dimly to conceive that religion might be a necessary
step in the evolution of human thought.

It is not a little interesting to note that Darwin, who was leader and
intellectual king of his generation, was also in this matter to some
extent its child. His attitude towards religion is stated clearly, in
