Chapter X. "On the Imperfection of the Geological Record," and Chapter
XI. "On the Geological Succession of Organic Beings"; there is, however,
little about plants in these chapters. At the present time the truth
of Evolution is no longer seriously disputed, though there are writers,
like Reinke, who insist, and rightly so, that the doctrine is still
only a belief, rather than an established fact of science. (J. Reinke,
"Kritische Abstammungslehre", "Wiesner-Festschrift", page 11, Vienna,
1908.) Evidently, then, however little the Theory of Descent may be
questioned in our own day, it is desirable to assure ourselves how the
case stands, and in particular how far the evidence from fossil plants
has grown stronger with time.

As regards direct evidence for the derivation of one species from
another, there has probably been little advance since Darwin wrote, at
least so we must infer from the emphasis laid on the discontinuity
of successive fossil species by great systematic authorities like
Grand'Eury and Zeiller in their most recent writings. We must either
adopt the mutationist views of those authors (referred to in the last
section of this essay) or must still rely on Darwin's explanation of the
absence of numerous intermediate varieties. The attempts which have been
made to trace, in the Tertiary rocks, the evolution of recent species,
cannot, owing to the imperfect character of the evidence, be regarded as
wholly satisfactory.

When we come to groups of a somewhat higher order we have an interesting
history of the evolution of a recent family in the work, not yet
completed, of Kidston and Gwynne-Vaughan on the fossil Osmundaceae.
("Trans. Royal Soc. Edinburgh", Vol. 45, Part III. 1907, Vol. 46, Part
II. 1908, Vol. 46, Part III. 1909.) The authors are able, mainly on
anatomical evidence, to trace back this now limited group of Ferns,
through the Tertiary and Mesozoic to the Permian, and to show, with
great probability, how their structure has been derived from that of
early Palaeozoic types.

The history of the Ginkgoaceae, now represented only by the isolated
maidenhair tree, scarcely known in a wild state, offers another striking
example of a family which can be traced with certainty to the older
Mesozoic and perhaps further back still. (See Seward and Gowan, "The
Maidenhair Tree (Gingko biloba)", "Annals of Botany", Vol. XIV. 1900,
page 109; also A. Sprecher "Le Ginkgo biloba", L., Geneva, 1907.)

On the wider question of the derivation of the great groups of plants,
a very considerable advance has been made, and, so far as the higher
plants are concerned, we are now able to form a far better conception
than before of the probable course of evolution. This is a matter
of phylogeny, and the facts will be considered under that head; our
immediate point is that the new knowledge of the relations between the
classes of plants in question materially strengthens the case for the
theory of descent. The discoveries of the last few years throw light
especially on the relation of the Angiosperms to the Gymnosperms,
on that of the Seed-plants generally to the Ferns, and on the
interrelations between the various classes of the higher Cryptogams.

That the fossil record has not done still more for Evolution is due to
the fact that it begins too late--a point on which Darwin laid stress
("Origin of Species" (6th edition), page 286.) and which has more
recently been elaborated by Poulton. ("Essays on Evolution", pages 46
et seq., Oxford, 1908.) An immense proportion of the whole evolutionary
history lies behind the lowest fossiliferous rocks, and the case is
worse for plants than for animals, as the record for the former begins,
for all practical purposes, much higher up in the rocks.

It may be well here to call attention to a question, often overlooked,
which has lately been revived by Reinke. (Reinke, loc. cit. page 13.) As
all admit, we know nothing of the origin of life; consequently, for all
we can tell, it is as probable that life began, on this planet, with
many living things, as with one. If the first organic beings were many,
they may have been heterogeneous, or at least exposed to different
conditions, from their origin; in either case there would have been a
number of distinct series from the beginning, and if so we should not
be justified in assuming that all organisms are related to one another.
There may conceivably be several of the original lines of descent still
surviving, or represented among extinct forms--to reverse the remark
of a distinguished botanist, there may be several Vegetable Kingdoms!
However improbable this may sound, the possibility is one to be borne in
mind.

That all VASCULAR plants really belong to one stock seems certain, and
here the palaeontological record has materially strengthened the
case for a monophyletic history. The Bryophyta are not likely to be
absolutely distinct, for their sexual organs, and the stomata of the
Mosses strongly suggest community of descent with the higher plants; if
this be so it no doubt establishes a certain presumption in favour of
a common origin for plants generally, for the gap between "Mosses and
Ferns" has been regarded as the widest in the Vegetable Kingdom. The
direct evidence of consanguinity is however much weaker when we come to
the Algae, and it is conceivable (even if improbable) that the higher
plants may have had a distinct ancestry (now wholly lost) from the
beginning. The question had been raised in Darwin's time, and he
referred to it in these words: "No doubt it is possible, as Mr G.H.
Lewes has urged, that at the first commencement of life many different
forms were evolved; but if so, we may conclude that only a very few
have left modified descendants." ("Origin of Species", page 425.) This
question, though it deserves attention, does not immediately affect the
subject of the palaeontological record of plants, for there can be no
reasonable doubt as to the interrelationship of those groups on which
the record at present throws light.

The past history of plants by no means shows a regular progression from
the simple to the complex, but often the contrary. This apparent anomaly
is due to two causes.

1. The palaeobotanical record is essentially the story of the successive
ascendancy of a series of dominant families, each of which attained
its maximum, in organisation as well as in extent, and then sank into
comparative obscurity, giving place to other families, which under new
conditions were better able to take a leading place. As each family ran
its downward course, either its members underwent an actual reduction in
structure as they became relegated to herbaceous or perhaps aquatic life
(this may have happened with the Horsetails and with Isoetes if derived
from Lepidodendreae), or the higher branches of the family were crowded
out altogether and only the "poor relations" were able to maintain their
position by evading the competition of the ascendant races; this is also
illustrated by the history of the Lycopod phylum. In either case there
would result a lowering of the type of organisation within the group.

2. The course of real progress is often from the complex to the simple.
If, as we shall find some grounds for believing, the Angiosperms came
from a type with a flower resembling in its complexity that of Mesozoic
"Cycads," almost the whole evolution of the flower in the highest
plants has been a process of reduction. The stamen, in particular, has
undoubtedly become extremely simplified during evolution; in the most
primitive known seed-plants it was a highly compound leaf or pinna; its
reduction has gone on in the Conifers and modern Cycads, as well as in
the Angiosperms, though in different ways and to a varying extent.

The seed offers another striking example; the Palaeozoic seeds (if we
leave the seed-like organs of certain Lycopods out of consideration)
were always, so far as we know, highly complex structures, with
an elaborate vascular system, a pollen-chamber, and often a
much-differentiated testa. In the present day such seeds exist only in a
few Gymnosperms which retain their ancient characters--in all the higher
Spermophytes the structure is very much simplified, and this holds good
even in the Coniferae, where there is no countervailing complication of
ovary and stigma.

Reduction, in fact, is not always, or even generally, the same thing as
degeneration. Simplification of parts is one of the most usual means of
advance for the organism as a whole. A large proportion of the higher
plants are microphyllous in comparison with the highly megaphyllous
fern-like forms from which they appear to have been derived.

Darwin treated the general question of advance in organisation with much
caution, saying: "The geological record... does not extend far enough
back, to show with unmistakeable clearness that within the known history
of the world organisation has largely advanced." ("Origin of Species",
page 308.) Further on (Ibid. page 309.) he gives two standards by which
advance may be measured: "We ought not solely to compare the highest
members of a class at any two periods... but we ought to compare all the
members, high and low, at the two periods." Judged by either standard
the Horsetails and Club Mosses of the Carboniferous were higher than
those of our own day, and the same is true of the Mesozoic Cycads. There
is a general advance in the succession of classes, but not within each
class.

Darwin's argument that "the inhabitants of the world at each successive
period in its history have beaten their predecessors in the race for
life, and are, in so far, higher in the scale" ("Origin of Species",
page 315.) is unanswerable, but we must remember that "higher in the
scale" only means "better adapted to the existing conditions." Darwin
points out (Ibid. page 279.) that species have remained unchanged for
long periods, probably longer than the periods of modification, and only
underwent change when the conditions of their life were altered. Higher
organisation, judged by the test of success, is thus purely relative to
the changing conditions, a fact of which we have a striking illustration
in the sudden incoming of the Angiosperms with all their wonderful
floral adaptations to fertilisation by the higher families of Insects.

II. PHYLOGENY.

The question of phylogeny is really inseparable from that of the truth
of the doctrine of evolution, for we cannot have historical evidence
that evolution has actually taken place without at the same time having
evidence of the course it has followed.

As already pointed out, the progress hitherto made has been rather in
the way of joining up the great classes of plants than in tracing the
descent of particular species or genera of the recent flora. There
appears to be a difference in this respect from the Animal record,
which tells us so much about the descent of living species, such as the
elephant or the horse. The reason for this difference is no doubt to be
found in the fact that the later part of the palaeontological record
is the most satisfactory in the case of animals and the least so in the
case of plants. The Tertiary plant-remains, in the great majority of
instances, are impressions of leaves, the conclusions to be drawn from
which are highly precarious; until the whole subject of Angiospermous
palaeobotany has been reinvestigated, it would be rash to venture on
any statements as to the descent of the families of Dicotyledons or
Monocotyledons.

Our attention will be concentrated on the following questions, all
relating to the phylogeny of main groups of plants: i. The Origin of the
Angiosperms. ii. The Origin of the Seed-plants. iii. The Origin of the
different classes of the Higher Cryptogamia.

i. THE ORIGIN OF THE ANGIOSPERMS.

The first of these questions has long been the great crux of botanical
phylogeny, and until quite recently no light had been thrown upon the
difficulty. The Angiosperms are the Flowering Plants, par excellence,
and form, beyond comparison, the dominant sub-kingdom in the flora of
our own age, including, apart from a few Conifers and Ferns, all the
most familiar plants of our fields and gardens, and practically all
plants of service to man. All recent work has tended to separate the
Angiosperms more widely from the other seed-plants now living, the
Gymnosperms. Vast as is the range of organisation presented by the great
modern sub-kingdom, embracing forms adapted to every environment, there
is yet a marked uniformity in certain points of structure, as in the
development of the embryo-sac and its contents, the pollination
through the intervention of a stigma, the strange phenomenon of double
fertilisation (One sperm fertilising the egg, while the other unites
with the embryo-sac nucleus, itself the product of a nuclear fusion, to
give rise to a nutritive tissue, the endosperm.), the structure of
the stamens, and the arrangement of the parts of the flower. All these
points are common to Monocotyledons and Dicotyledons, and separate the
Angiosperms collectively from all other plants.

In geological history the Angiosperms first appear in the Lower
Cretaceous, and by Upper Cretaceous times had already swamped all other
vegetation and seized the dominant position which they still hold. Thus
they are isolated structurally from the rest of the Vegetable Kingdom,
while historically they suddenly appear, almost in full force, and
apparently without intermediaries with other groups. To quote Darwin's
vigorous words: "The rapid development, as far as we can judge, of
all the higher plants within recent geological times is an abominable
mystery." ("More Letters of Charles Darwin", Vol. II. page 20, letter
to J.D. Hooker, 1879.) A couple of years later he made a bold suggestion
(which he only called an "idle thought") to meet this difficulty. He
says: "I have been so astonished at the apparently sudden coming in of
the higher phanerogams, that I have sometimes fancied that development
might have slowly gone on for an immense period in some isolated
continent or large island, perhaps near the South Pole." (Ibid, page
26, letter to Hooker, 1881.) This idea of an Angiospermous invasion from
some lost southern land has sometimes been revived since, but has not,
so far as the writer is aware, been supported by evidence. Light on the
problem has come from a different direction.

The immense development of plants with the habit of Cycads, during the
Mesozoic Period up to the Lower Cretaceous, has long been known. The
existing Order Cycadaceae is a small family, with 9 genera and perhaps
100 species, occurring in the tropical and sub-tropical zones of both
the Old and New World, but nowhere forming a dominant feature in the
vegetation. Some few attain the stature of small trees, while in the
majority the stem is short, though often living to a great age. The
large pinnate or rarely bipinnate leaves give the Cycads a superficial
resemblance in habit to Palms. Recent Cycads are dioecious; throughout
the family the male fructification is in the form of a cone, each scale
of the cone representing a stamen, and bearing on its lower surface
numerous pollen-sacs, grouped in sori like the sporangia of Ferns. In
all the genera, except Cycas itself, the female fructifications are
likewise cones, each carpel bearing two ovules on its margin. In Cycas,
however, no female cone is produced, but the leaf-like carpels, bearing
from two to six ovules each, are borne directly on the main stem of the
plant in rosettes alternating with those of the ordinary leaves--the
most primitive arrangement known in any living seed-plant. The
whole Order is relatively primitive, as shown most strikingly in its
cryptogamic mode of fertilisation, by means of spermatozoids, which it
shares with the maidenhair tree alone, among recent seed-plants.

In all the older Mesozoic rocks, from the Trias to the Lower Cretaceous,
plants of the Cycad class (Cycadophyta, to use Nathorst's comprehensive
name) are extraordinarily abundant in all parts of the world; in
fact they were almost as prominent in the flora of those ages as the
Dicotyledons are in that of our own day. In habit and to a great extent
in anatomy, the Mesozoic Cycadophyta for the most part much resemble the
recent Cycadaceae. But, strange to say, it is only in the rarest
cases that the fructification has proved to be of the simple type
characteristic of the recent family; the vast majority of the abundant
fertile specimens yielded by the Mesozoic rocks possess a type of
reproductive apparatus far more elaborate than anything known in
Cycadaceae or other Gymnosperms. The predominant Mesozoic family,
characterised by this advanced reproductive organisation, is known
as the Bennettiteae; in habit these plants resembled the more stunted
Cycads of the recent flora, but differed from them in the presence of
numerous lateral fructifications, like large buds, borne on the stem
among the crowded bases of the leaves. The organisation of these
fructifications was first worked out on European specimens by
Carruthers, Solms-Laubach, Lignier and others, but these observers had
only more or less ripe fruits to deal with; the complete structure of
the flower has only been elucidated within the last few years by the
researches of Wieland on the magnificent American material, derived from
the Upper Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous beds of Maryland, Dakota and
Wyoming. (G.R. Wieland, "American Fossil Cycads", Carnegie Institution,
Washington, 1906.) The word "flower" is used deliberately, for reasons
which will be apparent from the following brief description, based on
Wieland's observations.

The fructification is attached to the stem by a thick stalk, which,
in its upper part, bears a large number of spirally arranged bracts,
forming collectively a kind of perianth and completely enclosing the
essential organs of reproduction. The latter consist of a whorl of
stamens, of extremely elaborate structure, surrounding a central cone
or receptacle bearing numerous ovules. The stamens resemble the fertile
fronds of a fern; they are of a compound, pinnate form, and bear
very large numbers of pollen-sacs, each of which is itself a compound
structure consisting of a number of compartments in which the pollen
was formed. In their lower part the stamens are fused together by their
stalks, like the "monadelphous" stamens of a mallow. The numerous ovules
borne on the central receptacle are stalked, and are intermixed with
sterile scales; the latter are expanded at their outer ends, which are
united to form a kind of pericarp or ovary-wall, only interrupted by the
protruding micropyles of the ovules. There is thus an approach to
the closed pistil of an Angiosperm, but it is evident that the ovules
received the pollen directly. The whole fructification is of large size;
in the case of Cycadeoidea dacotensis, one of the species investigated
by Wieland, the total length, in the bud condition, is about 12 cm.,
half of which belongs to the peduncle.

The general arrangement of the organs is manifestly the same as in a
typical Angiospermous flower, with a central pistil, a surrounding whorl
of stamens and an enveloping perianth; there is, as we have seen, some
approach to the closed ovary of an Angiosperm; another point, first
discovered nearly 20 years ago by Solms-Laubach in his investigation of
a British species, is that the seed was practically "exalbuminous," its
cavity being filled by the large, dicotyledonous embryo, whereas in all
known Gymnosperms a large part of the sac is occupied by a nutritive
tissue, the prothallus or endosperm; here also we have a condition only
met with elsewhere among the higher Flowering Plants.

Taking all the characters into account, the indications of affinity
between the Mesozoic Cycadophyta and the Angiosperms appear extremely
significant, as was recognised by Wieland when he first discovered the
hermaphrodite nature of the Bennettitean flower. The Angiosperm
with which he specially compared the fossil type was the Tulip tree
(Liriodendron) and certainly there is a remarkable analogy with
the Magnoliaceous flowers, and with those of related orders such as
Ranunculaceae and the Water-lilies. It cannot, of course, be maintained
that the Bennettiteae, or any other Mesozoic Cycadophyta at present
known, were on the direct line of descent of the Angiosperms, for there
are some important points of difference, as, for example, in the great
complexity of the stamens, and in the fact that the ovary-wall
or pericarp was not formed by the carpels themselves, but by the
accompanying sterile scale-leaves. Botanists, since the discovery of the
bisexual flowers of the Bennettiteae, have expressed different views as
to the nearness of their relation to the higher Flowering Plants, but
the points of agreement are so many that it is difficult to resist the
conviction that a real relation exists, and that the ancestry of the
Angiosperms, so long shrouded in complete obscurity, is to be sought
among the great plexus of Cycad-like plants which dominated the flora
of the world in Mesozoic times. (On this subject see, in addition
to Wieland's great work above cited, F.W. Oliver, "Pteridosperms
and Angiosperms", "New Phytologist", Vol. V. 1906; D.H. Scott,
"The Flowering Plants of the Mesozoic Age in the Light of Recent
Discoveries", "Journal R. Microscop. Soc." 1907, and especially E.A.N.
Arber and J. Parkin, "On the Origin of Angiosperms", "Journal Linn.
Soc." (Bot.) Vol. XXXVIII. page 29, 1907.)

The great complexity of the Bennettitean flower, the earliest known
fructification to which the word "flower" can be applied without forcing
the sense, renders it probable, as Wieland and others have pointed
out, that the evolution of the flower in Angiosperms has consisted
essentially in a process of reduction, and that the simplest forms
of flower are not to be regarded as the most primitive. The older
morphologists generally took the view that such simple flowers were to
be explained as reductions from a more perfect type, and this opinion,
though abandoned by many later writers, appears likely to be true when
we consider the elaboration of floral structure attained among the
Mesozoic Cycadophyta, which preceded the Angiosperms in evolution.

If, as now seems probable, the Angiosperms were derived from ancestors
allied to the Cycads, it would naturally follow that the Dicotyledons
were first evolved, for their structure has most in common with that of
the Cycadophyta. We should then have to regard the Monocotyledons as
a side-line, diverging probably at a very early stage from the main
dicotyledonous stock, a view which many botanists have maintained,
of late, on other grounds. (See especially Ethel Sargant, "The
Reconstruction of a Race of Primitive Angiosperms", "Annals of Botany",
Vol. XXII. page 121, 1908.) So far, however, as the palaeontological
record shows, the Monocotyledons were little if at all later in their
appearance than the Dicotyledons, though always subordinate in numbers.
The typical and beautifully preserved Palm-wood from Cretaceous rocks
is striking evidence of the early evolution of a characteristic
monocotyledonous family. It must be admitted that the whole question of
the evolution of Monocotyledons remains to be solved.

Accepting, provisionally, the theory of the cycadophytic origin of
Angiosperms, it is interesting to see to what further conclusions we
are led. The Bennettiteae, at any rate, were still at the gymnospermous
level as regards their pollination, for the exposed micropyles of the
ovules were in a position to receive the pollen directly, without the
intervention of a stigma. It is thus indicated that the Angiosperms
sprang from a gymnospermous source, and that the two great phyla of
Seed-plants have not been distinct from the first, though no doubt the
great majority of known Gymnosperms, especially the Coniferae, represent
branch-lines of their own.

The stamens of the Bennettiteae are arranged precisely as in an
angiospermous flower, but in form and structure they are like the
fertile fronds of a Fern, in fact the compound pollen-sacs, or synangia
as they are technically called, almost exactly agree with the spore-sacs
of a particular family of Ferns--the Marattiaceae, a limited group,
now mainly tropical, which was probably more prominent in the later
Palaeozoic times than at present. The scaly hairs, or ramenta, which
clothe every part of the plant, are also like those of Ferns.

It is not likely that the characters in which the Bennettiteae resemble
the Ferns came to them directly from ancestors belonging to that class;
an extensive group of Seed-plants, the Pteridospermeae, existed in
Palaeozoic times and bear evident marks of affinity with the Fern
phylum. The fern-like characters so remarkably persistent in the highly
organised Cycadophyta of the Mesozoic were in all likelihood derived
through the Pteridosperms, plants which show an unmistakable approach to
the cycadophytic type.

The family Bennettiteae thus presents an extraordinary association
of characters, exhibiting, side by side, features which belong to the
Angiosperms, the Gymnosperms and the Ferns.

ii. ORIGIN OF SEED-PLANTS.

The general relation of the gymnospermous Seed-plants to the Higher
Cryptogamia was cleared up, independently of fossil evidence, by the
brilliant researches of Hofmeister, dating from the middle of the
past century. (W. Hofmeister, "On the Germination, Development and
Fructification of the Higher Cryptogamia", Ray Society, London, 1862.
The original German treatise appeared in 1851.) He showed that "the
embryo-sac of the Coniferae may be looked upon as a spore remaining
enclosed in its sporangium; the prothallium which it forms does not come
to the light." (Ibid. page 438.) He thus determined the homologies on
the female side. Recognising, as some previous observers had already
done, that the microspores of those Cryptogams in which two kinds of
spore are developed, are equivalent to the pollen-grains of the higher
plants, he further pointed out that fertilisation "in the Rhizocarpeae
and Selaginellae takes place by free spermatozoa, and in the Coniferae
by a pollen-tube, in the interior of which spermatozoa are probably
formed"--a remarkable instance of prescience, for though spermatozoids
have not been found in the Conifers proper, they were demonstrated
in the allied groups Cycadaceae and Ginkgo, in 1896, by the Japanese
botanists Ikeno and Hirase. A new link was thus established between the
Gymnosperms and the Cryptogams.

It remained uncertain, however, from which line of Cryptogams the
gymnospermous Seed-plants had sprung. The great point of morphological
comparison was the presence of two kinds of spore, and this was known to
occur in the recent Lycopods and Water-ferns (Rhizocarpeae) and was
also found in fossil representatives of the third phylum, that of the
Horsetails. As a matter of fact all the three great Cryptogamic classes
have found champions to maintain their claim to the ancestry of the
Seed-plants, and in every case fossil evidence was called in. For a long
time the Lycopods were the favourites, while the Ferns found the least
support. The writer remembers, however, in the year 1881, hearing the
late Prof. Sachs maintain, in a lecture to his class, that the descent
of the Cycads could be traced, not merely from Ferns, but from a
definite family of Ferns, the Marattiaceae, a view which, though in a
somewhat crude form, anticipated more modern ideas.

Williamson appears to have been the first to recognise the presence, in
the Carboniferous flora, of plants combining the characters of Ferns and
Cycads. (See especially his "Organisation of the Fossil Plants of the
Coal-Measures", Part XIII. "Phil. Trans. Royal Soc." 1887 B. page 299.)
This conclusion was first reached in the case of the genera Heterangium
and Lyginodendron, plants, which with a wholly fern-like habit, were
found to unite an anatomical structure holding the balance between
that of Ferns and Cycads, Heterangium inclining more to the former
and Lyginodendron to the latter. Later researches placed Williamson's
original suggestion on a firmer basis, and clearly proved the
intermediate nature of these genera, and of a number of others, so far
as their vegetative organs were concerned. This stage in our knowledge
was marked by the institution of the class Cycadofilices by Potonie in
1897.

Nothing, however, was known of the organs of reproduction of the
Cycadofilices, until F.W. Oliver, in 1903, identified a fossil seed,
Lagenostoma Lomaxi, as belonging to Lyginodendron, the identification
depending, in the first instance, on the recognition of an identical
form of gland, of very characteristic structure, on the vegetative
organs of Lyginodendron and on the cupule enveloping the seed. This
evidence was supported by the discovery of a close anatomical agreement
in other respects, as well as by constant association between the seed
and the plant. (F.W. Oliver and D.H. Scott, "On the Structure of the
Palaeozoic Seed, Lagenostoma Lomaxi, etc." "Phil. Trans. Royal Soc."
Vol. 197 B. 1904.) The structure of the seed of Lyginodendron, proved to
be of the same general type as that of the Cycads, as shown especially
by the presence of a pollen-chamber or special cavity for the reception
of the pollen-grains, an organ only known in the Cycads and Ginkgo among
recent plants.

Within a few months after the discovery of the seed of Lyginodendron,
Kidston found the large, nut-like seed of a Neuropteris, another
fern-like Carboniferous plant, in actual connection with the pinnules
of the frond, and since then seeds have been observed on the frond in
species of Aneimites and Pecopteris, and a vast body of evidence, direct
or indirect, has accumulated, showing that a large proportion of the
Palaeozoic plants formerly classed as Ferns were in reality reproduced
by seeds of the same type as those of recent Cycadaceae. (A summary
of the evidence will be found in the writer's article "On the present
position of Palaeozoic Botany", "Progressus Rei Botanicae", 1907, page
139, and "Studies in Fossil Botany", Vol. II. (2nd edition) London,
1909.) At the same time, the anatomical structure, where it is open to
investigation, confirms the suggestion given by the habit, and shows
that these early seed-bearing plants had a real affinity with Ferns.
This conclusion received strong corroboration when Kidston, in 1905,
discovered the male organs of Lyginodendron, and showed that they were
identical with a fructification of the genus Crossotheca, hitherto
regarded as belonging to Marattiaceous Ferns. (Kidston, "On the
Microsporangia of the Pteridospermeae, etc." "Phil. Trans. Royal Soc."
Vol. 198, B. 1906.)

The general conclusion which follows from the various observations
alluded to, is that in Palaeozoic times there was a great body of plants
(including, as it appears, a large majority of the fossils previously
regarded as Ferns) which had attained the rank of Spermophyta,
bearing seeds of a Cycadean type on fronds scarcely differing from the
vegetative foliage, and in other respects, namely anatomy, habit and the
structure of the pollen-bearing organs, retaining many of the characters
of Ferns. From this extensive class of plants, to which the name
Pteridospermeae has been given, it can scarcely be doubted that the
abundant Cycadophyta, of the succeeding Mesozoic period, were derived.
This conclusion is of far-reaching significance, for we have already
found reason to think that the Angiosperms themselves sprang, in
later times, from the Cycadophytic stock; it thus appears that the
Fern-phylum, taken in a broad sense, ultimately represents the source
from which the main line of descent of the Phanerogams took its rise.

It must further be borne in mind that in the Palaeozoic period there
existed another group of seed-bearing plants, the Cordaiteae, far more
advanced than the Pteridospermeae, and in many respects approaching the
Coniferae, which themselves begin to appear in the latest Palaeozoic
rocks. The Cordaiteae, while wholly different in habit from the
contemporary fern-like Seed-plants, show unmistakable signs of a common
origin with them. Not only is there a whole series of forms
connecting the anatomical structure of the Cordaiteae with that of the
Lyginodendreae among Pteridosperms, but a still more important point is
that the seeds of the Cordaiteae, which have long been known, are of
the same Cycadean type as those of the Pteridosperms, so that it is not
always possible, as yet, to discriminate between the seeds of the two
groups. These facts indicate that the same fern-like stock which gave
rise to the Cycadophyta and through them, as appears probable, to the
Angiosperms, was also the source of the Cordaiteae, which in their turn
show manifest affinity with some at least of the Coniferae. Unless the
latter are an artificial group, a view which does not commend itself to
the writer, it would appear probable that the Gymnosperms generally,
as well as the Angiosperms, were derived from an ancient race of
Cryptogams, most nearly related to the Ferns. (Some botanists, however,
believe that the Coniferae, or some of them, are probably more nearly
related to the Lycopods. See Seward and Ford, "The Araucarieae, Recent
and Extinct", "Phil. Trans. Royal Soc." Vol. 198 B. 1906.)

It may be mentioned here that the small gymnospermous group Gnetales
(including the extraordinary West African plant Welwitschia) which were
formerly regarded by some authorities as akin to the Equisetales, have
recently been referred, on better grounds, to a common origin with the
Angiosperms, from the Mesozoic Cycadophyta.

The tendency, therefore, of modern work on the palaeontological record
of the Seed-plants has been to exalt the importance of the Fern-phylum,
which, on present evidence, appears to be that from which the great
majority, possibly the whole, of the Spermophyta have been derived.

One word of caution, however, is necessary. The Seed-plants are of
enormous antiquity; both the Pteridosperms and the more highly organised
family Cordaiteae, go back as far in geological history (namely to the
Devonian) as the Ferns themselves or any other Vascular Cryptogams. It
must therefore be understood that in speaking of the derivation of the
Spermophyta from the Fern-phylum, we refer to that phylum at a very
early stage, probably earlier than the most ancient period to which
our record of land-plants extends. The affinity between the oldest
Seed-plants and the Ferns, in the widest sense, seems established, but
the common stock from which they actually arose is still unknown; though
no doubt nearer to the Ferns than to any other group, it must have
differed widely from the Ferns as we now know them, or perhaps even from
any which the fossil record has yet revealed to us.

iii. THE ORIGIN OF THE HIGHER CRYPTOGAMIA.

The Sub-kingdom of the higher Spore-plants, the Cryptogamia possessing a
vascular system, was more prominent in early geological periods than at
present. It is true that the dominance of the Pteridophyta in Palaeozoic
times has been much exaggerated owing to the assumption that everything
which looked like a Fern really was a Fern. But, allowing for the fact,
now established, that most of the Palaeozoic fern-like plants were
already Spermophyta, there remains a vast mass of Cryptogamic forms
of that period, and the familiar statement that they formed the main
constituent of the Coal-forests still holds good. The three
classes, Ferns (Filicales), Horsetails (Equisetales) and Club-mosses
(Lycopodiales), under which we now group the Vascular Cryptogams, all
extend back in geological history as far as we have any record of the
flora of the land; in the Palaeozoic, however, a fourth class, the
Sphenophyllales, was present.

As regards the early history of the Ferns, which are of special interest
from their relation to the Seed-plants, it is impossible to speak quite
positively, owing to the difficulty of discriminating between true
fossil Ferns and the Pteridosperms which so closely simulated them.
The difficulty especially affects the question of the position of
Marattiaceous Ferns in the Palaeozoic Floras. This family, now so
restricted, was until recently believed to have been one of the
most important groups of Palaeozoic plants, especially during later
Carboniferous and Permian times. Evidence both from anatomy and from
sporangial characters appeared to establish this conclusion. Of late,
however, doubts have arisen, owing to the discovery that some
supposed members of the Marattiaceae bore seeds, and that a form of
fructification previously referred to that family (Crossotheca) was
really the pollen-bearing apparatus of a Pteridosperm (Lyginodendron).
The question presents much difficulty; though it seems certain that our
ideas of the extent of the family in Palaeozoic times will have to be
restricted, there is still a decided balance of evidence in favour
of the view that a considerable body of Marattiaceous Ferns actually
existed. The plants in question were of large size (often arborescent)
and highly organised--they represent, in fact, one of the highest
developments of the Fern-stock, rather than a primitive type of the
class.

There was, however, in the Palaeozoic period, a considerable group of
comparatively simple Ferns (for which Arber has proposed the collective
name Primofilices); the best known of these are referred to the family
Botryopterideae, consisting of plants of small or moderate dimensions,
with, on the whole, a simple anatomical structure, in certain cases
actually simpler than that of any recent Ferns. On the other hand the
sporangia of these plants were usually borne on special fertile fronds,
a mark of rather high differentiation. This group goes back to the
Devonian and includes some of the earliest types of Fern with which we
are acquainted. It is probable that the Primofilices (though not the
particular family Botryopterideae) represent the stock from which the
various families of modern Ferns, already developed in the Mesozoic
period, may have sprung.

None of the early Ferns show any clear approach to other classes of
Vascular Cryptogams; so far as the fossil record affords any evidence,
Ferns have always been plants with relatively large and usually compound
leaves. There is no indication of their derivation from a microphyllous
ancestry, though, as we shall see, there is some slight evidence for the
converse hypothesis. Whatever the origin of the Ferns may have been it
is hidden in the older rocks.

It has, however, been held that certain other Cryptogamic phyla had
a common origin with the Ferns. The Equisetales are at present a
well-defined group; even in the rich Palaeozoic floras the habit,
anatomy and reproductive characters usually render the members of this
class unmistakable, in spite of the great development and stature which
they then attained. It is interesting, however, to find that in the
oldest known representatives of the Equisetales the leaves were highly
developed and dichotomously divided, thus differing greatly from the
mere scale-leaves of the recent Horsetails, or even from the simple
linear leaves of the later Calamites. The early members of the class, in
their forked leaves, and in anatomical characters, show an approximation
to the Sphenophyllales, which are chiefly represented by the large genus
Sphenophyllum, ranging through the Palaeozoic from the Middle Devonian
onwards. These were plants with rather slender, ribbed stems, bearing
whorls of wedge-shaped or deeply forked leaves, six being the typical
number in each whorl. From their weak habit it has been conjectured,
with much probability, that they may have been climbing plants, like the
scrambling Bedstraws of our hedgerows. The anatomy of the stem is simple
and root-like; the cones are remarkable for the fact that each scale or
sporophyll is a double structure, consisting of a lower, usually sterile
lobe and one or more upper lobes bearing the sporangia; in one species
both parts of the sporophyll were fertile. Sphenophyllum was evidently
much specialised; the only other known genus is based on an isolated
cone, Cheirostrobus, of Lower Carboniferous age, with an extraordinarily
complex structure. In this genus especially, but also in the entire
group, there is an evident relation to the Equisetales; hence it is of
great interest that Nathorst has described, from the Devonian of Bear
Island in the Arctic regions, a new genus Pseudobornia, consisting of
large plants, remarkable for their highly compound leaves which,
when found detached, were taken for the fronds of a Fern. The whorled
arrangement of the leaves, and the habit of the plant, suggest
affinities either with the Equisetales or the Sphenophyllales; Nathorst
makes the genus the type of a new class, the Pseudoborniales. (A.G.
Nathorst, "Zur Oberdevonischen Flora der Baren-Insel", "Kongl. Svenska
Vetenskaps-Akademiens Handlingar" Bd. 36, No. 3, Stockholm, 1902.)

The available data, though still very fragmentary, certainly suggest
that both Equisetales and Sphenophyllales may have sprung from a
common stock having certain fern-like characters. On the other hand the
Sphenophylls, and especially the peculiar genus Cheirostrobus, have in
their anatomy a good deal in common with the Lycopods, and of late years
they have been regarded as the derivatives of a stock common to
that class and the Equisetales. At any rate the characters of the
Sphenophyllales and of the new group Pseudoborniales suggest the
existence, at a very early period, of a synthetic race of plants,
combining the characters of various phyla of the Vascular Cryptogams.
It may further be mentioned that the Psilotaceae, an isolated epiphytic
family hitherto referred to the Lycopods, have been regarded by several
recent authors as the last survivors of the Sphenophyllales, which they
resemble both in their anatomy and in the position of their sporangia.

The Lycopods, so far as their early history is known, are remarkable
rather for their high development in Palaeozoic times than for any
indications of a more primitive ancestry. In the recent Flora, two
of the four living genera (Excluding Psilotaceae.) (Selaginella and
Isoetes) have spores of two kinds, while the other two (Lycopodium and
Phylloglossum) are homosporous. Curiously enough, no certain instance
of a homosporous Palaeozoic Lycopod has yet been discovered, though
well-preserved fructifications are numerous. Wherever the facts have
been definitely ascertained, we find two kinds of spore, differentiated
quite as sharply as in any living members of the group. Some of the
Palaeozoic Lycopods, in fact, went further, and produced bodies of the
nature of seeds, some of which were actually regarded, for many
years, as the seeds of Gymnosperms. This specially advanced form of
fructification goes back at least as far as the Lower Carboniferous,
while the oldest known genus of Lycopods, Bothrodendron, which is found
in the Devonian, though not seed-bearing, was typically heterosporous,
if we may judge from the Coal-measure species. No doubt homosporous
Lycopods existed, but the great prevalence of the higher mode of
reproduction in days which to us appear ancient, shows how long a course
of evolution must have already been passed through before the oldest
known members of the group came into being. The other characters of
the Palaeozoic Lycopods tell the same tale; most of them attained
the stature of trees, with a corresponding elaboration of anatomical
structure, and even the herbaceous forms show no special simplicity.
It appears from recent work that herbaceous Lycopods, indistinguishable
from our recent Selaginellas, already existed in the time of the
Coal-measures, while one herbaceous form (Miadesmia) is known to have
borne seeds.

The utmost that can be said for primitiveness of character in Palaeozoic
Lycopods is that the anatomy of the stem, in its primary ground-plan, as
distinguished from its secondary growth, was simpler than that of most
Lycopodiums and Selaginellas at the present day. There are also some
peculiarities in the underground organs (Stigmaria) which suggest the
possibility of a somewhat imperfect differentiation between root and
stem, but precisely parallel difficulties are met with in the case of
the living Selaginellas, and in some degree in species of Lycopodium.

In spite of their high development in past ages the Lycopods, recent
and fossil, constitute, on the whole, a homogeneous group, and there is
little at present to connect them with other phyla. Anatomically some
relation to the Sphenophylls is indicated, and perhaps the recent
Psilotaceae give some support to this connection, for while their
nearest alliance appears to be with the Sphenophylls, they approach the
Lycopods in anatomy, habit, and mode of branching.

The typically microphyllous character of the Lycopods, and the simple
relation between sporangium and sporophyll which obtains throughout the
class, have led various botanists to regard them as the most primitive
phylum of the Vascular Cryptogams. There is nothing in the fossil record
to disprove this view, but neither is there anything to support it, for
this class so far as we know is no more ancient than the megaphyllous
Cryptogams, and its earliest representatives show no special simplicity.
If the indications of affinity with Sphenophylls are of any value
the Lycopods are open to suspicion of reduction from a megaphyllous
ancestry, but there is no direct palaeontological evidence for such a
history.

The general conclusions to which we are led by a consideration of the
fossil record of the Vascular Cryptogams are still very hypothetical,
but may be provisionally stated as follows:

The Ferns go back to the earliest known period. In Mesozoic times
practically all the existing families had appeared; in the Palaeozoic
the class was less extensive than formerly believed, a majority of the
supposed Ferns of that age having proved to be seed-bearing plants. The
oldest authentic representatives of the Ferns were megaphyllous plants,
broadly speaking, of the same type as those of later epochs, though
differing much in detail. As far back as the record extends they show no
sign of becoming merged with other phyla in any synthetic group.

The Equisetales likewise have a long history, and manifestly attained
their greatest development in Palaeozoic times. Their oldest forms show
an approach to the extinct class Sphenophyllales, which connects them
to some extent, by anatomical characters, with the Lycopods. At the
same time the oldest Equisetales show a somewhat megaphyllous character,
which was more marked in the Devonian Pseudoborniales. Some remote
affinity with the Ferns (which has also been upheld on other grounds)
may thus be indicated. It is possible that in the Sphenophyllales we
may have the much-modified representatives of a very ancient synthetic
group.

The Lycopods likewise attained their maximum in the Palaeozoic, and
show, on the whole, a greater elaboration of structure in their early
forms than at any later period, while at the same time maintaining a
considerable degree of uniformity in morphological characters throughout
their history. The Sphenophyllales are the only other class with which
they show any relation; if such a connection existed, the common point
of origin must lie exceedingly far back.

The fossil record, as at present known, cannot, in the nature of things,
throw any direct light on what is perhaps the most disputed question in
the morphology of plants--the origin of the alternating generations of
the higher Cryptogams and the Spermophyta. At the earliest period
to which terrestrial plants have been traced back all the groups of
Vascular Cryptogams were in a highly advanced stage of evolution, while
innumerable Seed-plants--presumably the descendants of Cryptogamic
ancestors--were already flourishing. On the other hand we know
practically nothing of Palaeozoic Bryophyta, and the evidence even for
their existence at that period cannot be termed conclusive. While
there are thus no palaeontological grounds for the hypothesis that the
Vascular plants came of a Bryophytic stock, the question of their actual
origin remains unsolved.

III. NATURAL SELECTION.

Hitherto we have considered the palaeontological record of plants in
relation to Evolution. The question remains, whether the record
throws any light on the theory of which Darwin and Wallace were the
authors--that of Natural Selection. The subject is clearly one which
must be investigated by other methods than those of the palaeontologist;
still there are certain important points involved, on which the
palaeontological record appears to bear.

One of these points is the supposed distinction between morphological
and adaptive characters, on which Nageli, in particular, laid so much
stress. The question is a difficult one; it was discussed by Darwin
("Origin of Species" (6th edition), pages 170-176.), who, while
showing that the apparent distinction is in part to be explained by our
imperfect knowledge of function, recognised the existence of important
morphological characters which are not adaptations. The following
passage expresses his conclusion. "Thus, as I am inclined to believe,
morphological differences, which we consider as important--such as
the arrangement of the leaves, the divisions of the flower or of the
ovarium, the position of the ovules, etc.--first appeared in many cases
as fluctuating variations, which sooner or later became constant through
the nature of the organism and of the surrounding conditions, as well
as through the inter-crossing of distinct individuals, but not through
natural selection; for as these morphological characters do not affect
the welfare of the species, any slight deviations in them could not have
been governed or accumulated through this latter agency." (Ibid. page
176.)

This is a sufficiently liberal concession; Nageli, however, went much
further when he said: "I do not know among plants a morphological
modification which can be explained on utilitarian principles." (See
"More Letters", Vol. II. page 375 (footnote).) If this were true the
field of Natural Selection would be so seriously restricted, as to leave
the theory only a very limited importance.

It can be shown, as the writer believes, that many typical
"morphological characters," on which the distinction between great
classes of plants is based, were adaptive in origin, and even that their
constancy is due to their functional importance. Only one or two cases
will be mentioned, where the fossil evidence affects the question.

The pollen-tube is one of the most important morphological characters of
the Spermophyta as now existing--in fact the name Siphonogama is used
by Engler in his classification, as expressing a peculiarly constant
character of the Seed-plants. Yet the pollen-tube is a manifest
adaptation, following on the adoption of the seed-habit, and serving
first to bring the spermatozoids with greater precision to their
goal, and ultimately to relieve them of the necessity for independent
movement. The pollen-tube is constant because it has proved to be
indispensable.

In the Palaeozoic Seed-plants there are a number of instances in which
the pollen-grains, contained in the pollen-chamber of a seed, are so
beautifully preserved that the presence of a group of cells within the
grain can be demonstrated; sometimes we can even see how the cell-walls
broke down to emit the sperms, and quite lately it is said that the
sperms themselves have been recognised. (F.W. Oliver, "On Physostoma
elegans, an archaic type of seed from the Palaeozoic Rocks", "Annals of
Botany", January, 1909. See also the earlier papers there cited.) In
no case, however, is there as yet any satisfactory evidence for
the formation of a pollen-tube; it is probable that in these early
Seed-plants the pollen-grains remained at about the evolutionary level
of the microspores in Pilularia or Selaginella, and discharged their
spermatozoids directly, leaving them to find their own way to the
female cells. It thus appears that there were once Spermophyta without
pollen-tubes. The pollen-tube method ultimately prevailed, becoming a
constant "morphological character," for no other reason than because,
under the new conditions, it provided a more perfect mechanism for the
accomplishment of the act of fertilisation. We have still, in the Cycads
and Ginkgo, the transitional case, where the tube remains short, serves
mainly as an anchor and water-reservoir, but yet is able, by its slight
growth, to give the spermatozoids a "lift" in the right direction. In
other Seed-plants the sperms are mere passengers, carried all the way by
the pollen-tube; this fact has alone rendered the Angiospermous method
of fertilisation through a stigma possible.

We may next take the seed itself--the very type of a morphological
character. Our fossil record does not go far enough back to tell us the
origin of the seed in the Cycadophyta and Pteridosperms (the main line
of its development) but some interesting sidelights may be obtained from
the Lycopod phylum. In two Palaeozoic genera, as we have seen, seed-like
organs are known to have been developed, resembling true seeds in the
presence of an integument and of a single functional embryo-sac, as well
as in some other points. We will call these organs "seeds" for the sake
of shortness. In one genus (Lepidocarpon) the seeds were borne on a cone
indistinguishable from that of the ordinary cryptogamic Lepidodendreae,
the typical Lycopods of the period, while the seed itself retained
much of the detailed structure of the sporangium of that family. In the
second genus, Miadesmia, the seed-bearing plant was herbaceous, and much
like a recent Selaginella. (See Margaret Benson, "Miadesmia membranacea,
a new Palaeozoic Lycopod with a seed-like structure", "Phil. Trans.
Royal Soc. Vol." 199, B. 1908.) The seeds of the two genera are
differently constructed, and evidently had an independent origin. Here,
then, we have seeds arising casually, as it were, at different points
among plants which otherwise retain all the characters of their
cryptogamic fellows; the seed is not yet a morphological character of
importance. To suppose that in these isolated cases the seed sprang into
being in obedience to a Law of Advance ("Vervollkommungsprincip"),
from which other contemporary Lycopods were exempt, involves us in
unnecessary mysticism. On the other hand it is not difficult to see how
these seeds may have arisen, as adaptive structures, under the influence
of Natural Selection. The seed-like structure afforded protection to the
prothallus, and may have enabled the embryo to be launched on the world
in greater security. There was further, as we may suppose, a gain in
certainty of fertilisation. As the writer has pointed out elsewhere,
the chances against the necessary association of the small male with the
large female spores must have been enormously great when the cones were
borne high up on tall trees. The same difficulty may have existed in the
case of the herbaceous Miadesmia, if, as Miss Benson conjectures, it was
an epiphyte. One way of solving the problem was for pollination to take
place while the megaspore was still on the parent plant, and this is
just what the formation of an ovule or seed was likely to secure.

The seeds of the Pteridosperms, unlike those of the Lycopod stock,
have not yet been found in statu nascendi--in all known cases they were
already highly developed organs and far removed from the cryptogamic
sporangium. But in two respects we find that these seeds, or some
of them, had not yet realised their possibilities. In the seed
of Lyginodendron and other cases the micropyle, or orifice of the
integument, was not the passage through which the pollen entered; the
open neck of the pollen-chamber protruded through the micropyle and
itself received the pollen. We have met with an analogous case, at a
more advanced stage of evolution, in the Bennettiteae, where the wall
of the gynaecium, though otherwise closed, did not provide a stigma to
catch the pollen, but allowed the micropyles of the ovules to protrude
and receive the pollen in the old gymnospermous fashion. The integument
in the one case and the pistil in the other had not yet assumed all
the functions to which the organ ultimately became adapted. Again, no
Palaeozoic seed has yet been found to contain an embryo, though the
preservation is often good enough for it to have been recognised if
present. It is probable that the nursing of the embryo had not yet come
to be one of the functions of the seed, and that the whole embryonic
development was relegated to the germination stage.

In these two points, the reception of the pollen by the micropyle and
the nursing of the embryo, it appears that many Palaeozoic seeds
were imperfect, as compared with the typical seeds of later times.
As evolution went on, one function was superadded on another, and
it appears impossible to resist the conclusion that the whole
differentiation of the seed was a process of adaptation, and
consequently governed by Natural Selection, just as much as the
specialisation of the rostellum in an Orchid, or of the pappus in a
Composite.

Did space allow, other examples might be added. We may venture to
maintain that the glimpses which the fossil record allows us into early
stages in the evolution of organs now of high systematic importance,
by no means justify the belief in any essential distinction between
morphological and adaptive characters.

Another point, closely connected with Darwin's theory, on which the
fossil history of plants has been supposed to have some bearing, is
the question of Mutation, as opposed to indefinite variation. Arber and
Parkin, in their interesting memoir on the Origin of Angiosperms,
have suggested calling in Mutation to explain the apparently sudden
transition from the cycadean to the angiospermous type of foliage, in
late Mesozoic times, though they express themselves with much caution,
and point out "a distinct danger that Mutation may become the last
resort of the phylogenetically destitute"!

The distinguished French palaeobotanists, Grand'Eury (C. Grand'Eury,
"Sur les mutations de quelques Plantes fossiles du Terrain houiller".
"Comptes Rendus", CXLII. page 25, 1906.) and Zeiller (R. Zeiller
"Les Vegetaux fossiles et leurs Enchainements", "Revue du Mois", III.
February, 1907.), are of opinion, to quote the words of the latter
writer, that the facts of fossil Botany are in agreement with the sudden
appearance of new forms, differing by marked characters from those that
have given them birth; he adds that these results give more amplitude
to this idea of Mutation, extending it to groups of a higher order,
and even revealing the existence of discontinuous series between the
successive terms of which we yet recognise bonds of filiation. (Loc.
cit. page 23.)

If Zeiller's opinion should be confirmed, it would no doubt be a serious
blow to the Darwinian theory. As Darwin said: "Under a scientific point
of view, and as leading to further investigation, but little advantage
is gained by believing that new forms are suddenly developed in an
inexplicable manner from old and widely different forms, over the old
belief in the creation of species from the dust of the earth." ("Origin
of Species", page 424.)

It most however be pointed out, that such mutations as Zeiller, and to
some extent Arber and Parkin, appear to have in view, bridging the gulf
between different Orders and Classes, bear no relation to any mutations
which have been actually observed, such as the comparatively small
changes, of sub-specific value, described by De Vries in the type-case
of Oenothera Lamarckiana. The results of palaeobotanical research have
undoubtedly tended to fill up gaps in the Natural System of plants--that
many such gaps still persist is not surprising; their presence may well
serve as an incentive to further research but does not, as it seems
to the writer, justify the assumption of changes in the past, wholly
without analogy among living organisms.

As regards the succession of species, there are no greater authorities
than Grand'Eury and Zeiller, and great weight must be attached to their
opinion that the evidence from continuous deposits favours a somewhat
sudden change from one specific form to another. At the same time
it will be well to bear in mind that the subject of the "absence of
numerous intermediate varieties in any single formation" was fully
discussed by Darwin. ("Origin of Species", pages 275-282, and page
312.); the explanation which he gave may go a long way to account for
the facts which recent writers have regarded as favouring the theory of
saltatory mutation.

The rapid sketch given in the present essay can do no more than call
attention to a few salient points, in which the palaeontological records
of plants has an evident bearing on the Darwinian theory. At the present
day the whole subject of palaeobotany is a study in evolution, and
derives its chief inspiration from the ideas of Darwin and Wallace. In
return it contributes something to the verification of their teaching;
the recent progress of the subject, in spite of the immense difficulties
which still remain, has added fresh force to Darwin's statement that
"the great leading facts in palaeontology agree admirably with the
theory of descent with modification through variation and natural
selection." (Ibid. page 313.)




XIII. THE INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON THE FORMS OF PLANTS. By Georg
Klebs, PH.D.

Professor of Botany in the University of Heidelberg.


The dependence of plants on their environment became the object of
scientific research when the phenomena of life were first investigated
and physiology took its place as a special branch of science. This
occurred in the course of the eighteenth century as the result of the
pioneer work of Hales, Duhamel, Ingenhousz, Senebier and others. In
the nineteenth century, particularly in the second half, physiology
experienced an unprecedented development in that it began to concern
itself with the experimental study of nutrition and growth, and with
the phenomena associated with stimulus and movement; on the other hand,
physiology neglected phenomena connected with the production of form, a
department of knowledge which was the province of morphology, a purely
descriptive science. It was in the middle of the last century that the
growth of comparative morphology and the study of phases of development
reached their highest point.

The forms of plants appeared to be the expression of their inscrutable
inner nature; the stages passed through in the development of the
individual were regarded as the outcome of purely internal and hidden
laws. The feasibility of experimental inquiry seemed therefore remote.
Meanwhile, the recognition of the great importance of such a causal
morphology emerged from the researches of the physiologists of that
time, more especially from those of Hofmeister (Hofmeister, "Allgemeine
Morphologie", Leipzig, 1868, page 579.), and afterwards from the work of
Sachs. (Sachs, "Stoff und Form der Pflanzenorgane", Vol. I. 1880; Vol.
II. 1882. "Gesammelte Abhandlungen uber Pflanzen-Physiologie", II.
Leipzig, 1893.) Hofmeister, in speaking of this line of inquiry,
described it as "the most pressing and immediate aim of the investigator
to discover to what extent external forces acting on the organism are of
importance in determining its form." This advance was the outcome of the
influence of that potent force in biology which was created by Darwin's
"Origin of Species" (1859).

The significance of the splendid conception of the transformation of
species was first recognised and discussed by Lamarck (1809); as an
explanation of transformation he at once seized upon the idea--an
intelligible view--that the external world is the determining factor.
Lamarck (Lamarck, "Philosophie zoologique", pages 223-227. Paris, 1809.)
endeavoured, more especially, to demonstrate from the behaviour
of plants that changes in environment induce change in form which
eventually leads to the production of new species. In the case of
animals, Lamarck adopted the teleological view that alterations in the
environment first lead to alterations in the needs of the organisms,
which, as the result of a kind of conscious effort of will, induce
useful modifications and even the development of new organs. His work
has not exercised any influence on the progress of science: Darwin
himself confessed in regard to Lamarck's work--"I got not a fact or idea
from it." ("Life and Letters", Vol. II. page 215.)

On a mass of incomparably richer and more essential data Darwin
based his view of the descent of organisms and gained for it general
acceptance; as an explanation of modification he elaborated the
ingeniously conceived selection theory. The question of special interest
in this connection, namely what is the importance of the influence
of the environment, Darwin always answered with some hesitation and
caution, indeed with a certain amount of indecision.

The fundamental principle underlying his theory is that of general
variability as a whole, the nature and extent of which, especially
in cultivated organisms, are fully dealt with in his well-known book.
(Darwin, "The variation of Animals and Plants under domestication",
2 vols., edition 1, 1868; edition 2, 1875; popular edition 1905.) In
regard to the question as to the cause of variability Darwin adopts a
consistently mechanical view. He says: "These several considerations
alone render it probable that variability of every kind is directly or
indirectly caused by changed conditions of life. Or, to put the case
under another point of view, if it were possible to expose all the
individuals of a species during many generations to absolutely uniform
conditions of life, there would be no variability." ("The variation of
Animals and Plants" (2nd edition), Vol. II. page 242.) Darwin did not
draw further conclusions from this general principle.

Variations produced in organisms by the environment are distinguished by
Darwin as "the definite" and "the indefinite." (Ibid. II. page 260. See
also "Origin of Species" (6th edition), page 6.) The first occur "when
all or nearly all the offspring of an individual exposed to certain
conditions during several generations are modified in the same manner."
Indefinite variation is much more general and a more important factor in
the production of new species; as a result of this, single individuals
are distinguished from one another by "slight" differences, first in
one then in another character. There may also occur, though this is very
rare, more marked modifications, "variations which seem to us in our
ignorance to arise spontaneously." ("Origin of Species" (6th edition),
page 421.) The selection theory demands the further postulate that such
changes, "whether extremely slight or strongly marked," are inherited.
Darwin was no nearer to an experimental proof of this assumption than to
the discovery of the actual cause of variability. It was not until the
later years of his life that Darwin was occupied with the "perplexing
problem... what causes almost every cultivated plant to vary" ("Life
and Letters", Vol. III. page 342.): he began to make experiments on the
influence of the soil, but these were soon given up.

In the course of the violent controversy which was the outcome of
Darwin's work the fundamental principles of his teaching were not
advanced by any decisive observations. Among the supporters and
opponents, Nageli (Nageli, "Theorie der Abstammungslehre", Munich, 1884;
cf. Chapter III.) was one of the few who sought to obtain proofs by
experimental methods. His extensive cultural experiments with alpine
Hieracia led him to form the opinion that the changes which are induced
by an alteration in the food-supply, in climate or in habitat, are not
inherited and are therefore of no importance from the point of view of
the production of species. And yet Nageli did attribute an important
influence to the external world; he believed that adaptations of plants
arise as reactions to continuous stimuli, which supply a need and are
therefore useful. These opinions, which recall the teleological
aspect of Lamarckism, are entirely unsupported by proof. While other
far-reaching attempts at an explanation of the theory of descent were
formulated both in Nageli's time and afterwards, some in support of,
others in opposition to Darwin, the necessity of investigating, from
different standpoints, the underlying causes, variability and heredity,
was more and more realised. To this category belong the statistical
investigations undertaken by Quetelet and Galton, the researches into
hybridisation, to which an impetus was given by the re-discovery of
the Mendelian law of segregation, as also by the culture experiments
on mutating species following the work of de Vries, and lastly the
consideration of the question how far variation and heredity are
governed by external influences. These latter problems, which
are concerned in general with the causes of form-production and
form-modification, may be treated in a short summary which falls under
two heads, one having reference to the conditions of form-production in
single species, the other being concerned with the conditions governing
the transformation of species.

I. THE INFLUENCE OF EXTERNAL CONDITIONS ON FORM-PRODUCTION IN SINGLE
SPECIES.

The members of plants, which we express by the terms stem, leaf, flower,
etc. are capable of modification within certain limits; since Lamarck's
time this power of modification has been brought more or less into
relation with the environment. We are concerned not only with the
question of experimental demonstration of this relationship, but, more
generally, with an examination of the origin of forms, the sequences of
stages in development that are governed by recognisable causes. We have
to consider the general problem; to study the conditions of all typical
as well as of atypic forms, in other words, to found a physiology of
form.

If we survey the endless variety of plant-forms and consider the highly
complex and still little known processes in the interior of cells, and
if we remember that the whole of this branch of investigation came into
existence only a few decades ago, we are able to grasp the fact that
a satisfactory explanation of the factors determining form cannot be
discovered all at once. The goal is still far away. We are not concerned
now with the controversial question, whether, on the whole, the
fundamental processes in the development of form can be recognised by
physiological means. A belief in the possibility of this can in any case
do no harm. What we may and must attempt is this--to discover points
of attack on one side or another, which may enable us by means of
experimental methods to come into closer touch with these elusive
and difficult problems. While we are forced to admit that there is at
present much that is insoluble there remains an inexhaustible supply of
problems capable of solution.

The object of our investigations is the species; but as regards the
question, what is a species, science of to-day takes up a position
different from that of Darwin. For him it was the Linnean species which
illustrates variation: we now know, thanks to the work of Jordan,
de Bary, and particularly to that of de Vries (de Vries, "Die
Mutationstheorie", Leipzig, 1901, Vol. I. page 33.), that the Linnean
species consists of a large or small number of entities, elementary
species. In experimental investigation it is essential that observations
be made on a pure species, or, as Johannsen (Johannsen, "Ueber
Erblichkeit in Populationen und reinen Linien", Jena, 1903.) says, on
a pure "line." What has long been recognised as necessary in the
investigation of fungi, bacteria and algae must also be insisted on in
the case of flowering plants; we must start with a single individual
which is reproduced vegetatively or by strict self-fertilisation.
In dioecious plants we must aim at the reproduction of brothers and
sisters.

We may at the outset take it for granted that a pure species remains the
same under similar external conditions; it varies as these vary. IT IS
CHARACTERISTIC OF A SPECIES THAT IT ALWAYS EXHIBITS A CONSTANT RELATION
TO A PARTICULAR ENVIRONMENT. In the case of two different species, e.g.
the hay and anthrax bacilli or two varieties of Campanula with blue and
white flowers respectively, a similar environment produces a constant
difference. The cause of this is a mystery.

According to the modern standpoint, the living cell is a complex
chemico-physical system which is regarded as a dynamical system of
equilibrium, a conception suggested by Herbert Spencer and which has
acquired a constantly increasing importance in the light of modern
developments in physical chemistry. The various chemical compounds,
proteids, carbohydrates, fats, the whole series of different ferments,
etc. occur in the cell in a definite physical arrangement. The two
systems of two species must as a matter of fact possess a constant
difference, which it is necessary to define by a special term. We say,
therefore, that the SPECIFIC STRUCTURE is different.

By way of illustrating this provisionally, we may assume that the
proteids of the two species possess a constant chemical difference. This
conception of specific structure is specially important in its bearing
on a further treatment of the subject. In the original cell, eventually
also in every cell of a plant, the characters which afterwards
become apparent must exist somewhere; they are integral parts of the
capabilities or potentialities of specific structure. Thus not only the
characters which are exhibited under ordinary conditions in nature, but
also many others which become apparent only under special conditions (In
this connection I leave out of account, as before, the idea of material
carriers of heredity which since the publication of Darwin's Pangenesis
hypothesis has been frequently suggested. See my remarks in "Variationen
der Bluten", "Pringsheim's Jahrb. Wiss. Bot." 1905, page 298; also
Detto, "Biol. Centralbl." 1907, page 81, "Die Erklarbarkeit der
Ontogenese durch materielle Anlagen".), are to be included as such
potentialities in cells; the conception of specific structure includes
the WHOLE OF THE POTENTIALITIES OF A SPECIES; specific structure
comprises that which we must always assume without being able to explain
it.

A relatively simple substance, such as oxalate of lime, is known under
a great number of different crystalline forms belonging to different
systems (Compare Kohl's work on "Anatomisch-phys. Untersuchungen uber
Kalksalze", etc. Marburg, 1889.); these may occur as single crystals,
concretions or as concentric sphaerites. The power to assume this
variety of form is in some way inherent in the molecular structure,
though we cannot, even in this case, explain the necessary connection
between structure and crystalline form. These potentialities can only
become operative under the influence of external conditions; their
stimulation into activity depends on the degree of concentration of the
various solutions, on the nature of the particular calcium salt, on the
acid or alkaline reactions. Broadly speaking, the plant cell behaves in
a similar way. The manifestation of each form, which is inherent as a
potentiality in the specific structure, is ultimately to be referred to
external conditions.

An insight into this connection is, however, rendered exceedingly
difficult, often quite impossible, because the environment never
directly calls into action the potentialities. Its influence is exerted
on what we may call the inner world of the organism, the importance of
which increases with the degree of differentiation. The production of
form in every plant depends upon processes in the interior of the cells,
and the nature of these determines which among the possible characters
is to be brought to light. In no single case are we acquainted with the
internal process responsible for the production of a particular
form. All possible factors may play a part, such as osmotic pressure,
permeability of the protoplasm, the degree of concentration of the
various chemical substances, etc.; all these factors should be included
in the category of INTERNAL CONDITIONS. This inner world appears the
more hidden from our ken because it is always represented by a certain
definite state, whether we are dealing with a single cell or with a
small group of cells. These have been produced from pre-existing cells
and they in turn from others; the problem is constantly pushed back
through a succession of generations until it becomes identified with
that of the origin of species.

A way, however, is opened for investigation; experience teaches us that
this inner world is not a constant factor: on the contrary, it appears
to be very variable. The dependence of VARIABLE INTERNAL on VARIABLE
EXTERNAL conditions gives us the key with which research may open the
door. In the lower plants this dependence is at once apparent, each cell
is directly subject to external influences. In the higher plants with
their different organs, these influences were transmitted to cells in
course of development along exceedingly complex lines. In the case of
the growing-point of a bud, which is capable of producing a complete
plant, direct influences play a much less important part than those
exerted through other organs, particularly through the roots and leaves,
which are essential in nutrition. These correlations, as we may call
them, are of the greatest importance as aids to an understanding of
form-production. When a bud is produced on a particular part of a plant,
it undergoes definite internal modifications induced by the influence of
other organs, the activity of which is governed by the environment, and
as the result of this it develops along a certain direction; it may,
for example, become a flower. The particular direction of development
is determined before the rudiment is differentiated and is exerted so
strongly that further development ensues without interruption, even
though the external conditions vary considerably and exert a positively
inimical influence: this produces the impression that development
proceeds entirely independently of the outer world. The widespread
belief that such independence exists is very premature and at all events
unproven.

The state of the young rudiment is the outcome of previous influences of
the external world communicated through other organs. Experiments show
that in certain cases, if the efficiency of roots and leaves as organs
concerned with nutrition is interfered with, the production of flowers
is affected, and their characters, which are normally very constant,
undergo far-reaching modifications. To find the right moment at which to
make the necessary alteration in the environment is indeed difficult
and in many cases not yet possible. This is especially the case with
fertilised eggs, which in a higher degree than buds have acquired,
through parental influences, an apparently fixed internal organisation,
and this seems to have pre-determined their development. It is, however,
highly probable that it will be possible, by influencing the parents,
to alter the internal organisation and to switch off development on to
other lines.

Having made these general observations I will now cite a few of the many
facts at our disposal, in order to illustrate the methods and aim of the
experimental methods of research. As a matter of convenience I will deal
separately with modification of development and with modification of
single organs.

I. EFFECT OF ENVIRONMENT UPON THE COURSE OF DEVELOPMENT.

Every plant, whether an alga or a flowering plant passes, under natural
conditions, through a series of developmental stages characteristic of
each species, and these consist in a regular sequence of definite
forms. It is impossible to form an opinion from mere observation and
description as to what inner changes are essential for the production of
the several forms. We must endeavour to influence the inner factors by
known external conditions in such a way that the individual stages in
development are separately controlled and the order of their sequence
determined at will by experimental treatment. Such control over the
course of development may be gained with special certainty in the case
of the lower organisms.

With these it is practicable to control the principal conditions of
cultivation and to vary them in various ways. By this means it has been
demonstrated that each developmental stage depends upon special external
conditions, and in cases where our knowledge is sufficient, a particular
stage may be obtained at will. In the Green Algae (See Klebs, "Die
Bedingung der Fortpflanzung... ", Jena, 1896; also "Jahrb. fur
Wiss. Bot." 1898 and 1900; "Probleme der Entwickelung, III." "Biol.
Centralbl." 1904, page 452.), as in the case of Fungi, we may classify
the stages of development into purely vegetative growth (growth,
cell-division, branching), asexual reproduction (formation of zoospores,
conidia) and sexual processes (formation of male and female sexual
organs). By modifying the external conditions it is possible to induce
algae or fungi (Vaucheria, Saprolegnia) to grow continuously for
several years or, in the course of a few days, to die after an enormous
production of asexual or sexual cells. In some instances even an almost
complete stoppage of growth may be caused, reproductive cells being
scarcely formed before the organism is again compelled to resort to
reproduction. Thus the sequence of the different stages in development
can be modified as we may desire.

The result of a more thorough investigation of the determining
conditions appears to produce at first sight a confused impression
of all sorts of possibilities. Even closely allied species exhibit
differences in regard to the connection between their development and
external conditions. It is especially noteworthy that the same form in
development may be produced as the result of very different alterations
in the environment. At the same time we can undoubtedly detect a certain
unity in the multiplicity of the individual phenomena.

If we compare the factors essential for the different stages in
development, we see that the question always resolves itself into one
of modification of similar conditions common to all life-processes. We
should rather have inferred that there exist specific external stimuli
for each developmental stage, for instance, certain chemical agencies.
Experiments hitherto made support the conclusion that QUANTITATIVE
alterations in the general conditions of life produce different types of
development. An alga or a fungus grows so long as all the conditions
of nutrition remain at a certain optimum for growth. In order to bring
about asexual reproduction, e.g. the formation of zoospores, it is
sometimes necessary to increase the degree of intensity of external
factors; sometimes, on the other hand, these must be reduced in
intensity. In the case of many algae a decrease in light-intensity or
in the amount of salts in the culture solution, or in the temperature,
induces asexual reproduction, while in others, on the contrary, an
increase in regard to each of these factors is required to produce
the same result. This holds good for the quantitative variations which
induce sexual reproduction in algae. The controlling factor is found to
be a reduction in the supply of nutritive salts and the exposure of the
plants to prolonged illumination or, better still, an increase in the
intensity of the light, the efficiency of illumination depending on the
consequent formation of organic substances such as carbohydrates.

The quantitative alterations of external conditions may be spoken of as
releasing stimuli. They produce, in the complex equilibrium of the cell,
quantitative modifications in the arrangement and distribution of mass,
by means of which other chemical processes are at once set in motion,
and finally a new condition of equilibrium is attained. But the
commonly expressed view that the environment can as a rule act only as
a releasing agent is incorrect, because it overlooks an essential point.
The power of a cell to receive stimuli is only acquired as the result
of previous nutrition, which has produced a definite condition of
concentration of different substances. Quantities are in this case
the determining factors. The distribution of quantities is especially
important in the sexual reproduction of algae, for which a vigorous
production of the materials formed during carbon-assimilation appears to
be essential.

In the Flowering plants, on the other hand, for reasons already
mentioned, the whole problem is more complicated. Investigations on
changes in the course of development of fertilised eggs have hitherto
been unsuccessful; the difficulty of influencing egg-cells deeply
immersed in tissue constitutes a serious obstacle. Other parts of plants
are, however, convenient objects of experiment; e.g. the growing apices
of buds which serve as cuttings for reproductive purposes, or buds on
tubers, runners, rhizomes, etc. A growing apex consists of cells capable
of division in which, as in egg-cells, a complete series of latent
possibilities of development is embodied. Which of these possibilities
becomes effective depends upon the action of the outer world transmitted
by organs concerned with nutrition.

Of the different stages which a flowering plant passes through in the
course of its development we will deal only with one in order to show
that, in spite of its great complexity, the problem is, in essentials,
equally open to attack in the higher plants and in the simplest
organisms. The most important stage in the life of a flowering plant
is the transition from purely vegetative growth to sexual
reproduction--that is, the production of flowers. In certain cases it
can be demonstrated that there is no internal cause, dependent simply
on the specific structure, which compels a plant to produce its flowers
after a definite period of vegetative growth. (Klebs, "Willkurliche
Entwickelungsanderungen", Jena 1903; see also "Probleme der
Entwickelung", I. II. "Centralbl." 1904.)

One extreme case, that of exceptionally early flowering, has been
observed in nature and more often in cultivation. A number of plants
under certain conditions are able to flower soon after germination.
(Cf. numerous records of this kind by Diels, "Jugendformen und Bluten",
Berlin, 1906.) This shortening of the period of development is exhibited
in the most striking form in trees, as in the oak (Mobius, "Beitrage zur
Lehre von der Fortpflanzung", Jena, 1897, page 89.), flowering seedlings
of which have been observed from one to three years old, whereas
normally the tree does not flower until it is sixty or eighty years old.

Another extreme case is represented by prolonged vegetative growth
leading to the complete suppression of flower-production. This result
may be obtained with several plants, such as Glechoma, the sugar beet,
Digitalis, and others, if they are kept during the winter in a warm,
damp atmosphere, and in rich soil; in the following spring or summer
they fail to flower. (Klebs, "Willkurliche Aenderungen", etc. Jena,
1903, page 130.) Theoretically, however, experiments are of greater
importance in which the production of flowers is inhibited by
very favourable conditions of nutrition (Klebs, "Ueber kunstliche
Metamorphosen", Stuttgart, 1906, page 115) ("Abh. Naturf. Ges. Halle",
XXV.) occurring at the normal flowering period. Even in the case of
plants of Sempervivum several years old, which, as is shown by control
experiments on precisely similar plants, are on the point of flowering,
flowering is rendered impossible if they are forced to very vigorous
growth by an abundant supply of water and salts in the spring.
Flowering, however, occurs, if such plants are cultivated in relatively
dry sandy soil and in the presence of strong light. Careful researches
into the conditions of growth have led, in the cases Sempervivum, to
the following results: (1) With a strong light and vigorous
carbon-assimilation a considerably increased supply of water and
nutritive salts produces active vegetative growth. (2) With a vigorous
carbon-assimilation in strong light, and a decrease in the supply of
water and salts active flower-production is induced. (3) If an average
supply of water and salts is given both processes are possible;
the intensity of carbon-assimilation determines which of the two is
manifested. A diminution in the production of organic substances,
particularly of carbohydrates, induces vegetative growth. This can
be effected by culture in feeble light or in light deprived of the
yellow-red rays: on the other hand, flower-production follows an
increase in light-intensity. These results are essentially in agreement
with well-known observations on cultivated plants, according to which,
the application of much moisture, after a plentiful supply of manure
composed of inorganic salts, hinders the flower-production of many
vegetables, while a decrease in the supply of water and salts favours
flowering.

ii. INFLUENCE OF THE ENVIRONMENT ON THE FORM OF SINGLE ORGANS. (A
considerable number of observations bearing on this question are given
by Goebel in his "Experimentelle Morphologie der Pflanzen", Leipzig,
1908. It is not possible to deal here with the alteration in anatomical
structure; cf. Kuster, "Pathologische Pflanzenanatomie", Jena, 1903.)

If we look closely into the development of a flowering plant, we notice
that in a given species differently formed organs occur in definite
positions. In a potato plant colourless runners are formed from the
base of the main stem which grow underground and produce tubers at their
tips: from a higher level foliage shoots arise nearer the apex. External
appearances suggest that both the place of origin and the form of these
organs were predetermined in the egg-cell or in the tuber. But it was
shown experimentally by the well-known investigator Knight (Knight,
"Selection from the Physiological and Horticultural Papers", London,
1841.) that tubers may be developed on the aerial stem in place of
foliage shoots. These observations were considerably extended by
Vochting. (Vochting, "Ueber die Bildung der Knollen", Cassel, 1887; see
also "Bot. Zeit." 1902, 87.) In one kind of potato, germinating tubers
were induced to form foliage shoots under the influence of a higher
temperature; at a lower temperature they formed tuber-bearing shoots.
Many other examples of the conversion of foliage-shoots into runners and
rhizomes, or vice versa, have been described by Goebel and others. As in
the asexual reproduction of algae quantitative alteration in the amount
of moisture, light, temperature, etc. determines whether this or that
form of shoot is produced. If the primordia of these organs are exposed
to altered conditions of nutrition at a sufficiently early stage a
complete substitution of one organ for another is effected. If the
rudiment has reached a certain stage in development before it is exposed
to these influences, extraordinary intermediate forms are obtained,
bearing the characters of both organs.

The study of regeneration following injury is of greater importance as
regards the problem of the development and place of origin of organs.
(Reference may be made to the full summary of results given by Goebel in
his "Experimentelle Morphologie", Leipzig and Berlin, 1908, Section IV.)
Only in relatively very rare cases is there a complete re-formation
of the injured organ itself, as e.g. in the growing-apex. Much more
commonly injury leads to the development of complementary formations, it
may be the rejuvenescence of a hitherto dormant rudiment, or it may be
the formation of such ab initio. In all organs, stems, roots, leaves,
as well as inflorescences, this kind of regeneration, which occurs in
a great variety of ways according to the species, may be observed on
detached pieces of the plant. Cases are also known, such, for example,
as the leaves of many plants which readily form roots but not shoots,
where a complete regeneration does not occur.

The widely spread power of reacting to wounding affords a very valuable
means of inducing a fresh development of buds and roots on places
where they do not occur in normal circumstances. Injury creates special
conditions, but little is known as yet in regard to alterations directly
produced in this way. Where the injury consists in the separation of
an organ from its normal connections, the factors concerned are more
comprehensible. A detached leaf, e.g., is at once cut off from a supply
of water and salts, and is deprived of the means of getting rid of
organic substances which it produces; the result is a considerable
alteration in the degree of concentration. No experimental investigation
on these lines has yet been made. Our ignorance has often led to the
view that we are dealing with a force whose specific quality is the
restitution of the parts lost by operation; the proof, therefore,
that in certain cases a similar production of new roots or buds may
be induced without previous injury and simply by a change in external
conditions assumes an importance. (Klebs, "Willkurliche Entwickelung",
page 100; also, "Probleme der Entwickelung", "Biol. Centralbl." 1904,
page 610.)

A specially striking phenomenon of regeneration, exhibited also by
uninjured plants, is afforded by polarity, which was discovered by
Vochting. (See the classic work of Vochting, "Ueber Organbildung im
Pflanzenreich", I. Bonn, 1888; also "Bot. Zeit." 1906, page 101; cf.
Goebel, "Experimentelle Morphologie", Leipzig and Berlin, 1908, Section
V, Polaritat.) It is found, for example, that roots are formed from the
base of a detached piece of stem and shoots from the apex. Within
the limits of this essay it is impossible to go into this difficult
question; it is, however, important from the point of view of our
general survey to emphasise the fact that the physiological distinctions
between base and apex of pieces of stem are only of a quantitative
kind, that is, they consist in the inhibition of certain phenomena or
in favouring them. As a matter of fact roots may be produced from the
apices of willows and cuttings of other plants; the distinction is thus
obliterated under the influence of environment. The fixed polarity of
cuttings from full grown stems cannot be destroyed; it is the expression
of previous development. Vochting speaks of polarity as a fixed
inherited character. This is an unconvincing conclusion, as nothing can
be deduced from our present knowledge as to the causes which led up to
polarity. We know that the fertilised egg, like the embryo, is fixed at
one end by which it hangs freely in the embryo-sac and afterwards in
the endosperm. From the first, therefore, the two ends have different
natures, and these are revealed in the differentiation into root-apex
and stem-apex. A definite direction in the flow of food-substances
is correlated with this arrangement, and this eventually leads to a
polarity in the tissues. This view requires experimental proof, which in
the case of the egg-cells of flowering plants hardly appears possible;
but it derives considerable support from the fact that in herbaceous
plants, e.g. Sempervivum (Klebs, "Variationen der Bluten", "Jahrb. Wiss.
Bot." 1905, page 260.), rosettes or flower-shoots are formed in response
to external conditions at the base, in the middle, or at the apex of the
stem, so that polarity as it occurs under normal conditions cannot be
the result of unalterable hereditary factors. On the other hand, the
lower plants should furnish decisive evidence on this question, and
the experiments of Stahl, Winkler, Kniep, and others indicate the right
method of attacking the problem.

The relation of leaf-form to environment has often been investigated and
is well known. The leaves of bog and water plants (Cf.Goebel, loc.
cit. chapter II.; also Gluck, "Untersuchungen uber Wasser- und
Sumpfgewachse", Jena, Vols. I.-II. 1905-06.) afford the most striking
examples of modifications: according as they are grown in water, moist
or dry air, the form of the species characteristic of the particular
habitat is produced, since the stems are also modified. To the same
group of phenomena belongs the modification of the forms of leaves and
stems in plants on transplantation from the plains to the mountains
(Bonnier, "Recherches sur l'Anatomie experimentale des Vegetaux",
Corbeil, 1895.) or vice versa. Such variations are by no means isolated
examples. All plants exhibit a definite alteration in form as the result
of prolonged cultivation in moist or dry air, in strong or feeble
light, or in darkness, or in salt solutions of different composition and
strength.

Every individual which is exposed to definite combinations of external
factors exhibits eventually the same type of modification. This is the
type of variation which Darwin termed "definite." It is easy to realise
that indefinite or fluctuating variations belong essentially to the same
class of phenomena; both are reactions to changes in environment. In the
production of individual variations two different influences undoubtedly
cooperate. One set of variations is caused by different external
conditions, during the production, either of sexual cells or of
vegetative primordia; another set is the result of varying external
conditions during the development of the embryo into an adult plant. The
two sets of influences cannot as yet be sharply differentiated. If,
for purposes of vegetative reproduction, we select pieces of the
same parent-plant of a pure species, the second type of variation
predominates. Individual fluctuations depend essentially in such cases
on small variations in environment during development.

These relations must be borne in mind if we wish to understand the
results of statistical methods. Since the work of Quetelet, Galton, and
others the statistical examination of individual differences in animals
and plants has become a special science, which is primarily based on the
consideration that the application of the theory of probability renders
possible mathematical statement and control of the results. The facts
show that any character, size of leaf, length of stem, the number of
members in a flower, etc. do not vary haphazard but in a very regular
manner. In most cases it is found that there is a value which occurs
most commonly, the average or medium value, from which the larger and
smaller deviations, the so-called plus and minus variations fall away in
a continuous series and end in a limiting value. In the simpler cases
a falling off occurs equally on both sides of the curve; the curve
constructed from such data agrees very closely with the Gaussian curve
of error. In more complicated cases irregular curves of different kinds
are obtained which may be calculated on certain suppositions.

The regular fluctuations about a mean according to the rule of
probability is often attributed to some law underlying variability. (de
Vries, "Mutationstheorie", Vol. I. page 35, Leipzig, 1901.) But there is
no such law which compels a plant to vary in a particular manner. Every
experimental investigation shows, as we have already remarked, that
the fluctuation of characters depends on fluctuation in the external
factors. The applicability of the method of probability follows from
the fact that the numerous individuals of a species are influenced by
a limited number of variable conditions. (Klebs, "Willkurl. Ent." Jena,
1903, page 141.) As each of these conditions includes within certain
limits all possible values and exhibits all possible combinations, it
follows that, according to the rules of probability, there must be
a mean value, about which the larger and smaller deviations are
distributed. Any character will be found to have the mean value which
corresponds with that combination of determining factors which occurs
most frequently. Deviations towards plus and minus values will be
correspondingly produced by rarer conditions.

A conclusion of fundamental importance may be drawn from this
conception, which is, to a certain extent, supported by experimental
investigation. (Klebs, "Studien uber Variation", "Arch. fur Entw."
1907.) There is no normal curve for a particular CHARACTER, there is
only a curve for the varying combinations of conditions occurring in
nature or under cultivation. Under other conditions entirely different
curves may be obtained with other variants as a mean value. If, for
example, under ordinary conditions the number 10 is the most frequent
variant for the stamens of Sedum spectabile, in special circumstances
(red light) this is replaced by the number 5. The more accurately we
know the conditions for a particular form or number, and are able to
reproduce it by experiment, the nearer we are to achieving our aim of
rendering a particular variation impossible or of making it dominant.

In addition to the individual variations of a species, more pronounced
fluctuations occur relatively rarely and sporadically which are spoken
of as "single variations," or if specially striking as abnormalities
or monstrosities. These forms have long attracted the attention of
morphologists; a large number of observations of this kind are given
in the handbooks of Masters (Masters, "Vegetable Teratology", London,
1869.) and Penzig (Penzig, "Pflanzen-Teratologie", Vols I. and II. Genua,
1890-94.) These variations, which used to be regarded as curiosities,
have now assumed considerable importance in connection with the causes
of form-development. They also possess special interest in relation to
the question of heredity, a subject which does not at present concern
us, as such deviations from normal development undoubtedly arise as
individual variations induced by the influence of environment.

Abnormal developments of all kinds in stems, leaves, and flowers, may
be produced by parasites, insects, or fungi. They may also be induced
by injury, as Blaringhem (Blaringhem, "Mutation et traumatismes", Paris,
1907.) has more particularly demonstrated, which, by cutting away the
leading shoots of branches in an early stage of development, caused
fasciation, torsion, anomalous flowers, etc. The experiments of
Blaringhem point to the probability that disturbances in the conditions
of food-supply consequent on injury are the cause of the production of
monstrosities. This is certainly the case in my experiments with species
of Sempervivum (Klebs, "Kunstliche Metamorphosen", Stuttgart, 1906.);
individuals, which at first formed normal flowers, produced a great
variety of abnormalities as the result of changes in nutrition, we
may call to mind the fact that the formation of inflorescences occurs
normally when a vigorous production of organic compounds, such as
starch, sugar, etc. follows a diminution in the supply of mineral
salts. On the other hand, the development of inflorescences is entirely
suppressed if, at a suitable moment before the actual foundations have
been laid, water and mineral salts are supplied to the roots. If, during
the week when the inflorescence has just been laid down and is growing
very slowly, the supply of water and salts is increased, the internal
conditions of the cells are essentially changed. At a later stage, after
the elongation of the inflorescence, rosettes of leaves are produced
instead of flowers, and structures intermediate between the two kinds of
organs; a number of peculiar plant-forms are thus obtained (Cf. Lotsy,
"Vorlesungen uber Deszendenztheorien", Vol. II. pl. 3, Jena, 1908.)
Abnormalities in the greatest variety are produced in flowers by varying
the time at which the stimulus is applied, and by the cooperation
of other factors such as temperature, darkness, etc. In number and
arrangement the several floral members vary within wide limits;
sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels are altered in form and colour, a
transformation of stamens to carpels and from carpels to stamens occurs
in varying degrees. The majority of the deviations observed had not
previously been seen either under natural conditions or in cultivation;
they were first brought to light through the influence of external
factors.

Such transformations of flowers become apparent at a time, which is
separated by about two months from the period at which the particular
cause began to act. There is, therefore, no close connection between
the appearance of the modifications and the external conditions which
prevail at the moment. When we are ignorant of the causes which are
operative so long before the results are seen, we gain the impression
that such variations as occur are spontaneous or autonomous expressions
of the inner nature of the plant. It is much more likely that, as in
Sempervivum, they were originally produced by an external stimulus which
had previously reached the sexual cells or the young embryo. In any case
abnormalities of this kind appear to be of a special type as compared
with ordinary fluctuating variations. Darwin pointed out this
difference; Bateson (Bateson, "Materials for the study of Variation",
London, 1894, page 5.) has attempted to make the distinction sharper, at
the same time emphasising its importance in heredity.

Bateson applies the term CONTINUOUS to small variations connected with
one another by transitional stages, while those which are more striking
and characterised from the first by a certain completeness, he names
DISCONTINUOUS. He drew attention to a great difficulty which stands in
the way of Lamarck's hypothesis, as also of Darwin's view. "According to
both theories, specific diversity of form is consequent upon diversity
of environment, and diversity of environment is thus the ultimate
measure of diversity of specific form. Here then we meet the difficulty
that diverse environments often shade into each other insensibly and
form a continuous series, whereas the Specific Forms of life which
are subject to them on the whole form a Discontinuous Series."
This difficulty is, however, not of fundamental importance as well
authenticated facts have been adduced showing that by alteration of the
environment discontinuous variations, such as alterations in the number
and form of members of a flower, may be produced. We can as yet no more
explain how this happens than we can explain the existence of continuous
variations. We can only assert that both kinds of variation arise
in response to quantitative alterations in external conditions. The
question as to which kind of variation is produced depends on the
greater or less degree of alteration; it is correlated with the state of
the particular cells at the moment.

In this short sketch it is only possible to deal superficially with a
small part of the subject. It has been clearly shown that in view of the
general dependence of development on the factors of the environment
a number of problems are ready for experimental treatment. One must,
however, not forget that the science of the physiology of form has not
progressed beyond its initial stages. Just now our first duty is to
demonstrate the dependence on external factors in as many forms of
plants as possible, in order to obtain a more thorough control of all
the different plant-forms. The problem is not only to produce at will
(and independently of their normal mode of life) forms which occur
in nature, but also to stimulate into operation potentialities which
necessarily lie dormant under the conditions which prevail in nature.
The constitution of a species is much richer in possibilities of
development than would appear to be the case under normal conditions. It
remains for man to stimulate into activity all the potentialities.

But the control of plant-form is only a preliminary step--the foundation
stones on which to erect a coherent scientific structure. We must
discover what are the internal processes in the cell produced by
external factors, which as a necessary consequence result in the
appearance of a definite form. We are here brought into contact with the
most obscure problem of life. Progress can only be made pari passu with
progress in physics and chemistry, and with the growth of our knowledge
of nutrition, growth, etc.

Let us take one of the simplest cases--an alteration in form. A
cylindrical cell of the alga Stigeoclonium assumes, as Livingstone
(Livingstone, "On the nature of the stimulus which causes the change
of form, etc." "Botanical Gazette", XXX. 1900; also XXXII. 1901.) has
shown, a spherical form when the osmotic pressure of the culture fluid
is increased; or a spore of Mucor, which, in a sugar solution grows
into a branched filament, in the presence of a small quantity of acid
(hydrogen ions) becomes a comparatively large sphere. (Ritter, "Ueber
Kugelhefe, etc." "Ber. bot. Gesell." Berlin, XXV. page 255, 1907.)
In both cases there has undoubtedly been an alteration in the osmotic
pressure of the cell-sap, but this does not suffice to explain the
alteration in form, since the unknown alterations, which are induced in
the protoplasm, must in their turn influence the cell-membrane. In
the case of the very much more complex alterations in form, such as we
encounter in the course of development of plants, there do not appear
to be any clues which lead us to a deeper insight into the phenomena.
Nevertheless we continue the attempt, seeking with the help of any
available hypothesis for points of attack, which may enable us to
acquire a more complete mastery of physiological methods. To quote a
single example; I may put the question, what internal changes produce a
transition from vegetative growth to sexual reproduction?

The facts, which are as clearly established from the lower as for the
higher plants, teach us that quantitative alteration in the environment
produces such a transition. This suggests the conclusion that
quantitative internal changes in the cells, and with them disturbances
in the degree of concentration, are induced, through which the chemical
reactions are led in the direction of sexual reproduction. An increase
in the production of organic substances in the presence of light,
chiefly of the carbohydrates, with a simultaneous decrease in the amount
of inorganic salts and water, are the cause of the disturbance and
at the same time of the alteration in the direction of development.
Possibly indeed mineral salts as such are not in question, but only in
the form of other organic combinations, particularly proteid material,
so that we are concerned with an alteration in the relation of the
carbohydrates and proteids. The difficulties of such researches are very
great because the methods are not yet sufficiently exact to demonstrate
the frequently small quantitative differences in chemical composition.
Questions relating to the enzymes, which are of the greatest importance
in all these life-processes, are especially complicated. In any case
it is the necessary result of such an hypothesis that we must employ
chemical methods of investigation in dealing with problems connected
with the physiology of form.

II. INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON THE TRANSFORMATION OF SPECIES.

The study of the physiology of form-development in a pure species has
already yielded results and makes slow but sure progress. The physiology
of the possibility of the transformation of one species into another is
based, as yet, rather on pious hope than on accomplished fact. From
the first it appeared to be hopeless to investigate physiologically
the origin of Linnean species and at the same time that of the natural
system, an aim which Darwin had before him in his enduring work. The
historical sequence of events, of which an organism is the expression,
can only be treated hypothetically with the help of facts supplied
by comparative morphology, the history of development, geographical
distribution, and palaeontology. (See Lotsy, "Vorlesungen" (Jena, I.
1906, II. 1908), for summary of the facts.) A glance at the controversy
which is going on today in regard to different hypotheses shows that
the same material may lead different investigators to form entirely
different opinions. Our ultimate aim is to find a solution of the
problem as to the cause of the origin of species. Indeed such
attempts are now being made: they are justified by the fact that under
cultivation new and permanent strains are produced; the fundamental
importance of this was first grasped by Darwin. New points of view in
regard to these lines of inquiry have been adopted by H. de Vries
who has succeeded in obtaining from Oenothera Lamarckiana a number of
constant "elementary" species. Even if it is demonstrated that he was
simply dealing with the complex splitting up of a hybrid (Bateson,
"Reports to the Evolution Committee of the Royal Society", London, 1902;
cf. also Lotsy, "Vorlesungen", Vol. I. page 234.), the facts adduced in
no sense lose their very great value.

We must look at the problem in its simplest form; we find it in every
case where a new race differs essentially from the original type in a
single character only; for example, in the colour of the flowers or in
the petalody of the stamens (doubling of flowers). In this connection
we must keep in view the fact that every visible character in a plant is
the resultant of the cooperation of specific structure, with its various
potentialities, and the influence of the environment. We know, that in
a pure species all characters vary, that a blue-flowering Campanula or
a red Sempervivum can be converted by experiment into white-flowering
forms, that a transformation of stamens into petals may be caused by
fungi or by the influence of changed conditions of nutrition, or
that plants in dry and poor soil become dwarfed. But so far as the
experiments justify a conclusion, it would appear that such alterations
are not inherited by the offspring. Like all other variations they
appear only so long as special conditions prevail in the surroundings.

It has been shown that the case is quite different as regards the
white-flowering, double or dwarf races, because these retain their
characters when cultivated under practically identical conditions, and
side by side with the blue, single-flowering or tall races. The problem
may therefore be stated thus: how can a character, which appears in the
one case only under the strictly limited conditions of the experiment,
in other cases become apparent under the very much wider conditions of
ordinary cultivation? If a character appears, in these circumstances,
in the case of all individuals, we then speak of constant races. In such
simple cases the essential point is not the creation of a new character
but rather an ALTERATION OF THIS CHARACTER IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
ENVIRONMENT. In the examples mentioned the modified character in the
simple varieties (or a number of characters in elementary species)
appears more or less suddenly and is constant in the above sense. The
result is what de Vries has termed a Mutation. In this connection we
must bear in mind the fact that no difference, recognisable externally,
need exist between individual variation and mutation. Even the most
minute quantitative difference between two plants may be of specific
value if it is preserved under similar external conditions during many
successive generations. We do not know how this happens. We may state
the problem in other terms; by saying that the specific structure must
be altered. It is possible, to some extent, to explain this sudden
alteration, if we regard it as a chemical alteration of structure either
in the specific qualities of the proteids or of the unknown carriers
of life. In the case of many organic compounds their morphological
characters (the physical condition, crystalline form, etc.) are at once
changed by alteration of atomic relations or by incorporation of new
radicals. (For instance ethylchloride (C2H5Cl) is a gas at 21 deg
C., ethylenechloride (C2H4Cl2) a fluid boiling at 84 deg C., beta
trichlorethane (C2H3Cl3) a fluid boiling at 113 deg C.,
perchlorethane (C2Cl6) a crystalline substance. Klebs, ("Willkurliche
Entwickelungsanderungen" page 158.) Much more important, however, would
be an answer to the question, whether an individual variation can be
converted experimentally into an inherited character--a mutation in de
Vries's sense.

In all circumstances we may recognise as a guiding principle the
assumption adopted by Lamarck, Darwin, and many others, that the
inheritance of any one character, or in more general terms, the
transformation of one species into another, is, in the last instance,
to be referred to a change in the environment. From a causal-mechanical
point of view it is not a priori conceivable that one species can
ever become changed into another so long as external conditions remain
constant. The inner structure of a species must be essentially altered
by external influences. Two methods of experimental research may be
adopted, the effect of crossing distinct species and, secondly, the
effect of definite factors of the environment.

The subject of hybridisation is dealt with in another part of this
essay. It is enough to refer here to the most important fact, that as
the result of combinations of characters of different species new and
constant forms are produced. Further, Tschermack, Bateson and others
have demonstrated the possibility that hitherto unknown inheritable
characters may be produced by hybridisation.

The other method of producing constant races by the influence of special
external conditions has often been employed. The sporeless races of
Bacteria and Yeasts (Cf. Detto, "Die Theorie der direkten Anpassung... ",
pages 98 et seq., Jena, 1904; see also Lotsy, "Vorlesungen", II. pages
636 et seq., where other similar cases are described.) are well known,
in which an internal alteration of the cells is induced by the influence
of poison or higher temperature, so that the power of producing spores
even under normal conditions appears to be lost. A similar state of
things is found in some races which under certain definite conditions
lose their colour or their virulence. Among the phanerogams the
investigations of Schubler on cereals afford parallel cases, in which
the influence of a northern climate produces individuals which ripen
their seeds early; these seeds produce plants which seed early in
southern countries. Analogous results were obtained by Cieslar in his
experiments; seeds of conifers from the Alps when planted in the plains
produced plants of slow growth and small diameter.

All these observations are of considerable interest theoretically; they
show that the action of environment certainly induces such internal
changes, and that these are transmitted to the next generation. But as
regards the main question, whether constant races may be obtained by
this means, the experiments cannot as yet supply a definite answer. In
phanerogams, the influence very soon dies out in succeeding generations;
in the case of bacteria, in which it is only a question of the loss of
a character it is relatively easy for this to reappear. It is not
impossible, that in all such cases there is a material hanging-on of
certain internal conditions, in consequence of which the modification
of the character persists for a time in the descendants, although the
original external conditions are no longer present.

Thus a slow dying-out of the effect of a stimulus was seen in my
experiments on Veronica chamaedrys. (Klebs, "Kunstliche Metamorphosen",
Stuttgart, 1906, page 132.) During the cultivation of an artificially
modified inflorescence I obtained a race showing modifications in
different directions, among which twisting was especially conspicuous.
This plant, however, does not behave as the twisted race of Dipsacus
isolated by de Vries (de Vries, "Mutationstheorie", Vol. II. Leipzig,
1903, page 573.), which produced each year a definite percentage of
twisted individuals. In the vegetative reproduction of this Veronica the
torsion appeared in the first, also in the second and third year, but
with diminishing intensity. In spite of good cultivation this character
has apparently now disappeared; it disappeared still more quickly in
seedlings. In another character of the same Veronica chamaedrys the
influence of the environment was stronger. The transformation of the
inflorescences to foliage-shoots formed the starting-point; it occurred
only under narrowly defined conditions, namely on cultivation as a
cutting in moist air and on removal of all other leaf-buds. In the
majority (7/10) of the plants obtained from the transformed shoots, the
modification appeared in the following year without any interference.
Of the three plants which were under observation several years the first
lost the character in a short time, while the two others still retain
it, after vegetative propagation, in varying degrees. The same character
occurs also in some of the seedlings; but anything approaching a
constant race has not been produced.

Another means of producing new races has been attempted by Blaringhem.
(Blaringhem, "Mutation et Traumatisme", Paris, 1907.) On removing at
an early stage the main shoots of different plants he observed various
abnormalities in the newly formed basal shoots. From the seeds of such
plants he obtained races, a large percentage of which exhibited these
abnormalities. Starting from a male Maize plant with a fasciated
inflorescence, on which a proportion of the flowers had become male,
a new race was bred in which hermaphrodite flowers were frequently
produced. In the same way Blaringhem obtained, among other similar
results, a race of barley with branched ears. These races, however,
behaved in essentials like those which have been demonstrated by de
Vries to be inconstant, e.g. Trifolium pratense quinquefolium and
others. The abnormality appears in a proportion of the individuals
and only under very special conditions. It must be remembered too that
Blaringhem worked with old cultivated plants, which from the first had
been disposed to split into a great variety of races. It is possible,
but difficult to prove, that injury contributed to this result.

A third method has been adopted by MacDougal (MacDougal, "Heredity and
Origin of species", "Monist", 1906; "Report of department of botanical
research", "Fifth Year-book of the Carnegie Institution of Washington",
page 119, 1907.) who injected strong (10 percent) sugar solution or weak
solutions of calcium nitrate and zinc sulphate into young carpels of
different plants. From the seeds of a plant of Raimannia odorata the
carpels of which had been thus treated he obtained several plants
distinguished from the parent-forms by the absence of hairs and by
distinct forms of leaves. Further examination showed that he had here to
do with a new elementary species. MacDougal also obtained a more or less
distinct mutant of Oenothera biennis. We cannot as yet form an opinion
as to how far the effect is due to the wound or to the injection of
fluid as such, or to its chemical properties. This, however, is not so
essential as to decide whether the mutant stands in any relation to the
influence of external factors. It is at any rate very important that
this kind of investigation should be carried further.

If it could be shown that new and inherited races were obtained by
MacDougal's method, it would be safe to conclude that the same end might
be gained by altering the conditions of the food-stuff conducted to the
sexual cells. New races or elementary species, however, arise without
wounding or injection. This at once raises the much discussed question,
how far garden-cultivation has led to the creation of new races?
Contrary to the opinion expressed by Darwin and others, de Vries
("Mutationstheorie", Vol. I. pages 412 et seq.) tried to show that
garden-races have been produced only from spontaneous types which occur
in a wild state or from sub-races, which the breeder has accidentally
discovered but not originated. In a small number of cases only has de
Vries adduced definite proof. On the other side we have the work of
Korschinsky (Korschinsky, "Heterogenesis und Evolution", "Flora", 1901.)
which shows that whole series of garden-races have made their appearance
only after years of cultivation. In the majority of races we are
entirely ignorant of their origin.

It is, however, a fact that if a plant is removed from natural
conditions into cultivation, a well-marked variation occurs. The
well-known plant-breeder L. de Vilmorin (L. de Vilmorin, "Notices sur
l'amelioration des plantes", Paris, 1886, page 36.), speaking from his
own experience, states that a plant is induced to "affoler," that is
to exhibit all possible variations from which the breeder may make a
further selection only after cultivation for several generations. The
effect of cultivation was particularly striking in Veronica chamaedrys
(Klebs, "Kunstliche Metamorphosen", Stuttgart, 1906, page 152.) which,
in spite of its wide distribution in nature, varies very little. After a
few years of cultivation this "good" and constant species becomes highly
variable. The specimens on which the experiments were made were three
modified inflorescence cuttings, the parent-plants of which certainly
exhibited no striking abnormalities. In a short time many hitherto
latent potentialities became apparent, so that characters, never
previously observed, or at least very rarely, were exhibited, such
as scattered leaf-arrangement, torsion, terminal or branched
inflorescences, the conversion of the inflorescence into foliage-shoots,
every conceivable alteration in the colour of flowers, the assumption of
a green colour by parts of the flowers, the proliferation of flowers.

All this points to some disturbance in the species resulting from
methods of cultivation. It has, however, not yet been possible to
produce constant races with any one of these modified characters. But
variations appeared among the seedlings, some of which, e.g. yellow
variegation, were not inheritable, while others have proved constant.
This holds good, so far as we know at present, for a small rose-coloured
form which is to be reckoned as a mutation. Thus the prospect of
producing new races by cultivation appears to be full of promise.

So long as the view is held that good nourishment, i.e. a plentiful
supply of water and salts, constitutes the essential characteristic of
garden-cultivation, we can hardly conceive that new mutations can be
thus produced. But perhaps the view here put forward in regard to the
production of form throws new light on this puzzling problem.

Good manuring is in the highest degree favourable to vegetative growth,
but is in no way equally favourable to the formation of flowers. The
constantly repeated expression, good or favourable nourishment, is not
only vague but misleading, because circumstances favourable to growth
differ from those which promote reproduction; for the production of
every form there are certain favourable conditions of nourishment, which
may be defined for each species. Experience shows that, within definite
and often very wide limits, it does not depend upon the ABSOLUTE AMOUNT
of the various food substances, but upon their respective degrees of
concentration. As we have already stated, the production of flowers
follows a relative increase in the amount of carbohydrates formed in
the presence of light, as compared with the inorganic salts on which
the formation of albuminous substances depends. (Klebs, "Kunstliche
Metamorphosen", page 117.) The various modifications of flowers are due
to the fact that a relatively too strong solution of salts is supplied
to the rudiments of these organs. As a general rule every plant
form depends upon a certain relation between the different chemical
substances in the cells and is modified by an alteration of that
relation.

During long cultivation under conditions which vary in very different
degrees, such as moisture, the amount of salts, light intensity,
temperature, oxygen, it is possible that sudden and special disturbances
in the relations of the cell substances have a directive influence on
the inner organisation of the sexual cells, so that not only inconstant
but also constant varieties will be formed.

Definite proof in support of this view has not yet been furnished, and
we must admit that the question as to the cause of heredity remains,
fundamentally, as far from solution as it was in Darwin's time. As the
result of the work of many investigators, particularly de Vries,
the problem is constantly becoming clearer and more definite. The
penetration into this most difficult and therefore most interesting
problem of life and the creation by experiment of new races or
elementary species are no longer beyond the region of possibility.




XIV. EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF THE INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT ON ANIMALS.
By Jacques Loeb, M.D. Professor of Physiology in the University of
California.


I. INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.

What the biologist calls the natural environment of an animal is from a
physical point of view a rather rigid combination of definite forces. It
is obvious that by a purposeful and systematic variation of these and
by the application of other forces in the laboratory, results must be
obtainable which do not appear in the natural environment. This is the
reasoning underlying the modern development of the study of the effects
of environment upon animal life. It was perhaps not the least important
of Darwin's services to science that the boldness of his conceptions
gave to the experimental biologist courage to enter upon the attempt of
controlling at will the life-phenomena of animals, and of bringing about
effects which cannot be expected in Nature.

The systematic physico-chemical analysis of the effect of outside
forces upon the form and reactions of animals is also our only means of
unravelling the mechanism of heredity beyond the scope of the Mendelian
law. The manner in which a germ-cell can force upon the adult certain
characters will not be understood until we succeed in varying
and controlling hereditary characteristics; and this can only be
accomplished on the basis of a systematic study of the effects of
chemical and physical forces upon living matter.

Owing to limitation of space this sketch is necessarily very incomplete,
and it must not be inferred that studies which are not mentioned here
were considered to be of minor importance. All the writer could hope to
do was to bring together a few instances of the experimental analysis of
the effect of environment, which indicate the nature and extent of our
control over life-phenomena and which also have some relation to the
work of Darwin. In the selection of these instances preference is given
to those problems which are not too technical for the general reader.

The forces, the influence of which we shall discuss, are in succession
chemical agencies, temperature, light, and gravitation. We shall also
treat separately the effect of these forces upon form and instinctive
reactions.


II. THE EFFECTS OF CHEMICAL AGENCIES.

(a) HETEROGENEOUS HYBRIDISATION.

It was held until recently that hybridisation is not possible except
between closely related species and that even among these a successful
hybridisation cannot always be counted upon. This view was well
supported by experience. It is, for instance, well known that the
majority of marine animals lay their unfertilised eggs in the ocean and
that the males shed their sperm also into the sea-water. The numerical
excess of the spermatozoa over the ova in the sea-water is the only
guarantee that the eggs are fertilised, for the spermatozoa are
carried to the eggs by chance and are not attracted by the latter. This
statement is the result of numerous experiments by various authors,
and is contrary to common belief. As a rule all or the majority of
individuals of a species in a given region spawn on the same day, and
when this occurs the sea-water constitutes a veritable suspension of
sperm. It has been shown by experiment that in fresh sea-water the sperm
may live and retain its fertilising power for several days. It is thus
unavoidable that at certain periods more than one kind of spermatozoon
is suspended in the sea-water and it is a matter of surprise that the
most heterogeneous hybridisations do not constantly occur. The reason
for this becomes obvious if we bring together mature eggs and equally
mature and active sperm of a different family. When this is done no egg
is, as a rule, fertilised. The eggs of a sea-urchin can be fertilised by
sperm of their own species, or, though in smaller numbers, by the sperm
of other species of sea-urchins, but not by the sperm of other groups of
echinoderms, e.g. starfish, brittle-stars, holothurians or crinoids, and
still less by the sperm of more distant groups of animals. The consensus
of opinion seemed to be that the spermatozoon must enter the egg
through a narrow opening or canal, the so-called micropyle, and that
the micropyle allowed only the spermatozoa of the same or of a closely
related species to enter the egg.

It seemed to the writer that the cause of this limitation of
hybridisation might be of another kind and that by a change in the
constitution of the sea-water it might be possible to bring about
heterogenous hybridisations, which in normal sea-water are impossible.
This assumption proved correct. Sea-water has a faintly alkaline
reaction (in terms of the physical chemist its concentration of hydroxyl
ions is about (10 to the power minus six)N at Pacific Grove, California,
and about (10 to the power minus 5)N at Woods Hole, Massachusetts).
If we slightly raise the alkalinity of the sea-water by adding to it a
small but definite quantity of sodium hydroxide or some other alkali,
the eggs of the sea-urchin can be fertilised with the sperm of widely
different groups of animals, possibly with the sperm of any marine
animal which sheds it into the ocean. In 1903 it was shown that if we
add from about 0.5 to 0.8 cubic centimetre N/10 sodium hydroxide to
50 cubic centimetres of sea-water, the eggs of Strongylocentrotus
purpuratus (a sea-urchin which is found on the coast of California)
can be fertilised in large quantities by the sperm of various kinds of
starfish, brittle-stars and holothurians; while in normal sea-water or
with less sodium hydroxide not a single egg of the same female could
be fertilised with the starfish sperm which proved effective in the
hyper-alkaline sea-water. The sperm of the various forms of starfish was
not equally effective for these hybridisations; the sperm of Asterias
ochracea and A. capitata gave the best results, since it was possible to
fertilise 50 per cent or more of the sea-urchin eggs, while the sperm of
Pycnopodia and Asterina fertilised only 2 per cent of the same eggs.

Godlewski used the same method for the hybridisation of the sea-urchin
eggs with the sperm of a crinoid (Antedon rosacea). Kupelwieser
afterwards obtained results which seemed to indicate the possibility of
fertilising the eggs of Strongylocentrotus with the sperm of a mollusc
(Mytilus.) Recently, the writer succeeded in fertilising the
eggs of Strongylocentrotus franciscanus with the sperm of a
mollusc--Chlorostoma. This result could only be obtained in sea-water
the alkalinity of which had been increased (through the addition of
0.8 cubic centimetre N/10 sodium hydroxide to 50 cubic centimetres
of sea-water). We thus see that by increasing the alkalinity of the
sea-water it is possible to effect heterogeneous hybridisations which
are at present impossible in the natural environment of these animals.

It is, however, conceivable that in former periods of the earth's
history such heterogeneous hybridisations were possible. It is known
that in solutions like sea-water the degree of alkalinity must increase
when the amount of carbon-dioxide in the atmosphere is diminished. If it
be true, as Arrhenius assumes, that the Ice age was caused or preceded
by a diminution in the amount of carbon-dioxide in the air, such a
diminution must also have resulted in an increase of the alkalinity
of the sea-water, and one result of such an increase must have been to
render possible heterogeneous hybridisations in the ocean which in the
present state of alkalinity are practically excluded.

But granted that such hybridisations were possible, would they have
influenced the character of the fauna? In other words, are the hybrids
between sea-urchin and starfish, or better still, between sea-urchin and
mollusc, capable of development, and if so, what is their character?
The first experiment made it appear doubtful whether these heterogeneous
hybrids could live. The sea-urchin eggs which were fertilised in the
laboratory by the spermatozoa of the starfish, as a rule, died earlier
than those of the pure breeds. But more recent results indicate that
this was due merely to deficiencies in the technique of the earlier
experiments. The writer has recently obtained hybrid larvae between the
sea-urchin egg and the sperm of a mollusc (Chlorostoma) which, in the
laboratory, developed as well and lived as long as the pure breeds of
the sea-urchin, and there was nothing to indicate any difference in the
vitality of the two breeds.

So far as the question of heredity is concerned, all the experiments on
heterogeneous hybridisation of the egg of the sea-urchin with the sperm
of starfish, brittle-stars, crinoids and molluscs, have led to the same
result, namely, that the larvae have purely maternal characteristics and
differ in no way from the pure breed of the form from which the egg
is taken. By way of illustration it may be said that the larvae of the
sea-urchin reach on the third day or earlier (according to species
and temperature) the so-called pluteus stage, in which they possess a
typical skeleton; while neither the larvae of the starfish nor those
of the mollusc form a skeleton at the corresponding stage. It was,
therefore, a matter of some interest to find out whether or not the
larvae produced by the fertilisation of the sea-urchin egg with the
sperm of starfish or mollusc would form the normal and typical pluteus
skeleton. This was invariably the case in the experiments of Godlewski,
Kupelwieser, Hagedoorn, and the writer. These hybrid larvae were
exclusively maternal in character.

It might be argued that in the case of heterogeneous hybridisation the
sperm-nucleus does not fuse with the egg-nucleus, and that, therefore,
the spermatozoon cannot transmit its hereditary substances to the
larvae. But these objections are refuted by Godlewski's experiments,
in which he showed definitely that if the egg of the sea-urchin is
fertilised with the sperm of a crinoid the fusion of the egg-nucleus
and sperm-nucleus takes place in the normal way. It remains for further
experiments to decide what the character of the adult hybrids would be.

(b). ARTIFICIAL PARTHENOGENESIS.

Possibly in no other field of Biology has our ability to control
life-phenomena by outside conditions been proved to such an extent as
in the domain of fertilisation. The reader knows that the eggs of the
overwhelming majority of animals cannot develop unless a spermatozoon
enters them. In this case a living agency is the cause of development
and the problem arises whether it is possible to accomplish the same
result through the application of well-known physico-chemical agencies.
This is, indeed, true, and during the last ten years living larvae
have been produced by chemical agencies from the unfertilised eggs
of sea-urchins, starfish, holothurians and a number of annelids and
molluscs; in fact this holds true in regard to the eggs of practically
all forms of animals with which such experiments have been tried long
enough. In each form the method of procedure is somewhat different and
a long series of experiments is often required before the successful
method is found.

The facts of Artificial Parthenogenesis, as the chemical fertilisation
of the egg is called, have, perhaps, some bearing on the problem of
evolution. If we wish to form a mental image of the process of evolution
we have to reckon with the possibility that parthenogenetic propagation
may have preceded sexual reproduction. This suggests also the
possibility that at that period outside forces may have supplied
the conditions for the development of the egg which at present the
spermatozoon has to supply. For this, if for no other reason, a brief
consideration of the means of artificial parthenogenesis may be of
interest to the student of evolution.

It seemed necessary in these experiments to imitate as completely as
possible by chemical agencies the effects of the spermatozoon upon
the egg. When a spermatozoon enters the egg of a sea-urchin or certain
starfish or annelids, the immediate effect is a characteristic change of
the surface of the egg, namely the formation of the so-called membrane
of fertilisation. The writer found that we can produce this membrane in
the unfertilised egg by certain acids, especially the monobasic acids
of the fatty series, e.g. formic, acetic, propionic, butyric, etc.
Carbon-dioxide is also very efficient in this direction. It was also
found that the higher acids are more efficient than the lower ones,
and it is possible that the spermatozoon induces membrane-formation by
carrying into the egg a higher fatty acid, namely oleic acid or one of
its salts or esters.

The physico-chemical process which underlies the formation of the
membrane seems to be the cause of the development of the egg. In all
cases in which the unfertilised egg has been treated in such a way as
to cause it to form a membrane it begins to develop. For the eggs of
certain animals membrane-formation is all that is required to induce a
complete development of the unfertilised egg, e.g. in the starfish and
certain annelids. For the eggs of other animals a second treatment is
necessary, presumably to overcome some of the injurious effects of
acid treatment. Thus the unfertilised eggs of the sea-urchin
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus of the Californian coast begin to develop
when membrane-formation has been induced by treatment with a fatty acid,
e.g. butyric acid; but the development soon ceases and the eggs
perish in the early stages of segmentation, or after the first nuclear
division. But if we treat the same eggs, after membrane-formation, for
from 35 to 55 minutes (at 15 deg C.) with sea-water the concentration
(osmotic pressure) of which has been raised through the addition of a
definite amount of some salt or sugar, the eggs will segment and develop
normally, when transferred back to normal sea-water. If care is taken,
practically all the eggs can be caused to develop into plutei, the
majority of which may be perfectly normal and may live as long as larvae
produced from eggs fertilised with sperm.

It is obvious that the sea-urchin egg is injured in the process of
membrane-formation and that the subsequent treatment with a hypertonic
solution only acts as a remedy. The nature of this injury became clear
when it was discovered that all the agencies which cause haemolysis,
i.e. the destruction of the red blood corpuscles, also cause
membrane-formation in unfertilised eggs, e.g. fatty acids or ether,
alcohols or chloroform, etc., or saponin, solanin, digitalin, bile
salts and alkali. It thus happens that the phenomena of artificial
parthenogenesis are linked together with the phenomena of haemolysis
which at present play so important a role in the study of immunity. The
difference between cytolysis (or haemolysis) and fertilisation seems to
be this, that the latter is caused by a superficial or slight cytolysis
of the egg, while if the cytolytic agencies have time to act on the
whole egg the latter is completely destroyed. If we put unfertilised
eggs of a sea-urchin into sea-water which contains a trace of saponin we
notice that, after a few minutes, all the eggs form the typical
membrane of fertilisation. If the eggs are then taken out of the saponin
solution, freed from all traces of saponin by repeated washing in normal
sea-water, and transferred to the hypertonic sea-water for from 35 to
55 minutes, they develop into larvae. If, however, they are left in
the sea-water containing the saponin they undergo, a few minutes after
membrane-formation, the disintegration known in pathology as CYTOLYSIS.
Membrane-formation is, therefore, caused by a superficial or incomplete
cytolysis. The writer believes that the subsequent treatment of the egg
with hypertonic sea-water is needed only to overcome the destructive
effects of this partial cytolysis. The full reasons for this belief
cannot be given in a short essay.

Many pathologists assume that haemolysis or cytolysis is due to a
liquefaction of certain fatty or fat-like compounds, the so-called
lipoids, in the cell. If this view is correct, it would be necessary to
ascribe the fertilisation of the egg to the same process.

The analogy between haemolysis and fertilisation throws, possibly,
some light on a curious observation. It is well known that the blood
corpuscles, as a rule, undergo cytolysis if injected into the blood of
an animal which belongs to a different family. The writer found last
year that the blood of mammals, e.g. the rabbit, pig, and cattle, causes
the egg of Strongylocentrotus to form a typical fertilisation-membrane.
If such eggs are afterwards treated for a short period with hypertonic
sea-water they develop into normal larvae (plutei). Some substance
contained in the blood causes, presumably, a superficial cytolysis of
the egg and thus starts its development.

We can also cause the development of the sea-urchin egg without
membrane-formation. The early experiments of the writer were done in
this way and many experimenters still use such methods. It is probable
that in this case the mechanism of fertilisation is essentially the same
as in the case where the membrane-formation is brought about, with
this difference only, that the cytolytic effect is less when no
fertilisation-membrane is formed. This inference is corroborated by
observations on the fertilisation of the sea-urchin egg with ox blood.
It very frequently happens that not all of the eggs form membranes in
this process. Those eggs which form membranes begin to develop, but
perish if they are not treated with hypertonic sea-water. Some of the
other eggs, however, which do not form membranes, develop directly into
normal larvae without any treatment with hypertonic sea-water, provided
they are exposed to the blood for only a few minutes. Presumably some
blood enters the eggs and causes the cytolytic effects in a less degree
than is necessary for membrane-formation, but in a sufficient degree to
cause their development. The slightness of the cytolytic effect allows
the egg to develop without treatment with hypertonic sea-water.

Since the entrance of the spermatozoon causes that degree of cytolysis
which leads to membrane-formation, it is probable that, in addition to
the cytolytic or membrane-forming substance (presumably a higher fatty
acid), it carries another substance into the egg which counteracts the
deleterious cytolytic effects underlying membrane-formation.

The question may be raised whether the larvae produced by artificial
parthenogenesis can reach the mature stage. This question may be
answered in the affirmative, since Delage has succeeded in raising
several parthenogenetic sea-urchin larvae beyond the metamorphosis into
the adult stage and since in all the experiments made by the writer
the parthenogenetic plutei lived as long as the plutei produced from
fertilised eggs.

(c). ON THE PRODUCTION OF TWINS FROM ONE EGG THROUGH A CHANGE IN THE
CHEMICAL CONSTITUTION OF THE SEA-WATER.

The reader is probably familiar with the fact that there exist two
different types of human twins. In the one type the twins differ as much
as two children of the same parents born at different periods; they
may or may not have the same sex. In the second type the twins have
invariably the same sex and resemble each other most closely. Twins
of the latter type are produced from the same egg, while twins of the
former type are produced from two different eggs.

The experiments of Driesch and others have taught us that twins
originate from one egg in this manner, namely, that the first two cells
into which the egg divides after fertilisation become separated from
each other. This separation can be brought about by a change in the
chemical constitution of the sea-water. Herbst observed that if the
fertilised eggs of the sea-urchin are put into sea-water which is freed
from calcium, the cells into which the egg divides have a tendency
to fall apart. Driesch afterwards noticed that eggs of the sea-urchin
treated with sea-water which is free from lime have a tendency to give
rise to twins. The writer has recently found that twins can be produced
not only by the absence of lime, but also through the absence of sodium
or of potassium; in other words, through the absence of one or two of
the three important metals in the sea-water. There is, however, a second
condition, namely, that the solution used for the production of twins
must have a neutral or at least not an alkaline reaction.

The procedure for the production of twins in the sea-urchin egg consists
simply in this:--the eggs are fertilised as usual in normal sea-water
and then, after repeated washing in a neutral solution of sodium
chloride (of the concentration of the sea-water), are placed in a
neutral mixture of potassium chloride and calcium chloride, or of sodium
chloride and potassium chloride, or of sodium chloride and calcium
chloride, or of sodium chloride and magnesium chloride. The eggs must
remain in this solution until half an hour or an hour after they have
reached the two-cell stage. They are then transferred into normal
sea-water and allowed to develop. From 50 to 90 per cent of the eggs of
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus treated in this manner may develop into
twins. These twins may remain separate or grow partially together and
form double monsters, or heal together so completely that only slight or
even no imperfections indicate that the individual started its career
as a pair of twins. It is also possible to control the tendency of such
twins to grow together by a change in the constitution of the sea-water.
If we use as a twin-producing solution a mixture of sodium, magnesium
and potassium chlorides (in the proportion in which these salts exist in
the sea-water) the tendency of the twins to grow together is much
more pronounced than if we use simply a mixture of sodium chloride and
magnesium chloride.

The mechanism of the origin of twins, as the result of altering the
composition of the sea-water, is revealed by observation of the first
segmentation of the egg in these solutions. This cell-division is
modified in a way which leads to a separation of the first two cells.
If the egg is afterwards transferred back into normal sea-water, each
of these two cells develops into an independent embryo. Since normal
sea-water contains all three metals, sodium, calcium, and potassium, and
since it has besides an alkaline reaction, we perceive the reason why
twins are not normally produced from one egg. These experiments suggest
the possibility of a chemical cause for the origin of twins from one egg
or of double monstrosities in mammals. If, for some reason, the liquids
which surround the human egg a short time before and after the first
cell-division are slightly acid, and at the same time lacking in one
of the three important metals, the conditions for the separation of the
first two cells and the formation of identical twins are provided.

In conclusion it may be pointed out that the reverse result, namely,
the fusion of normally double organs, can also be brought about
experimentally through a change in the chemical constitution of the
sea-water. Stockard succeeded in causing the eyes of fish embryos
(Fundulus heteroclitus) to fuse into a single cyclopean eye through the
addition of magnesium chloride to the sea-water. When he added about 6
grams of magnesium chloride to 100 cubic centimetres of sea-water and
placed the fertilised eggs in the mixture, about 50 per cent of the
eggs gave rise to one-eyed embryos. "When the embryos were studied the
one-eyed condition was found to result from the union or fusion of the
'anlagen' of the two eyes. Cases were observed which showed various
degrees in this fusion; it appeared as though the optic vessels were
formed too far forward and ventral, so that their antero-ventro-median
surfaces fused. This produces one large optic cup, which in all cases
gives more or less evidence of its double nature." (Stockard, "Archiv f.
Entwickelungsmechanik", Vol. 23, page 249, 1907.)

We have confined ourselves to a discussion of rather simple effects of
the change in the constitution of the sea-water upon development. It
is a priori obvious, however, that an unlimited number of pathological
variations might be produced by a variation in the concentration and
constitution of the sea-water, and experience confirms this statement.
As an example we may mention the abnormalities observed by Herbst in the
development of sea-urchins through the addition of lithium to sea-water.
It is, however, as yet impossible to connect in a rational way the
effects produced in this and similar cases with the cause which produced
them; and it is also impossible to define in a simple way the character
of the change produced.

III. THE INFLUENCE OF TEMPERATURE.

(a) THE INFLUENCE OF TEMPERATURE UPON THE DENSITY OF PELAGIC ORGANISMS
AND THE DURATION OF LIFE.

It has often been noticed by explorers who have had a chance to compare
the faunas in different climates that in polar seas such species as
thrive at all in those regions occur, as a rule, in much greater density
than they do in the moderate or warmer regions of the ocean. This refers
to those members of the fauna which live at or near the surface, since
they alone lend themselves to a statistical comparison. In his account
of the Valdivia expedition, Chun (Chun, "Aus den Tiefen des Weltmeeres",
page 225, Jena, 1903.) calls especial attention to this quantitative
difference in the surface fauna and flora of different regions. "In the
icy water of the Antarctic, the temperature of which is below 0 deg C.,
we find an astonishingly rich animal and plant life. The same condition
with which we are familiar in the Arctic seas is repeated here, namely,
that the quantity of plankton material exceeds that of the temperate and
warm seas." And again, in regard to the pelagic fauna in the region of
the Kerguelen Islands, he states: "The ocean is alive with transparent
jelly fish, Ctenophores (Bolina and Callianira) and of Siphonophore
colonies of the genus Agalma."

The paradoxical character of this general observation lies in the fact
that a low temperature retards development, and hence should be
expected to have the opposite effect from that mentioned by Chun. Recent
investigations have led to the result that life-phenomena are affected
by temperature in the same sense as the velocity of chemical reactions.
In the case of the latter van't Hoff had shown that a decrease in
temperature by 10 degrees reduces their velocity to one half or less,
and the same has been found for the influence of temperature on the
velocity of physiological processes. Thus Snyder and T.B. Robertson
found that the rate of heartbeat in the tortoise and in Daphnia is
reduced to about one-half if the temperature is lowered 10 deg C., and
Maxwell, Keith Lucas, and Snyder found the same influence of temperature
for the rate with which an impulse travels in the nerve. Peter observed
that the rate of development in a sea-urchin's egg is reduced to less
than one-half if the temperature (within certain limits) is reduced by
10 degrees. The same effect of temperature upon the rate of development
holds for the egg of the frog, as Cohen and Peter calculated from
the experiments of O. Hertwig. The writer found the same
temperature-coefficient for the rate of maturation of the egg of a
mollusc (Lottia).

All these facts prove that the velocity of development of animal life
in Arctic regions, where the temperature is near the freezing point of
water, must be from two to three times smaller than in regions where the
temperature of the ocean is about 10 deg C. and from four to nine times
smaller than in seas the temperature of which is about 20 deg C. It is,
therefore, exactly the reverse of what we should expect when authors
state that the density of organisms at or near the surface of the ocean
in polar regions is greater than in more temperate regions.

The writer believes that this paradox finds its explanation in
experiments which he has recently made on the influence of temperature
on the duration of life of cold-blooded marine animals. The experiments
were made on the fertilised and unfertilised eggs of the sea-urchin, and
yielded the result that for the lowering of temperature by 1 deg C.
the duration of life was about doubled. Lowering the temperature by 10
degrees therefore prolongs the life of the organism 2 to the power 10,
i.e. over a thousand times, and a lowering by 20 degrees prolongs it
about one million times. Since this prolongation of life is far
in excess of the retardation of development through a lowering of
temperature, it is obvious that, in spite of the retardation of
development in Arctic seas, animal life must be denser there than in
temperate or tropical seas. The excessive increase of the duration of
life at the poles will necessitate the simultaneous existence of more
successive generations of the same species in these regions than in the
temperate or tropical regions.

The writer is inclined to believe that these results have some bearing
upon a problem which plays an important role in theories of evolution,
namely, the cause of natural death. It has been stated that the
processes of differentiation and development lead also to the natural
death of the individual. If we express this in chemical terms it means
that the chemical processes which underlie development also determine
natural death. Physical chemistry has taught us to identify two chemical
processes even if only certain of their features are known. One of
these means of identification is the temperature coefficient. When two
chemical processes are identical, their velocity must be reduced by
the same amount if the temperature is lowered to the same extent.
The temperature coefficient for the duration of life of cold-blooded
organisms seems, however, to differ enormously from the temperature
coefficient for their rate of development. For a difference in
temperature of 10 deg C. the duration of life is altered five hundred
times as much as the rate of development; and, for a change of 20 deg
C., it is altered more than a hundred thousand times as much. From this
we may conclude that, at least for the sea-urchin eggs and embryo,
the chemical processes which determine natural death are certainly not
identical with the processes which underlie their development. T.B.
Robertson has also arrived at the conclusion, for quite different
reasons, that the process of senile decay is essentially different from
that of growth and development.

(b) CHANGES IN THE COLOUR OF BUTTERFLIES PRODUCED THROUGH THE INFLUENCE
OF TEMPERATURE.

The experiments of Dorfmeister, Weismann, Merrifield, Standfuss,
and Fischer, on seasonal dimorphism and the aberration of colour in
butterflies have so often been discussed in biological literature that
a short reference to them will suffice. By seasonal dimorphism is meant
the fact that species may appear at different seasons of the year in a
somewhat different form or colour. Vanessa prorsa is the summer form,
Vanessa levana the winter form of the same species. By keeping the pupae
of Vanessa prorsa several weeks at a temperature of from 0 deg to 1 deg
Weismann succeeded in obtaining from the summer chrysalids specimens
which resembled the winter variety, Vanessa levana.

If we wish to get a clear understanding of the causes of variation in
the colour and pattern of butterflies, we must direct our attention to
the experiments of Fischer, who worked with more extreme temperatures
than his predecessors, and found that almost identical aberrations
of colour could be produced by both extremely high and extremely low
temperatures. This can be clearly seen from the following tabulated
results of his observations. At the head of each column the reader
finds the temperature to which Fischer submitted the pupae, and in the
vertical column below are found the varieties that were produced. In the
vertical column A are given the normal forms:

(Temperatures in deg C.)

  0 to -20     0 to +10    A.           +35 to +37    +36 to +41  +42 to +46
                          (Normal forms)

  ichnusoides  polaris     urticae      ichnusa       polaris     ichnusoides
    (nigrita)                                                       (nigrita)

  antigone     fischeri    io             -           fischeri    antigone
    (iokaste)                                                       (iokaste)

  testudo      dixeyi      polychloros  erythromelas  dixeyi      testudo

  hygiaea      artemis     antiopa      epione        artemis     hygiaea

  elymi        wiskotti    cardui         -           wiskotti    elymi

  klymene      merrifieldi atalanta       -           merrifieldi klymene

  weismanni    porima      prorsa         -           porima      weismanni

The reader will notice that the aberrations produced at a very low
temperature (from 0 to -20 deg C.) are absolutely identical with
the aberrations produced by exposing the pupae to extremely high
temperatures (42 to 46 deg C.). Moreover the aberrations produced by a
moderately low temperature (from 0 to 10 deg C.) are identical with the
aberrations produced by a moderately high temperature (36 to 41 deg C.)

From these observations Fischer concludes that it is erroneous to speak
of a specific effect of high and of low temperatures, but that there
must be a common cause for the aberration found at the high as well
as at the low temperature limits. This cause he seems to find in the
inhibiting effects of extreme temperatures upon development.

If we try to analyse such results as Fischer's from a physico-chemical
point of view, we must realise that what we call life consists of a
series of chemical reactions, which are connected in a catenary way;
inasmuch as one reaction or group of reactions (a) (e.g. hydrolyses)
causes or furnishes the material for a second reaction or group
of reactions (b) (e.g. oxydations). We know that the temperature
coefficient for physiological processes varies slightly at various parts
of the scale; as a rule it is higher near 0 and lower near 30 deg. But
we know also that the temperature coefficients do not vary equally from
the various physiological processes. It is, therefore, to be expected
that the temperature coefficients for the group of reactions of the type
(a) will not be identical through the whole scale with the temperature
coefficients for the reactions of the type (b). If therefore a certain
substance is formed at the normal temperature of the animal in such
quantities as are needed for the catenary reaction (b), it is not to be
expected that this same perfect balance will be maintained for extremely
high or extremely low temperatures; it is more probable that one group
of reactions will exceed the other and thus produce aberrant chemical
effects, which may underlie the colour aberrations observed by Fischer
and other experimenters.

It is important to notice that Fischer was also able to produce
aberrations through the application of narcotics. Wolfgang Ostwald has
produced experimentally, through variation of temperature, dimorphism of
form in Daphnia. Lack of space precludes an account of these important
experiments, as of so many others.

IV. THE EFFECTS OF LIGHT.

At the present day nobody seriously questions the statement that the
action of light upon organisms is primarily one of a chemical character.
While this chemical action is of the utmost importance for organisms,
the nutrition of which depends upon the action of chlorophyll, it
becomes of less importance for organisms devoid of chlorophyll.
Nevertheless, we find animals in which the formation of organs by
regeneration is not possible unless they are exposed to light. An
observation made by the writer on the regeneration of polyps in a
hydroid, Eudendrium racemosum, at Woods Hole, may be mentioned as an
instance of this. If the stem of this hydroid, which is usually covered
with polyps, is put into an aquarium the polyps soon fall off. If the
stems are kept in an aquarium where light strikes them during the day, a
regeneration of numerous polyps takes place in a few days. If, however,
the stems of Eudendrium are kept permanently in the dark, no polyps are
formed even after an interval of some weeks; but they are formed in a
few days after the same stems have been transferred from the dark to
the light. Diffused daylight suffices for this effect. Goldfarb, who
repeated these experiments, states that an exposure of comparatively
short duration is sufficient for this effect, it is possible that the
light favours the formation of substances which are a prerequisite for
the origin of polyps and their growth.

Of much greater significance than this observation are the facts which
show that a large number of animals assume, to some extent, the
colour of the ground on which they are placed. Pouchet found through
experiments upon crustaceans and fish that this influence of the ground
on the colour of animals is produced through the medium of the eyes.
If the eyes are removed or the animals made blind in another way these
phenomena cease. The second general fact found by Pouchet was that the
variation in the colour of the animal is brought about through an action
of the nerves on the pigment-cells of the skin; the nerve-action being
induced through the agency of the eye.

The mechanism and the conditions for the change in colouration were made
clear through the beautiful investigations of Keeble and Gamble, on
the colour-change in crustaceans. According to these authors the
pigment-cells can, as a rule, be considered as consisting of a central
body from which a system of more or less complicated ramifications or
processes spreads out in all directions. As a rule, the centre of the
cell contains one or more different pigments which under the influence
of nerves can spread out separately or together into the ramifications.
These phenomena of spreading and retraction of the pigments into or from
the ramifications of the pigment-cells form on the whole the basis for
the colour changes under the influence of environment. Thus Keeble
and Gamble observed that Macromysis flexuosa appears transparent and
colourless or grey on sandy ground. On a dark ground their colour
becomes darker. These animals have two pigments in their chromatophores,
a brown pigment and a whitish or yellow pigment; the former is much more
plentiful than the latter. When the animal appears transparent all the
pigment is contained in the centre of the cells, while the ramifications
are free from pigment. When the animal appears brown both pigments are
spread out into the ramifications. In the condition of maximal spreading
the animals appear black.

This is a comparatively simple case. Much more complicated conditions
were found by Keeble and Gamble in other crustaceans, e.g. in Hippolyte
cranchii, but the influence of the surroundings upon the colouration of
this form was also satisfactorily analysed by these authors.

While many animals show transitory changes in colour under the influence
of their surroundings, in a few cases permanent changes can be produced.
The best examples of this are those which were observed by Poulton
in the chrysalids of various butterflies, especially the small
tortoise-shell. These experiments are so well known that a short
reference to them will suffice. Poulton (Poulton, E.B., "Colours of
Animals" (The International Scientific Series), London, 1890, page 121.)
found that in gilt or white surroundings the pupae became light coloured
and there was often an immense development of the golden spots, "so that
in many cases the whole surface of the pupae glittered with an apparent
metallic lustre. So remarkable was the appearance that a physicist to
whom I showed the chrysalids, suggested that I had played a trick and
had covered them with goldleaf." When black surroundings were used "the
pupae were as a rule extremely dark, with only the smallest trace, and
often no trace at all, of the golden spots which are so conspicuous in
the lighter form." The susceptibility of the animal to this influence of
its surroundings was found to be greatest during a definite period when
the caterpillar undergoes the metamorphosis into the chrysalis stage.
As far as the writer is aware, no physico-chemical explanation, except
possibly Wiener's suggestion of colour-photography by mechanical colour
adaptation, has ever been offered for the results of the type of those
observed by Poulton.


V. EFFECTS OF GRAVITATION.

(a) EXPERIMENTS ON THE EGG OF THE FROG.

Gravitation can only indirectly affect life-phenomena; namely, when we
have in a cell two different non-miscible liquids (or a liquid and a
solid) of different specific gravity, so that a change in the position
of the cell or the organ may give results which can be traced to a
change in the position of the two substances. This is very nicely
illustrated by the frog's egg, which has two layers of very viscous
protoplasm one of which is black and one white. The dark one occupies
normally the upper position in the egg and may therefore be assumed to
possess a smaller specific gravity than the white substance. When
the egg is turned with the white pole upwards a tendency of the white
protoplasm to flow down again manifests itself. It is, however, possible
to prevent or retard this rotation of the highly viscous protoplasm, by
compressing the eggs between horizontal glass plates. Such compression
experiments may lead to rather interesting results, as O. Schultze first
pointed out. Pflueger had already shown that the first plane of division
in a fertilised frog's egg is vertical and Roux established the fact
that the first plane of division is identical with the plane of symmetry
of the later embryo. Schultze found that if the frog's egg is turned
upside down at the time of its first division and kept in this abnormal
position, through compression between two glass plates for about 20
hours, a small number of eggs may give rise to twins. It is possible,
in this case, that the tendency of the black part of the egg to rotate
upwards along the surface of the egg leads to a separation of its first
cells, such a separation leading to the formation of twins.

T.H. Morgan made an interesting additional observation. He destroyed
one half of the egg after the first segmentation and found that the
half which remained alive gave rise to only one half of an embryo, thus
confirming an older observation of Roux. When, however, Morgan put the
egg upside down after the destruction of one of the first two cells, and
compressed the eggs between two glass plates, the surviving half of the
egg gave rise to a perfect embryo of half size (and not to a half embryo
of normal size as before.) Obviously in this case the tendency of the
protoplasm to flow back to its normal position was partially successful
and led to a partial or complete separation of the living from the dead
half; whereby the former was enabled to form a whole embryo, which, of
course, possessed only half the size of an embryo originating from a
whole egg.

(b) EXPERIMENTS ON HYDROIDS.

A striking influence of gravitation can be observed in a hydroid,
Antennularia antennina, from the bay of Naples. This hydroid consists of
a long straight main stem which grows vertically upwards and which has
at regular intervals very fine and short bristle-like lateral branches,
on the upper side of which the polyps grow. The main stem is negatively
geotropic, i.e. its apex continues to grow vertically upwards when we
put it obliquely into the aquarium, while the roots grow vertically
downwards. The writer observed that when the stem is put horizontally
into the water the short lateral branches on the lower side give rise to
an altogether different kind of organ, namely, to roots, and these roots
grow indefinitely in length and attach themselves to solid bodies; while
if the stem had remained in its normal position no further growth
would have occurred in the lateral branches. From the upper side of the
horizontal stem new stems grow out, mostly directly from the original
stem, occasionally also from the short lateral branches. It is thus
possible to force upon this hydroid an arrangement of organs which is
altogether different from the hereditary arrangement. The writer
had called the change in the hereditary arrangement of organs or the
transformation of organs by external forces HETEROMORPHOSIS. We cannot
now go any further into this subject, which should, however, prove of
interest in relation to the problem of heredity.

If it is correct to apply inferences drawn from the observation on the
frog's egg to the behaviour of Antennularia, one might conclude that the
cells of Antennularia also contain non-miscible substances of different
specific gravity, and that wherever the specifically lighter substance
comes in contact with the sea-water (or gets near the surface of the
cell) the growth of a stem is favoured; while contact with the sea-water
of the specifically heavier of the substances, will favour the formation
of roots.

VI. THE EXPERIMENTAL CONTROL OF ANIMAL INSTINCTS.

(a) EXPERIMENTS ON THE MECHANISM OF HELIOTROPIC REACTIONS IN ANIMALS.

Since the instinctive reactions of animals are as hereditary as
their morphological character, a discussion of experiments on the
physico-chemical character of the instinctive reactions of animals
should not be entirely omitted from this sketch. It is obvious that such
experiments must begin with the simplest type of instincts, if they are
expected to lead to any results; and it is also obvious that only such
animals must be selected for this purpose, the reactions of which are
not complicated by associative memory, or, as it may preferably be
termed, associative hysteresis.

The simplest type of instincts is represented by the purposeful motions
of animals to or from a source of energy, e.g. light; and it is with
some of these that we intend to deal here. When we expose winged aphides
(after they have flown away from the plant), or young caterpillars of
Porthesia chrysorrhoea (when they are aroused from their winter sleep)
or marine or freshwater copepods and many other animals, to diffused
daylight falling in from a window, we notice a tendency among these
animals to move towards the source of light. If the animals are
naturally sensitive, or if they are rendered sensitive through the
agencies which we shall mention later, and if the light is strong
enough, they move towards the source of light in as straight a line as
the imperfections and peculiarities of their locomotor apparatus will
permit. It is also obvious that we are here dealing with a forced
reaction in which the animals have no more choice in the direction
of their motion than have the iron filings in their arrangement in a
magnetic field. This can be proved very nicely in the case of starving
caterpillars of Porthesia. The writer put such caterpillars into a glass
tube the axis of which was at right angles to the plane of the window:
the caterpillars went to the window side of the tube and remained there,
even if leaves of their food-plant were put into the tube directly
behind them. Under such conditions the animals actually died from
starvation, the light preventing them from turning to the food, which
they eagerly ate when the light allowed them to do so. One cannot say
that these animals, which we call positively helioptropic, are attracted
by the light, since it can be shown that they go towards the source
of the light even if in so doing they move from places of a higher to
places of a lower degree of illumination.

The writer has advanced the following theory of these instinctive
reactions. Animals of the type of those mentioned are automatically
orientated by the light in such a way that symmetrical elements of their
retina (or skin) are struck by the rays of light at the same angle.
In this case the intensity of light is the same for both retinae or
symmetrical parts of the skin.

This automatic orientation is determined by two factors, first a
peculiar photo-sensitiveness of the retina (or skin), and second
a peculiar nervous connection between the retina and the muscular
apparatus. In symmetrically built heliotropic animals in which the
symmetrical muscles participate equally in locomotion, the symmetrical
muscles work with equal energy as long as the photo-chemical processes
in both eyes are identical. If, however, one eye is struck by stronger
light than the other, the symmetrical muscles will work unequally and
in positively heliotropic animals those muscles will work with greater
energy which bring the plane of symmetry back into the direction of the
rays of light and the head towards the source of light. As soon as both
eyes are struck by the rays of light at the same angle, there is no more
reason for the animal to deviate from this direction and it will move in
a straight line. All this holds good on the supposition that the animals
are exposed to only one source of light and are very sensitive to light.

Additional proof for the correctness of this theory was furnished
through the experiments of G.H. Parker and S.J. Holmes. The former
worked on a butterfly, Vanessa antiope, the latter on other arthropods.
All the animals were in a marked degree positively heliotropic. These
authors found that if one cornea is blackened in such an animal, it
moves continually in a circle when it is exposed to a source of light,
and in these motions the eye which is not covered with paint is directed
towards the centre of the circle. The animal behaves, therefore, as if
the darkened eye were in the shade.

(b) THE PRODUCTION OF POSITIVE HELIOTROPISM BY ACIDS AND OTHER MEANS AND
THE PERIODIC DEPTH-MIGRATIONS OF PELAGIC ANIMALS.

When we observe a dense mass of copepods collected from a freshwater
pond, we notice that some have a tendency to go to the light while
others go in the opposite direction and many, if not the majority,
are indifferent to light. It is an easy matter to make the negatively
heliotropic or the indifferent copepods almost instantly positively
heliotropic by adding a small but definite amount of carbon-dioxide
in the form of carbonated water to the water in which the animals are
contained. If the animals are contained in 50 cubic centimetres of water
it suffices to add from three to six cubic centimetres of carbonated
water to make all the copepods energetically positively heliotropic.
This heliotropism lasts about half an hour (probably until all the
carbon-dioxide has again diffused into the air.) Similar results may be
obtained with any other acid.

The same experiments may be made with another freshwater crustacean,
namely Daphnia, with this difference, however, that it is as a rule
necessary to lower the temperature of the water also. If the water
containing the Daphniae is cooled and at the same time carbon-dioxide
added, the animals which were before indifferent to light now become
most strikingly positively heliotropic. Marine copepods can be made
positively heliotropic by the lowering of the temperature alone, or by a
sudden increase in the concentration of the sea-water.

These data have a bearing upon the depth-migrations of pelagic animals,
as was pointed out years ago by Theo. T. Groom and the writer. It is
well known that many animals living near the surface of the ocean or
freshwater lakes, have a tendency to migrate upwards towards evening and
downwards in the morning and during the day. These periodic motions are
determined to a large extent, if not exclusively, by the heliotropism
of these animals. Since the consumption of carbon-dioxide by the green
plants ceases towards evening, the tension of this gas in the water must
rise and this must have the effect of inducing positive heliotropism or
increasing its intensity. At the same time the temperature of the
water near the surface is lowered and this also increases the positive
heliotropism in the organisms.

The faint light from the sky is sufficient to cause animals which are in
a high degree positively heliotropic to move vertically upwards towards
the light, as experiments with such pelagic animals, e.g. copepods, have
shown. When, in the morning, the absorption of carbon-dioxide by the
green algae begins again and the temperature of the water rises, the
animals lose their positive heliotropism, and slowly sink down or become
negatively heliotropic and migrate actively downwards.

These experiments have also a bearing upon the problem of the
inheritance of instincts. The character which is transmitted in this
case is not the tendency to migrate periodically upwards and downwards,
but the positive heliotropism. The tendency to migrate is the outcome of
the fact that periodically varying external conditions induce a periodic
change in the sense and intensity of the heliotropism of these animals.
It is of course immaterial for the result, whether the carbon-dioxide or
any other acid diffuse into the animal from the outside or whether they
are produced inside in the tissue cells of the animals. Davenport and
Cannon found that Daphniae, which at the beginning of the experiment,
react sluggishly to light react much more quickly after they have been
made to go to the light a few times. The writer is inclined to attribute
this result to the effect of acids, e.g. carbon-dioxide, produced in the
animals themselves in consequence of their motion. A similar effect of
the acids was shown by A.D. Waller in the case of the response of nerve
to stimuli.

The writer observed many years ago that winged male and female ants
are positively helioptropic and that their heliotropic sensitiveness
increases and reaches its maximum towards the period of nuptial flight.
Since the workers show no heliotropism it looks as if an internal
secretion from the sexual glands were the cause of their heliotropic
sensitiveness. V. Kellogg has observed that bees also become intensely
positively heliotropic at the period of their wedding flight, in fact so
much so that by letting light fall into the observation hive from above,
the bees are prevented from leaving the hive through the exit at the
lower end.

We notice also the reverse phenomenon, namely, that chemical changes
produced in the animal destroy its heliotropism. The caterpillars of
Porthesia chrysorrhoea are very strongly positively heliotropic when
they are first aroused from their winter sleep. This heliotropic
sensitiveness lasts only as long as they are not fed. If they are kept
permanently without food they remain permanently positively heliotropic
until they die from starvation. It is to be inferred that as soon as
these animals take up food, a substance or substances are formed
in their bodies which diminish or annihilate their heliotropic
sensitiveness.

The heliotropism of animals is identical with the heliotropism of
plants. The writer has shown that the experiments on the effect of acids
on the heliotropism of copepods can be repeated with the same result in
Volvox. It is therefore erroneous to try to explain these heliotropic
reactions of animals on the basis of peculiarities (e.g. vision) which
are not found in plants.

We may briefly discuss the question of the transmission through the sex
cells of such instincts as are based upon heliotropism. This problem
reduces itself simply to that of the method whereby the gametes transmit
heliotropism to the larvae or to the adult. The writer has expressed the
idea that all that is necessary for this transmission is the presence in
the eyes (or in the skin) of the animal of a photo-sensitive substance.
For the transmission of this the gametes need not contain anything more
than a catalyser or ferment for the synthesis of the photo-sensitive
substance in the body of the animal. What has been said in regard to
animal heliotropism might, if space permitted, be extended, mutatis
mutandis, to geotropism and stereotropism.

(c) THE TROPIC REACTIONS OF CERTAIN TISSUE-CELLS AND THE MORPHOGENETIC
EFFECTS OF THESE REACTIONS.

Since plant-cells show heliotropic reactions identical with those
of animals, it is not surprising that certain tissue-cells also show
reactions which belong to the class of tropisms. These reactions of
tissue-cells are of special interest by reason of their bearing upon the
inheritance of morphological characters. An example of this is found in
the tiger-like marking of the yolk-sac of the embryo of Fundulus and in
the marking of the young fish itself. The writer found that the former
is entirely, and the latter at least in part, due to the creeping of the
chromatophores upon the blood-vessels. The chromatophores are at first
scattered irregularly over the yolk-sac and show their characteristic
ramifications. There is at that time no definite relation between
blood-vessels and chromatophores. As soon as a ramification of a
chromatophore comes in contact with a blood-vessel the whole mass of the
chromatophore creeps gradually on the blood-vessel and forms a complete
sheath around the vessel, until finally all the chromatophores form a
sheath around the vessels and no more pigment cells are found in the
meshes between the vessels. Nobody who has not actually watched the
process of the creeping of the chromatophores upon the blood-vessels
would anticipate that the tiger-like colouration of the yolk-sac in the
later stages of the development was brought about in this way. Similar
facts can be observed in regard to the first marking of the embryo
itself. The writer is inclined to believe that we are here dealing with
a case of chemotropism, and that the oxygen of the blood may be the
cause of the spreading of the chromatophores around the blood-vessels.
Certain observations seem to indicate the possibility that in the adult
the chromatophores have, in some forms at least, a more rigid structure
and are prevented from acting in the way indicated. It seems to the
writer that such observations as those made on Fundulus might simplify
the problem of the hereditary transmission of certain markings.

Driesch has found that a tropism underlies the arrangement of the
skeleton in the pluteus larvae of the sea-urchin. The position of this
skeleton is predetermined by the arrangement of the mesenchyme cells,
and Driesch has shown that these cells migrate actively to the place
of their destination, possibly led there under the influence of certain
chemical substances. When Driesch scattered these cells mechanically
before their migration, they nevertheless reached their destination.

In the developing eggs of insects the nuclei, together with some
cytoplasm, migrate to the periphery of the egg. Herbst pointed out that
this might be a case of chemotropism, caused by the oxygen surrounding
the egg. The writer has expressed the opinion that the formation of
the blastula may be caused generally by a tropic reaction of the
blastomeres, the latter being forced by an outside influence to creep to
the surface of the egg.

These examples may suffice to indicate that the arrangement of definite
groups of cells and the morphological effects resulting therefrom may
be determined by forces lying outside the cells. Since these forces are
ubiquitous and constant it appears as if we were dealing exclusively
with the influence of a gamete; while in reality all that it is
necessary for the gamete to transmit is a certain form of irritability.

(d) FACTORS WHICH DETERMINE PLACE AND TIME FOR THE DEPOSITION OF EGGS.

For the preservation of species the instinct of animals to lay their
eggs in places in which the young larvae find their food and can develop
is of paramount importance. A simple example of this instinct is the
fact that the common fly lays its eggs on putrid material which serves
as food for the young larvae. When a piece of meat and of fat of the
same animal are placed side by side, the fly will deposit its eggs upon
the meat on which the larvae can grow, and not upon the fat, on which
they would starve. Here we are dealing with the effect of a volatile
nitrogenous substance which reflexly causes the peristaltic motions for
the laying of the egg in the female fly.

Kammerer has investigated the conditions for the laying of eggs in two
forms of salamanders, e.g. Salamandra atra and S. maculosa. In both
forms the eggs are fertilised in the body and begin to develop in the
uterus. Since there is room only for a few larvae in the uterus, a large
number of eggs perish and this number is the greater the longer the
period of gestation. It thus happens that when the animals retain their
eggs a long time, very few young ones are born; and these are in a
rather advanced stage of development, owing to the long time which
elapsed since they were fertilised. When the animal lays its eggs
comparatively soon after copulation, many eggs (from 12 to 72) are
produced and the larvae are of course in an early stage of development.
In the early stage the larvae possess gills and can therefore live in
water, while in later stages they have no gills and breathe through
their lungs. Kammerer showed that both forms of Salamandra can be
induced to lay their eggs early or late, according to the physical
conditions surrounding them. If they are kept in water or in proximity
to water and in a moist atmosphere they have a tendency to lay their
eggs earlier and a comparatively high temperature enhances the tendency
to shorten the period of gestation. If the salamanders are kept in
comparative dryness they show a tendency to lay their eggs rather late
and a low temperature enhances this tendency.

Since Salamandra atra is found in rather dry alpine regions with a
relatively low temperature and Salamandra maculosa in lower regions with
plenty of water and a higher temperature, the fact that S. atra bears
young which are already developed and beyond the stage of aquatic life,
while S. maculosa bears young ones in an earlier stage, has been termed
adaptation. Kammerer's experiments, however, show that we are dealing
with the direct effects of definite outside forces. While we may speak
of adaptation when all or some of the variables which determine a
reaction are unknown, it is obviously in the interest of further
scientific progress to connect cause and effect directly whenever our
knowledge allows us to do so.

VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS.

The discovery of De Vries, that new species may arise by mutation and
the wide if not universal applicability of Mendel's Law to phenomena of
heredity, as shown especially by Bateson and his pupils, must, for
the time being, if not permanently, serve as a basis for theories of
evolution. These discoveries place before the experimental biologist the
definite task of producing mutations by physico-chemical means. It
is true that certain authors claim to have succeeded in this, but
the writer wishes to apologise to these authors for his inability to
convince himself of the validity of their claims at the present moment.
He thinks that only continued breeding of these apparent mutants through
several generations can afford convincing evidence that we are here
dealing with mutants rather than with merely pathological variations.

What was said in regard to the production of new species by
physico-chemical means may be repeated with still more justification
in regard to the second problem of transformation, namely the making
of living from inanimate matter. The purely morphological imitations
of bacteria or cells which physicists have now and then proclaimed as
artificially produced living beings; or the plays on words by which,
e.g. the regeneration of broken crystals and the regeneration of lost
limbs by a crustacean were declared identical, will not appeal to the
biologist. We know that growth and development in animals and plants are
determined by definite although complicated series of catenary chemical
reactions, which result in the synthesis of a DEFINITE compound or group
of compounds, namely, NUCLEINS.

The nucleins have the peculiarity of acting as ferments or enzymes
for their own synthesis. Thus a given type of nucleus will continue to
synthesise other nuclein of its own kind. This determines the continuity
of a species; since each species has, probably, its own specific nuclein
or nuclear material. But it also shows us that whoever claims to have
succeeded in making living matter from inanimate will have to prove that
he has succeeded in producing nuclein material which acts as a ferment
for its own synthesis and thus reproduces itself. Nobody has thus far
succeeded in this, although nothing warrants us in taking it for granted
that this task is beyond the power of science.




XV. THE VALUE OF COLOUR IN THE STRUGGLE FOR LIFE. By E.B. Poulton.

Hope Professor of Zoology in the University of Oxford.


INTRODUCTION.

The following pages have been written almost entirely from the
historical stand-point. Their principal object has been to give some
account of the impressions produced on the mind of Darwin and his great
compeer Wallace by various difficult problems suggested by the colours
of living nature. In order to render the brief summary of Darwin's
thoughts and opinions on the subject in any way complete, it was found
necessary to say again much that has often been said before. No attempt
has been made to display as a whole the vast contribution of Wallace;
but certain of its features are incidentally revealed in passages quoted
from Darwin's letters. It is assumed that the reader is familiar with
the well-known theories of Protective Resemblance, Warning Colours, and
Mimicry both Batesian and Mullerian. It would have been superfluous to
explain these on the present occasion; for a far more detailed account
than could have been attempted in these pages has recently appeared.
(Poulton, "Essays on Evolution" Oxford, 1908, pages 293-382.) Among the
older records I have made a point of bringing together the principal
observations scattered through the note-books and collections of W.J.
Burchell. These have never hitherto found a place in any memoir dealing
with the significance of the colours of animals.

INCIDENTAL COLOURS.

Darwin fully recognised that the colours of living beings are not
necessarily of value as colours, but that they may be an incidental
result of chemical or physical structure. Thus he wrote to T. Meehan,
Oct. 9, 1874: "I am glad that you are attending to the colours of
dioecious flowers; but it is well to remember that their colours may be
as unimportant to them as those of a gall, or, indeed, as the colour
of an amethyst or ruby is to these gems." ("More Letters of Charles
Darwin", Vol. I. pages 354, 355. See also the admirable account of
incidental colours in "Descent of Man" (2nd edition), 1874, pages 261,
262.)

Incidental colours remain as available assets of the organism ready to
be turned to account by natural selection. It is a probable speculation
that all pigmentary colours were originally incidental; but now and for
immense periods of time the visible tints of animals have been modified
and arranged so as to assist in the struggle with other organisms or in
courtship. The dominant colouring of plants, on the other hand, is
an essential element in the paramount physiological activity of
chlorophyll. In exceptional instances, however, the shapes and visible
colours of plants may be modified in order to promote concealment.

TELEOLOGY AND ADAPTATION.

In the department of Biology which forms the subject of this essay,
the adaptation of means to an end is probably more evident than in
any other; and it is therefore of interest to compare, in a brief
introductory section, the older with the newer teleological views.

The distinctive feature of Natural Selection as contrasted with other
attempts to explain the process of Evolution is the part played by the
struggle for existence. All naturalists in all ages must have known
something of the operations of "Nature red in tooth and claw"; but it
was left for this great theory to suggest that vast extermination is
a necessary condition of progress, and even of maintaining the ground
already gained.

Realising that fitness is the outcome of this fierce struggle, thus
turned to account for the first time, we are sometimes led to associate
the recognition of adaptation itself too exclusively with Natural
Selection. Adaptation had been studied with the warmest enthusiasm
nearly forty years before this great theory was given to the scientific
world, and it is difficult now to realise the impetus which the works
of Paley gave to the study of Natural History. That they did inspire the
naturalists of the early part of the last century is clearly shown in
the following passages.

In the year 1824 the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford was intrusted to the
care of J.S. Duncan of New College. He was succeeded in this office by
his brother, P.B. Duncan, of the same College, author of a History of
the Museum, which shows very clearly the influence of Paley upon the
study of nature, and the dominant position given to his teachings:
"Happily at this time (1824) a taste for the study of natural history
had been excited in the University by Dr Paley's very interesting
work on Natural Theology, and the very popular lectures of Dr Kidd on
Comparative Anatomy, and Dr Buckland on Geology." In the arrangement of
the contents of the Museum the illustration of Paley's work was given
the foremost place by J.S. Duncan: "The first division proposes to
familiarize the eye to those relations of all natural objects which form
the basis of argument in Dr Paley's Natural Theology; to induce a mental
habit of associating the view of natural phenomena with the conviction
that they are the media of Divine manifestation; and by such association
to give proper dignity to every branch of natural science." (From
"History and Arrangement of the Ashmolean Museum" by P.B. Duncan: see
pages vi, vii of "A Catalogue of the Ashmolean Museum", Oxford, 1836.)

The great naturalist, W.J. Burchell, in his classical work shows the
same recognition of adaptation in nature at a still earlier date.
Upon the subject of collections he wrote ("Travels in the Interior of
Southern Africa", London, Vol. I. 1822, page 505. The references to
Burchell's observations in the present essay are adapted from
the author's article in "Report of the British and South African
Associations", 1905, Vol. III. pages 57-110.): "It must not be supposed
that these charms (the pleasures of Nature) are produced by the mere
discovery of new objects: it is the harmony with which they have been
adapted by the Creator to each other, and to the situations in which
they are found, which delights the observer in countries where Art has
not yet introduced her discords." The remainder of the passage is so
admirable that I venture to quote it: "To him who is satisfied with
amassing collections of curious objects, simply for the pleasure of
possessing them, such objects can afford, at best, but a childish
gratification, faint and fleeting; while he who extends his view beyond
the narrow field of nomenclature, beholds a boundless expanse, the
exploring of which is worthy of the philosopher, and of the best talents
of a reasonable being."

On September 14, 1811, Burchell was at Zand Valley (Vlei), or Sand Pool,
a few miles south-west of the site of Prieska, on the Orange River. Here
he found a Mesembryanthemum (M. turbiniforme, now M. truncatum) and also
a "Gryllus" (Acridian), closely resembling the pebbles with which their
locality was strewn. He says of both of these, "The intention of Nature,
in these instances, seems to have been the same as when she gave to the
Chameleon the power of accommodating its color, in a certain degree,
to that of the object nearest to it, in order to compensate for the
deficiency of its locomotive powers. By their form and colour, this
insect may pass unobserved by those birds, which otherwise would soon
extirpate a species so little able to elude its pursuers, and this juicy
little Mesembryanthemum may generally escape the notice of cattle and
wild animals." (Loc. cit. pages 310, 311. See Sir William Thiselton-Dyer
"Morphological Notes", XI.; "Protective Adaptations", I.; "Annals of
Botany", Vol. XX. page 124. In plates VII., VIII. and IX. accompanying
this article the author represents the species observed by Burchell,
together with others in which analogous adaptations exist. He writes:
"Burchell was clearly on the track on which Darwin reached the goal.
But the time had not come for emancipation from the old teleology. This,
however, in no respect detracts from the merit or value of his work.
For, as Huxley has pointed out ("Life and Letters of Thomas Henry
Huxley", London, 1900, I. page 457), the facts of the old teleology are
immediately transferable to Darwinism, which simply supplies them with a
natural in place of a supernatural explanation.") Burchell here seems
to miss, at least in part, the meaning of the relationship between the
quiescence of the Acridian and its cryptic colouring. Quiescence is an
essential element in the protective resemblance to a stone--probably
even more indispensable than the details of the form and colouring.
Although Burchell appears to overlook this point he fully recognised the
community between protection by concealment and more aggressive modes
of defence; for, in the passage of which a part is quoted above, he
specially refers to some earlier remarks on page 226 of his Vol. I. We
here find that even when the oxen were resting by the Juk rivier (Yoke
river), on July 19, 1811, Burchell observed "Geranium spinosum, with
a fleshy stem and large white flowers...; and a succulent species of
Pelargonium... so defended by the old panicles, grown to hard woody
thorns, that no cattle could browze upon it." He goes on to say, "In
this arid country, where every juicy vegetable would soon be eaten up by
the wild animals, the Great Creating Power, with all-provident wisdom,
has given to such plants either an acrid or poisonous juice, or sharp
thorns, to preserve the species from annihilation... " All these modes
of defence, especially adapted to a desert environment, have since
been generally recognised, and it is very interesting to place beside
Burchell's statement the following passage from a letter written by
Darwin, Aug. 7, 1868, to G.H. Lewes; "That Natural Selection would tend
to produce the most formidable thorns will be admitted by every one
who has observed the distribution in South America and Africa (vide
Livingstone) of thorn-bearing plants, for they always appear where the
bushes grow isolated and are exposed to the attacks of mammals. Even
in England it has been noticed that all spine-bearing and sting-bearing
plants are palatable to quadrupeds, when the thorns are crushed." ("More
Letters", I. page 308.)

ADAPTATION AND NATURAL SELECTION.

I have preferred to show the influence of the older teleology upon
Natural History by quotations from a single great and insufficiently
appreciated naturalist. It might have been seen equally well in the
pages of Kirby and Spence and those of many other writers. If the older
naturalists who thought and spoke with Burchell of "the intention
of Nature" and the adaptation of beings "to each other, and to
the situations in which they are found," could have conceived the
possibility of evolution, they must have been led, as Darwin was, by the
same considerations to Natural Selection. This was impossible for them,
because the philosophy which they followed contemplated the phenomena of
adaptation as part of a static immutable system. Darwin, convinced that
the system is dynamic and mutable, was prevented by these very phenomena
from accepting anything short of the crowning interpretation offered by
Natural Selection. ("I had always been much struck by such adaptations
(e.g. woodpecker and tree-frog for climbing, seeds for dispersal),
and until these could be explained it seemed to me almost useless
to endeavour to prove by indirect evidence that species have been
modified." "Autobiography" in "Life and Letters of Charles Darwin", Vol.
I. page 82. The same thought is repeated again and again in Darwin's
letters to his friends. It is forcibly urged in the Introduction to
the "Origin" (1859), page 3.) And the birth of Darwin's unalterable
conviction that adaptation is of dominant importance in the organic
world,--a conviction confirmed and ever again confirmed by his
experience as a naturalist--may probably be traced to the influence of
the great theologian. Thus Darwin, speaking of his Undergraduate days,
tells us in his "Autobiography" that the logic of Paley's "Evidences
of Christianity" and "Moral Philosophy" gave him as much delight as did
Euclid.

"The careful study of these works, without attempting to learn any part
by rote, was the only part of the academical course which, as I then
felt and as I still believe, was of the least use to me in the education
of my mind. I did not at that time trouble myself about Paley's
premises; and taking these on trust, I was charmed and convinced by the
long line of argumentation." ("Life and Letters", I. page 47.)

When Darwin came to write the "Origin" he quoted in relation to Natural
Selection one of Paley's conclusions. "No organ will be formed, as Paley
has remarked, for the purpose of causing pain or for doing an injury to
its possessor." ("Origin of Species" (1st edition) 1859, page 201.)

The study of adaptation always had for Darwin, as it has for many,
a peculiar charm. His words, written Nov. 28, 1880, to Sir W.
Thiselton-Dyer, are by no means inapplicable to-day: "Many of the
Germans are very contemptuous about making out use of organs; but they
may sneer the souls out of their bodies, and I for one shall think it
the most interesting part of natural history." ("More Letters" II. page
428.)

PROTECTIVE AND AGGRESSIVE RESEMBLANCE: PROCRYPTIC AND ANTICRYPTIC
COLOURING.

Colouring for the purpose of concealment is sometimes included under the
head Mimicry, a classification adopted by H.W. Bates in his classical
paper. Such an arrangement is inconvenient, and I have followed Wallace
in keeping the two categories distinct.

The visible colours of animals are far more commonly adapted for
Protective Resemblance than for any other purpose. The concealment of
animals by their colours, shapes and attitudes, must have been well
known from the period at which human beings first began to take an
intelligent interest in Nature. An interesting early record is that of
Samuel Felton, who (Dec. 2, 1763) figured and gave some account of an
Acridian (Phyllotettix) from Jamaica. Of this insect he says "THE THORAX
is like a leaf that is raised perpendicularly from the body." ("Phil.
Trans. Roy. Soc." Vol. LIV. Tab. VI. page 55.)

Both Protective and Aggressive Resemblances were appreciated and clearly
explained by Erasmus Darwin in 1794: "The colours of many animals seem
adapted to their purposes of concealing themselves either to avoid
danger, or to spring upon their prey." ("Zoonomia", Vol. I. page 509,
London, 1794.)

Protective Resemblance of a very marked and beautiful kind is found
in certain plants, inhabitants of desert areas. Examples observed by
Burchell almost exactly a hundred years ago have already been mentioned.
In addition to the resemblance to stones Burchell observed, although
he did not publish the fact, a South African plant concealed by its
likeness to the dung of birds. (Sir William Thiselton-Dyer has suggested
the same method of concealment ("Annals of Botany", Vol. XX. page 123).
Referring to Anacampseros papyracea, figured on plate IX., the author
says of its adaptive resemblance: "At the risk of suggesting one perhaps
somewhat far-fetched, I must confess that the aspect of the plant always
calls to my mind the dejecta of some bird, and the more so owing to the
whitening of the branches towards the tips" (loc. cit. page 126). The
student of insects, who is so familiar with this very form of protective
resemblance in larvae, and even perfect insects, will not be inclined to
consider the suggestion far-fetched.) The observation is recorded in
one of the manuscript journals kept by the great explorer during his
journey. I owe the opportunity of studying it to the kindness of Mr
Francis A. Burchell of the Rhodes University College, Grahamstown. The
following account is given under the date July 5, 1812, when Burchell
was at the Makkwarin River, about half-way between the Kuruman River and
Litakun the old capital of the Bachapins (Bechuanas): "I found a curious
little Crassula (not in flower) so snow white, that I should never has
(have) distinguished it from the white limestones... It was an inch high
and a little branchy,... and was at first mistaken for the dung of birds
of the passerine order. I have often had occasion to remark that in
stony place(s) there grow many small succulent plants and abound insects
(chiefly Grylli) which have exactly the same colour as the ground and
must for ever escape observation unless a person sit on the ground and
observe very attentively."

The cryptic resemblances of animals impressed Darwin and Wallace in
very different degrees, probably in part due to the fact that Wallace's
tropical experiences were so largely derived from the insect world, in
part to the importance assigned by Darwin to Sexual Selection "a
subject which had always greatly interested me," as he says in his
"Autobiography", ("Life and Letters", Vol. I. page 94.) There is no
reference to Cryptic Resemblance in Darwin's section of the Joint Essay,
although he gives an excellent short account of Sexual Selection (see
page 295). Wallace's section on the other hand contains the following
statement: "Even the peculiar colours of many animals, especially
insects, so closely resembling the soil or the leaves or the trunks on
which they habitually reside, are explained on the same principle; for
though in the course of ages varieties of many tints may have occurred,
YET THOSE RACES HAVING COLOURS BEST ADAPTED TO CONCEALMENT FROM THEIR
ENEMIES WOULD INEVITABLY SURVIVE THE LONGEST." ("Journ. Proc. Linn.
Soc." Vol. III. 1859, page 61. The italics are Wallace's.)

It would occupy too much space to attempt any discussion of the
difference between the views of these two naturalists, but it is clear
that Darwin, although fully believing in the efficiency of protective
resemblance and replying to St George Mivart's contention that Natural
Selection was incompetent to produce it ("Origin" (6th edition) London,
1872, pages 181, 182; see also page 66.), never entirely agreed with
Wallace's estimate of its importance. Thus the following extract from a
letter to Sir Joseph Hooker, May 21, 1868, refers to Wallace: "I find
I must (and I always distrust myself when I differ from him) separate
rather widely from him all about birds' nests and protection; he is
riding that hobby to death." ("More Letters", I. page 304.) It is clear
from the account given in "The Descent of Man", (London, 1874, pages
452-458. See also "Life and Letters", III. pages 123-125, and "More
Letters", II. pages 59-63, 72-74, 76-78, 84-90, 92, 93.), that the
divergence was due to the fact that Darwin ascribed more importance
to Sexual Selection than did Wallace, and Wallace more importance to
Protective Resemblance than Darwin. Thus Darwin wrote to Wallace,
Oct. 12 and 13, 1867: "By the way, I cannot but think that you push
protection too far in some cases, as with the stripes on the tiger."
("More Letters", I. page 283.) Here too Darwin was preferring the
explanation offered by Sexual Selection ("Descent of Man" (2nd edition)
1874, pages 545, 546.), a preference which, considering the relation of
the colouring of the lion and tiger to their respective environments,
few naturalists will be found to share. It is also shown that Darwin
contemplated the possibility of cryptic colours such as those of
Patagonian animals being due to sexual selection influenced by the
aspect of surrounding nature.

Nearly a year later Darwin in his letter of May 5, 1868?, expressed
his agreement with Wallace's views: "Expect that I should put sexual
selection as an equal, or perhaps as even a more important agent in
giving colour than Natural Selection for protection." ("More Letters",
II. pages 77, 78.) The conclusion expressed in the above quoted passage
is opposed by the extraordinary development of Protective Resemblance in
the immature stages of animals, especially insects.

It must not be supposed, however, that Darwin ascribed an unimportant
role to Cryptic Resemblances, and as observations accumulated he came to
recognise their efficiency in fresh groups of the animal kingdom. Thus
he wrote to Wallace, May 5, 1867: "Haeckel has recently well shown that
the transparency and absence of colour in the lower oceanic animals,
belonging to the most different classes, may be well accounted for on
the principle of protection." ("More Letters", II. page 62. See also
"Descent of Man", page 261.) Darwin also admitted the justice of
Professor E.S. Morse's contention that the shells of molluscs are often
adaptively coloured. ("More Letters", II. page 95.) But he looked
upon cryptic colouring and also mimicry as more especially Wallace's
departments, and sent to him and to Professor Meldola observations and
notes bearing upon these subjects. Thus the following letter given to me
by Dr A.R. Wallace and now, by kind permission, published for the first
time, accompanied a photograph of the chrysalis of Papilio sarpedon
choredon, Feld., suspended from a leaf of its food-plant:

July 9th, Down, Beckenham, Kent.

My Dear Wallace,

Dr G. Krefft has sent me the enclosed from Sydney. A nurseryman saw a
caterpillar feeding on a plant and covered the whole up, but when he
searched for the cocoon (pupa), was long before he could find it, so
good was its imitation in colour and form to the leaf to which it was
attached. I hope that the world goes well with you. Do not trouble
yourself by acknowledging this.

Ever yours

Ch. Darwin.

Another deeply interesting letter of Darwin's bearing upon protective
resemblance, has only recently been shown to me by my friend Professor
E.B. Wilson, the great American Cytologist. With his kind consent and
that of Mr Francis Darwin, this letter, written four months before
Darwin's death on April 19, 1882, is reproduced here (The letter is
addressed: "Edmund B. Wilson, Esq., Assistant in Biology, John Hopkins
University, Baltimore Md, U. States."):

December 21, 1881.

Dear Sir,

I thank you much for having taken so much trouble in describing fully
your interesting and curious case of mimickry.

I am in the habit of looking through many scientific Journals, and
though my memory is now not nearly so good as it was, I feel pretty sure
that no such case as yours has been described (amongst the nudibranch)
molluscs. You perhaps know the case of a fish allied to Hippocampus,
(described some years ago by Dr Gunther in "Proc. Zoolog. Socy.") which
clings by its tail to sea-weeds, and is covered with waving filaments
so as itself to look like a piece of the same sea-weed. The parallelism
between your and Dr Gunther's case makes both of them the more
interesting; considering how far a fish and a mollusc stand apart. It
would be difficult for anyone to explain such cases by the direct
action of the environment.--I am glad that you intend to make further
observations on this mollusc, and I hope that you will give a figure and
if possible a coloured figure.

With all good wishes from an old brother naturalist,

I remain, Dear Sir,

Yours faithfully,

Charles Darwin.

Professor E.B. Wilson has kindly given the following account of the
circumstances under which he had written to Darwin: "The case to which
Darwin's letter refers is that of the nudibranch mollusc Scyllaea,
which lives on the floating Sargassum and shows a really astonishing
resemblance to the plant, having leaf-shaped processes very closely
similar to the fronds of the sea-weed both in shape and in colour. The
concealment of the animal may be judged from the fact that we found
the animal quite by accident on a piece of Sargassum that had been in a
glass jar in the laboratory for some time and had been closely examined
in the search for hydroids and the like without disclosing the presence
upon it of two large specimens of the Scyllaea (the animal, as I recall
it, is about two inches long). It was first detected by its movements
alone, by someone (I think a casual visitor to the laboratory) who was
looking closely at the Sargassum and exclaimed 'Why, the sea-weed is
moving its leaves'! We found the example in the summer of 1880 or 1881
at Beaufort, N.C., where the Johns Hopkins laboratory was located for
the time being. It must have been seen by many others, before or since.

"I wrote and sent to Darwin a short description of the case at the
suggestion of Brooks, with whom I was at the time a student. I was, of
course, entirely unknown to Darwin (or to anyone else) and to me the
principal interest of Darwin's letter is the evidence that it gives of
his extraordinary kindness and friendliness towards an obscure youngster
who had of course absolutely no claim upon his time or attention. The
little incident made an indelible impression upon my memory and taught
me a lesson that was worth learning."

VARIABLE PROTECTIVE RESEMBLANCE.

The wonderful power of rapid colour adjustment possessed by the
cuttle-fish was observed by Darwin in 1832 at St Jago, Cape de Verd
Islands, the first place visited during the voyage of the "Beagle".
From Rio he wrote to Henslow, giving the following account of his
observations, May 18, 1832: "I took several specimens of an Octopus
which possessed a most marvellous power of changing its colours,
equalling any chameleon, and evidently accommodating the changes to the
colour of the ground which it passed over. Yellowish green, dark brown,
and red, were the prevailing colours; this fact appears to be new, as
far as I can find out." ("Life and Letters", I. pages 235, 236. See
also Darwin's "Journal of Researches", 1876, pages 6-8, where a far more
detailed account is given together with a reference to "Encycl. of Anat.
and Physiol.")

Darwin was well aware of the power of individual colour adjustment,
now known to be possessed by large numbers of lepidopterous pupae and
larvae. An excellent example was brought to his notice by C.V. Riley
("More Letters" II, pages 385, 386.), while the most striking of the
early results obtained with the pupae of butterflies--those of Mrs M.E.
Barber upon Papilio nireus--was communicated by him to the Entomological
Society of London. ("Trans. Ent. Soc. Lond." 1874, page 519. See also
"More Letters", II. page 403.)

It is also necessary to direct attention to C.W. Beebe's ("Zoologica:
N.Y. Zool. Soc." Vol. I. No. 1, Sept. 25, 1907: "Geographic variation
in birds with especial reference to the effects of humidity".) recent
discovery that the pigmentation of the plumage of certain birds is
increased by confinement in a superhumid atmosphere. In Scardafella
inca, on which the most complete series of experiments was made, the
changes took place only at the moults, whether normal and annual or
artificially induced at shorter periods. There was a corresponding
increase in the choroidal pigment of the eye. At a certain advanced
stage of feather pigmentation a brilliant iridescent bronze or green
tint made its appearance on those areas where iridescence most often
occurs in allied genera. Thus in birds no less than in insects,
characters previously regarded as of taxonomic value, can be evoked or
withheld by the forces of the environment.

WARNING OR APOSEMATIC COLOURS.

From Darwin's description of the colours and habits it is evident that
he observed, in 1833, an excellent example of warning colouring in a
little South American toad (Phryniscus nigricans). He described it in a
letter to Henslow, written from Monte Video, Nov. 24, 1832: "As for
one little toad, I hope it may be new, that it may be christened
'diabolicus.' Milton must allude to this very individual when he talks
of 'squat like a toad'; its colours are by Werner ("Nomenclature of
Colours", 1821) ink black, vermilion red and buff orange." ("More
Letters", I. page 12.) In the "Journal of Researches" (1876, page 97.)
its colours are described as follows: "If we imagine, first, that it had
been steeped in the blackest ink, and then, when dry, allowed to crawl
over a board, freshly painted with the brightest vermilion, so as to
colour the soles of its feet and parts of its stomach, a good idea
of its appearance will be gained." "Instead of being nocturnal in its
habits, as other toads are, and living in damp obscure recesses, it
crawls during the heat of the day about the dry sand-hillocks and
arid plains,... " The appearance and habits recall T. Belt's well-known
description of the conspicuous little Nicaraguan frog which he found to
be distasteful to a duck. ("The Naturalist in Nicaragua" (2nd edition)
London, 1888, page 321.)

The recognition of the Warning Colours of caterpillars is due in the
first instance to Darwin, who, reflecting on Sexual Selection, was
puzzled by the splendid colours of sexually immature organisms. He
applied to Wallace "who has an innate genius for solving difficulties."
("Descent of Man", page 325. On this and the following page an excellent
account of the discovery will be found, as well as in Wallace's "Natural
Selection", London, 1875, pages 117-122.) Darwin's original letter
exists ("Life and Letters", III. pages 93, 94.), and in it we are
told that he had taken the advice given by Bates: "You had better ask
Wallace." After some consideration Wallace replied that he believed the
colours of conspicuous caterpillars and perfect insects were a warning
of distastefulness and that such forms would be refused by birds.
Darwin's reply ("Life and Letters", III. pages 94, 95.) is extremely
interesting both for its enthusiasm at the brilliancy of the hypothesis
and its caution in acceptance without full confirmation:

"Bates was quite right; you are the man to apply to in a difficulty. I
never heard anything more ingenious than your suggestion, and I hope you
may be able to prove it true. That is a splendid fact about the white
moths (A single white moth which was rejected by young turkeys, while
other moths were greedily devoured: "Natural Selection", 1875, page
78.); it warms one's very blood to see a theory thus almost proved to be
true."

Two years later the hypothesis was proved to hold for caterpillars of
many kinds by J. Jenner Weir and A.G. Butler, whose observations have
since been abundantly confirmed by many naturalists. Darwin wrote to
Weir, May 13, 1869: "Your verification of Wallace's suggestion seems
to me to amount to quite a discovery." ("More Letters", II. page 71
(footnote).)

RECOGNITION OR EPISEMATIC CHARACTERS.

This principle does not appear to have been in any way foreseen by
Darwin, although he draws special attention to several elements of
pattern which would now be interpreted by many naturalists as epismes.
He believed that the markings in question interfered with the cryptic
effect, and came to the conclusion that, even when common to both sexes,
they "are the result of sexual selection primarily applied to the male."
("Descent of Man", page 544.) The most familiar of all recognition
characters was carefully explained by him, although here too explained
as an ornamental feature now equally transmitted to both sexes: "The
hare on her form is a familiar instance of concealment through colour;
yet this principle partly fails in a closely-allied species, the rabbit,
for when running to its burrow, it is made conspicuous to the sportsman,
and no doubt to all beasts of prey, by its upturned white tail."
("Descent of Man", page 542.)

The analogous episematic use of the bright colours of flowers to attract
insects for effecting cross-fertilisation and of fruits to attract
vertebrates for effecting dispersal is very clearly explained in the
"Origin". (Edition 1872, page 161. For a good example of Darwin's
caution in dealing with exceptions see the allusion to brightly coloured
fruit in "More Letters", II. page 348.)

It is not, at this point, necessary to treat sematic characters at
any greater length. They will form the subject of a large part of
the following section, where the models of Batesian (Pseudaposematic)
mimicry are considered as well as the Mullerian (Synaposematic)
combinations of Warning Colours.

MIMICRY,--BATESIAN OR PSEUDAPOSEMATIC, MULLERIAN OR SYNAPOSEMATIC.

The existence of superficial resemblances between animals of various
degrees of affinity must have been observed for hundreds of years.
Among the early examples, the best known to me have been found in
the manuscript note-books and collections of W.J. Burchell, the great
traveller in Africa (1810-15) and Brazil (1825-30). The most interesting
of his records on this subject are brought together in the following
paragraphs.

Conspicuous among well-defended insects are the dark steely or
iridescent greenish blue fossorial wasps or sand-wasps, Sphex and the
allied genera. Many Longicorn beetles mimic these in colour, slender
shape of body and limbs, rapid movements, and the readiness with which
they take to flight. On Dec. 21, 1812, Burchell captured one such beetle
(Promeces viridis) at Kosi Fountain on the journey from the source
of the Kuruman River to Klaarwater. It is correctly placed among the
Longicorns in his catalogue, but opposite to its number is the comment
"Sphex! totus purpureus."

In our own country the black-and-yellow colouring of many stinging
insects, especially the ordinary wasps, affords perhaps the commonest
model for mimicry. It is reproduced with more or less accuracy on moths,
flies and beetles. Among the latter it is again a Longicorn which offers
one of the best-known, although by no means one of the most perfect,
examples. The appearance of the well-known "wasp-beetle" (Clytus
arietis) in the living state is sufficiently suggestive to prevent
the great majority of people from touching it. In Burchell's Brazilian
collection there is a nearly allied species (Neoclytus curvatus) which
appears to be somewhat less wasp-like than the British beetle. The
specimen bears the number "1188," and the date March 27, 1827, when
Burchell was collecting in the neighbourhood of San Paulo. Turning to
the corresponding number in the Brazilian note-book we find this
record: "It runs rapidly like an ichneumon or wasp, of which it has the
appearance."

The formidable, well-defended ants are as freely mimicked by other
insects as the sand-wasps, ordinary wasps and bees. Thus on February
17, 1901, Guy A.K. Marshall captured, near Salisbury, Mashonaland,
three similar species of ants (Hymenoptera) with a bug (Hemiptera) and
a Locustid (Orthoptera), the two latter mimicking the former. All the
insects, seven in number, were caught on a single plant, a small bushy
vetch. ("Trans. Ent. Soc. Lond." 1902, page 535, plate XIX. figs.
53-59.)

This is an interesting recent example from South Africa, and large
numbers of others might be added--the observations of many naturalists
in many lands; but nearly all of them known since that general awakening
of interest in the subject which was inspired by the great hypotheses
of H.W. Bates and Fritz Muller. We find, however, that Burchell had
more than once recorded the mimetic resemblance to ants. An extremely
ant-like bug (the larva of a species of Alydus) in his Brazilian
collection is labelled "1141," with the date December 8, 1826, when
Burchell was at the Rio das Pedras, Cubatao, near Santos. In the
note-book the record is as follows: "1141 Cimex. I collected this for a
Formica."

Some of the chief mimics of ants are the active little hunting spiders
belonging to the family Attidae. Examples have been brought forward
during many recent years, especially by my friends Dr and Mrs Peckham,
of Milwaukee, the great authorities on this group of Araneae. Here too
we find an observation of the mimetic resemblance recorded by Burchell,
and one which adds in the most interesting manner to our knowledge
of the subject. A fragment, all that is now left, of an Attid spider,
captured on June 30, 1828, at Goyaz, Brazil, bears the following note,
in this case on the specimen and not in the note-book: "Black... runs and
seems like an ant with large extended jaws." My friend Mr R.I. Pocock,
to whom I have submitted the specimen, tells me that it is not one of
the group of species hitherto regarded as ant-like, and he adds, "It is
most interesting that Burchell should have noticed the resemblance to an
ant in its movements. This suggests that the perfect imitation in shape,
as well as in movement, seen in many species was started in forms of an
appropriate size and colour by the mimicry of movement alone." Up to the
present time Burchell is the only naturalist who has observed an example
which still exhibits this ancestral stage in the evolution of mimetic
likeness.

Following the teachings of his day, Burchell was driven to believe that
it was part of the fixed and inexorable scheme of things that these
strange superficial resemblances existed. Thus, when he found other
examples of Hemipterous mimics, including one (Luteva macrophthalma)
with "exactly the manners of a Mantis," he added the sentence, "In the
genus Cimex (Linn.) are to be found the outward resemblances of insects
of many other genera and orders" (February 15, 1829). Of another
Brazilian bug, which is not to be found in his collection, and cannot
therefore be precisely identified, he wrote: "Cimex... Nature seems
to have intended it to imitate a Sphex, both in colour and the rapid
palpitating and movement of the antennae" (November 15, 1826). At the
same time it is impossible not to feel the conviction that Burchell felt
the advantage of a likeness to stinging insects and to aggressive ants,
just as he recognised the benefits conferred on desert plants by spines
and by concealment. Such an interpretation of mimicry was perfectly
consistent with the theological doctrines of his day. (See Kirby and
Spence, "An Introduction to Entomology" (1st edition), London, Vol. II.
1817, page 223.)

The last note I have selected from Burchell's manuscript refers to one
of the chief mimics of the highly protected Lycid beetles. The whole
assemblage of African insects with a Lycoid colouring forms a most
important combination and one which has an interesting bearing upon the
theories of Bates and Fritz Muller. This most wonderful set of
mimetic forms, described in 1902 by Guy A.K. Marshall, is composed
of flower-haunting beetles belonging to the family Lycidae, and the
heterogeneous group of varied insects which mimic their conspicuous and
simple scheme of colouring. The Lycid beetles, forming the centre or
"models" of the whole company, are orange-brown in front for about
two-thirds of the exposed surface, black behind for the remaining third.
They are undoubtedly protected by qualities which make them excessively
unpalatable to the bulk of insect-eating animals. Some experimental
proof of this has been obtained by Mr Guy Marshall. What are the forms
which surround them? According to the hypothesis of Bates they would be,
at any rate mainly, palatable hard-pressed insects which only hold their
own in the struggle for life by a fraudulent imitation of the trade-mark
of the successful and powerful Lycidae. According to Fritz Muller's
hypothesis we should expect that the mimickers would be highly
protected, successful and abundant species, which (metaphorically
speaking) have found it to their advantage to possess an advertisement,
a danger-signal, in common with each other, and in common with the
beetles in the centre of the group.

How far does the constitution of this wonderful combination--the largest
and most complicated as yet known in all the world--convey to us the
idea of mimicry working along the lines supposed by Bates or those
suggested by Muller? Figures 1 to 52 of Mr Marshall's coloured plate
("Trans. Ent. Soc. Lond." 1902, plate XVIII. See also page 517, where
the group is analysed.) represent a set of forty-two or forty-three
species or forms of insects captured in Mashonaland, and all except two
in the neighbourhood of Salisbury. The combination includes six species
of Lycidae; nine beetles of five groups all specially protected by
nauseous qualities, Telephoridae, Melyridae, Phytophaga, Lagriidae,
Cantharidae; six Longicorn beetles; one Coprid beetle; eight stinging
Hymenoptera; three or four parasitic Hymenoptera (Braconidae, a group
much mimicked and shown by some experiments to be distasteful); five
bugs (Hemiptera, a largely unpalatable group); three moths (Arctiidae
and Zygaenidae, distasteful families); one fly. In fact the whole
combination, except perhaps one Phytophagous, one Coprid and the
Longicorn beetles, and the fly, fall under the hypothesis of Muller
and not under that of Bates. And it is very doubtful whether these
exceptions will be sustained: indeed the suspicion of unpalatability
already besets the Longicorns and is always on the heels,--I should say
the hind tarsi--of a Phytophagous beetle.

This most remarkable group which illustrates so well the problem of
mimicry and the alternative hypotheses proposed for its solution, was,
as I have said, first described in 1902. Among the most perfect of
the mimetic resemblances in it is that between the Longicorn beetle,
Amphidesmus analis, and the Lycidae. It was with the utmost astonishment
and pleasure that I found this very resemblance had almost certainly
been observed by Burchell. A specimen of the Amphidesmus exists in his
collection and it bears "651." Turning to the same number in the
African Catalogue we find that the beetle is correctly placed among the
Longicorns, that it was captured at Uitenhage on Nov. 18, 1813, and that
it was found associated with Lycid beetles in flowers ("consocians cum
Lycis 78-87 in floribus"). Looking up Nos. 78-87 in the collection and
catalogue, three species of Lycidae are found, all captured on Nov. 18,
1813, at Uitenhage. Burchell recognised the wide difference in affinity,
shown by the distance between the respective numbers; for his catalogue
is arranged to represent relationships. He observed, what students of
mimicry are only just beginning to note and record, the coincidence
between model and mimic in time and space and in habits. We are
justified in concluding that he observed the close superficial likeness
although he does not in this case expressly allude to it.

One of the most interesting among the early observations of superficial
resemblance between forms remote in the scale of classification was made
by Darwin himself, as described in the following passage from his letter
to Henslow, written from Monte Video, Aug. 15, 1832: "Amongst the lower
animals nothing has so much interested me as finding two species of
elegantly coloured true Planaria inhabiting the dewy forest! The false
relation they bear to snails is the most extraordinary thing of the kind
I have ever seen." ("More Letters", I. page 9.)

Many years later, in 1867, he wrote to Fritz Muller suggesting that the
resemblance of a soberly coloured British Planarian to a slug might be
due to mimicry. ("Life and Letters", III. page 71.)

The most interesting copy of Bates's classical memoir on Mimicry
("Contributions to an Insect Fauna of the Amazon Valley". "Trans. Linn.
Soc." Vol. XXIII. 1862, page 495.), read before the Linnean Society in
1861, is that given by him to the man who has done most to support and
extend the theory. My kind friend has given that copy to me; it bears
the inscription:

"Mr A.R. Wallace from his old travelling companion the Author."

Only a year and a half after the publication of the "Origin", we find
that Darwin wrote to Bates on the subject which was to provide such
striking evidence of the truth of Natural Selection: "I am glad to hear
that you have specially attended to 'mimetic' analogies--a most curious
subject; I hope you publish on it. I have for a long time wished to
know whether what Dr Collingwood asserts is true--that the most striking
cases generally occur between insects inhabiting the same country." (The
