Chapter VIII. of the "Life and Letters". (Vol. I. page 304. For Darwin's
religious views see also "Descent of Man", 1871, Vol. I. page 65; 2nd
edition. Vol. I. page 142.) On board the "Beagle" he was simply orthodox
and was laughed at by several of the officers for quoting the Bible as
an unanswerable authority on some point of morality. By 1839 he had come
to see that the Old Testament was no more to be trusted than the sacred
books of the Hindoos. Next went the belief in miracles, and next Paley's
"argument from design" broke down before the law of natural selection;
the suffering so manifest in nature is seen to be compatible rather with
Natural Selection than with the goodness and omnipotence of God. Darwin
felt to the full all the ignorance that lay hidden under specious
phrases like "the plan of creation" and "Unity of design." Finally, he
tells us "the mystery of the beginning of all things is insoluble by us;
and I for one must be content to remain an Agnostic."

The word Agnostic is significant not only of the humility of the man
himself but also of the attitude of his age. Religion, it is clear,
is still conceived as something to be KNOWN, a matter of true or
false OPINION. Orthodox religion was to Darwin a series of erroneous
hypotheses to be bit by bit discarded when shown to be untenable. The
ACTS of religion which may result from such convictions, i.e. devotion
in all its forms, prayer, praise, sacraments, are left unmentioned.
It is clear that they are not, as now to us, sociological survivals
of great interest and importance, but rather matters too private, too
personal, for discussion.

Huxley, writing in the "Contemporary Review" (1871.), says, "In a dozen
years "The Origin of Species" has worked as complete a revolution in
biological science as the "Principia" did in astronomy." It has done
so because, in the words of Helmholtz, it contained "an essentially
new creative thought," that of the continuity of life, the absence of
breaks. In the two most conservative subjects, Religion and Classics,
this creative ferment was slow indeed to work. Darwin himself felt
strongly "that a man should not publish on a subject to which he has
not given special and continuous thought," and hence wrote little on
religion and with manifest reluctance, though, as already seen, in
answer to pertinacious inquiry he gave an outline of his own views. But
none the less he foresaw that his doctrine must have, for the history
of man's mental evolution, issues wider than those with which he was
prepared personally to deal. He writes, in "The Origin of Species"
(6th edition, page 428.), "In the future I see open fields for far
more important researches. Psychology will be securely based on
the foundation already well laid by Mr Herbert Spencer, that of the
necessary acquirement of each mental power and capacity by gradation."

Nowhere, it is true, does Darwin definitely say that he regarded
religion as a set of phenomena, the development of which may be studied
from the psychological standpoint. Rather we infer from his PIETY--in
the beautiful Roman sense--towards tradition and association, that
religion was to him in some way sacrosanct. But it is delightful to see
how his heart went out towards the new method in religious study which
he had himself, if half-unconsciously, inaugurated. Writing in 1871 to
Dr Tylor, on the publication of his "Primitive Culture", he says ("Life
and Letters", Vol. III. page 151.), "It is wonderful how you trace
animism from the lower races up the religious belief of the highest
races. It will make me for the future look at religion--a belief in the
soul, etc.--from a new point of view."

Psychology was henceforth to be based on "the necessary acquirement of
each mental capacity by gradation." With these memorable words the
door closes on the old and opens on the new horizon. The mental focus
henceforth is not on the maintaining or refuting of an orthodoxy but
on the genesis and evolution of a capacity, not on perfection but on
process. Continuous evolution leaves no gap for revelation sudden and
complete. We have henceforth to ask, not when was religion revealed
or what was the revelation, but how did religious phenomena arise and
develop. For an answer to this we turn with new and reverent eyes to
study "the heathen in his blindness" and the child "born in sin." We
still indeed send out missionaries to convert the heathen, but here
at least in Cambridge before they start they attend lectures on
anthropology and comparative religion. The "decadence" theory is dead
and should be buried.

The study of primitive religions then has been made possible and even
inevitable by the theory of Evolution. We have now to ask what new facts
and theories have resulted from that study. This brings us to our second
point, the advanced outlook on religion to-day.

The view I am about to state is no mere personal opinion of my own.
To my present standpoint I have been led by the investigations of such
masters as Drs Wundt, Lehmann, Preuss, Bergson, Beck and in our own
country Drs Tylor and Frazer. (I can only name here the books that
have specially influenced my own views. They are W. Wundt,
"Volkerpsychologie", Leipzig, 1900, P. Beck, "Die Nachahmung", Leipzig,
1904, and "Erkenntnisstheorie des primitiven Denkens" in "Zeitschrift
f. Philos. und Philos. Kritik", 1903, page 172, and 1904, page 9. Henri
Bergson, "L'Evolution Creatrice" and "Matiere et Memoire", 1908, K. Th.
Preuss, various articles published in the "Globus" (see page 507, note
1), and in the "Archiv. f. Religionswissenschaft", and for the subject
of magic, MM. Hubert et Mauss, "Theorie generale de la Magie", in
"L'Annee Sociologique", VII.)

Religion always contains two factors. First, a theoretical factor, what
a man THINKS about the unseen--his theology, or, if we prefer so to call
it, his mythology. Second, what he DOES in relation to this unseen--his
ritual. These factors rarely if ever occur in complete separation; they
are blended in very varying proportions. Religion we have seen was
in the last century regarded mainly in its theoretical aspect as a
doctrine. Greek religion for example meant to most educated persons
Greek mythology. Yet even a cursory examination shows that neither
Greek nor Roman had any creed or dogma, any hard and fast formulation
of belief. In the Greek Mysteries (See my "Prolegomena to the Study of
Greek Religion", page 155, Cambridge, 1903.) only we find what we should
call a Confiteor; and this is not a confession of faith, but an avowal
of rites performed. When the religion of primitive peoples came to be
examined it was speedily seen that though vague beliefs necessarily
abound, definite creeds are practically non-existent. Ritual is dominant
and imperative.

This predominance and priority of ritual over definite creed was first
forced upon our notice by the study of savages, but it promptly and
happily joined hands with modern psychology. Popular belief says, I
think, therefore I act; modern scientific psychology says, I act (or
rather, REact to outside stimulus), and so I come to think. Thus there
is set going a recurrent series: act and thought become in their turn
stimuli to fresh acts and thoughts. In examining religion as envisaged
to-day it would therefore be more correct to begin with the practice
of religion, i.e. ritual, and then pass to its theory, theology or
mythology. But it will be more convenient to adopt the reverse
method. The theoretical content of religion is to those of us who are
Protestants far more familiar and we shall thus proceed from the known
to the comparatively unknown.

I shall avoid all attempt at rigid definition. The problem before the
modern investigator is, not to determine the essence and definition of
religion but to inquire how religious phenomena, religious ideas and
practices arose. Now the theoretical content of religion, the domain of
theology or mythology, is broadly familiar to all. It is the world of
the unseen, the supersensuous; it is the world of what we call the soul
and the supposed objects of the soul's perception, sprites, demons,
ghosts and gods. How did this world grow up?

We turn to our savages. Intelligent missionaries of bygone days used to
ply savages with questions such as these: Had they any belief in God?
Did they believe in the immortality of the soul? Taking their own
clear-cut conceptions, discriminated by a developed terminology, these
missionaries tried to translate them into languages that had neither the
words nor the thoughts, only a vague, inchoate, tangled substratum, out
of which these thoughts and words later differentiated themselves. Let
us examine this substratum.

Nowadays we popularly distinguish between objective and subjective;
and further, we regard the two worlds as in some sense opposed. To
the objective world we commonly attribute some reality independent of
consciousness, while we think of the subjective as dependent for its
existence on the mind. The objective world consists of perceptible
things, or of the ultimate constituents to which matter is reduced by
physical speculation. The subjective world is the world of beliefs,
hallucinations, dreams, abstract ideas, imaginations and the like.
Psychology of course knows that the objective and subjective worlds are
interdependent, inextricably intertwined, but for practical purposes the
distinction is convenient.

But primitive man has not yet drawn the distinction between objective
and subjective. Nay, more, it is foreign to almost the whole of ancient
philosophy. Plato's Ideas (I owe this psychological analysis of the
elements of the primitive supersensuous world mainly to Dr Beck,
"Erkenntnisstheorie des primitiven Denkens", see page 498, note 1.), his
Goodness, Truth, Beauty, his class-names, horse, table, are it is true
dematerialised as far as possible, but they have outside existence,
apart from the mind of the thinker, they have in some shadowy way
spatial extension. Yet ancient philosophies and primitive man alike
needed and possessed for practical purposes a distinction which served
as well as our subjective and objective. To the primitive savage all his
thoughts, every object of which he was conscious, whether by perception
or conception, had reality, that is, it had existence outside himself,
but it might have reality of various kinds or different degrees.

It is not hard to see how this would happen. A man's senses may mislead
him. He sees the reflection of a bird in a pond. To his eyes it is a
real bird. He touches it, HE PUTS IT TO THE TOUCH, and to his touch it
is not a bird at all. It is real then, but surely not quite so real as
a bird that you can touch. Again, he sees smoke. It is real to his eyes.
He tries to grasp it, it vanishes. The wind touches him, but he cannot
see it, which makes him feel uncanny. The most real thing is that which
affects most senses and especially what affects the sense of touch.
Apparently touch is the deepest down, most primitive, of senses. The
rest are specialisations and complications. Primitive man has no formal
rubric "optical delusion," but he learns practically to distinguish
between things that affect only one sense and things that affect two or
more--if he did not he would not survive. But both classes of things are
real to him. Percipi est esse.

So far, primitive man has made a real observation; there are things that
appeal to one sense only. But very soon creeps in confusion fraught with
disaster. He passes naturally enough, being economical of any mental
effort, from what he really sees but cannot feel to what he thinks
he sees, and gives to it the same secondary reality. He has dreams,
visions, hallucinations, nightmares. He dreams that an enemy is beating
him, and he wakes rubbing his head. Then further he remembers things;
that is, for him, he sees them. A great chief died the other day and
they buried him, but he sees him still in his mind, sees him in his
war-paint, splendid, victorious. So the image of the past goes together
with his dreams and visions to the making of this other less real,
but still real world, his other-world of the supersensuous, the
supernatural, a world, the outside existence of which, independent of
himself, he never questions.

And, naturally enough, the future joins the past in this supersensuous
world. He can hope, he can imagine, he can prophesy. And again the
images of his hope are real; he sees them with that mind's eye which
as yet he has not distinguished from his bodily eye. And so the
supersensuous world grows and grows big with the invisible present, and
big also with the past and the future, crowded with the ghosts of the
dead and shadowed with oracles and portents. It is this supersensuous,
supernatural world which is the eternity, the other-world, of primitive
religion, not an endlessness of time, but a state removed from full
sensuous reality, a world in which anything and everything may happen,
a world peopled by demonic ancestors and liable to a splendid vagueness,
to a "once upon a time-ness" denied to the present. It not unfrequently
happens that people who know that the world nowadays obeys fixed laws
have no difficulty in believing that six thousand years ago man was
made direct from a lump of clay, and woman was made from one of man's
superfluous ribs.

The fashioning of the supersensuous world comes out very clearly in
primitive man's views about the soul and life after death. Herbert
Spencer noted long ago the influence of dreams in forming a belief in
immortality, but being very rational himself, he extended to primitive
man a quite alien quality of rationality. Herbert Spencer argued that
when a savage has a dream he seeks to account for it, and in so doing
invents a spirit world. The mistake here lies in the "seeks to account
for it." (Primitive man, as Dr Beck observes, is not impelled by an
Erkenntnisstrieb. Dr Beck says he has counted upwards of 30 of these
mythological Triebe (tendencies) with which primitive man has been
endowed.) Man is at first too busy LIVING to have any time for
disinterested THINKING. He dreams a dream and it is real for him. He
does not seek to account for it any more than for his hands and feet. He
cannot distinguish between a CONception and a PERception, that is all.
He remembers his ancestors or they appear to him in a dream; therefore
they are alive still, but only as a rule to about the third generation.
Then he remembers them no more and they cease to be.

Next as regards his own soul. He feels something within him,
his life-power, his will to live, his power to act, his
personality--whatever we like to call it. He cannot touch this thing
that is himself, but it is real. His friend too is alive and one day he
is dead; he cannot move, he cannot act. Well, something has gone that
was his friend's self. He has stopped breathing. Was it his breath? or
he is bleeding; is it his blood? This life-power IS something; does it
live in his heart or his lungs or his midriff? He did not see it go;
perhaps it is like wind, an anima, a Geist, a ghost. But again it comes
back in a dream, only looking shadowy; it is not the man's life, it is
a thin copy of the man; it is an "image" (eidolon). It is like that
shifting distorted thing that dogs the living man's footsteps in the
sunshine; it is a "shade" (skia). (The two conceptions of the soul, as a
life-essence, inseparable from the body, and as a separable phantom seem
to occur in most primitive systems. They are distinct conceptions but
are inextricably blended in savage thought. The two notions Korperseele
and Psyche have been very fully discussed in Wundt's "Volkerpsychologie"
II. pages 1-142, Leipzig, 1900.)

Ghosts and sprites, ancestor worship, the soul, oracles, prophecy; all
these elements of the primitive supersensuous world we willingly admit
to be the proper material of religion; but other elements are more
surprising; such are class-names, abstract ideas, numbers, geometrical
figures. We do not nowadays think of these as of religious content, but
to primitive men they were all part of the furniture of his supernatural
world.

With respect to class-names, Dr Tylor ("Primitive Culture", Vol. II.
page 245 (4th edition), 1903.) has shown how instructive are the first
attempts of the savage to get at the idea of a class. Things in which
similarity is observed, things indeed which can be related at all are
to the savage KINDRED. A species is a family or a number of individuals
with a common god to look after them. Such for example is the Finn
doctrine of the haltia. Every object has its haltia, but the haltiat
were not tied to the individual, they interested themselves in every
member of the species. Each stone had its haltia, but that haltia was
interested in other stones; the individuals disappeared, the haltia
remained.

Nor was it only class-names that belonged to the supersensuous world. A
man's own proper-name is a sort of spiritual essence of him, a kind
of soul to be carefully concealed. By pronouncing a name you bring the
thing itself into being. When Elohim would create Day "he called out to
the Light 'Day,' and to the Darkness he called out 'Night'"; the great
magician pronounced the magic Names and the Things came into being. "In
the beginning was the Word" is literally true, and this reflects the
fact that our CONCEPTUAL world comes into being by the mental process of
naming. (For a full discussion of this point see Beck, "Nachahmung" page
41, "Die Sprache".) In old times people went further; they thought that
by naming events they could bring them to be, and custom even to-day
keeps up the inveterate magical habit of wishing people "Good Morning"
and a "Happy Christmas."

Number, too, is part of the supersensuous world that is thoroughly
religious. We can see and touch seven apples, but seven itself, that
wonderful thing that shifts from object to object, giving it
its SEVENness, that living thing, for it begets itself anew in
multiplication--surely seven is a fit denizen of the upper-world.
Originally all numbers dwelt there, and a certain supersensuous sanctity
still clings to seven and three. We still say "Holy, Holy, Holy," and in
some mystic way feel the holier.

The soul and the supersensuous world get thinner and thinner, rarer and
more rarified, but they always trail behind them clouds of smoke and
vapour from the world of sense and space whence they have come. It is
difficult for us even nowadays to use the word "soul" without lapsing
into a sensuous mythology. The Cartesians' sharp distinction between res
extensa non cogitans and res cogitans non extansa is remote.

So far then man, through the processes of his thinking, has provided
himself with a supersensuous world, the world of sense-delusion, of
smoke and cloud, of dream and phantom, of imagination, of name and
number and image. The natural course would now seem to be that this
supersensuous world should develop into the religious world as we know
it, that out of a vague animism with ghosts of ancestors, demons,
and the like, there should develop in due order momentary gods
(Augenblicks-Gotter), tribal gods, polytheism, and finally a pure
monotheism.

This course of development is usually assumed, but it is not I think
quite what really happens. The supersensuous world as we have got it so
far is too theoretic to be complete material of religion. It is indeed
only one factor, or rather it is as it were a lifeless body that waits
for a living spirit to possess and inform it. Had the theoretic factor
remained uninformed it would eventually have separated off into its
constituent elements of error and truth, the error dying down as a
belated metaphysic, the truth developing into a correct and scientific
psychology of the subjective. But man has ritual as well as mythology;
that is, he feels and acts as well as thinks; nay more he probably feels
and acts long before he definitely thinks. This contradicts all our
preconceived notions of theology. Man, we imagine, believes in a god
or gods and then worships. The real order seems to be that, in a sense
presently to be explained, he worships, he feels and acts, and out
of his feeling and action, projected into his confused thinking,
he develops a god. We pass therefore to our second factor in
religion:--ritual.

The word "ritual" brings to our modern minds the notion of a church
with a priesthood and organised services. Instinctively we think of a
congregation meeting to confess sins, to receive absolution, to pray,
to praise, to listen to sermons, and possibly to partake of sacraments.
Were we to examine these fully developed phenomena we should hardly get
further in the analysis of our religious conceptions than the notion
of a highly anthropomorphic god approached by purely human methods of
personal entreaty and adulation.

Further, when we first come to the study of primitive religions we
expect a priori to find the same elements, though in a ruder form. We
expect to see "The heathen in his blindness bow down to wood and stone,"
but the facts that actually confront us are startlingly dissimilar.
Bowing down to wood and stone is an occupation that exists mainly in the
minds of hymn-writers. The real savage is more actively engaged. Instead
of asking a god to do what he wants done, he does it or tries to do
it himself; instead of prayers he utters spells. In a word he is busy
practising magic, and above all he is strenuously engaged in dancing
magical dances. When the savage wants rain or wind or sunshine, he does
not go to church; he summons his tribe and they dance a rain-dance or
wind-dance or sun-dance. When a savage goes to war we must not picture
his wife on her knees at home praying for the absent; instead we must
picture her dancing the whole night long; not for mere joy of heart
or to pass the weary hours; she is dancing his war-dance to bring him
victory.

Magic is nowadays condemned alike by science and by religion; it is
both useless and impious. It is obsolete, and only practised by malign
sorcerers in obscure holes and corners. Undoubtedly magic is neither
religion nor science, but in all probability it is the spiritual
protoplasm from which religion and science ultimately differentiated.
As such the doctrine of evolution bids us scan it closely. Magic may
be malign and private; nowadays it is apt to be both. But in early days
magic was as much for good as for evil; it was publicly practised for
the common weal.

The gist of magic comes out most clearly in magical dances. We think of
dancing as a light form of recreation, practised by the young from sheer
joie de vivre and unsuitable for the mature. But among the Tarahumares
(Carl Lumholtz, "Unknown Mexico", page 330, London, 1903.) in Mexico the
word for dancing, nolavoa, means "to work." Old men will reproach young
men saying "Why do you not go to work?" meaning why do you not dance
instead of only looking on. The chief religious sin of which the
Tarahumare is conscious is that he has not danced enough and not made
enough tesvino, his cereal intoxicant.

Dancing then is to the savage WORKING, DOING, and the dance is in its
origin an imitation or perhaps rather an intensification of processes of
work. (Karl Bucher, "Arbeit und Rhythmus", Leipzig (3rd edition), 1902,
passim.) Repetition, regular and frequent, constitutes rhythm and rhythm
heightens the sense of will power in action. Rhythmical action may even,
as seen in the dances of Dervishes, produce a condition of ecstasy.
Ecstasy among primitive peoples is a condition much valued; it is often,
though not always, enhanced by the use of intoxicants. Psychologically
the savage starts from the sense of his own will power, he stimulates
it by every means at his command. Feeling his will strongly and knowing
nothing of natural law he recognises no limits to his own power; he
feels himself a magician, a god; he does not pray, he WILLS. Moreover
he wills collectively (The subject of collective hallucination as an
element in magic has been fully worked out by MM. Hubert and Mauss.
"Theorie generale de la Magie", In "L'Annee Sociologique", 1902--3, page
140.), reinforced by the will and action of his whole tribe. Truly of
him it may be said "La vie deborde l'intelligence, l'intelligence c'est
un retrecissement." (Henri Bergson, "L'Evolution Creatrice", page 50.)

The magical extension and heightening of personality come out very
clearly in what are rather unfortunately known as MIMETIC dances. Animal
dances occur very frequently among primitive peoples. The dancers
dress up as birds, beasts, or fishes, and reproduce the characteristic
movements and habits of the animals impersonated. (So characteristic is
this impersonation in magical dancing that among the Mexicans the
word for magic, navali, means "disguise." K. Th. Preuss, "Archiv f.
Religionswissenschaft", 1906, page 97.) A very common animal dance is
the frog-dance. When it rains the frogs croak. If you desire rain you
dress up like a frog and croak and jump. We think of such a performance
as a conscious imitation. The man, we think, is more or less LIKE a
frog. That is not how primitive man thinks; indeed, he scarcely thinks
at all; what HE wants done the frog can do by croaking and jumping, so
he croaks and jumps and, for all he can, BECOMES a frog. "L'intelligence
animale JOUE sans doute les representations plutot qu'elle ne les
pense." (Bergson, "L'Evolution Creatrice", page 205.)

We shall best understand this primitive state of mind if we study
the child "born in sin." If a child is "playing at lions" he does not
IMITATE a lion, i.e. he does not consciously try to be a thing more or
less like a lion, he BECOMES one. His reaction, his terror, is the same
as if the real lion were there. It is this childlike power of utter
impersonation, of BEING the thing we act or even see acted, this
extension and intensification of our own personality that lives deep
down in all of us and is the very seat and secret of our joy in the
drama.

A child's mind is indeed throughout the best clue to the understanding
of savage magic. A young and vital child knows no limit to his own will,
and it is the only reality to him. It is not that he wants at the outset
to fight other wills, but that they simply do not exist for him. Like
the artist he goes forth to the work of creation, gloriously alone. His
attitude towards other recalcitrant wills is "they simply must." Let
even a grown man be intoxicated, be in love, or subject to an intense
excitement, the limitations of personality again fall away. Like the
omnipotent child he is again a god, and to him all things are possible.
Only when he is old and weary does he cease to command fate.

The Iroquois (Hewitt, "American Anthropologist", IV. I. page 32, 1902,
N.S.) of North America have a word, orenda, the meaning of which is
easier to describe than to define, but it seems to express the very soul
of magic. This orenda is your power to do things, your force, sometimes
almost your personality. A man who hunts well has much and good orenda;
the shy bird who escapes his snares has a fine orenda. The orenda of the
rabbit controls the snow and fixes the depth to which it will fall. When
a storm is brewing the magician is said to be making its orenda. When
you yourself are in a rage, great is your orenda. The notes of birds
are utterances of their orenda. When the maize is ripening, the Iroquois
know it is the sun's heat that ripens it, but they know more; it is the
cigala makes the sun to shine and he does it by chirping, by uttering
his orenda. This orenda is sometimes very like the Greek thumos, your
bodily life, your vigour, your passion, your power, the virtue that is
in you to feel and do. This notion of orenda, a sort of pan-vitalism, is
more fluid than animism, and probably precedes it. It is the projection
of man's inner experience, vague and unanalysed, into the outer world.

The mana of the Melanesians (Codrington, "The Melanesians", pages 118,
119, 192, Oxford, 1891.) is somewhat more specialised--all men do not
possess mana--but substantially it is the same idea. Mana is not only a
force, it is also an action, a quality, a state, at once a substantive,
an adjective, and a verb. It is very closely neighboured by the idea
of sanctity. Things that have mana are tabu. Like orenda it manifests
itself in noises, but specially mysterious ones, it is mana that is
rustling in the trees. Mana is highly contagious, it can pass from a
holy stone to a man or even to his shadow if it cross the stone. "All
Melanesian religion," Dr Codrington says, "consists in getting mana
for oneself or getting it used for one's benefit." (Codrington, "The
Melanesians", page 120, Oxford, 1891.)

Specially instructive is a word in use among the Omaka (See Prof.
Haddon, "Magic and Fetishism", page 60, London, 1906. Dr Vierkandt
("Globus", July, 1907, page 41) thinks that "Fernzauber" is a later
development from Nahzauber.), wazhin-dhedhe, "directive energy, to
send." This word means roughly what we should call telepathy, sending
out your thought or will-power to influence another and affect his
action. Here we seem to get light on what has always been a puzzle, the
belief in magic exercised at a distance. For the savage will, distance
is practically non-existent, his intense desire feels itself as
non-spatial. (This notion of mana, orenda, wazhin-dhedhe and the like
lives on among civilised peoples in such words as the Vedic brahman in
the neuter, familiar to us in its masculine form Brahman. The neuter,
brahman, means magic power of a rite, a rite itself, formula, charm,
also first principle, essence of the universe. It is own cousin to the
Greek dunamis and phusis. See MM. Hubert et Mauss, "Theorie generale de
la Magie", page 117, in "L'Annee Sociologique", VII.)

Through the examination of primitive ritual we have at last got at one
tangible, substantial factor in religion, a real live experience, the
sense, that is, of will, desire, power actually experienced in person
by the individual, and by him projected, extended into the rest of the
world.

At this stage it may fairly be asked, though the question cannot with
any certainty be answered, "at what point in the evolution of man does
this religious experience come in?"

So long as an organism reacts immediately to outside stimulus, with a
certainty and conformity that is almost chemical, there is, it would
seem, no place, no possibility for magical experience. But when the
germ appears of an intellect that can foresee an end not immediately
realised, or rather when a desire arises that we feel and recognise as
not satisfied, then comes in the sense of will and the impulse magically
to intensify that will. The animal it would seem is preserved by
instinct from drawing into his horizon things which do not immediately
subserve the conservation of his species. But the moment man's
life-power began to make on the outside world demands not immediately
and inevitably realised in action (I owe this observation to Dr K. Th.
Preuss. He writes ("Archiv f. Relig." 1906, page 98), "Die Betonung des
Willens in den Zauberakten ist der richtige Kern. In der Tat muss der
Mensch den Willen haben, sich selbst und seiner Umgebung besondere
Fahigkeiten zuzuschreiben, und den Willen hat er, sobald sein Verstand
ihn befahigt, EINE UBER DEN INSTINKT HINAUSGEHEN DER FURSORGE fur
sich zu zeigen. SO LANGE IHN DER INSTINKT ALLEIN LEITET, KONNEN
ZAUBERHANDLUNGEN NICHT ENSTEHEN." For more detailed analysis of the
origin of magic, see Dr Preuss "Ursprung der Religion und Kunst",
"Globus", LXXXVI. and LXXXVII.), then a door was opened to magic, and
in the train of magic followed errors innumerable, but also religion,
philosophy, science and art.

The world of mana, orenda, brahman is a world of feeling, desiring,
willing, acting. What element of thinking there may be in it is not yet
differentiated out. But we have already seen that a supersensuous world
of thought grew up very early in answer to other needs, a world of
sense-illusions, shadows, dreams, souls, ghosts, ancestors, names,
numbers, images, a world only wanting as it were the impulse of mana to
live as a religion. Which of the two worlds, the world of thinking or
the world of doing, developed first it is probably idle to inquire. (If
external stimuli leave on organisms a trace or record such as is known
as an Engram, this physical basis of memory and hence of thought is
almost coincident with reaction of the most elementary kind. See Mr
Francis Darwin's Presidential Address to the British Association,
Dublin, 1908, page 8, and again Bergson places memory at the very root
of conscious existence, see "L'Evolution Creatrice", page 18, "le
fond meme de notre existence consciente est memoire, c'est a dire
prolongation du passee dans le present," and again "la duree mord dans
le temps et y laisse l'enpreint de son dent," and again, "l'Evolution
implique une continuation reelle du passee par le present.")

It is more important to ask, Why do these two worlds join? Because,
it would seem, mana, the egomaniac or megalomaniac element, cannot get
satisfied with real things, and therefore goes eagerly out to a false
world, the supersensuous other-world whose growth we have sketched. This
junction of the two is fact, not fancy. Among all primitive peoples dead
men, ghosts, spirits of all kinds, become the chosen vehicle of mana.
Even to this day it is sometimes urged that religion, i.e. belief in
the immortality of the soul, is true "because it satisfies the deepest
craving of human nature." The two worlds, of mana and magic on the one
hand, of ghosts and other-world on the other, combine so easily because
they have the same laws, or rather the same comparative absence of law.
As in the world of dreams and ghosts, so in the world of mana, space and
time offer no obstacles; with magic all things are possible. In the one
world what you imagine is real; in the other what you desire is ipso
facto accomplished. Both worlds are egocentric, megalomaniac, filled to
the full with unbridled human will and desire.

We are all of us born in sin, in that sin which is to science
"the seventh and deadliest," anthropomorphism, we are egocentric,
ego-projective. Hence necessarily we make our gods in our own image.
Anthropomorphism is often spoken of in books on religion and mythology
as if it were a last climax, a splendid final achievement in religious
thought. First, we are told, we have the lifeless object as god
(fetichism), then the plant or animal (phytomorphism, theriomorphism),
and last God is incarnate in the human form divine. This way of putting
things is misleading. Anthropomorphism lies at the very beginning of
our consciousness. Man's first achievement in thought is to realise that
there is anything at all not himself, any object to his subject. When
he has achieved however dimly this distinction, still for long, for very
long he can only think of those other things in terms of himself; plants
and animals are people with ways of their own, stronger or weaker than
himself but to all intents and purposes human.

Again the child helps us to understand our own primitive selves. To
children animals are always people. You promise to take a child for a
drive. The child comes up beaming with a furry bear in her arms. You say
the bear cannot go. The child bursts into tears. You think it is because
the child cannot endure to be separated from a toy. It is no such thing.
It is the intolerable hurt done to the bear's human heart--a hurt not
to be healed by any proffer of buns. He wanted to go, but he was a shy,
proud bear, and he would not say so.

The relation of magic to religion has been much disputed. According to
one school religion develops out of magic, according to another, though
they ultimately blend, they are at the outset diametrically opposed,
magic being a sort of rudimentary and mistaken science (This view held
by Dr Frazer is fully set forth in his "Golden Bough" (2nd edition),
pages 73-79, London, 1900. It is criticised by Mr R.R. Marett in "From
Spell to Prayer", "Folk-Lore" XI. 1900, page 132, also very fully by
MM. Hubert and Mauss, "Theorie generale de la Magie", in "L'Annee
Sociologique", VII. page 1, with Mr Marett's view and with that of MM.
Hubert and Mauss I am in substantial agreement.), religion having to do
from the outset with spirits.

But, setting controversy aside, at the present stage of our inquiry
their relation becomes, I think, fairly clear. Magic is, if my view
(This view as explained above is, I believe, my own most serious
contribution to the subject. In thinking it out I was much helped by
Prof. Gilbert Murray.) be correct, the active element which informs a
supersensuous world fashioned to meet other needs. This blend of
theory and practice it is convenient to call religion. In practice the
transition from magic to religion, from Spell to Prayer, has always been
found easy. So long as mana remains impersonal you order it about; when
it is personified and bulks to the shape of an overgrown man, you drop
the imperative and cringe before it. "My will be done" is magic,
"Thy Will be done" is the last word in religion. The moral discipline
involved in the second is momentous, the intellectual advance not
striking.

I have spoken of magical ritual as though it were the informing
life-spirit without which religion was left as an empty shell. Yet the
word ritual does not, as normally used, convey to our minds this notion
of intense vitalism. Rather we associate ritual with something cut
and dried, a matter of prescribed form and monotonous repetition. The
association is correct; ritual tends to become less and less informed by
the life-impulse, more and more externalised. Dr Beck ("Die Nachahmung
und ihre Bedeutung fur Psychologie und Volkerkunde", Leipzig, 1904.)
in his brilliant monograph on "Imitation" has laid stress on the almost
boundless influence of the imitation of one man by another in the
evolution of civilisation. Imitation is one of the chief spurs to
action. Imitation begets custom, custom begets sanctity. At first all
custom is sacred. To the savage it is as much a religious duty to tattoo
himself as to sacrifice to his gods. But certain customs naturally
survive, because they are really useful; they actually have good
effects, and so need no social sanction. Others are really useless;
but man is too conservative and imitative to abandon them. These become
ritual. Custom is cautious, but la vie est aleatoire. (Bergson, op. cit.
page 143.)

Dr Beck's remarks on ritual are I think profoundly true and suggestive,
but with this reservation--they are true of ritual only when uninformed
by personal experience. The very elements in ritual on which Dr
Beck lays such stress, imitation, repetition, uniformity and social
collectivity, have been found by the experience of all time to have
a twofold influence--they inhibit the intellect, they stimulate and
suggest emotion, ecstasy, trance. The Church of Rome knows what she is
about when she prescribes the telling of the rosary. Mystery-cults and
sacraments, the lineal descendants of magic, all contain rites charged
with suggestion, with symbols, with gestures, with half-understood
formularies, with all the apparatus of appeal to emotion and will--the
more unintelligible they are the better they serve their purpose of
inhibiting thought. Thus ritual deadens the intellect and stimulates
will, desire, emotion. "Les operations magiques... sont le resultat d'une
science et d'une habitude qui exaltent la volonte humaine au-dessus de
ses limites habituelles." (Eliphas Levi, "Dogme et Rituel de la haute
Magie", II. page 32, Paris, 1861, and "A defence of Magic", by Evelyn
Underhill, "Fortnightly Review", 1907.) It is this personal EXPERIENCE,
this exaltation, this sense of immediate, non-intellectual revelation,
of mystical oneness with all things, that again and again rehabilitates
a ritual otherwise moribund.

To resume. The outcome of our examination of ORIGINES seems to be that
religious phenomena result from two delusive processes--a delusion of
the non-critical intellect, a delusion of the over-confident will. Is
religion then entirely a delusion? I think not. (I am deeply conscious
that what I say here is a merely personal opinion or sentiment,
unsupported and perhaps unsupportable by reason, and very possibly quite
worthless, but for fear of misunderstanding I prefer to state it.) Every
dogma religion has hitherto produced is probably false, but for all that
the religious or mystical spirit may be the only way of apprehending
some things and these of enormous importance. It may also be that the
contents of this mystical apprehension cannot be put into language
without being falsified and misstated, that they have rather to be felt
and lived than uttered and intellectually analysed, and thus do not
properly fall under the category of true or false, in the sense in which
these words are applied to propositions; yet they may be something
for which "true" is our nearest existing word and are often, if not
necessary at least highly advantageous to life. That is why man through
a series of more or less grossly anthropomorphic mythologies and
theologies with their concomitant rituals tries to restate them.
Meantime we need not despair. Serious psychology is yet young and has
only just joined hands with physiology. Religious students are still
hampered by mediaevalisms such as Body and Soul, and by the perhaps
scarcely less mythological segregations of Intellect, Emotion, Will. But
new facts (See the "Proceedings" of the Society for Psychical Research,
London, passim, and especially Vols. VII.-XV. For a valuable collection
of the phenomena of mysticism, see William James, "Varieties of
Religious Experience", Edinburgh, 1901-2.) are accumulating, facts about
the formation and flux of personality, and the relations between the
conscious and the sub-conscious. Any moment some great imagination may
leap out into the dark, touch the secret places of life, lay bare the
cardinal mystery of the marriage of the spatial with the non-spatial. It
is, I venture to think, towards the apprehension of such mysteries,
not by reason only, but by man's whole personality, that the religious
spirit in the course of its evolution through ancient magic and modern
mysticism is ever blindly yet persistently moving.

Be this as it may, it is by thinking of religion in the light of
evolution, not as a revelation given, not as a realite faite but as a
process, and it is so only, I think, that we attain to a spirit of real
patience and tolerance. We have ourselves perhaps learnt laboriously
something of the working of natural law, something of the limitations of
our human will, and we have therefore renounced the practice of magic.
Yet we are bidden by those in high places to pray "Sanctify this water
to the mystical washing away of sin." Mystical in this connection spells
magical, and we have no place for a god-magician: the prayer is to us
unmeaning, irreverent. Or again, after much toil we have ceased, or
hope we have ceased, to think anthropomorphically. Yet we are invited
to offer formal thanks to God for a meal of flesh whose sanctity is the
last survival of that sacrifice of bulls and goats he has renounced.
Such a ritual confuses our intellect and fails to stir our emotion. But
to others this ritual, magical or anthropomorphic as it is, is charged
with emotional impulse, and others, a still larger number, think that
they act by reason when really they are hypnotised by suggestion and
tradition; their fathers did this or that and at all costs they must do
it. It was good that primitive man in his youth should bear the yoke of
conservative custom; from each man's neck that yoke will fall, when and
because he has outgrown it. Science teaches us to await that moment with
her own inward and abiding patience. Such a patience, such a gentleness
we may well seek to practise in the spirit and in the memory of Darwin.




XXVI. EVOLUTION AND THE SCIENCE OF LANGUAGE. By P. Giles, M.A., LL.D.
(Aberdeen),

Reader in Comparative Philology in the University of Cambridge.


In no study has the historical method had a more salutary influence
than in the Science of Language. Even the earliest records show that the
meaning of the names of persons, places, and common objects was then, as
it has always been since, a matter of interest to mankind. And in every
age the common man has regarded himself as competent without special
training to explain by inspection (if one may use a mathematical phrase)
the meaning of any words that attracted his attention. Out of this
amateur etymologising has sprung a great amount of false history, a kind
of historical mythology invented to explain familiar names. A single
example will illustrate the tendency. According to the local legend the
ancestor of the Earl of Erroll--a husbandman who stayed the flight of
his countrymen in the battle of Luncarty and won the victory over the
Danes by the help of the yoke of his oxen--exhausted with the fray
uttered the exclamation "Hoch heigh!" The grateful king about to ennoble
the victorious ploughman at once replied:

     "Hoch heigh! said ye
     And Hay shall ye be."

The Norman origin of the name Hay is well-known, and the battle of
Luncarty long preceded the appearance of Normans in Scotland, but the
legend nevertheless persists.

Though the earliest European treatise on philological questions which
is now extant--the "Cratylus" of Plato,--as might be expected from its
authorship, contains some acute thinking and some shrewd guesses, yet
the work as a whole is infantine in its handling of language, and it
has been doubted whether Plato was more than half serious in some of
the suggestions which he puts forward. (For an account of the "Cratylus"
with references to other literature see Sandys' "History of Classical
Scholarship", I. page 92 ff., Cambridge, 1903.) In the hands of the
Romans things were worse even than they had been in the hands of Plato
and his Greek successors. The lack of success on the part of Varro and
later Roman writers may have been partly due to the fact that, from the
etymological point of view, Latin is a much more difficult language than
Greek; it is by no means so closely connected with Greek as the ancients
imagined, and they had no knowledge of the Celtic languages from which,
on some sides at least, much greater light on the history of the
Latin language might have been obtained. Roman civilisation was a late
development compared with Greek, and its records dating earlier than
300 B.C.--a period when the best of Greek literature was already in
existence--are very few and scanty. Varro it is true was much more of
an antiquary than Plato, but his extant works seem to show that he was
rather a "dungeon of learning" than an original thinker.

A scientific knowledge of language can be obtained only by comparison
of different languages of the same family and the contrasting of their
characteristics with those of another family or other families. It never
occurred to the Greeks that any foreign language was worthy of serious
study. Herodotus and other travellers and antiquaries indeed picked up
individual words from various languages, either as being necessary
in communication with the inhabitants of the countries where they
sojourned, or because of some point which interested them personally.
Plato and others noticed the similarity of some Phrygian words to Greek,
but no systematic comparison seems ever to have been instituted.

In the Middle Ages the treatment of language was in a sense more
historical. The Middle Ages started with the hypothesis, derived
from the book of Genesis, that in the early world all men were of one
language and of one speech. Though on the same authority they believed
that the plain of Shinar has seen that confusion of tongues whence
sprang all the languages upon earth, they seem to have considered that
the words of each separate language were nevertheless derived from this
original tongue. And as Hebrew was the language of the Chosen People,
it was naturally assumed that this original tongue was Hebrew. Hence
we find Dante declaring in his treatise on the Vulgar Tongue (Dante "de
Vulgari Eloquio", I. 4.) that the first word man uttered in Paradise
must have been "El," the Hebrew name of his Maker, while as a result of
the fall of Adam, the first utterance of every child now born into this
world of sin and misery is "heu," Alas! After the splendidly engraved
bronze plates containing, as we now know, ritual regulations for certain
cults, were discovered in 1444 at the town of Gubbio, in Umbria, they
were declared, by some authorities, to be written in excellent Hebrew.
The study of them has been the fascination and the despair of many a
philologist. Thanks to the devoted labours of numerous scholars, mainly
in the last sixty years, the general drift of these inscriptions is
now known. They are the only important records of the ancient Umbrian
language, which was related closely to that of the Samnites and,
though not so closely, to that of the Romans on the other side of
the Apennines. Yet less than twenty years ago a book was published in
Germany, which boasts itself the home of Comparative Philology,
wherein the German origin of the Umbrian language was no less solemnly
demonstrated than had been its Celtic origin by Sir William Betham in
1842.

It is good that the study of language should be historical, but the
first requisite is that the history should be sound. How little had been
learnt of the true history of language a century ago may be seen from a
little book by Stephen Weston first published in 1802 and several
times reprinted, where accidental assonance is considered sufficient to
establish connection. Is there not a word "bad" in English and a word
"bad" in Persian which mean the same thing? Clearly therefore Persian
and English must be connected. The conclusion is true, but it is drawn
from erroneous premises. As stated, this identity has no more value
than the similar assonance between the English "cover" and the Hebrew
"kophar", where the history of "cover" as coming through French from a
Latin "co-operire" was even in 1802 well-known to many. To this day,
in spite of recent elaborate attempts (Most recently in H. Moller's
"Semitisch und Indogermanisch", Erster Teil, Kopenhagen, 1907.) to
establish connection between the Indo-Germanic and the Semitic families
of languages, there is no satisfactory evidence of such relation between
these families. This is not to deny the possibility of such a connection
at a very early period; it is merely to say that through the lapse
of long ages all trustworthy record of such relationship, if it ever
existed, has been, so far as present knowledge extends, obliterated.

But while Stephen Weston was publishing, with much public approval, his
collection of amusing similarities between languages--similarities which
proved nothing--the key to the historical study of at least one family
of languages had already been found by a learned Englishman in a distant
land. In 1783 Sir William Jones had been sent out as a judge in the
supreme court of judicature in Bengal. While still a young man at Oxford
he was noted as a linguist; his reputation as a Persian scholar had
preceded him to the East. In the intervals of his professional duties
he made a careful study of the language which was held sacred by
the natives of the country in which he was living. He was mainly
instrumental in establishing a society for the investigation of language
and related subjects. He was himself the first president of the society,
and in the "third anniversary discourse" delivered on February 2, 1786,
he made the following observations: "The Sanscrit language, whatever be
its antiquity, is of a wonderful structure; more perfect than the GREEK,
more copious than the LATIN, and more exquisitely refined than either,
yet bearing to both of them a stronger affinity, both in the roots
of verbs and in the forms of grammar, than could possibly have been
produced by accident; so strong indeed, that no philologer could examine
them all three, without believing them to have sprung from some common
source, which, perhaps, no longer exists: there is a similar reason,
though not quite so forcible, for supposing that both the Gothick and
the Celtick, though blended with a very different idiom, had the same
origin with the Sanscrit; and the old Persian might be added to the same
family, if this was the place for discussing any question concerning the
antiquities of Persia." ("Asiatic Researches", I. page 422, "Works of
Sir W. Jones", I. page 26, London, 1799.)

No such epoch-making discovery was probably ever announced with less
flourish of trumpets. Though Sir William Jones lived for eight years
more and delivered other anniversary discourses, he added nothing of
importance to this utterance. He had neither the time nor the health
that was needed for the prosecution of so arduous an undertaking.

But the good seed did not fall upon stony ground. The news was speedily
conveyed to Europe. By a happy chance, the sudden renewal of war between
France and England in 1803 gave Friedrich Schlegel the opportunity of
learning Sanscrit from Alexander Hamilton, an Englishman who, like many
others, was confined in Paris during the long struggle with Napoleon.
The influence of Schlegel was not altogether for good in the history of
this research, but he was inspiring. Not upon him but upon Franz Bopp,
a struggling German student who spent some time in Paris and London
a dozen years later, fell the mantle of Sir William Jones. In Bopp's
Comparative Grammar of the Indo-Germanic languages which appeared in
1833, three-quarters of a century ago, the foundations of Comparative
Philology were laid. Since that day the literature of the subject has
grown till it is almost, if not altogether, beyond the power of any
single man to cope with it. But long as the discourse may be, it is but
the elaboration of the text that Sir William Jones supplied.

With the publication of Bopp's Comparative Grammar the historical study
of language was put upon a stable footing. Needless to say much remained
to be done, much still remains to be done. More than once there has been
danger of the study following erroneous paths. Its terminology and its
point of view have in some degree changed. But nothing can shake the
truth of the statement that the Indo-Germanic languages constitute in
themselves a family sprung from the same source, marked by the same
characteristics, and differentiated from all other languages by
formation, by vocabulary, and by syntax. The historical method was
applied to language long before it reached biology. Nearly a quarter of
a century before Charles Darwin was born, Sir William Jones had made the
first suggestion of a comparative study of languages. Bopp's Comparative
Grammar began to be published nine years before the first draft of
Darwin's treatise on the Origin of Species was put on paper in 1842.

It is not therefore on the history of Comparative Philology in general
that the ideas of Darwin have had most influence. Unfortunately, as
Jowett has said in the introduction to his translation of Plato's
"Republic", most men live in a corner. The specialisation of knowledge
has many advantages, but it has also disadvantages, none worse perhaps
than that it tends to narrow the specialist's horizon and to make it
more difficult for one worker to follow the advances that are being made
by workers in other departments. No longer is it possible as in earlier
days for an intellectual prophet to survey from a Pisgah height all the
Promised Land. And the case of linguistic research has been specially
hard. This study has, if the metaphor may be allowed, a very extended
frontier. On one side it touches the domain of literature, on other
sides it is conterminous with history, with ethnology and anthropology,
with physiology in so far as language is the production of the brain and
tissues of a living being, with physics in questions of pitch and stress
accent, with mental science in so far as the principles of similarity,
contrast, and contiguity affect the forms and the meanings of words
through association of ideas. The territory of linguistic study
is immense, and it has much to supply which might be useful to the
neighbours who border on that territory. But they have not regarded her
even with that interest which is called benevolent because it is not
actively maleficent. As Horne Tooke remarked a century ago, Locke had
found a whole philosophy in language. What have the philosophers done
for language since? The disciples of Kant and of Wilhelm von Humboldt
supplied her plentifully with the sour grapes of metaphysics; otherwise
her neighbours have left her severely alone save for an occasional
"Ausflug," on which it was clear they had sadly lost their bearings.
Some articles in Psychological Journals, Wundt's great work on
"Volkerpsychologie" (Erster Band: "Die Sprache", Leipzig, 1900. New
edition, 1904. This work has been fertile in producing both opponents
and supporters. Delbruck, "Grundfragen der Sprachforschung",
Strassburg, 1901, with a rejoinder by Wundt, "Sprachgeschichte" and
"Sprachpsychologie", Leipzig, 1901; L. Sutterlin, "Das Wesen der
Sprachgebilde", Heidelberg, 1902; von Rozwadowski, "Wortbildung
und Wortbedeutung", Heidelberg, 1904; O. Dittrich, "Grundzuge der
Sprachpsychologie", Halle, 1904, Ch. A. Sechehaye, "Programme et
methodes de la linguistique theorique", Paris, 1908.), and Mauthner's
brilliantly written "Beitrage zu einer Kritik der Sprache" (In three
parts: (i) "Sprache und Psychologie, (ii) "Zur Sprachwissenschaft", both
Stuttgart 1901, (iii) "Zur Grammatic und Logik" (with index to all three
volumes), Stuttgart and Berlin, 1902.) give some reason to hope that, on
one side at least, the future may be better than the past.

Where Charles Darwin's special studies came in contact with the Science
of Language was over the problem of the origin and development of
language. It is curious to observe that, where so many fields of
linguistic research have still to be reclaimed--many as yet can hardly
be said to be mapped out,--the least accessible field of all--that
of the Origin of Language--has never wanted assiduous tillers.
Unfortunately it is a field beyond most others where it may be said that

"Wilding oats and luckless darnel grow."

If Comparative Philology is to work to purpose here, it must be on
results derived from careful study of individual languages and groups of
languages. But as yet the group which Sir William Jones first mapped out
and which Bopp organised is the only one where much has been achieved.
Investigation of the Semitic group, in some respects of no less moment
in the history of civilisation and religion, where perhaps the labour
of comparison is not so difficult, as the languages differ less among
themselves, has for some reason strangely lagged behind. Some years ago
in the "American Journal of Philology" Paul Haupt pointed out that if
advance was to be made, it must be made according to the principles
which had guided the investigation of the Indo-Germanic languages to
success, and at last a Comparative Grammar of an elaborate kind is in
progress also for the Semitic languages. (Brockelmann, "Vergleichende
Grammatik der semitischen Sprachen", Berlin, 1907 ff. Brockelmann and
Zimmern had earlier produced two small hand-books. The only large work
was William Wright's "Lectures on the Comparative Grammar of the
Semitic Languages", Cambridge, 1890.) For the great group which includes
Finnish, Hungarian, Turkish and many languages of northern Asia, a
beginning, but only a beginning has been made. It may be presumed from
the great discoveries which are in progress in Turkestan that presently
much more will be achieved in this field. But for a certain utterance
to be given by Comparative Philology on the question of the origin of
language it is necessary that not merely for these languages but also
for those in other quarters of the globe, the facts should be collected,
sifted and tabulated. England rules an empire which contains a greater
variety of languages by far than were ever held under one sway before.
The Government of India is engaged in producing, under the editorship of
Dr Grierson, a linguistic survey of India, a remarkable undertaking and,
so far as it has gone, a remarkable achievement. Is it too much to ask
that, with the support of the self-governing colonies, a similar survey
should be undertaken for the whole of the British Empire?

Notwithstanding the great number of books that have been written on the
origin of language in the last three and twenty centuries, the results
of the investigation which can be described as certain are very meagre.
The question originally raised was whether language came into being
thesei or phusei, by convention or by nature. The first alternative, in
its baldest form at least, has passed from out the field of controversy.
No one now claims that names were given to living things or objects or
activities by formal agreement among the members of an early community,
or that the first father of mankind passed in review every living thing
and gave it its name. Even if the record of Adam's action were to be
taken literally there would still remain the question, whence had he
this power? Did he develop it himself or was it a miraculous gift with
which he was endowed at his creation? If the latter, then as Wundt says
("Volkerpsychologie", I. 2, page 585.), "the miracle of language is
subsumed in the miracle of creation." If Adam developed language of
himself, we are carried over to the alternative origin of phusei. On
this hypothesis we must assume that the natural growth which modern
theories of development regard as the painful progress of multitudinous
generations was contracted into the experience of a single individual.

But even if the origin of language is admitted to be NATURAL there may
still be much variety of signification attached to the word: NATURE,
like most words which are used by philosophers, has accumulated
many meanings, and as research into the natural world proceeds, is
accumulating more.

Forty years ago an animated controversy raged among the supporters of
the theories which were named for short the bow-wow, the pooh-pooh and
the ding-dong theories of the origin of language. The third, which was
the least tenacious of life, was made known to the English-speaking
world by the late Professor Max Muller who, however, when questioned,
repudiated it as his own belief. ("Science of Thought", London, 1887,
page 211.) It was taken by him from Heyse's lectures on language which
were published posthumously by Steinthal. Put shortly the theory is
that "everything which is struck, rings. Each substance has its peculiar
ring. We can tell the more or less perfect structure of metals by their
vibrations, by the answer which they give. Gold rings differently
from tin, wood rings differently from stone; and different sounds are
produced according to the nature of each percussion. It may be the same
with man, the most highly organised of nature's work." (Max Muller as
above, translating from Heyse.) Max Muller's repudiation of this theory
was, however, not very whole-hearted for he proceeds later in the same
argument: "Heyse's theory, which I neither adopted nor rejected, but
which, as will be seen, is by no means incompatible with that which for
many years has been gaining on me, and which of late has been so clearly
formulated by Professor Noire, has been assailed with ridicule and torn
to pieces, often by persons who did not even suspect how much truth was
hidden behind its paradoxical appearance. We are still very far from
being able to identify roots with nervous vibrations, but if it should
appear hereafter that sensuous vibrations supply at least the raw
material of roots, it is quite possible that the theory, proposed by
Oken and Heyse, will retain its place in the history of the various
attempts at solving the problem of the origin of language, when other
theories, which in our own days were received with popular applause,
will be completely forgotten." ("Science of Thought", page 212.)

Like a good deal else that has been written on the origin of language,
this statement perhaps is not likely to be altogether clear to the plain
man, who may feel that even the "raw material of roots" is some distance
removed from nervous vibrations, though obviously without the existence
of afferent and efferent nerves articulate speech would be impossible.
But Heyse's theory undoubtedly was that every thought or idea which
occurred to the mind of man for the first time had its own special
phonetic expression, and that this responsive faculty, when its object
was thus fulfilled, became extinct. Apart from the philosophical
question whether the mind acts without external stimulus, into which it
is not necessary to enter here, it is clear that this theory can neither
be proved nor disproved, because it postulates that this faculty existed
only when language first began, and later altogether disappeared. As we
have already seen, it is impossible for us to know what happened at the
first beginnings of language, because we have no information from any
period even approximately so remote; nor are we likely to attain it.
Even in their earliest stages the great families of language which
possess a history extending over many centuries--the Indo-Germanic and
the Semitic--have very little in common. With the exception of Chinese,
the languages which are apparently of a simpler or more primitive
formation have either a history which, compared with that of the
families mentioned, is very short, or, as in the case of the vast
majority, have no history beyond the time extending only over a few
years or, at most, a few centuries when they have been observed by
competent scholars of European origin. But, if we may judge by the
history of geology and other studies, it is well to be cautious in
assuming for the first stages of development forces which do not operate
in the later, unless we have direct evidence of their existence.

It is unnecessary here to enter into a prolonged discussion of the other
views christened by Max Muller, not without energetic protest from their
supporters, the bow-wow and pooh-pooh theories of language. Suffice it
to say that the former recognises as a source of language the imitation
of the sounds made by animals, the fall of bodies into water or on
to solid substances and the like, while the latter, also called the
interjectional theory, looks to the natural ejaculations produced by
particular forms of effort for the first beginnings of speech. It would
be futile to deny that some words in most languages come from
imitation, and that others, probably fewer in number, can be traced
to ejaculations. But if either of these sources alone or both in
combination gave rise to primitive speech, it clearly must have been a
simple form of language and very limited in amount. There is no reason
to think that it was otherwise. Presumably in its earliest stages
language only indicated the most elementary ideas, demands for food
or the gratification of other appetites, indications of danger, useful
animals and plants. Some of these, such as animals or indications of
danger, could often be easily represented by imitative sounds: the need
for food and the like could be indicated by gesture and natural cries.
Both sources are verae causae; to them Noire, supported by Max Muller,
has added another which has sometimes been called the Yo-heave-ho
theory. Noire contends that the real crux in the early stages of
language is for primitive man to make other primitive men understand
what he means. The vocal signs which commend themselves to one may not
have occurred to another, and may therefore be unintelligible. It may be
admitted that this difficulty exists, but it is not insuperable. The
old story of the European in China who, sitting down to a meal and being
doubtful what the meat in the dish might be, addressed an interrogative
Quack-quack? to the waiter and was promptly answered by Bow-wow,
illustrates a simple situation where mutual understanding was easy.
But obviously many situations would be more complex than this, and to
grapple with them Noire has introduced his theory of communal action.
"It was common effort directed to a common object, it was the most
primitive (uralteste) labour of our ancestors, from which sprang
language and the life of reason." (Noire "Der Ursprung der Sprache",
page 331, Mainz, 1877.) As illustrations of such common effort he cites
battle cries, the rescue of a ship running on shore (a situation not
likely to occur very early in the history of man), and others. Like Max
Muller he holds that language is the utterance and the organ of thought
for mankind, the one characteristic which separates man from the
brute. "In common action the word was first produced; for long it was
inseparably connected with action; through long-continued connection it
gradually became the firm, intelligible symbol of action, and then in
its development indicated also things of the external world in so far
as the action affected them and finally the sound began to enter into a
connexion with them also." (Op. cit. page 339.) In so far as this theory
recognises language as a social institution it is undoubtedly correct.
Darwin some years before Noire had pointed to the same social origin
of language in the fourth chapter of his work on "The Expression of the
Emotions in Man and Animals". "Naturalists have remarked, I believe with
truth, that social animals, from habitually using their vocal organs
as a means of intercommunication, use them on other occasions much more
freely than other animals... The principle, also, of association, which
is so widely extended in its power, has likewise played its part. Hence
it allows that the voice, from having been employed as a serviceable
aid under certain conditions, inducing pleasure, pain, rage, etc., is
commonly used whenever the same sensations or emotions are excited,
under quite different conditions, or in a lesser degree." ("The
Expression of the Emotions", page 84 (Popular Edition, 1904).

Darwin's own views on language which are set forth most fully in
"The Descent of Man" (page 131 ff. (Popular Edition, 1906).) are
characterised by great modesty and caution. He did not profess to be a
philologist and the facts are naturally taken from the best known works
of the day (1871). In the notes added to the second edition he remarks
on Max Muller's denial of thought without words, "what a strange
definition must here be given to the word thought!" (Op. cit. page
135, footnote 63.) He naturally finds the origin of language in "the
imitation and modification of various natural sounds, the voices of
other animals, and man's own instinctive cries aided by signs and
gestures (op. cit. page 132.)... As the voice was used more and more,
the vocal organs would have been strengthened and perfected through the
principle of the inherited effects of use; and this would have reacted
on the power of speech." (Op. cit. page 133.) On man's own instinctive
cries, he has more to say in "The Expression of the Emotions". (Page 93
(Popular Edition, 1904) and elsewhere.) These remarks have been utilised
by Prof. Jespersen of Copenhagen in propounding an ingenious theory of
his own to the effect that speech develops out of singing. ("Progress in
Language", page 361, London, 1894.)

For many years and in many books Max Muller argued against Darwin's
views on evolution on the one ground that thought is impossible without
speech; consequently as speech is confined to the human race, there is a
gulf which cannot be bridged between man and all other creatures.
(Some interesting comments on the theory will be found in a lecture
on "Thought and Language" in Samuel Butler's "Essays on Life, Art and
Science", London, 1908.) On the title-page of his "Science of Thought"
he put the two sentences "No Reason without Language: No Language
without Reason." It may be readily admitted that the second dictum is
true, that no language properly so-called can exist without reason.
Various birds can learn to repeat words or sentences used by their
masters or mistresses. In most cases probably the birds do not attach
their proper meaning to the words they have learnt; they repeat them in
season and out of season, sometimes apparently for their own amusement,
generally in the expectation, raised by past experience, of being
rewarded for their proficiency. But even here it is difficult to prove
a universal negative, and most possessors of such pets would repudiate
indignantly the statement that the bird did not understand what was said
to it, and would also contend that in many cases the words which it used
were employed in their ordinary meaning. The first dictum seems to be
inconsistent with fact. The case of deaf mutes, such as Laura Bridgeman,
who became well educated, or the still more extraordinary case of Helen
Keller, deaf, dumb, and blind, who in spite of these disadvantages
has learnt not only to reason but to reason better than the average of
persons possessed of all their senses, goes to show that language and
reason are not necessarily always in combination. Reason is but the
conscious adaptation of means to ends, and so defined is a faculty which
cannot be denied to many of the lower animals. In these days when so
many books on Animal Intelligence are issued from the press, it seems
unnecessary to labour the point. Yet none of these animals, except by
parrot-imitation, makes use of speech, because man alone possesses in a
sufficient degree of development the centres of nervous energy which are
required for the working of articulation in speech. On this subject much
investigation was carried on during the last years of Darwin's life
and much more in the period since his death. As early as 1861 Broca,
following up observations made by earlier French writers, located the
centre of articulate speech in the third left frontal convolution of
the brain. In 1876 he more definitely fixed the organ of speech in
"the posterior two-fifths of the third frontal convolution" (Macnamara,
"Human Speech", page 197, London, 1908.), both sides and not merely the
left being concerned in speech production. Owing however to the greater
use by most human beings of the right side of the body, the left side of
the brain, which is the motor centre for the right side of the body, is
more highly developed than its right side, which moves the left side
of the body. The investigations of Professors Ferrier, Sherrington and
Grunbaum have still more precisely defined the relations between brain
areas and certain groups of muscles. One form of aphasia is the result
of injury to or disease in the third frontal convolution because the
motor centre is no longer equal to the task of setting the necessary
muscles in motion. In the brain of idiots who are unable to speak,
the centre for speech is not developed. (Op. cit. page 226.) In the
anthropoid apes the brain is similarly defective, though it has been
demonstrated by Professors Cunningham and Marchand "that there is a
tendency, especially in the gorilla's brain, for the third frontal
convolution to assume the human form... But if they possessed a centre
for speech, those parts of the hemispheres of their brains which form
the mechanism by which intelligence is elaborated are so ill-developed,
as compared with the rest of their bodies, that we can not conceive,
even with more perfect frontal convolutions, that these animals could
formulate ideas expressible in intelligent speech." (Op. cit. page 223.)

While Max Muller's theory is Shelley's

"He gave man speech, and speech created thought, Which is the measure of
the universe" ("Prometheus Unbound" II. 4.),

it seems more probable that the development was just the opposite--that
the development of new activities originated new thoughts which required
new symbols to express them, symbols which may at first have been, even
to a greater extent than with some of the lower races at present, sign
language as much as articulation. When once the faculty of articulation
was developed, which, though we cannot trace the process, was probably a
very gradual growth, there is no reason to suppose that words developed
in any other way then they do at present. An erroneous notion of the
development of language has become widely spread through the adoption
of the metaphorical term "roots" for the irreducible elements of human
speech. Men never talked in roots; they talked in words. Many words of
kindred meaning have a part in common, and a root is nothing but that
common part stripped of all additions. In some cases it is obvious that
one word is derived from another by the addition of a fresh element; in
other cases it is impossible to say which of two kindred words is the
more primitive. A root is merely a convenient term for an abstraction.
The simplest word may be called a root, but it is nevertheless a
word. How are new words added to a language in the present day? Some
communities, like the Germans, prefer to construct new words for new
ideas out of the old material existing in the language; others, like the
English, prefer to go to the ancient languages of Greece and Rome for
terms to express new ideas. The same chemical element is described in
the two languages as sour stuff (Sauerstoff) and as oxygen. Both terms
mean the same thing etymologically as well as in fact. On behalf of the
German method, it may be contended that the new idea is more closely
attached to already existing ideas, by being expressed in elements of
the language which are intelligible even to the meanest capacity. For
the English practice it may be argued that, if we coin a new word which
means one thing, and one thing only, the idea which it expresses is
more clearly defined than if it were expressed in popularly intelligible
elements like "sour stuff." If the etymological value of words were
always present in the minds of their users, "oxygen" would undoubtedly
have an advantage over "sour stuff" as a technical term. But the
tendency in language is to put two words of this kind which express but
one idea under a single accent, and when this has taken place, no one
but the student of language any longer observes what the elements really
mean. When the ordinary man talks of a "blackbird" it is certainly not
present to his consciousness that he is talking of a black bird, unless
for some reason conversation has been dwelling upon the colour rather
than other characteristics of the species.

But, it may be said, words like "oxygen" are introduced by learned men,
and do not represent the action of the man in the street, who, after
all, is the author of most additions to the stock of human language. We
may go back therefore some four centuries to a period, when scientific
study was only in its infancy, and see what process was followed. With
the discovery of America new products never seen before reached Europe,
and these required names. Three of the most characteristic were tobacco,
the potato, and the turkey. How did these come to be so named? The first
people to import these products into Europe were naturally the Spanish
discoverers. The first of these words--tobacco--appears in forms which
differ only slightly in the languages of all civilised countries:
Spanish tabaco, Italian tabacco, French tabac, Dutch and German tabak,
Swedish tobak, etc. The word in the native dialect of Hayti is said to
have been tabaco, but to have meant not the plant (According to William
Barclay, "Nepenthes, or the Virtue of Tobacco", Edinburgh, 1614, "the
countrey which God hath honoured and blessed with this happie and holy
herbe doth call it in their native language 'Petum'.") but the pipe
in which it was smoked. It thus illustrates a frequent feature of
borrowing--that the word is not borrowed in its proper signification,
but in some sense closely allied thereto, which a foreigner,
understanding the language with difficulty, might readily mistake for
the real meaning. Thus the Hindu practice of burning a wife upon the
funeral pyre of her husband is called in English "suttee", this word
being in fact but the phonetic spelling of the Sanskrit "sati", "a
virtuous woman," and passing into its English meaning because formerly
the practice of self-immolation by a wife was regarded as the highest
virtue.

The name of the potato exhibits greater variety. The English name was
borrowed from the Spanish "patata", which was itself borrowed from a
native word for the "yam" in the dialect of Hayti. The potato appeared
early in Italy, for the mariners of Genoa actively followed the
footsteps of their countryman Columbus in exploring America. In Italian
generally the form "patata" has survived. The tubers, however,
also suggested a resemblance to truffles, so that the Italian word
"tartufolo", a diminutive of the Italian modification of the Latin
"terrae tuber" was applied to them. In the language of the Rhaetian Alps
this word appears as "tartufel". From there it seems to have passed
into Germany where potatoes were not cultivated extensively till the
eighteenth century, and "tartufel" has in later times through some
popular etymology been metamorphosed into "Kartoffel". In France the
shape of the tubers suggested the name of earth-apple (pomme de terre),
a name also adopted in Dutch (aard-appel), while dialectically in German
a form "Grumbire" appears, which is a corruption of "Grund-birne",
"ground pear". (Kluge "Etymologisches Worterbuch der deutschen Sprache"
(Strassburg), s.v. "Kartoffel".) Here half the languages have adopted
the original American word for an allied plant, while others have
adopted a name originating in some more or less fanciful resemblance
discovered in the tubers; the Germans alone in Western Europe, failing
to see any meaning in their borrowed name, have modified it almost
beyond recognition. To this English supplies an exact parallel in
"parsnep" which, though representing the Latin "pastinaca" through the
Old French "pastenaque", was first assimilated in the last syllable to
the "nep" of "turnep" ("pasneppe" in Elizabethan English), and later had
an "r" introduced into the first syllable, apparently on the analogy of
"parsley".

The turkey on the other hand seems never to be found with its original
American name. In England, as the name implies, the turkey cock was
regarded as having come from the land of the Turks. The bird no doubt
spread over Europe from the Italian seaports. The mistake, therefore,
was not unnatural, seeing that these towns conducted a great trade
with the Levant, while the fact that America when first discovered was
identified with India helped to increase the confusion. Thus in French
the "coq d'Inde" was abbreviated to "d'Inde" much as "turkey cock" was
to "turkey"; the next stage was to identify "dinde" as a feminine word
and create a new "dindon" on the analogy of "chapon" as the masculine.
In Italian the name "gallo d'India" besides survives, while in German
the name "Truthahn" seems to be derived onomatopoetically from
the bird's cry, though a dialectic "Calecutischer Hahn" specifies
erroneously an origin for the bird from the Indian Calicut. In the
Spanish "pavo", on the other hand, there is a curious confusion with
the peacock. Thus in these names for objects of common knowledge,
the introduction of which into Europe can be dated with tolerable
definiteness, we see evinced the methods by which in remoter ages
objects were named. The words were borrowed from the community whence
came the new object, or the real or fancied resemblance to some known
object gave the name, or again popular etymology might convert the
unknown term into something that at least approached in sound a
well-known word.

"The Origin of Species" had not long been published when the parallelism
of development in natural species and in languages struck investigators.
At the time, one of the foremost German philologists was August
Schleicher, Professor at Jena. He was himself keenly interested in the
natural sciences, and amongst his colleagues was Ernst Haeckel, the
protagonist in Germany of the Darwinian theory. How the new ideas struck
Schleicher may be seen from the following sentences by his colleague
Haeckel. "Speech is a physiological function of the human organism,
and has been developed simultaneously with its organs, the larynx and
tongue, and with the functions of the brain. Hence it will be quite
natural to find in the evolution and classification of languages the
same features as in the evolution and classification of organic species.
The various groups of languages that are distinguished in philology as
primitive, fundamental, parent, and daughter languages, dialects, etc.,
correspond entirely in their development to the different categories
which we classify in zoology and botany as stems, classes, orders,
families, genera, species and varieties. The relation of these groups,
partly coordinate and partly subordinate, in the general scheme is just
the same in both cases; and the evolution follows the same lines in
both." (Haeckel, "The Evolution of Man", page 485, London, 1905. This
represents Schleicher's own words: Was die Naturforscher als Gattung
bezeichnen wurden, heisst bei den Glottikern Sprachstamm, auch
Sprachsippe; naher verwandte Gattungen bezeichnen sie wohl auch als
Sprachfamilien einer Sippe oder eines Sprachstammes... Die Arten einer
Gattung nennen wir Sprachen eines Stammes; die Unterarten einer Art sind
bei uns die Dialekte oder Mundarten einer Sprache; den Varietaten
und Spielarten entsprechen die Untermundarten oder Nebenmundarten und
endlich den einzelnen Individuen die Sprechweise der einzelnen
die Sprachen redenden Menschen. "Die Darwinische Theorie und die
Sprachwissenschaft", Weimar, 1863, page 12 f. Darwin makes a more
cautious statement about the classification of languages in "The Origin
of Species", page 578, (Popular Edition, 1900).) These views were set
forth in an open letter addressed to Haeckel in 1863 by Schleicher
entitled, "The Darwinian theory and the science of language".
Unfortunately Schleicher's views went a good deal farther than is
indicated in the extract given above. He appended to the pamphlet a
genealogical tree of the Indo-Germanic languages which, though to a
large extent confirmed by later research, by the dichotomy of each
branch into two other branches, led the unwary reader to suppose their
phylogeny (to use Professor Haeckel's term) was more regular than our
evidence warrants.

Without qualification Schleicher declared languages to be "natural
organisms which originated unconditioned by the human will,
developed according to definite laws, grow old and die; they also are
characterised by that series of phenomena which we designate by the
term 'Life.' Consequently Glottic, the science of language, is a natural
science; its method is in general the same as that of the other natural
sciences." ("Die Darwinische Theorie", page 6 f.) In accordance with
this view he declared (op. cit. page 23.) that the root in language
might be compared with the simple cell in physiology, the linguistic
simple cell or root being as yet not differentiated into special organs
for the function of noun, verb, etc.

In this probably all recent philologists admit that Schleicher went too
far. One of the most fertile theories in the modern science of language
originated with him, and was further developed by his pupil, August
Leskien ("Die Declination im Slavisch-litanischen und Germanischen",
Leipzig, 1876; Osthoff and Brugmann, "Morphologische Untersuchungen",
I. (Introduction), 1878. The general principles of this school were
formulated (1880) in a fuller form in H. Paul's "Prinzipien der
Sprachgeschichte", Halle (3rd edition, 1898). Paul and Wundt (in his
"Volkerpsychologie") deal largely with the same matter, but begin their
investigations from different points of view, Paul being a philologist
with leanings to philosophy and Wundt a philosopher interested in
language.), and by Leskien's colleagues and friends, Brugmann and
Osthoff. This was the principle that phonetic laws have no exceptions.
Under the influence of this generalisation much greater precision in
etymology was insisted upon, and a new and remarkably active period in
the study of language began. Stated broadly in the fashion given above
the principle is not true. A more accurate statement would be that an
original sound is represented in a given dialect at a given time and in
a given environment only in one way; provided that the development of
the original sound into its representation in the given dialect has not
been influenced by the working of analogy.

It is this proviso that is most important for the characterisation of
the science of language. As I have said elsewhere, it is at this point
that this science parts company with the natural sciences. "If the
chemist compounds two pure simple elements, there can be but one result,
and no power of the chemist can prevent it. But the minds of men do
act upon the sounds which they produce. The result is that, when this
happens, the phonetic law which would have acted in the case is stopped,
and this particular form enters on the same course of development as
other forms to which it does not belong." (P. Giles, "Short Manual of
Comparative Philology", 2nd edition, page 57, London, 1901.)

Schleicher was wrong in defining a language to be an organism in the
sense in which a living being is an organism. Regarded physiologically,
language is a function or potentiality of certain human organs; regarded
from the point of view of the community it is of the nature of an
institution. (This view of language is worked out at some length by
Prof. W.D. Whitney in an article in the "Contemporary Review" for 1875,
page 713 ff. This article forms part of a controversy with Max Muller,
which is partly concerned with Darwin's views on language. He criticises
Schleicher's views severely in his "Oriental and Linguistic Studies",
page 298 ff., New York, 1873. In this volume will be found criticisms of
various other views mentioned in this essay.) More than most influences
it conduces to the binding together of the elements that form a state.
That geographical or other causes may effectively counteract the
influence of identity of language is obvious. One need only read the
history of ancient Greece, or observe the existing political separation
of Germany and Austria, of Great Britain and the United States of
America. But however analogous to an organism, language is not an
organism. In a less degree Schleicher, by defining languages as such,
committed the same mistake which Bluntschli made regarding the State,
and which led him to declare that the State is by nature masculine and
the Church feminine. (Bluntschli, "Theory of the State", page 24, Second
English Edition, Oxford, 1892.) The views of Schleicher were to some
extent injurious to the proper methods of linguistic study. But this
misfortune was much more than fully compensated by the inspiration
which his ideas, collected and modified by his disciples, had upon the
science. In spite of the difference which the psychological element
represented by analogy makes between the science of language and the
natural sciences, we are entitled to say of it as Schleicher said of
Darwin's theory of the origin of species, "it depends upon observation,
and is essentially an attempt at a history of development."

Other questions there are in connection with language and evolution
which require investigation--the survival of one amongst several
competing words (e.g. why German keeps only as a high poetic word
"ross", which is identical in origin with the English work-a-day
"horse", and replaces it by "pferd", whose congener the English
"palfrey" is almost confined to poetry and romance), the persistence
of evolution till it becomes revolution in languages like English or
Persian which have practically ceased to be inflectional languages, and
many other problems. Into these Darwin did not enter, and they require
a fuller investigation than is possible within the limits of the present
paper.




XXVII. DARWINISM AND HISTORY. By J.B. Bury, Litt.D., LL.D.

Regius Professor of Modern History in the University of Cambridge.


1. Evolution, and the principles associated with the Darwinian theory,
could not fail to exert a considerable influence on the studies
connected with the history of civilised man. The speculations which
are known as "philosophy of history," as well as the sciences of
anthropology, ethnography, and sociology (sciences which though they
stand on their own feet are for the historian auxiliary), have been
deeply affected by these principles. Historiographers, indeed, have
with few exceptions made little attempt to apply them; but the growth
of historical study in the nineteenth century has been determined and
characterised by the same general principle which has underlain the
simultaneous developments of the study of nature, namely the GENETIC
idea. The "historical" conception of nature, which has produced the
history of the solar system, the story of the earth, the genealogies of
telluric organisms, and has revolutionised natural science, belongs
to the same order of thought as the conception of human history as
a continuous, genetic, causal process--a conception which has
revolutionised historical research and made it scientific. Before
proceeding to consider the application of evolutional principles, it
will be pertinent to notice the rise of this new view.

2. With the Greeks and Romans history had been either a descriptive
record or had been written in practical interests. The most eminent of
the ancient historians were pragmatical; that is, they regarded history
as an instructress in statesmanship, or in the art of war, or in morals.
Their records reached back such a short way, their experience was so
brief, that they never attained to the conception of continuous process,
or realised the significance of time; and they never viewed the history
of human societies as a phenomenon to be investigated for its own sake.
In the middle ages there was still less chance of the emergence of the
ideas of progress and development. Such notions were excluded by the
fundamental doctrines of the dominant religion which bounded and bound
men's minds. As the course of history was held to be determined from
hour to hour by the arbitrary will of an extra-cosmic person, there
could be no self-contained causal development, only a dispensation
imposed from without. And as it was believed that the world was within
no great distance from the end of this dispensation, there was no motive
to take much interest in understanding the temporal, which was to be
only temporary.

The intellectual movements of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries
prepared the way for a new conception, but it did not emerge
immediately. The historians of the Renaissance period simply reverted to
the ancient pragmatical view. For Machiavelli, exactly as for Thucydides
and Polybius, the use of studying history was instruction in the art of
politics. The Renaissance itself was the appearance of a new culture,
different from anything that had gone before; but at the time men were
not conscious of this; they saw clearly that the traditions of classical
antiquity had been lost for a long period, and they were seeking to
revive them, but otherwise they did not perceive that the world had
moved, and that their own spirit, culture, and conditions were
entirely unlike those of the thirteenth century. It was hardly till the
seventeenth century that the presence of a new age, as different from
the middle ages as from the ages of Greece and Rome, was fully realised.
It was then that the triple division of ancient, medieval, and modern
was first applied to the history of western civilisation. Whatever
objections may be urged against this division, which has now become
almost a category of thought, it marks a most significant advance in
man's view of his own past. He has become conscious of the immense
changes in civilisation which have come about slowly in the course of
time, and history confronts him with a new aspect. He has to explain how
those changes have been produced, how the transformations were effected.
The appearance of this problem was almost simultaneous with the rise
of rationalism, and the great historians and thinkers of the eighteenth
century, such as Montesquieu, Voltaire, Gibbon, attempted to explain
the movement of civilisation by purely natural causes. These brilliant
writers prepared the way for the genetic history of the following
century. But in the spirit of the Aufklarung, that eighteenth-century
Enlightenment to which they belonged, they were concerned to judge all
phenomena before the tribunal of reason; and the apotheosis of "reason"
tended to foster a certain superior a priori attitude, which was
not favourable to objective treatment and was incompatible with
a "historical sense." Moreover the traditions of pragmatical
historiography had by no means disappeared.

3. In the first quarter of the nineteenth century the meaning of genetic
history was fully realised. "Genetic" perhaps is as good a word as can
be found for the conception which in this century was applied to so many
branches of knowledge in the spheres both of nature and of mind. It
does not commit us to the doctrine proper of evolution, nor yet to any
teleological hypothesis such as is implied in "progress." For history
it meant that the present condition of the human race is simply and
strictly the result of a causal series (or set of causal series)--a
continuous succession of changes, where each state arises causally out
of the preceding; and that the business of historians is to trace this
genetic process, to explain each change, and ultimately to grasp the
complete development of the life of humanity. Three influential writers,
who appeared at this stage and helped to initiate a new period
of research, may specially be mentioned. Ranke in 1824 definitely
repudiated the pragmatical view which ascribes to history the duties
of an instructress, and with no less decision renounced the function,
assumed by the historians of the Aufklarung, to judge the past; it
was his business, he said, merely to show how things really happened.
Niebuhr was already working in the same spirit and did more than any
other writer to establish the principle that historical transactions
must be related to the ideas and conditions of their age. Savigny about
the same time founded the "historical school" of law. He sought to show
that law was not the creation of an enlightened will, but grew out of
custom and was developed by a series of adaptations and rejections, thus
applying the conception of evolution. He helped to diffuse the notion
that all the institutions of a society or a notion are as closely
interconnected as the parts of a living organism.

4. The conception of the history of man as a causal development meant
the elevation of historical inquiry to the dignity of a science. Just
as the study of bees cannot become scientific so long as the student's
interest in them is only to procure honey or to derive moral lessons
from the labours of "the little busy bee," so the history of human
societies cannot become the object of pure scientific investigation so
long as man estimates its value in pragmatical scales. Nor can it become
a science until it is conceived as lying entirely within a sphere
in which the law of cause and effect has unreserved and unrestricted
dominion. On the other hand, once history is envisaged as a causal
process, which contains within itself the explanation of the development
of man from his primitive state to the point which he has reached, such
a process necessarily becomes the object of scientific investigation and
the interest in it is scientific curiosity.

At the same time, the instruments were sharpened and refined. Here Wolf,
a philologist with historical instinct, was a pioneer. His "Prolegomena"
to Homer (1795) announced new modes of attack. Historical investigation
was soon transformed by the elaboration of new methods.

5. "Progress" involves a judgment of value, which is not involved in the
conception of history as a genetic process. It is also an idea distinct
from that of evolution. Nevertheless it is closely related to the ideas
which revolutionised history at the beginning of the last century;
it swam into men's ken simultaneously; and it helped effectively to
establish the notion of history as a continuous process and to emphasise
the significance of time. Passing over earlier anticipations, I may
point to a "Discours" of Turgot (1750), where history is presented as a
process in which "the total mass of the human race" "marches continually
though sometimes slowly to an ever increasing perfection." That is
a clear statement of the conception which Turgot's friend Condorcet
elaborated in the famous work, published in 1795, "Esquisse d'un tableau
historique des progres de l'esprit humain". This work first treated with
explicit fulness the idea to which a leading role was to fall in the
ideology of the nineteenth century. Condorcet's book reflects the
triumphs of the Tiers etat, whose growing importance had also inspired
Turgot; it was the political changes in the eighteenth century which led
to the doctrine, emphatically formulated by Condorcet, that the masses
are the most important element in the historical process. I dwell
on this because, though Condorcet had no idea of evolution, the
pre-dominant importance of the masses was the assumption which made
it possible to apply evolutional principles to history. And it enabled
Condorcet himself to maintain that the history of civilisation, a
progress still far from being complete, was a development conditioned by
general laws.

6. The assimilation of society to an organism, which was a governing
notion in the school of Savigny, and the conception of progress,
combined to produce the idea of an organic development, in which the
historian has to determine the central principle or leading character.
This is illustrated by the apotheosis of democracy in Tocqueville's
"Democratie en Amerique", where the theory is maintained that "the
gradual and progressive development of equality is at once the past and
the future of the history of men." The same two principles are combined
in the doctrine of Spencer (who held that society is an organism,
though he also contemplated its being what he calls a "super-organic
aggregate") (A society presents suggestive analogies with an organism,
but it certainly is not an organism, and sociologists who draw
inferences from the assumption of its organic nature must fall into
error. A vital organism and a society are radically distinguished by the
fact that the individual components of the former, namely the cells,
are morphologically as well as functionally differentiated, whereas the
individuals which compose a society are morphologically homogeneous and
only functionally differentiated. The resemblances and the differences
are worked out in E. de Majewski's striking book "La Science de la
Civilisation", Paris, 1908.), that social evolution is a progressive
change from militarism to industrialism.

7. the idea of development assumed another form in the speculations of
German idealism. Hegel conceived the successive periods of history as
corresponding to the ascending phases or ideas in the self-evolution
of his Absolute Being. His "Lectures on the Philosophy of History" were
published in 1837 after his death. His philosophy had a considerable
effect, direct and indirect, on the treatment of history by historians,
and although he was superficial and unscientific himself in dealing with
historical phenomena, he contributed much towards making the idea of
historical development familiar. Ranke was influenced, if not by Hegel
himself, at least by the Idealistic philosophies of which Hegel's was
the greatest. He was inclined to conceive the stages in the process of
history as marked by incarnations, as it were, of ideas, and sometimes
speaks as if the ideas were independent forces, with hands and feet. But
while Hegel determined his ideas by a priori logic, Ranke obtained his
by induction--by a strict investigation of the phenomena; so that he
was scientific in his method and work, and was influenced by Hegelian
prepossessions only in the kind of significance which he was disposed
to ascribe to his results. It is to be noted that the theory of Hegel
implied a judgment of value; the movement was a progress towards
perfection.

8. In France, Comte approached the subject from a different side, and
exercised, outside Germany, a far wider influence than Hegel. The 4th
volume of his "Cours de philosophie positive", which appeared in 1839,
created sociology and treated history as a part of this new science,
namely as "social dynamics." Comte sought the key for unfolding
historical development, in what he called the social-psychological point
of view, and he worked out the two ideas which had been enunciated by
Condorcet: that the historian's attention should be directed not, as
hitherto, principally to eminent individuals, but to the collective
behaviour of the masses, as being the most important element in the
process; and that, as in nature, so in history, there are general laws,
necessary and constant, which condition the development. The two points
are intimately connected, for it is only when the masses are moved into
the foreground that regularity, uniformity, and law can be conceived
as applicable. To determine the social-psychological laws which
have controlled the development is, according to Comte, the task of
sociologists and historians.

9. The hypothesis of general laws operative in history was carried
further in a book which appeared in England twenty years later and
exercised an influence in Europe far beyond its intrinsic merit,
Buckle's "History of Civilisation in England" (1857-61). Buckle owed
much to Comte, and followed him, or rather outdid him, in regarding
intellect as the most important factor conditioning the upward
development of man, so that progress, according to him, consisted in the
victory of the intellectual over the moral laws.

10. The tendency of Comte and Buckle to assimilate history to the
sciences of nature by reducing it to general "laws," derived stimulus
and plausibility from the vista offered by the study of statistics, in
which the Belgian Quetelet, whose book "Sur l'homme" appeared in 1835,
discerned endless possibilities. The astonishing uniformities which
statistical inquiry disclosed led to the belief that it was only a
question of collecting a sufficient amount of statistical material, to
enable us to predict how a given social group will act in a particular
case. Bourdeau, a disciple of this school, looks forward to the time
when historical science will become entirely quantitative. The actions
of prominent individuals, which are generally considered to have altered
or determined the course of things, are obviously not amenable to
statistical computation or explicable by general laws. Thinkers like
Buckle sought to minimise their importance or explain them away.

11. These indications may suffice to show that the new efforts to
interpret history which marked the first half of the nineteenth century
were governed by conceptions closely related to those which were current
in the field of natural science and which resulted in the doctrine of
evolution. The genetic principle, progressive development, general
laws, the significance of time, the conception of society as an organic
aggregate, the metaphysical theory of history as the self-evolution of
spirit,--all these ideas show that historical inquiry had been advancing
independently on somewhat parallel lines to the sciences of nature. It
was necessary to bring this out in order to appreciate the influence of
Darwinism.

12. In the course of the dozen years which elapsed between the
appearances of "The Origin of Species" (observe that the first volume of
Buckle's work was published just two years before) and of "The Descent
of Man" (1871), the hypothesis of Lamarck that man is the co-descendant
with other species of some lower extinct form was admitted to have been
raised to the rank of an established fact by most thinkers whose brains
were not working under the constraint of theological authority.

One important effect of the discovery of this fact (I am not speaking
now of the Darwinian explanation) was to assign to history a definite
place in the coordinated whole of knowledge, and relate it more closely
to other sciences. It had indeed a defined logical place in systems
such as Hegel's and Comte's; but Darwinism certified its standing
convincingly and without more ado. The prevailing doctrine that man
was created ex abrupto had placed history in an isolated position,
disconnected with the sciences of nature. Anthropology, which deals with
the animal anthropos, now comes into line with zoology, and brings it
into relation with history. (It is to be observed that history is not
only different in scope but) not coextensive with anthropology IN TIME.
For it deals only with the development of man in societies, whereas
anthropology includes in its definition the proto-anthropic period
when anthropos was still non-social, whether he lived in herds like
the chimpanzee, or alone like the male ourang-outang. (It has been well
shown by Majewski that congregations--herds, flocks, packs, etc.--of
animals are not SOCIETIES; the characteristic of a society is
differentiation of function. Bee hives, ant hills, may be called
quasi-societies; but in their case the classes which perform distinct
functions are morphologically different.) Man's condition at the present
day is the result of a series of transformations, going back to the most
primitive phase of society, which is the ideal (unattainable) beginning
of history. But that beginning had emerged without any breach of
continuity from a development which carries us back to a quadrimane
ancestor, still further back (according to Darwin's conjecture) to a
marine animal of the ascidian type, and then through remoter periods to
the lowest form of organism. It is essential in this theory that though
links have been lost there was no break in the gradual development;
and this conception of a continuous progress in the evolution of
life, resulting in the appearance of uncivilised Anthropos, helped to
reinforce, and increase a belief in, the conception of the history of
civilised Anthropos as itself also a continuous progressive development.

13. Thus the diffusion of the Darwinian theory of the origin of man,
by emphasising the idea of continuity and breaking down the barriers
between the human and animal kingdoms, has had an important effect in
establishing the position of history among the sciences which deal with
telluric development. The perspective of history is merged in a larger
perspective of development. As one of the objects of biology is to find
the exact steps in the genealogy of man from the lowest organic form,
so the scope of history is to determine the stages in the unique
causal series from the most rudimentary to the present state of human
civilisation.

It is to be observed that the interest in historical research implied
by this conception need not be that of Comte. In the Positive Philosophy
history is part of sociology; the interest in it is to discover the
sociological laws. In the view of which I have just spoken, history
is permitted to be an end in itself; the reconstruction of the
genetic process is an independent interest. For the purpose of the
reconstruction, sociology, as well as physical geography, biology,
psychology, is necessary; the sociologist and the historian play
into each other's hands; but the object of the former is to establish
generalisations; the aim of the latter is to trace in detail a singular
causal sequence.

14. The success of the evolutional theory helped to discredit
the assumption or at least the invocation of transcendent causes.
Philosophically of course it is compatible with theism, but historians
have for the most part desisted from invoking the naive conception of a
"god in history" to explain historical movements. A historian may be a
theist; but, so far as his work is concerned, this particular belief is
otiose. Otherwise indeed (as was remarked above) history could not be a
science; for with a deus ex machina who can be brought on the stage to
solve difficulties scientific treatment is a farce. The transcendent
element had appeared in a more subtle form through the influence of
German philosophy. I noticed how Ranke is prone to refer to ideas as
if they were transcendent existences manifesting themselves in the
successive movements of history. It is intelligible to speak of certain
ideas as controlling, in a given period,--for instance, the idea of
nationality; but from the scientific point of view, such ideas have
no existence outside the minds of individuals and are purely psychical
forces; and a historical "idea," if it does not exist in this form, is
merely a way of expressing a synthesis of the historian himself.

15. From the more general influence of Darwinism on the place of history
in the system of human knowledge, we may turn to the influence of the
principles and methods by which Darwin explained development. It had
been recognised even by ancient writers (such as Aristotle and
Polybius) that physical circumstances (geography, climate) were factors
conditioning the character and history of a race or society. In the
sixteenth century Bodin emphasised these factors, and many subsequent
writers took them into account. The investigations of Darwin, which
brought them into the foreground, naturally promoted attempts to
discover in them the chief key to the growth of civilisation. Comte had
expressly denounced the notion that the biological methods of Lamarck
could be applied to social man. Buckle had taken account of natural
influences, but had relegated them to a secondary plane, compared with
psychological factors. But the Darwinian theory made it tempting to
explain the development of civilisation in terms of "adaptation to
environment," "struggle for existence," "natural selection," "survival
of the fittest," etc. (Recently O. Seeck has applied these principles to
the decline of Graeco-Roman civilisation in his "Untergang der antiken
Welt", 2 volumes, Berlin, 1895, 1901.)

The operation of these principles cannot be denied. Man is still an
animal, subject to zoological as well as mechanical laws. The dark
influence of heredity continues to be effective; and psychical
development had begun in lower organic forms,--perhaps with life itself.
The organic and the social struggles for existence are manifestations of
the same principle. Environment and climatic influence must be called in
to explain not only the differentiation of the great racial sections of
humanity, but also the varieties within these sub-species and, it may
be, the assimilation of distinct varieties. Ritter's "Anthropogeography"
has opened a useful line of research. But on the other hand, it is urged
that, in explaining the course of history, these principles do not take
us very far, and that it is chiefly for the primitive ultra-prehistoric
period that they can account for human development. It may be said
that, so far as concerns the actions and movements of men which are
the subject of recorded history, physical environment has ceased to act
mechanically, and in order to affect their actions must affect their
wills first; and that this psychical character of the causal relations
substantially alters the problem. The development of human societies, it
may be argued, derives a completely new character from the dominance
of the conscious psychical element, creating as it does new conditions
(inventions, social institutions, etc.) which limit and counteract the
operation of natural selection, and control and modify the influence of
physical environment. Most thinkers agree now that the chief clews to
the growth of civilisation must be sought in the psychological
sphere. Imitation, for instance, is a principle which is probably
more significant for the explanation of human development than natural
selection. Darwin himself was conscious that his principles had only
a very restricted application in this sphere, as is evident from his
cautious and tentative remarks in the 5th chapter of his "Descent of
Man". He applied natural selection to the growth of the intellectual
faculties and of the fundamental social instincts, and also to the
differentiation of the great races or "sub-species" (Caucasian, African,
etc.) which differ in anthropological character. (Darwinian formulae may
be suggestive by way of analogy. For instance, it is characteristic of
social advance that a multitude of inventions, schemes and plans are
framed which are never carried out, similar to, or designed for the same
end as, an invention or plan which is actually adopted because it has
chanced to suit better the particular conditions of the hour (just as
the works accomplished by an individual statesman, artist or savant are
usually only a residue of the numerous projects conceived by his brain).
This process in which so much abortive production occurs is analogous to
elimination by natural selection.)

16. But if it is admitted that the governing factors which concern
the student of social development are of the psychical order, the
preliminary success of natural science in explaining organic evolution
by general principles encouraged sociologists to hope that social
evolution could be explained on general principles also. The idea of
Condorcet, Buckle, and others, that history could be assimilated to
the natural sciences was powerfully reinforced, and the notion that the
actual historical process, and every social movement involved in it, can
be accounted for by sociological generalisations, so-called "laws," is
still entertained by many, in one form or another. Dissentients from
this view do not deny that the generalisations at which the sociologist
arrives by the comparative method, by the analysis of social factors,
and by psychological deduction may be an aid to the historian; but they
deny that such uniformities are laws or contain an explanation of the
phenomena. They can point to the element of chance coincidence. This
element must have played a part in the events of organic evolution, but
it has probably in a larger measure helped to determine events in social
evolution. The collision of two unconnected sequences may be fraught
with great results. The sudden death of a leader or a marriage without
issue, to take simple cases, has again and again led to permanent
political consequences. More emphasis is laid on the decisive actions
of individuals, which cannot be reduced under generalisations and which
deflect the course of events. If the significance of the individual will
had been exaggerated to the neglect of the collective activity of the
social aggregate before Condorcet, his doctrine tended to eliminate as
unimportant the roles of prominent men, and by means of this elimination
it was possible to found sociology. But it may be urged that it is
patent on the face of history that its course has constantly been
shaped and modified by the wills of individuals (We can ignore here the
metaphysical question of freewill and determinism. For the character of
the individual's brain depends in any case on ante-natal accidents
and coincidences, and so it may be said that the role of individuals
ultimately depends on chance,--the accidental coincidence of independent
sequences.), which are by no means always the expression of the
collective will; and that the appearance of such personalities at the
given moments is not a necessary outcome of the conditions and cannot be
deduced. Nor is there any proof that, if such and such an individual
had not been born, some one else would have arisen to do what he did. In
some cases there is no reason to think that what happened need ever have
come to pass. In other cases, it seems evident that the actual change
was inevitable, but in default of the man who initiated and guided it,
it might have been postponed, and, postponed or not, might have borne
a different cachet. I may illustrate by an instance which has just come
under my notice. Modern painting was founded by Giotto, and the Italian
expedition of Charles VIII, near the close of the sixteenth century,
introduced into France the fashion of imitating Italian painters.
But for Giotto and Charles VIII, French painting might have been very
different. It may be said that "if Giotto had not appeared, some other
great initiator would have played a role analogous to his, and that
without Charles VIII there would have been the commerce with Italy,
which in the long run would have sufficed to place France in relation
with Italian artists. But the equivalent of Giotto might have been
deferred for a century and probably would have been different; and
commercial relations would have required ages to produce the rayonnement
imitatif of Italian art in France, which the expedition of the royal
adventurer provoked in a few years." (I have taken this example from G.
Tarde's "La logique sociale" 2 (page 403), Paris, 1904, where it is used
for quite a different purpose.) Instances furnished by political history
are simply endless. Can we conjecture how events would have moved if the
son of Philip of Macedon had been an incompetent? The aggressive action
of Prussia which astonished Europe in 1740 determined the subsequent
history of Germany; but that action was anything but inevitable; it
depended entirely on the personality of Frederick the Great.

Hence it may be argued that the action of individual wills is a
determining and disturbing factor, too significant and effective to
allow history to be grasped by sociological formulae. The types and
general forms of development which the sociologist attempts to disengage
can only assist the historian in understanding the actual course
of events. It is in the special domains of economic history and
Culturgeschichte which have come to the front in modern times that
generalisation is most fruitful, but even in these it may be contended
that it furnishes only partial explanations.

17. The truth is that Darwinism itself offers the best illustration of
the insufficiency of general laws to account for historical
development. The part played by coincidence, and the part played
by individuals--limited by, and related to, general social
conditions--render it impossible to deduce the course of the past
history of man or to predict the future. But it is just the same with
organic development. Darwin (or any other zoologist) could not deduce
the actual course of evolution from general principles. Given an
organism and its environment, he could not show that it must evolve into
a more complex organism of a definite pre-determined type; knowing
what it has evolved into, he could attempt to discover and assign the
determining causes. General principles do not account for a particular
sequence; they embody necessary conditions; but there is a chapter of
accidents too. It is the same in the case of history.

18. Among the evolutional attempts to subsume the course of history
under general syntheses, perhaps the most important is that of
Lamprecht, whose "kulturhistorische Methode," which he has deduced from
and applied to German history, exhibits the (indirect) influence of the
Comtist school. It is based upon psychology, which, in his view, holds
among the sciences of mind (Geisteswissenschaften) the same place (that
of a Grundwissenschaft) which mechanics holds among the sciences of
nature. History, by the same comparison, corresponds to biology, and,
according to him, it can only become scientific if it is reduced to
general concepts (Begriffe). Historical movements and events are of
a psychical character, and Lamprecht conceives a given phase of
civilisation as "a collective psychical condition (seelischer
Gesamtzustand)" controlling the period, "a diapason which penetrates
all psychical phenomena and thereby all historical events of the time."
("Die kulturhistorische Methode", Berlin, 1900, page 26.) He has worked
out a series of such phases, "ages of changing psychical diapason," in
his "Deutsche Geschichte" with the aim of showing that all the feelings
and actions of each age can be explained by the diapason; and has
attempted to prove that these diapasons are exhibited in other social
developments, and are consequently not singular but typical. He
maintains further that these ages succeed each other in a definite
order; the principle being that the collective psychical development
begins with the homogeneity of all the individual members of a society
and, through heightened psychical activity, advances in the form of a
continually increasing differentiation of the individuals (this is akin
to the Spencerian formula). This process, evolving psychical freedom
from psychical constraint, exhibits a series of psychical phenomena
which define successive periods of civilisation. The process depends on
two simple principles, that no idea can disappear without leaving behind
it an effect or influence, and that all psychical life, whether in
a person or a society, means change, the acquisition of new mental
contents. It follows that the new have to come to terms with the old,
and this leads to a synthesis which determines the character of a new
age. Hence the ages of civilisation are defined as the "highest
concepts for subsuming without exception all psychical phenomena of
the development of human societies, that is, of all historical events."
(Ibid. pages 28, 29.) Lamprecht deduces the idea of a special historical
science, which might be called "historical ethnology," dealing with the
ages of civilisation, and bearing the same relation to (descriptive or
narrative) history as ethnology to ethnography. Such a science obviously
corresponds to Comte's social dynamics, and the comparative method,
on which Comte laid so much emphasis, is the principal instrument of
Lamprecht.

19. I have dwelt on the fundamental ideas of Lamprecht, because they are
not yet widely known in England, and because his system is the ablest
product of the sociological school of historians. It carries the
more weight as its author himself is a historical specialist, and his
historical syntheses deserve the most careful consideration. But there
is much in the process of development which on such assumptions is
not explained, especially the initiative of individuals. Historical
development does not proceed in a right line, without the choice of
diverging. Again and again, several roads are open to it, of which it
chooses one--why? On Lamprecht's method, we may be able to assign the
conditions which limit the psychical activity of men at a particular
stage of evolution, but within those limits the individual has so many
options, such a wide room for moving, that the definition of those
conditions, the "psychical diapasons," is only part of the explanation
of the particular development. The heel of Achilles in all historical
speculations of this class has been the role of the individual.

The increasing prominence of economic history has tended to encourage
the view that history can be explained in terms of general concepts or
types. Marx and his school based their theory of human development on
the conditions of production, by which, according to them, all social
movements and historical changes are entirely controlled. The leading
part which economic factors play in Lamprecht's system is significant,
illustrating the fact that economic changes admit most readily this
kind of treatment, because they have been less subject to direction or
interference by individual pioneers.

Perhaps it may be thought that the conception of SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT
(essentially psychical), on which Lamprecht's "psychical diapasons"
depend, is the most valuable and fertile conception that the historian
owes to the suggestion of the science of biology--the conception of
all particular historical actions and movements as (1) related to and
conditioned by the social environment, and (2) gradually bringing about
a transformation of that environment. But no given transformation can be
proved to be necessary (pre-determined). And types of development do not
represent laws; their meaning and value lie in the help they may give
to the historian, in investigating a certain period of civilisation,
to enable him to discover the interrelations among the diverse features
which it presents. They are, as some one has said, an instrument of
heuretic method.

20. The men engaged in special historical researches--which have been
pursued unremittingly for a century past, according to scientific
methods of investigating evidence (initiated by Wolf, Niebuhr,
Ranke)--have for the most part worked on the assumptions of genetic
history or at least followed in the footsteps of those who fully grasped
the genetic point of view. But their aim has been to collect and sift
evidence, and determine particular facts; comparatively few have given
serious thought to the lines of research and the speculations which
have been considered in this paper. They have been reasonably shy
of compromising their work by applying theories which are still much
debated and immature. But historiography cannot permanently evade the
questions raised by these theories. One may venture to say that no
historical change or transformation will be fully understood until it is
explained how social environment acted on the individual components of
the society (both immediately and by heredity), and how the individuals
reacted upon their environment. The problem is psychical, but it is
analogous to the main problem of the biologist.




XXVIII. THE GENESIS OF DOUBLE STARS. By Sir George Darwin, K.C.B.,
F.R.S.

Plumian Professor of Astronomy and Experimental Philosophy in the
University of Cambridge.

In ordinary speech a system of any sort is said to be stable when it
cannot be upset easily, but the meaning attached to the word is usually
somewhat vague. It is hardly surprising that this should be the case,
when it is only within the last thirty years, and principally through
the investigations of M. Poincare, that the conception of stability has,
even for physicists, assumed a definiteness and clearness in which it
was previously lacking. The laws which govern stability hold good in
regions of the greatest diversity; they apply to the motion of planets
round the sun, to the internal arrangement of those minute corpuscles of
which each chemical atom is constructed, and to the forms of celestial
bodies. In the present essay I shall attempt to consider the laws of
stability as relating to the last case, and shall discuss the succession
of shapes which may be assumed by celestial bodies in the course of
their evolution. I believe further that homologous conceptions are
applicable in the consideration of the transmutations of the various
forms of animal and of vegetable life and in other regions of thought.
Even if some of my readers should think that what I shall say on this
head is fanciful, yet at least the exposition will serve to illustrate
the meaning to be attached to the laws of stability in the physical
universe.

I propose, therefore, to begin this essay by a sketch of the principles
of stability as they are now formulated by physicists.

I.

If a slight impulse be imparted to a system in equilibrium one of two
consequences must ensue; either small oscillations of the system will
be started, or the disturbance will increase without limit and the
arrangement of the system will be completely changed. Thus a stick may
be in equilibrium either when it hangs from a peg or when it is balanced
on its point. If in the first case the stick is touched it will swing to
and fro, but in the second case it will topple over. The first position
is a stable one, the second is unstable. But this case is too simple to
illustrate all that is implied by stability, and we must consider cases
of stable and of unstable motion. Imagine a satellite and its planet,
and consider each of them to be of indefinitely small size, in fact
particles; then the satellite revolves round its planet in an ellipse. A
small disturbance imparted to the satellite will only change the ellipse
to a small amount, and so the motion is said to be stable. If, on the
other hand, the disturbance were to make the satellite depart from its
initial elliptic orbit in ever widening circuits, the motion would be
unstable. This case affords an example of stable motion, but I have
adduced it principally with the object of illustrating another point
not immediately connected with stability, but important to a proper
comprehension of the theory of stability.

The motion of a satellite about its planet is one of revolution or
rotation. When the satellite moves in an ellipse of any given degree
of eccentricity, there is a certain amount of rotation in the system,
technically called rotational momentum, and it is always the same at
every part of the orbit. (Moment of momentum or rotational momentum
is measured by the momentum of the satellite multiplied by the
perpendicular from the planet on to the direction of the path of the
satellite at any instant.)

Now if we consider all the possible elliptic orbits of a satellite about
its planet which have the same amount of "rotational momentum," we find
that the major axis of the ellipse described will be different according
to the amount of flattening (or the eccentricity) of the ellipse
described. A figure titled "A 'family' of elliptic orbits with constant
rotational momentum" (Fig. 1) illustrates for a given planet and
satellite all such orbits with constant rotational momentum, and with
all the major axes in the same direction. It will be observed that there
is a continuous transformation from one orbit to the next, and that the
whole forms a consecutive group, called by mathematicians "a family"
of orbits. In this case the rotational momentum is constant and the
position of any orbit in the family is determined by the length of the
major axis of the ellipse; the classification is according to the major
axis, but it might have been made according to anything else which would
cause the orbit to be exactly determinate.

I shall come later to the classification of all possible forms of ideal
liquid stars, which have the same amount of rotational momentum, and the
classification will then be made according to their densities, but the
idea of orderly arrangement in a "family" is just the same.

We thus arrive at the conception of a definite type of motion, with
a constant amount of rotational momentum, and a classification of all
members of the family, formed by all possible motions of that type,
according to the value of some measurable quantity (this will hereafter
be density) which determines the motion exactly. In the particular case
of the elliptic motion used for illustration the motion was stable,
but other cases of motion might be adduced in which the motion would
be unstable, and it would be found that classification in a family and
specification by some measurable quantity would be equally applicable.

A complex mechanical system may be capable of motion in several distinct
modes or types, and the motions corresponding to each such type may
be arranged as before in families. For the sake of simplicity I will
suppose that only two types are possible, so that there will only be two
families; and the rotational momentum is to be constant. The two types
of motion will have certain features in common which we denote in a sort
of shorthand by the letter A. Similarly the two types may be described
as A + a and A + b, so that a and b denote the specific differences
which discriminate the families from one another. Now following in
imagination the family of the type A + a, let us begin with the case
where the specific difference a is well marked. As we cast our eyes
along the series forming the family, we find the difference a becoming
less conspicuous. It gradually dwindles until it disappears; beyond this
point it either becomes reversed, or else the type has ceased to be
a possible one. In our shorthand we have started with A + a, and have
watched the characteristic a dwindling to zero. When it vanishes we have
reached a type which may be specified as A; beyond this point the type
would be A - a or would be impossible.

Following the A + b type in the same way, b is at first well marked, it
dwindles to zero, and finally may become negative. Hence in shorthand
this second family may be described as A + b,... A,... A - b.

In each family there is one single member which is indistinguishable
from a member of the other family; it is called by Poincare a form of
bifurcation. It is this conception of a form of bifurcation which forms
the important consideration in problems dealing with the forms of liquid
or gaseous bodies in rotation.

But to return to the general question,--thus far the stability of these
families has not been considered, and it is the stability which renders
this way of looking at the matter so valuable. It may be proved that if
before the point of bifurcation the type A + a was stable, then A + b
must have been unstable. Further as a and b each diminish A + a becomes
less pronouncedly stable, and A + b less unstable. On reaching the point
of bifurcation A + a has just ceased to be stable, or what amounts to
the same thing is just becoming unstable, and the converse is true
of the A + b family. After passing the point of bifurcation A + a has
become definitely unstable and A + b has become stable. Hence the point
of bifurcation is also a point of "exchange of stabilities between the
two types." (In order not to complicate unnecessarily this explanation
of a general principle I have not stated fully all the cases that may
occur. Thus: firstly, after bifurcation A + a may be an impossible type
and A + a will then stop at this point; or secondly, A + b may have been
an impossible type before bifurcation, and will only begin to be a real
one after it; or thirdly, both A + a and A + b may be impossible after
the point of bifurcation, in which case they coalesce and disappear.
This last case shows that types arise and disappear in pairs, and that
on appearance or before disappearance one must be stable and the other
unstable.)

In nature it is of course only the stable types of motion which can
persist for more than a short time. Thus the task of the physical
evolutionist is to determine the forms of bifurcation, at which he must,
as it were, change carriages in the evolutionary journey so as always
to follow the stable route. He must besides be able to indicate
some natural process which shall correspond in effect to the ideal
arrangement of the several types of motion in families with gradually
changing specific differences. Although, as we shall see hereafter, it
may frequently or even generally be impossible to specify with exactness
the forms of bifurcation in the process of evolution, yet the conception
is one of fundamental importance.

The ideas involved in this sketch are no doubt somewhat recondite, but I
hope to render them clearer to the non-mathematical reader by homologous
considerations in other fields of thought (I considered this subject in
my Presidential address to the British Association in 1905, "Report of
the 75th Meeting of the British Assoc." (S. Africa, 1905), London, 1906,
page 3. Some reviewers treated my speculations as fanciful, but as I
believe that this was due generally to misapprehension, and as I hold
that homologous considerations as to stability and instability are
really applicable to evolution of all sorts, I have thought it well to
return to the subject in the present paper.), and I shall pass on thence
to illustrations which will teach us something of the evolution of
stellar systems.

States or governments are organised schemes of action amongst groups of
men, and they belong to various types to which generic names, such as
autocracy, aristocracy or democracy, are somewhat loosely applied. A
definite type of government corresponds to one of our types of
motion, and while retaining its type it undergoes a slow change as the
civilisation and character of the people change, and as the relationship
of the nation to other nations changes. In the language used before, the
government belongs to a family, and as time advances we proceed through
the successive members of the family. A government possesses a certain
degree of stability--hardly measurable in numbers however--to resist
disintegrating influences such as may arise from wars, famines, and
internal dissensions. This stability gradually rises to a maximum and
gradually declines. The degree of stability at any epoch will depend on
the fitness of some leading feature of the government to suit the
slowly altering circumstances, and that feature corresponds to the
characteristic denoted by a in the physical problem. A time at length
arrives when the stability vanishes, and the slightest shock will
overturn the government. At this stage we have reached the crisis of
a point of bifurcation, and there will then be some circumstance,
apparently quite insignificant and almost unnoticed, which is such as
to prevent the occurrence of anarchy. This circumstance or condition
is what we typified as b. Insignificant although it may seem, it has
started the government on a new career of stability by imparting to it
a new type. It grows in importance, the form of government becomes
obviously different, and its stability increases. Then in its turn this
newly acquired stability declines, and we pass on to a new crisis or
revolution. There is thus a series of "points of bifurcation" in history
at which the continuity of political history is maintained by means of
changes in the type of government. These ideas seem, to me at least, to
give a true account of the history of states, and I contend that it is
no mere fanciful analogy but a true homology, when in both realms of
thought--the physical and the political--we perceive the existence of
forms of bifurcation and of exchanges of stability.

Further than this, I would ask whether the same train of ideas does not
also apply to the evolution of animals? A species is well adapted to its
environment when the individual can withstand the shocks of famine or
the attacks and competition of other animals; it then possesses a high
degree of stability. Most of the casual variations of individuals are
indifferent, for they do not tell much either for or against success
in life; they are small oscillations which leave the type unchanged. As
circumstances change, the stability of the species may gradually dwindle
through the insufficiency of some definite quality, on which in earlier
times no such insistent demands were made. The individual animals will
then tend to fail in the struggle for life, the numbers will dwindle and
extinction may ensue. But it may be that some new variation, at first of
insignificant importance, may just serve to turn the scale. A new
type may be formed in which the variation in question is preserved and
augmented; its stability may increase and in time a new species may be
produced.

At the risk of condemnation as a wanderer beyond my province into the
region of biological evolution, I would say that this view accords with
what I understand to be the views of some naturalists, who recognise the
existence of critical periods in biological history at which extinction
occurs or which form the starting-point for the formation of new
species. Ought we not then to expect that long periods will elapse
during which a type of animal will remain almost constant, followed by
other periods, enormously long no doubt as measured in the life of man,
of acute struggle for existence when the type will change more rapidly?
This at least is the view suggested by the theory of stability in
the physical universe. (I make no claim to extensive reading on this
subject, but refer the reader for example to a paper by Professor A.A.W.
Hubrecht on "De Vries's theory of Mutations", "Popular Science Monthly",
July 1904, especially to page 213.)

And now I propose to apply these ideas of stability to the theory of
stellar evolution, and finally to illustrate them by certain recent
observations of a very remarkable character.

Stars and planets are formed of materials which yield to the enormous
forces called into play by gravity and rotation. This is obviously true
if they are gaseous or fluid, and even solid matter becomes plastic
under sufficiently great stresses. Nothing approaching a complete study
of the equilibrium of a heterogeneous star has yet been found possible,
and we are driven to consider only bodies of simpler construction. I
shall begin therefore by explaining what is known about the shapes which
may be assumed by a mass of incompressible liquid of uniform density
under the influences of gravity and of rotation. Such a liquid mass may
be regarded as an ideal star, which resembles a real star in the fact
that it is formed of gravitating and rotating matter, and because its
shape results from the forces to which it is subject. It is unlike a
star in that it possesses the attributes of incompressibility and
of uniform density. The difference between the real and the ideal is
doubtless great, yet the similarity is great enough to allow us
to extend many of the conclusions as to ideal liquid stars to the
conditions which must hold good in reality. Thus with the object of
obtaining some insight into actuality, it is justifiable to discuss an
avowedly ideal problem at some length.

The attraction of gravity alone tends to make a mass of liquid assume
the shape of a sphere, and the effects of rotation, summarised under
the name of centrifugal force, are such that the liquid seeks to spread
itself outwards from the axis of rotation. It is a singular fact that
it is unnecessary to take any account of the size of the mass of liquid
under consideration, because the shape assumed is exactly the same
whether the mass be small or large, and this renders the statement of
results much easier than would otherwise be the case.

A mass of liquid at rest will obviously assume the shape of a sphere,
under the influence of gravitation, and it is a stable form, because
any oscillation of the liquid which might be started would gradually die
away under the influence of friction, however small. If now we impart
to the whole mass of liquid a small speed of rotation about some axis,
which may be called the polar axis, in such a way that there are no
internal currents and so that it spins in the same way as if it were
solid, the shape will become slightly flattened like an orange. Although
the earth and the other planets are not homogeneous they behave in the
same way, and are flattened at the poles and protuberant at the equator.
This shape may therefore conveniently be described as planetary.

If the planetary body be slightly deformed the forces of restitution
are slightly less than they were for the sphere; the shape is stable
but somewhat less so than the sphere. We have then a planetary spheroid,
rotating slowly, slightly flattened at the poles, with a high degree of
stability, and possessing a certain amount of rotational momentum. Let
us suppose this ideal liquid star to be somewhere in stellar space far
removed from all other bodies; then it is subject to no external forces,
and any change which ensues must come from inside. Now the amount
of rotational momentum existing in a system in motion can neither be
created nor destroyed by any internal causes, and therefore, whatever
happens, the amount of rotational momentum possessed by the star must
remain absolutely constant.

A real star radiates heat, and as it cools it shrinks. Let us suppose
then that our ideal star also radiates and shrinks, but let the process
proceed so slowly that any internal currents generated in the liquid
by the cooling are annulled so quickly by fluid friction as to be
insignificant; further let the liquid always remain at any instant
incompressible and homogeneous. All that we are concerned with is that,
as time passes, the liquid star shrinks, rotates in one piece as if it
were solid, and remains incompressible and homogeneous. The condition is
of course artificial, but it represents the actual processes of nature
as well as may be, consistently with the postulated incompressibility
and homogeneity. (Mathematicians are accustomed to regard the density
as constant and the rotational momentum as increasing. But the way of
looking at the matter, which I have adopted, is easier of comprehension,
and it comes to the same in the end.)

The shrinkage of a constant mass of matter involves an increase of its
density, and we have therefore to trace the changes which supervene as
the star shrinks, and as the liquid of which it is composed increases
in density. The shrinkage will, in ordinary parlance, bring the weights
nearer to the axis of rotation. Hence in order to keep up the rotational
momentum, which as we have seen must remain constant, the mass must
rotate quicker. The greater speed of rotation augments the importance of
centrifugal force compared with that of gravity, and as the flattening
of the planetary spheroid was due to centrifugal force, that flattening
is increased; in other words the ellipticity of the planetary spheroid
increases.

As the shrinkage and corresponding increase of density proceed, the
planetary spheroid becomes more and more elliptic, and the succession
of forms constitutes a family classified according to the density of
the liquid. The specific mark of this family is the flattening or
ellipticity.

Now consider the stability of the system, we have seen that the spheroid
with a slow rotation, which forms our starting-point, was slightly less
stable than the sphere, and as we proceed through the family of ever
flatter ellipsoids the stability continues to diminish. At length when
it has assumed the shape shown in a figure titled "Planetary spheroid
just becoming unstable" (Fig. 2.) where the equatorial and polar axes
are proportional to the numbers 1000 and 583, the stability has just
disappeared. According to the general principle explained above this
is a form of bifurcation, and corresponds to the form denoted A. The
specific difference a of this family must be regarded as the excess
of the ellipticity of this figure above that of all the earlier ones,
beginning with the slightly flattened planetary spheroid. Accordingly
the specific difference a of the family has gradually diminished from
the beginning and vanishes at this stage.

According to Poincare's principle the vanishing of the stability serves
us with notice that we have reached a figure of bifurcation, and
it becomes necessary to inquire what is the nature of the specific
difference of the new family of figures which must be coalescent with
the old one at this stage. This difference is found to reside in the
fact that the equator, which in the planetary family has hitherto been
circular in section, tends to become elliptic. Hitherto the rotational
momentum has been kept up to its constant value partly by greater speed
of rotation and partly by a symmetrical bulging of the equator. But now
while the speed of rotation still increases (The mathematician familiar
with Jacobi's ellipsoid will find that this is correct, although in
the usual mode of exposition, alluded to above in a footnote, the speed
diminishes.), the equator tends to bulge outwards at two diametrically
opposite points and to be flattened midway between these protuberances.
The specific difference in the new family, denoted in the general sketch
by b, is this ellipticity of the equator. If we had traced the planetary
figures with circular equators beyond this stage A, we should have found
them to have become unstable, and the stability has been shunted off
along the A + b family of forms with elliptic equators.

This new series of figures, generally named after the great
mathematician Jacobi, is at first only just stable, but as the density
increases the stability increases, reaches a maximum and then declines.
As this goes on the equator of these Jacobian figures becomes more
and more elliptic, so that the shape is considerably elongated in a
direction at right angles to the axis of rotation.

At length when the longest axis of the three has become about three
times as long as the shortest (The three axes of the ellipsoid are
then proportional to 1000, 432, 343.), the stability of this family of
figures vanishes, and we have reached a new form of bifurcation and must
look for a new type of figure along which the stable development will
presumably extend. Two sections of this critical Jacobian figure, which
is a figure of bifurcation, are shown by the dotted lines in a figure
titled "The 'pear-shaped figure' and the Jocobian figure from which it
is derived" (Fig. 3.) comprising two figures, one above the other: the
upper figure is the equatorial section at right angles to the axis of
rotation, the lower figure is a section through the axis.

Now Poincare has proved that the new type of figure is to be derived
from the figure of bifurcation by causing one of the ends to be
prolonged into a snout and by bluntening the other end. The snout forms
a sort of stalk, and between the stalk and the axis of rotation the
surface is somewhat flattened. These are the characteristics of a pear,
and the figure has therefore been called the "pear-shaped figure of
equilibrium." The firm line shows this new type of figure, whilst, as
already explained, the dotted line shows the form of bifurcation
from which it is derived. The specific mark of this new family is the
protrusion of the stalk together with the other corresponding smaller
differences. If we denote this difference by c, while A + b denotes the
Jacobian figure of bifurcation from which it is derived, the new family
may be called A + b + c, and c is zero initially. According to my
calculations this series of figures is stable (M. Liapounoff contends
that for constant density the new series of figures, which M. Poincare
discovered, has less rotational momentum than that of the figure of
bifurcation. If he is correct, the figure of bifurcation is a limit of
stable figures, and none can exist with stability for greater rotational
momentum. My own work seems to indicate that the opposite is true, and,
notwithstanding M. Liapounoff's deservedly great authority, I venture
to state the conclusions in accordance with my own work.), but I do not
know at what stage of its development it becomes unstable.

Professor Jeans has solved a problem which is of interest as throwing
light on the future development of the pear-shaped figure, although
it is of a still more ideal character than the one which has been
discussed. He imagines an INFINITELY long circular cylinder of liquid
to be in rotation about its central axis. The existence is virtually
postulated of a demon who is always occupied in keeping the axis of the
cylinder straight, so that Jeans has only to concern himself with the
stability of the form of the section of the cylinder, which as I have
said is a circle with the axis of rotation at the centre. He then
supposes the liquid forming the cylinder to shrink in diameter, just as
we have done, and finds that the speed of rotation must increase so as
to keep up the constancy of the rotational momentum. The circularity of
section is at first stable, but as the shrinkage proceeds the stability
diminishes and at length vanishes. This stage in the process is a form
of bifurcation, and the stability passes over to a new series consisting
of cylinders which are elliptic in section. The circular cylinders are
exactly analogous with our planetary spheroids, and the elliptic ones
with the Jacobian ellipsoids.

With further shrinkage the elliptic cylinders become unstable, a new
form of bifurcation is reached, and the stability passes over to a
series of cylinders whose section is pear-shaped. Thus far the analogy
is complete between our problem and Jeans's, and in consequence of
the greater simplicity of the conditions, he is able to carry his
investigation further. He finds that the stalk end of the pear-like
section continues to protrude more and more, and the flattening between
it and the axis of rotation becomes a constriction. Finally the neck
breaks and a satellite cylinder is born. Jeans's figure for an advanced
stage of development is shown in a figure titled "Section of a rotating
cylinder of liquid" (Fig. 4.), but his calculations do not enable him
actually to draw the state of affairs after the rupture of the neck.

There are certain difficulties in admitting the exact parallelism
between this problem and ours, and thus the final development of our
pear-shaped figure and the end of its stability in a form of bifurcation
remain hidden from our view, but the successive changes as far as they
have been definitely traced are very suggestive in the study of stellar
evolution.

Attempts have been made to attack this problem from the other end. If
we begin with a liquid satellite revolving about a liquid planet and
proceed backwards in time, we must make the two masses expand so that
their density will be diminished. Various figures have been drawn
exhibiting the shapes of two masses until their surfaces approach close
to one another and even until they just coalesce, but the discussion of
their stability is not easy. At present it would seem to be impossible
to reach coalescence by any series of stable transformations, and
if this is so Professor Jeans's investigation has ceased to be truly
analogous to our problem at some undetermined stage. However this may be
this line of research throws an instructive light on what we may expect
to find in the evolution of real stellar systems.

In the second part of this paper I shall point out the bearing which
this investigation of the evolution of an ideal liquid star may have on
the genesis of double stars.

II.

There are in the heavens many stars which shine with a variable
brilliancy. Amongst these there is a class which exhibits special
peculiarities; the members of this class are generally known as Algol
Variables, because the variability of the star Beta Persei or Algol was
the first of such cases to attract the attention of astronomers, and
because it is perhaps still the most remarkable of the whole class. But
the circumstances which led to this discovery were so extraordinary that
it seems worth while to pause a moment before entering on the subject.

John Goodricke, a deaf-mute, was born in 1764; he was grandson and heir
of Sir John Goodricke of Ribston Hall, Yorkshire. In November 1782,
he noted that the brilliancy of Algol waxed and waned (It is said that
Georg Palitzch, a farmer of Prohlis near Dresden, had about 1758 already
noted the variability of Algol with the naked eye. "Journ. Brit. Astron.
Assoc." Vol. XV. (1904-5), page 203.), and devoted himself to observing
it on every fine night from the 28th December 1782 to the 12th May 1783.
He communicated his observations to the Royal Society, and suggested
that the variation in brilliancy was due to periodic eclipses by a dark
companion star, a theory now universally accepted as correct. The
Royal Society recognised the importance of the discovery by awarding to
Goodricke, then only 19 years of age, their highest honour, the Copley
medal. His later observations of Beta Lyrae and of Delta Cephei were
almost as remarkable as those of Algol, but unfortunately a career of
such extraordinary promise was cut short by death, only a fortnight
after his election to the Royal Society. ("Dict. of National Biography";
article Goodricke (John). The article is by Miss Agnes Clerke. It is
strange that she did not then seem to be aware that he was a deaf-mute,
but she notes the fact in her "Problems of Astrophysics", page 337,
London, 1903.)

It was not until 1889 that Goodricke's theory was verified, when it
was proved by Vogel that the star was moving in an orbit, and in such
a manner that it was only possible to explain the rise and fall in the
luminosity by the partial eclipse of a bright star by a dark companion.

The whole mass of the system of Algol is found to be half as great again
as that of our sun, yet the two bodies complete their orbit in the short
period of 2d 20h 48m 55s. The light remains constant during each period,
except for 9h 20m when it exhibits a considerable fall in brightness
(Clerke, "Problems of Astrophysics" page 302 and chapter XVIII.); the
curve which represents the variation in the light is shown in a figure
titled "The light-curve and system of Beta Lyrae" (Fig. 7.).

The spectroscope has enabled astronomers to prove that many stars,
although apparently single, really consist of two stars circling around
one another (If a source of light is approaching with a great velocity
the waves of light are crowded together, and conversely they are spaced
out when the source is receding. Thus motion in the line of sight
virtually produces an infinitesimal change of colour. The position
of certain dark lines in the spectrum affords an exceedingly accurate
measurement of colour. Thus displacements of these spectral lines
enables us to measure the velocity of the source of light towards or
away from the observer.); they are known as spectroscopic binaries.
Campbell of the Lick Observatory believes that about one star in six is
a binary ("Astrophysical Journ." Vol. XIII. page 89, 1901. See also A.
Roberts, "Nature", Sept. 12, 1901, page 468.); thus there must be many
thousand such stars within the reach of our spectroscopes.

The orientation of the planes of the orbits of binary stars appears to
be quite arbitrary, and in general the star does not vary in brightness.
Amongst all such orbits there must be some whose planes pass nearly
through the sun, and in these cases the eclipse of one of the stars by
the other becomes inevitable, and in each circuit there will occur two
eclipses of unequal intensities.

It is easy to see that in the majority of such cases the two components
must move very close to one another.

The coincidence between the spectroscopic and the photometric evidence
permits us to feel complete confidence in the theory of eclipses. When
then we find a star with a light-curve of perfect regularity and with
a characteristics of that of Algol, we are justified in extending the
theory of eclipses to it, although it may be too faint to permit of
adequate spectroscopic examination. This extension of the theory secures
a considerable multiplication of the examples available for observation,
and some 30 have already been discovered.

Dr Alexander Roberts, of Lovedale in Cape Colony, truly remarks that
the study of Algol variables "brings us to the very threshold of the
question of stellar evolution." ("Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh", XXIV. Part
II. (1902), page 73.) It is on this account that I propose to explain
in some detail the conclusion to which he and some other observers have
been led.

Although these variable stars are mere points of light, it has been
proved by means of the spectroscope that the law of gravitation holds
good in the remotest regions of stellar space, and further it seems now
to have become possible even to examine the shapes of stars by indirect
methods, and thus to begin the study of their evolution. The chain of
reasoning which I shall explain must of necessity be open to criticism,
yet the explanation of the facts by the theory is so perfect that it is
not easy to resist the conviction that we are travelling along the path
of truth.

The brightness of a star is specified by what is called its "magnitude."
The average brightness of all the stars which can just be seen with
the naked eye defines the sixth magnitude. A star which only gives
two-fifths as much light is said to be of the seventh magnitude; while
one which gives 2 1/2 times as much light is of the fifth magnitude,
and successive multiplications or divisions by 2 1/2 define the lower or
higher magnitudes. Negative magnitudes have clearly to be contemplated;
thus Sirius is of magnitude minus 1.4, and the sun is of magnitude minus
26.

The definition of magnitude is also extended to fractions; for example,
the lights given by two candles which are placed at 100 feet and 100
feet 6 inches from the observer differ in brightness by one-hundredth of
a magnitude.

A great deal of thought has been devoted to the measurement of the
brightness of stars, but I will only describe one of the methods used,
that of the great astronomer Argelander. In the neighbourhood of the
star under observation some half dozen standard stars are selected of
known invariable magnitudes, some being brighter and some fainter than
the star to be measured; so that these stars afford a visible scale of
brightness. Suppose we number them in order of increasing brightness
from 1 to 6; then the observer estimates that on a given night his star
falls between stars 2 and 3, on the next night, say between 3 and 4, and
then again perhaps it may return to between 2 and 3, and so forth. With
practice he learns to evaluate the brightness down to small fractions
of a magnitude, even a hundredth part of a magnitude is not quite
negligible.

For example, in observing the star RR Centauri five stars were in
general used for comparison by Dr Roberts, and in course of three months
he secured thereby 300 complete observations. When the period of the
cycle had been ascertained exactly, these 300 values were reduced to
mean values which appertained to certain mean places in the cycle, and
a mean light-curve was obtained in this way. Figures titled "Light curve
of RR Centauri" (Fig. 5) and "The light-curve and system of Beta Lyrae"
(Fig. 7) show examples of light curves.

I shall now follow out the results of the observation of RR Centauri
not only because it affords the easiest way of explaining these
investigations, but also because it is one of the stars which furnishes
the most striking results in connection with the object of this essay.
(See "Monthly notices R.A.S." Vol. 63, 1903, page 527.) This star has
a mean magnitude of about 7 1/2, and it is therefore invisible to
the naked eye. Its period of variability is 14h 32m 10s.76, the last
refinement of precision being of course only attained in the final
stages of reduction. Twenty-nine mean values of the magnitude were
determined, and they were nearly equally spaced over the whole cycle of
changes. The black dots in Fig. 5 exhibit the mean values determined by
Dr Roberts. The last three dots on the extreme right are merely the same
as the first three on the extreme left, and are repeated to show how
the next cycle would begin. The smooth dotted curve will be explained
hereafter, but, by reference to the scale of magnitudes on the margins
of the figure, it may be used to note that the dots might be brought
into a perfectly smooth curve by shifting some few of the dots by about
a hundredth of a magnitude.

This light-curve presents those characteristics which are due to
successive eclipses, but the exact form of the curve must depend on the
nature of the two mutually eclipsing stars. If we are to interpret the
curve with all possible completeness, it is necessary to make certain
assumptions as to the stars. It is assumed then that the stars are
equally bright all over their disks, and secondly that they are not
surrounded by an extensive absorptive atmosphere. This last appears to
me to be the most dangerous assumption involved in the whole theory.

Making these assumptions, however, it is found that if each of the
eclipsing stars were spherical it would not be possible to generate such
a curve with the closest accuracy. The two stars are certainly close
together, and it is obvious that in such a case the tidal forces
exercised by each on the other must be such as to elongate the figure
of each towards the other. Accordingly it is reasonable to adopt the
hypothesis that the system consists of a pair of elongated ellipsoids,
with their longest axes pointed towards one another. No supposition
is adopted a priori as to the ratio of the two masses, or as to their
relative size or brightness, and the orbit may have any degree of
eccentricity. These last are all to be determined from the nature of the
light-curve.

In the case of RR Centauri, however, Dr Roberts finds the conditions are
best satisfied by supposing the orbit to be circular, and the sizes and
masses of the components to be equal, while their luminosities are to
one another in the ratio of 4 to 3. As to their shapes he finds them
to be so much elongated that they overlap, as exhibited in his figure
titled "The shape of the star RR Centauri" (Fig. 6.). The dotted curve
shows a form of equilibrium of rotating liquid as computed by me some
years before, and it was added for the sake of comparison.

On turning back to Fig. 5 the reader will see in the smooth dotted curve
the light variation which would be exhibited by such a binary system as
this. The curve is the result of computation and it is impossible not to
be struck by the closeness of the coincidence with the series of black
dots which denote the observations.

It is virtually certain that RR Centauri is a case of an eclipsing
binary system, and that the two stars are close together. It is not
of course proved that the figures of the stars are ellipsoids, but
gravitation must deform them into a pair of elongated bodies, and, on
the assumptions that they are not enveloped in an absorptive atmosphere
and that they are ellipsoidal, their shapes must be as shown in the
figure.

This light-curve gives an excellent illustration of what we have reason
to believe to be a stage in the evolution of stars, when a single star
is proceeding to separate into a binary one.

As the star is faint, there is as yet no direct spectroscopic evidence
of orbital motion. Let us turn therefore to the case of another star,
namely V Puppis, in which such evidence does already exist. I give an
account of it, because it presents a peculiarly interesting confirmation
of the correctness of the theory.

In 1895 Pickering announced in the "Harvard Circular" No. 14 that the
spectroscopic observations at Arequipa proved V Puppis to be a double
star with a period of 3d 2h 46m. Now when Roberts discussed its
light-curve he found that the period was 1d 10h 54m 27s, and on account
of this serious discrepancy he effected the reduction only on the simple
assumption that the two stars were spherical, and thus obtained a fairly
good representation of the light-curve. It appeared that the orbit was
circular and that the two spheres were not quite in contact. Obviously
if the stars had been assumed to be ellipsoids they would have been
found to overlap, as was the case for RR Centauri. ("Astrophysical
Journ." Vol. XIII. (1901), page 177.) The matter rested thus for some
months until the spectroscopic evidence was re-examined by Miss Cannon
on behalf of Professor Pickering, and we find in the notes on page
177 of Vol. XXVIII. of the "Annals of the Harvard Observatory" the
following: "A.G.C. 10534. This star, which is the Algol variable V
Puppis, has been found to be a spectroscopic binary. The period 1d.454
(i.e. 1d 10h 54m) satisfies the observations of the changes in light,
and of the varying separation of the lines of the spectrum. The spectrum
has been examined on 61 plates, on 23 of which the lines are double."
Thus we have valuable evidence in confirmation of the correctness of the
conclusions drawn from the light-curve. In the circumstances, however,
I have not thought it worth while to reproduce Dr Roberts's provisional
figure.

I now turn to the conclusions drawn a few years previously by another
observer, where we shall find the component stars not quite in contact.
This is the star Beta Lyrae which was observed by Goodricke, Argelander,
Belopolsky, Schur, Markwick and by many others. The spectroscopic method
has been successfully applied in this case, and the component stars are
proved to move in an orbit about one another. In 1897, Mr. G.W. Myers
applied the theory of eclipses to the light-curve, on the hypothesis
that the stars are elongated ellipsoids, and he obtained the interesting
results exhibited in Fig. 7. ("Astrophysical Journ." Vol. VII. (1898),
page 1.)

The period of Beta Lyrae is relatively long, being 12d 21h 47m, the
orbit is sensibly eccentric, and the two spheroids are not so much
elongated as was the case with RR Centauri. The mass of the system is
enormous, one of the two stars being 10 times and the other 21 times as
heavy as our sun.

Further illustrations of this subject might be given, but enough has
been said to explain the nature of the conclusions which have been drawn
from this class of observation.

In my account of these remarkable systems the consideration of one very
important conclusion has been purposely deferred. Since the light-curve
is explicable by eclipses, it follows that the sizes of the two stars
are determinable relatively to the distance between them. The period of
their orbital motion is known, being identical with the complete period
of the variability of their light, and an easy application of Kepler's
law of periodic times enables us to compute the sum of the masses of the
two stars divided by the cube of the distance between their centres.
Now the sizes of the bodies being known, the mean density of the whole
system may be calculated. In every case that density has been found to
be much less than the sun's, and indeed the average of a number of mean
densities which have been determined only amounts to one-eighth of that
of the sun. In some cases the density is extremely small, and in no case
is it quite so great as half the solar density.

It would be absurd to suppose that these stars can be uniform in
density throughout, and from all that is known of celestial bodies it
is probable that they are gaseous in their external parts with great
condensation towards their centres. This conclusion is confirmed by
arguments drawn from the theory of rotating masses of liquid. (See J.H.
Jeans, "On the density of Algol variables", "Astrophysical Journ." Vol.
XXII. (1905), page 97.)

Although, as already explained, a good deal is known about the shapes
and the stability of figures consisting of homogeneous incompressible
liquid in rotation, yet comparatively little has hitherto been
discovered about the equilibrium of rotating gaseous stars. The figures
calculated for homogeneous liquid can obviously only be taken to afford
a general indication of the kind of figure which we might expect to find
in the stellar universe. Thus the dotted curve in Fig. 5, which exhibits
one of the figures which I calculated, has some interest when placed
alongside the figures of the stars in RR Centauri, as computed from the
observations, but it must not be accepted as the calculated form of such
a system. I have moreover proved more recently that such a figure of
homogeneous liquid is unstable. Notwithstanding this instability it does
not necessarily follow that the analogous figure for compressible fluid
is also unstable, as will be pointed out more fully hereafter.

Professor Jeans has discussed in a paper of great ability the difficult
problems offered by the conditions of equilibrium and of stability of a
spherical nebula. ("Phil. Trans. R.S." Vol. CXCIX. A (1902), page 1. See
also A. Roberts, "S. African Assoc. Adv. Sci." Vol. I. (1903), page 6.)
In a later paper ("Astrophysical Journ." Vol. XXII. (1905), page 97.),
in contrasting the conditions which must govern the fission of a star
into two parts when the star is gaseous and compressible with the
corresponding conditions in the case of incompressible liquid, he points
out that for a gaseous star (the agency which effects the separation
will no longer be rotation alone; gravitation also will tend towards
separation... From numerical results obtained in the various papers of
my own,... I have been led to the conclusion that a gravitational
instability of the kind described must be regarded as the primary agent
at work in the actual evolution of the universe, Laplace's rotation
playing only the secondary part of separating the primary and satellite
after the birth of the satellite.)

It is desirable to add a word in explanation of the expression
"gravitational instability" in this passage. It means that when the
concentration of a gaseous nebula (without rotation) has proceeded to
a certain stage, the arrangement in spherical layers of equal density
becomes unstable, and a form of bifurcation has been reached. For
further concentration concentric spherical layers become unstable, and
the new stable form involves a concentration about two centres. The
first sign of this change is that the spherical layers cease to be
quite concentric and then the layers of equal density begin to assume
a somewhat pear-shaped form analogous to that which we found to occur
under rotation for an incompressible liquid. Accordingly it appears that
while a sphere of liquid is stable a sphere of gas may become unstable.
Thus the conditions of stability are different in these two simple
cases, and it is likely that while certain forms of rotating liquid are
unstable the analogous forms for gas may be stable. This furnishes a
reason why it is worth while to consider the unstable forms of rotating
liquid.

There can I think be little doubt but that Jeans is right in looking to
gravitational instability as the primary cause of fission, but when we
consider that a binary system, with a mass larger than the sun's, is
found to rotate in a few hours, there seems reason to look to rotation
as a contributory cause scarcely less important than the primary one.

With the present extent of our knowledge it is only possible to
reconstruct the processes of the evolution of stars by means of
inferences drawn from several sources. We have first to rely on the
general principles of stability, according to which we are to look for a
series of families of forms, each terminating in an unstable form, which
itself becomes the starting-point of the next family of stable forms.
Secondly we have as a guide the analogy of the successive changes in
the evolution of ideal liquid stars; and thirdly we already possess some
slender knowledge as to the equilibrium of gaseous stars.

From these data it is possible to build up in outline the probable
history of binary stars. Originally the star must have been single, it
must have been widely diffused, and must have been endowed with a slow
rotation. In this condition the strata of equal density must have been
of the planetary form. As it cooled and contracted the symmetry round
the axis of rotation must have become unstable, through the effects of
gravitation, assisted perhaps by the increasing speed of rotation. (I
learn from Professor Jeans that he now (December 1908) believes that
he can prove that some small amount of rotation is necessary to induce
instability in the symmetrical arrangement.) The strata of equal
density must then become somewhat pear-shaped, and afterwards like an
hour-glass, with the constriction more pronounced in the internal than
in the external strata. The constrictions of the successive strata then
begin to rupture from the inside progressively outwards, and when at
length all are ruptured we have the twin stars portrayed by Roberts and
by others.

As we have seen, the study of the forms of equilibrium of rotating
liquid is almost complete, and Jeans has made a good beginning in the
investigation of the equilibrium of gaseous stars, but much more remains
to be discovered. The field for the mathematician is a wide one, and in
proportion as the very arduous exploration of that field is attained so
will our knowledge of the processes of cosmical evolution increase.

From the point of view of observation, improved methods in the use of
the spectroscope and increase of accuracy in photometry will certainly
lead to a great increase in our knowledge within the next few years.
Probably the observational advance will be more rapid than that of
theory, for we know how extraordinary has been the success attained
within the last few years, and the theory is one of extreme difficulty;
but the two ought to proceed together hand in hand. Human life is
too short to permit us to watch the leisurely procedure of cosmical
evolution, but the celestial museum contains so many exhibits that it
may become possible, by the aid of theory, to piece together bit by bit
the processes through which stars pass in the course of their evolution.

In the sketch which I have endeavoured to give of this fascinating
subject, I have led my reader to the very confines of our present
knowledge. It is not much more than a quarter of a century since this
class of observation has claimed the close attention of astronomers;
something considerable has been discovered already and there seems
scarcely a discernible limit to what will be known in this field a
century from now. Some of the results which I have set forth may then be
shown to be false, but it seems profoundly improbable that we are being
led astray by a Will-of-the-Wisp.




XXIX. THE EVOLUTION OF MATTER. By W.C.D. Whetham, M.A., F.R.S.

Trinity College, Cambridge.


The idea of evolution in the organic world, made intelligible by the
work of Charles Darwin, has little in common with the recent conception
of change in certain types of matter. The discovery that a process of
disintegration may take place in some at least of the chemical atoms,
previously believed to be indestructible and unalterable, has modified
our view of the physical universe, even as Darwin's scheme of the mode
of evolution changed the trend of thought concerning the organic world.
Both conceptions have in common the idea of change throughout extended
realms of space and time, and, therefore, it is perhaps not unfitting
that some account of the most recent physical discoveries should be
included in the present volume.

The earliest conception of the evolution of matter is found in the
speculation of the Greeks. Leucippus and Democritus imagined unchanging
eternal atoms, Heracleitus held that all things were in a continual
state of flux--Panta rei.

But no one in the Ancient World--no one till quite modern times--could
appreciate the strength of the position which the theory of the
evolution of matter must carry before it wins the day. Vague
speculation, even by the acute minds of philosophers, is of little use
in physical science before experimental facts are available. The true
problems at issue cannot even be formulated, much less solved, till the
humble task of the observer and experimenter has given us a knowledge of
the phenomena to be explained.

It was only through the atomic theory, at first apparently diametrically
opposed to it, that the conception of evolution in the physical world
was to gain an established place. For a century the atomic theory, when
put into a modern form by Dalton, led farther and farther away from
the idea of change in matter. The chemical elements seemed quite
unalterable, and the atoms, of which each element in modern view is
composed, bore to Clerk Maxwell, writing about 1870, "the stamp of
manufactured articles" exactly similar in kind, unchanging, eternal.

Nevertheless throughout these years, on the whole so unfavourable to its
existence, there persisted the idea of a common origin of the distinct
kinds of matter known to chemists. Indeed, this idea of unity in
substance in nature seems to accord with some innate desire or intimate
structure of the human mind. As Mr Arthur Balfour well puts it, "There
is no a priori reason that I know of for expecting that the material
world should be a modification of a single medium, rather than a
composite structure built out of sixty or seventy elementary substances,
eternal and eternally different. Why then should we feel content with
the first hypothesis and not with the second? Yet so it is. Men of
science have always been restive under the multiplication of entities.
They have eagerly watched for any sign that the different chemical
elements own a common origin, and are all compounded out of some
primordial substance. Nor, for my part, do I think that such instincts
should be ignored... that they exist is certain; that they modify the
indifferent impartiality of pure empiricism can hardly be denied."
("Report of the 74th Meeting of the British Association" (Presidential
Address, Cambridge 1904), page 9, London, 1905.)

When Dalton's atomic theory had been in existence some half century, it
was noted that certain numerical relations held good between the atomic
weights of elements chemically similar to one another. Thus the weight
(88) of an atom of strontium compared with that of hydrogen as unity,
is about the mean of those of calcium (40) and barium (137). Such
relations, in this and other chemical groups, were illustrated by
Beguyer de Chancourtois in 1862 by the construction of a spiral diagram
in which the atomic weights are placed in order round a cylinder and
elements chemically similar are found to fall on vertical lines.

Newlands seems to have been the first to see the significance of such
a diagram. In his "law of octaves," formulated in 1864, he advanced
the hypothesis that, if arranged in order of rising atomic weight, the
elements fell into groups, so that each eighth element was chemically
similar. Stated thus, the law was too definite; no room was left for
newly-discovered elements, and some dissimilar elements were perforce
grouped together.

But in 1869 Mendeleeff developed Newland's hypothesis in a form that
attracted at once general attention. Placing the elements in order of
rising atomic weight, but leaving a gap where necessary to bring similar
elements into vertical columns, he obtained a periodic table with
natural vacancies to be filled as new elements were discovered, and with
a certain amount of flexibility at the ends of the horizontal lines.
From the position of the vacancies, the general chemical and physical
properties of undiscovered elements could be predicted, and the
success of such predictions gave a striking proof of the usefulness of
Mendeleeff's generalisation.

When the chemical and physical properties of the elements were known
to be periodic functions of their atomic weights, the idea of a common
origin and common substance became much more credible. Differences in
atomic weight and differences in properties alike might reasonably be
explained by the differences in the amount of the primordial substance
present in the various atoms; an atom of oxygen being supposed to be
composed of sixteen times as much stuff as the atom of hydrogen, but to
be made of the same ultimate material. Speculations about the mode of
origin of the elements now began to appear, and put on a certain air
of reality. Of these speculations perhaps the most detailed was that of
Crookes, who imagined an initial chaos of a primordial medium he named
protyle, and a process of periodic change in which the chemical elements
successively were precipitated.

From another side too, suggestions were put forward by Sir Norman
Lockyer and others that the differences in spectra observed in
different classes of stars, and produced by different conditions in
the laboratory, were to be explained by changes in the structure of the
vibrating atoms.

The next step in advance gave a theoretical basis for the idea of a
common structure of matter, and was taken in an unexpected direction.
Clerk Maxwell's electromagnetic theory of light, accepted in England,
was driven home to continental minds by the confirmatory experiments of
Hertz, who in 1888 detected and measured the electromagnetic waves
that Maxwell had described twenty years earlier. But, if light be an
electromagnetic phenomenon, the light waves radiated by hot bodies must
take their origin in the vibrations of electric systems. Hence within
the atoms must exist electric charges capable of vibration. On these
lines Lorentz and Larmor have developed an electronic theory of matter,
which is imagined in its essence to be a conglomerate of electric
charges, with electro-magnetic inertia to explain mechanical inertia.
(Larmor, "Aether and Matter", Cambridge, 1900.) The movement of electric
charges would be affected by a magnetic field, and hence the discovery
by Zeeman that the spectral lines of sodium were doubled by a strong
magnetic force gave confirmatory evidence to the theory of electrons.

Then came J.J. Thomson's great discovery of minute particles, much
smaller than any chemical atom, forming a common constituent of many
different kinds of matter. (Thomson, "Conduction of Electricity through
Gases" (2nd edition), Cambridge, 1906.) If an electric discharge be
passed between metallic terminals through a glass vessel containing
air at very low pressure, it is found that rectilinear rays, known
as cathode rays, proceed from the surface of the cathode or negative
terminal. Where these rays strike solid objects, they give rise to
the Rontgen rays now so well known; but it is with the cathode rays
themselves that we are concerned. When they strike an insulated
conductor, they impart to it a negative charge, and Thomson found that
they were deflected from their path both by magnetic and electric forces
in the direction in which negatively electrified particles would be
deflected. Cathode rays then were accepted as flights of negatively
charged particles, moving with high velocities. The electric and
magnetic deflections give two independent measurements which may be made
on a cathode ray, and both the deflections involve theoretically three
unknown quantities, the mass of the particles, their electric charge
and their velocity. There is strong cumulative evidence that all
such particles possess the same charge, which is identical with that
associated with a univalent atom in electrolytic liquids. The number of
unknown quantities was thus reduced to two--the mass and the velocity.
The measurement of the magnetic and electric deflections gave two
independent relations between the unknowns, which could therefore be
determined. The velocities of the cathode ray particles were found to
vary round a value about one-tenth that of light, but the mass was found
always to be the same within the limits of error, whatever the nature of
the terminals, of the residual gas in the vessel, and of the conditions
of the experiment. The mass of a cathode ray particle, or corpuscle, as
Thomson, adopting Newton's name, called it, is about the eight-hundredth
part of the mass of a hydrogen atom.

These corpuscles, found in so many different kinds of substance,
are inevitably regarded as a common constituent of matter. They are
associated each with a unit of negative electricity. Now electricity in
motion possesses electromagnetic energy, and produces effects like those
of mechanical inertia. In other words, an electric charge possesses
mass, and there is evidence to show that the effective mass of a
corpuscle increases as its velocity approaches that of light in the way
it would do if all its mass were electromagnetic. We are led therefore
to regard the corpuscle from one aspect as a disembodied charge of
electricity, and to identify it with the electron of Lorentz and Larmor.

Thus, on this theory, matter and electricity are identified; and a great
simplification of our conception of the physical structure of Nature is
reached. Moreover, from our present point of view, a common basis for
matter suggests or implies a common origin, and a process of development
possibly intelligible to our minds. The idea of the evolution of matter
becomes much more probable.

The question of the nature and physical meaning of a corpuscle or
electron remains for consideration. On the hypothesis of a universal
luminiferous aether, Larmor has suggested a centre of aethereal strain
"a place where the continuity of the medium has been broken and cemented
together again (to use a crude but effective image) without accurately
fitting the parts, so that there is a residual strain all round the
place." (Larmor, loc. cit.) Thus he explains in quasi-mechanical terms
the properties of an electron. But whether we remain content for the
time with our identification of matter and electricity, or attempt to
express both of them in terms of hypothetical aether, we have made a
great step in advance on the view that matter is made up of chemical
atoms fundamentally distinct and eternally isolated.

Such was the position when the phenomena of radio-activity threw a new
light on the problem, and, for the first time in the history of science,
gave definite experimental evidence of the transmutation of matter from
one chemical element to another.

In 1896 H. Becquerel discovered that compounds of the metal uranium
continually emitted rays capable of penetrating opaque screens and
affecting photographic plates. Like cathode and Rontgen rays, the
rays from uranium make the air through which they pass a conductor
of electricity, and this property gives the most convenient method of
detecting the rays and of measuring their intensity. An electroscope may
be made of a strip of gold-leaf attached to an insulated brass plate
and confined in a brass vessel with glass windows. When the gold-leaf is
electrified, it is repelled from the similarly electrified brass plate,
and the angle at which it stands out measures the electrification. Such
a system, if well insulated, holds its charge for hours, the leakage
of electricity through the air being very slow. But, if radio-active
radiation reach the air within, the gold-leaf falls, and the rate of
its fall, as watched through a microscope with a scale in the eye-piece,
measures the intensity of the radiation. With some form of this simple
instrument, or with the more complicated quadrant electrometer, most
radio-active measurements have been made.

It was soon discovered that the activity of uranium compounds
was proportional to the amount of uranium present in them. Thus
radio-activity is an atomic property dependent on the amount of an
element and independent of its state of chemical combination.

In a search for radio-activity in different minerals, M. and Mme Curie
found a greater effect in pitch-blende than its contents of uranium
warranted, and, led by the radio-active property alone, they succeeded,
by a long series of chemical separations, in isolating compounds of a
new and intensely radio-active substance which they named radium.

Radium resembles barium in its chemical properties, and is precipitated
with barium in the ordinary course of chemical analysis. It is separated
by a prolonged course of successive crystallisation, the chloride of
radium being less soluble than that of barium, and therefore sooner
separated from an evaporating solution. When isolated, radium chloride
has a composition, which, on the assumption that one atom of metal
combines with two of chlorine as in barium chloride, indicates that the
relative weight of the atom of radium is about 225. As thus prepared,
radium is a well-marked chemical element, forming a series of compounds
analogous to those of barium and showing a characteristic line spectrum.
But, unlike most other chemical elements, it is intensely radio-active,
and produces effects some two million times greater than those of
uranium.

In 1899 E. Rutherford, then of Montreal, discovered that the
radiation from uranium, thorium and radium was complex. (Rutherford,
"Radio-activity" (2nd edition), Cambridge, 1905.) Three types of rays
were soon distinguished. The first, named by Rutherford alpha-rays, are
absorbed by thin metal foil or a few centimetres of air. When examined
by measurements of the deflections caused by magnetic and electric
fields, the alpha-rays are found to behave as would positively
electrified particles of the magnitude of helium atoms possessing a
double ionic charge and travelling with a velocity about one-tenth that
of light. The second or beta type of radiation is much more penetrating.
It will pass through a considerable thickness of metallic foil, or many
centimetres of air, and still affect photographic plates or discharge
electroscopes. Magnetic and electric forces deflect beta-rays much
more than alpha-rays, indicating that, although the speed is greater,
approaching in some cases within five per cent. that of light, the mass
is very much less. The beta-rays must be streams of particles, identical
with those of cathode rays, possessing the minute mass of J.J. Thomson's
corpuscle, some eight-hundredth part of that of a hydrogen atom. A third
or gamma type of radiation was also detected. More penetrating even than
beta-rays, the gamma-rays have never been deflected by any magnetic
or electric force yet applied. Like Rontgen rays, it is probable that
gamma-rays are wave-pulses in the luminiferous aether, though the
possibility of explaining them as flights of non-electrified particles
is before the minds of some physicists.

Still another kind of radiation has been discovered more recently by
Thomson, who has found that in high vacua, rays become apparent which
are absorbed at once by air at any ordinary pressure.

The emission of all these different types of radiation involves a
continual drain of energy from the radio-active body. When M. and Mme
Curie had prepared as much as a gramme of radium chloride, the energy of
the radiation became apparent as an evolution of heat. The radium salt
itself, and the case containing it, absorbed the major part of the
radiation, and were thus maintained at a temperature measurably higher
than that of the surroundings. The rate of thermal evolution was such
that it appeared that one gramme of pure radium must emit about 100
gramme-calories of heat in an hour. This observation, naturally as it
follows from the phenomena previously discovered, first called attention
to the question of the source of the energy which maintains indefinitely
and without apparent diminution the wonderful stream of radiation
proceeding from a radio-active substance. In the solution of this
problem lies the point of the present essay.

In order to appreciate the evidence which bears on the question we must
now describe two other series of phenomena.

It is a remarkable fact that the intensity of the radiation from
a radio-active body is independent of the external conditions of
temperature, pressure, etc. which modify so profoundly almost all other
physical and chemical processes. Exposure to the extreme cold of liquid
air, or to the great heat of a furnace, leaves the radio-activity of a
substance unchanged, apparent exceptions to this statement having been
traced to secondary causes.

Then, it is found that radio-activity is always accompanied by some
chemical change; a new substance always appears as the parent substance
emits these radiations. Thus by chemical reactions it is possible to
separate from uranium and thorium minute quantities of radio-active
materials to which the names of uranium-X and thorium-X have been given.
These bodies behave differently from their parents uranium and thorium,
and show all the signs of distinct chemical individuality. They are
strongly radio-active, while, after the separation, the parents uranium
and thorium are found to have lost some of their radio-activity. If the
X-substances be kept, their radio-activity decays, while that of the
uranium or thorium from which they were obtained gradually rises to the
initial value it had before the separation. At any moment, the sum of
the radio-activity is constant, the activity lost by the product being
equal to that gained by the parent substance. These phenomena are
explained if we suppose that the X-product is slowly produced in the
substance of the parent, and decays at a constant rate. Uranium,
as usually seen, contains a certain amount of uranium-X, and its
radio-activity consists of two parts--that of the uranium itself, and
that of the X product. When the latter is separated by means of its
chemical reactions, its radio-activity is separated also, and the rates
of decay and recovery may be examined.

Radium and thorium, but not uranium, give rise to radio-active gases
which have been called emanations. Rutherford has shown that their
radio-activity, like that of the X products, suffers decay, while
the walls of the vessel in which the emanation is confined, become
themselves radio-active. If washed with certain acids, however, the
walls lose their activity, which is transferred to the acid, and can be
deposited by evaporation from it on to a solid surface. Here again it
is clear that the emanation gives rise to a radio-active substance which
clings to the walls of the vessel, and is soluble in certain liquids,
but not in others.

We shall return to this point, and trace farther the history of the
radio-active matter. At present we wish to emphasise the fact that, as
in other cases, the radio-activity of the emanation is accompanied
by the appearance of a new kind of substance with distinct chemical
properties.

We are now in a position to consider as a whole the evidence on the
question of the source of radio-active energy.

(1) Radio-activity is accompanied by the appearance of new chemical
substances. The energy liberated is therefore probably due to the
associated chemical change. (2) The activity of a series of compounds is
found to accompany the presence of a radio-active element, the activity
of each compound depends only on the contents of the element, and is
independent of the nature of its combination. Thus radio-activity is a
property of the element, and is not affected by its state of isolation
or chemical combination. (3) The radio-activity of a simple transient
product decays in a geometrical progression, the loss per second being
proportional to the mass of substance still left at the moment, and
independent of its state of concentration or dilution. This type of
reaction is well known in chemistry to mark a mono-molecular
change, where each molecule is dissociated or altered in structure
independently. If two or more molecules were concerned simultaneously,
the rate of reaction would depend on the nearness of the molecules
to each other, that is, to the concentration of the material. (4) The
amount of energy liberated by the change of a given mass of material far
transcends the amount set free by any known ordinary chemical action.
The activity of radium decays so slowly that it would not sink to half
its initial value in less than some two thousand years, and yet one
gramme of radium emits about 100 calories of heat during each hour of
its existence.

The energy of radio-activity is due to chemical change, but clearly
to no chemical change hitherto familiar to science. It is an atomic
property, characteristic of a given element, and the atoms undergo the
change individually, not by means of interaction among each other. The
conclusion is irresistible that we are dealing with a fundamental
change in the structure of the individual atoms, which, one by one, are
dissociating into simpler parts. We are watching the disintegration
of the "atoms" of the chemist, hitherto believed indestructible and
eternal, and measuring the liberation of some of the long-suspected
store of internal atomic energy. We have stumbled on the transmutation
dreamed by the alchemist, and discovered the process of a veritable
evolution of matter.

The transmutation theory of radio-activity was formulated by Rutherford
(Rutherford, "Radio-activity" (2nd edition), Cambridge, 1905, page 307.)
and Soddy in 1903. By its light, all recent work on the subject has been
guided; it has stood the supreme test of a hypothesis, and shown power
to suggest new investigations and to co-ordinate and explain them, when
carried out. We have summarised the evidence which led to the conception
of the theory; we have now to consider the progress which has been made
in tracing the successive disintegration of radio-active atoms.

Soon after the statement of the transmutation theory, a striking
verification of one of its consequences appeared. The measurement of
the magnetic and electric deflection of the alpha-rays suggested
to Rutherford the idea that the stream of projectiles of which they
consisted was a flight of helium atoms. Ramsay and Soddy, confining a
minute bubble of radium emanation in a fine glass tube, were able
to watch the development of the helium spectrum as, day by day, the
emanation decayed. By isolating a very narrow pencil of alpha-rays,
and watching through a microscope their impact on a fluorescent screen,
Rutherford has lately counted the individual alpha-projectiles, and
confirmed his original conclusion that their mass corresponded to that
of helium atoms and their charge to double that on a univalent atom.
("Proc. Roy. Soc." A, page 141, 1908.) Still more recently, he has
collected the alpha-particles shot through an extremely thin wall of
glass, and demonstrated by direct spectroscopic evidence the presence of
helium. ("Phil. Mag." February 1909.)

But the most thorough investigation of a radio-active pedigree is found
in Rutherford's classical researches on the successive disintegration
products of radium, in order to follow the evidence on which his results
are founded, we must describe more fully the process of decay of the
activity of a simple radio-active substance. The decay of activity of
the body known as uranium-X is shown in a falling curve (Fig. 1.). It
will be seen that, in each successive 22 days, the activity falls to
half the value it possessed at the beginning.

This change in a geometrical progression is characteristic of simple
radio-active processes, and can be expressed mathematically by a simple
exponential formula.

As we have said above, solid bodies exposed to the emanations of radium
or thorium become coated with a radio-active deposit. The rate of decay
of this activity depends on the time of exposure to the emanation, and
does not always show the usual simple type of curve. Thus the activity
of a rod exposed to radium emanation for 1 minute decays in accordance
with a curve (Fig. 2) which represents the activity as measured by the
alpha-rays. If the electroscope be screened from the alpha-rays, it is
found that the activity of the rod in beta- an gamma-rays increases for
some 35 minutes and then diminishes (Fig. 3.).

These complicated relations have been explained satisfactorily and
completely by Rutherford on the hypothesis of successive changes of
the radio-active matter into one new body after another. (Rutherford,
"Radio-activity" (2nd edition), Cambridge, 1905, page 379.) The
experimental curve represents the resultant activity of all the
matter present at a given moment, and the process of disentangling the
component effects consists in finding a number of curves, which express
the rise and fall of activity of each kind of matter as it is produced
and decays, and, fitted together, give the curve of the experiments.

Other methods of investigation also are open. They have enabled
Rutherford to complete the life-history of radium and its products, and
to clear up doubtful points left by the analysis of the curves. By the
removal of the emanation, the activity of radium itself has been shown
to consist solely of alpha-rays. This removal can be effected by passing
air through the solution of a radium salt. The emanation comes away, and
the activity of the deposit which it leaves behind decays rapidly to a
small fraction of its initial value. Again, some of the active deposits
of the emanation are more volatile than others, and can be separated
from them by the agency of heat.

From such evidence Rutherford has traced a long series of disintegration
products of radium, all but the first of which exist in much too minute
quantities to be detected otherwise than by their radio-activities.
Moreover, two of these products are not themselves appreciably
radio-active, though they are born from radio-active parents, and give
rise to a series of radio-active descendants. Their presence is inferred
from such evidence as the rise of beta and gamma radio-activity in the
solid newly deposited by the emanation; this rise measuring the growth
of the first radio-active offspring of one of the non-active bodies.
Some of the radium products give out alpha-rays only, one beta- and
gamma-rays, while one yields all three types of radiation. The pedigree
of the radium family may be expressed in the following table, the time
noted in the second column being the time required for a given quantity
to be half transformed into its next derivative.


             Time of half      Radio-       Properties
             decay             activity

  Radium     About 2600 years  alpha rays   Element chemically analogous
                                            to barium.

  Emanation  3.8 days          alpha rays   Chemically inert gas;
                                             condenses at -150 deg C.

  Radium-A   3 minutes         alpha rays   Behaves as a solid deposited on
                                             surfaces; concentrated on a
                                             negative electrode.

  Radium-B   21 minutes        no rays      Soluble in strong acids;
                                             volatile at a white heat; more
                                             volatile than A or C.

  Radium-C   28 minutes        alpha, beta, Soluble in strong acids; less
                               gamma rays    volatile than B.

  Radium-D   about 40 years    no rays      Soluble in strong acids; volatile
                                             below 1000 deg C.

  Radium-E   6 days            beta, gamma  Non-volatile at 1000 deg C.
                               rays

  Radium-F   143 days          alpha rays   Volatile at 1000 deg C.
                                             Deposited from solution on a
                                             bismuth plate.


Of these products, A, B, and C constitute that part of the active
deposit of the emanation which suffers rapid decay and nearly disappears
in a few hours. Radium-D, continually producing its short-lived
descendants E and F, remains for years on surfaces once exposed to the
emanation, and makes delicate radio-active researches impossible
in laboratories which have been contaminated by an escape of radium
emanation.

A somewhat similar pedigree has been made out in the case of thorium.
Here thorium-X is interposed between thorium and its short-lived
emanation, which decays to half its initial quantity in 54 seconds. Two
active deposits, thorium A and B, arise successively from the emanation.
In uranium, we have the one obvious derivative uranium-X, and the
question remains whether this one descent can be connected with any
other individual or family. Uranium is long-lived, and emits only
alpha-rays. Uranium-X decays to half value in 22 days, giving out beta-
and gamma-rays. Since our evidence goes to show that radio-activity is
generally accompanied by the production of new elements, it is natural
to search for the substance of uranium-X in other forms, and perhaps
under other names, rather than to surrender immediately our belief in
the conservation of matter.

With this idea in mind we see at once the significance of the
constitution of uranium minerals. Formed in the remote antiquity of
past geological ages, these minerals must become store-houses of all
the products of uranium except those which may have escaped as gases
or possibly liquids. Even gases may be expected to some extent to be
retained by occlusion. Among the contents of uranium minerals, then, we
may look for the descendants of the parent uranium. If the descendants
are permanent or more long-lived than uranium, they will accumulate
continually. If they are short-lived, they will accumulate at a steady
rate till enough is formed for the quantity disintegrating to be equal
to the quantity developed. A state of mobile equilibrium will then
be reached, and the amount of the product will remain constant. This
constant amount of substance will depend only on the amount of uranium
which is its source, and, for different minerals, if all the product
is retained, the quantity of the product will be proportional to the
quantity of uranium. In a series of analyses of uranium minerals,
therefore, we ought to be able to pick out its more short-lived
descendants by seeking for instances of such proportionality.

Now radium itself is a constituent of uranium minerals, and two series
of experiments by R.J. Strutt and B.B. Boltwood have shown that the
content of radium, as measured by the radio-activity of the emanation,
is directly proportional to the content of uranium. (Strutt, "Proc.
Roy. Soc." A, February 1905; Boltwood, "Phil. Mag." April, 1905.) In
Boltwood's investigation, some twenty minerals, with amounts of uranium
varying from that in a specimen of uraninite with 74.65 per cent.,
to that in a monazite with 0.30 per cent., gave a ratio of uranium to
radium, constant within about one part in ten.

The conclusion is irresistible that radium is a descendant of uranium,
though whether uranium is its parent or a more remote ancestor requires
further investigation by the radio-active genealogist. On the hypothesis
of direct parentage, it is easy to calculate that the amount of radium
produced in a month by a kilogramme of a uranium salt would be enough
to be detected easily by the radio-activity of its emanation. The
investigation has been attempted by several observers, and the results,
especially those of a careful experiment of Boltwood, show that from
purified uranium salts the growth of radium, if appreciable at all, is
much less than would be found if the radium was the first product of
change of the uranium. It is necessary, therefore, to look for one or
more intermediate substances.

While working in 1899 with the uranium residues used by M. and Mme
Curie for the preparation of radium, Debierne discovered and partially
separated another radio-active element which he called actinium. It
gives rise to an intermediate product actinium-X, which yields an
emanation with the short half-life of 3.9 seconds. The emanation
deposits two successive disintegration products actinium-A and
actinium-B.

Evidence gradually accumulated that the amounts of actinium in
radio-active minerals were, roughly at any rate, proportional to the
amounts of uranium. This result pointed to a lineal connection between
them, and led Boltwood to undertake a direct attack on the problem.
Separating a quantity of actinium from a kilogramme of ore, Boltwood
observed a growth of 8.5 x (10 to the power -9) gramme of radium in
193 days, agreeing with that indicated by theory within the limits of
experimental error. ("American Journal of Science", December, 1906.)
We may therefore insert provisionally actinium and its series of
derivatives between uranium and radium in the radio-active pedigree.

Turning to the other end of the radium series we are led to ask what
becomes of radium-F when in turn it disintegrates? What is the final
non-active product of the series of changes we have traced from uranium
through actinium and radium?

One such product has been indicated above. The alpha-ray particles
appear to possess the mass of helium atoms, and the growth of helium has
been detected by its spectrum in a tube of radium emanation. Moreover,
helium is found occluded in most if not all radio-active minerals in
amount which approaches, but never exceeds, the quantity suggested by
theory. We may safely regard such helium as formed by the accumulation
of alpha-ray particles given out by successive radio-active changes.

In considering the nature of the residue left after the expulsion of the
five alpha-particles, and the consequent passage of radium to radium-F
we are faced by the fact that lead is a general constituent of uranium
minerals. Five alpha-particles, each of atomic weight 4, taken from the
atomic weight (about 225) of radium gives 205--a number agreeing fairly
well with the 207 of lead. Since lead is more permanent than uranium, it
must steadily accumulate, no radio-active equilibrium will be reached,
and the amount of lead will depend on the age of the mineral as well as
on the quantity of uranium present in it. In primary minerals from
the same locality, Boltwood has shown that the contents of lead are
proportional to the amounts of uranium, while, accepting this theory,
the age of minerals with a given content of uranium may be calculated
from the amount of lead they contain. The results vary from 400 to
2000 million years. ("American Journal of Science", October, 1905, and
February, 1907.)

We can now exhibit in tabular form the amazing pedigree of radio-active
change shown by this one family of elements. An immediate descent is
indicated by >, while one which may either be immediate or involve an
intermediate step is shown by.... No place is found in this pedigree
for thorium and its derivatives. They seem to form a separate and
independent radio-active family.


                       Atomic Weight  Time of half     Radio-Activity
                                         decay

   Uranium               238.5                         alpha

   Uranium-X             ?            22 days          beta, gamma
   ...
   Actinium              ?            ?                no rays

   Actinium-X            ?            10.2 days        alpha (beta, gamma)

   Actinium Emanation    ?            3.9 seconds      alpha

   Actinium-A            ?            35.7 minutes     no rays

   Actinium-B            ?            2.15 minutes      alpha, beta, gamma
   ...
   Radium                225          about 2600 years  alpha

   Radium Emanation      ?            3.8 days          alpha

   Radium-A              ?            3 minutes         alpha

   Radium-B              ?            21 minutes        no rays

   Radium-C              ?            28 minutes        alpha, beta, gamma

   Radium-D              ?            about 40 years    no rays

   Radium-E              ?            6 days            beta (gamma)

   Radium-F              ?            143 days          alpha
   ...
   Lead                  207          ?                 no rays


As soon as the transmutation theory of radio-activity was accepted,
it became natural to speculate about the intimate structure of the
radio-active atoms, and the mode in which they broke up with the
liberation of some of their store of internal energy. How could we
imagine an atomic structure which would persist unchanged for long
periods of time, and yet eventually spontaneously explode, as here an
atom and there an atom reached a condition of instability?

The atomic theory of corpuscles or electrons fortunately was ready to
be applied to this new problem. Of the resulting speculations the most
detailed and suggestive is that of J.J. Thomson. ("Phil. Mag." March,
1904.) Thomson regards the atom as composed of a number of mutually
repelling negative corpuscles or electrons held together by some central
attractive force which he represents by supposing them immersed in a
uniform sphere of positive electricity. Under the action of the two
forces, the electrons space themselves in symmetrical patterns, which
depend on the number of electrons. Three place themselves at the corner
of an equilateral triangle, four at those of a square, and five form
a pentagon. With six, however, the single ring becomes unstable, one
corpuscle moves to the middle and five lie round it. But if we imagine
the system rapidly to rotate, the centrifugal force would enable the
six corpuscles to remain in a single ring. Thus internal kinetic energy
would maintain a configuration which would become unstable as the energy
drained away. Now in a system of electrons, electromagnetic radiation
would result in a loss of energy, and at one point of instability we
might well have a sudden spontaneous redistribution of the constituents,
taking place with an explosive violence, and accompanied by the ejection
of a corpuscle as a beta-ray, or of a large fragment of the atom as an
alpha-ray.

The discovery of the new property of radio-activity in a small number of
chemical elements led physicists to ask whether the property might not
be found in other elements, though in a much less striking form. Are
ordinary materials slightly radio-active? Does the feeble electric
conductivity always observed in the air contained within the walls of
an electroscope depend on ionizing radiations from the material of the
walls themselves? The question is very difficult, owing to the wide
distribution of slight traces of radium. Contact with radium emanation
results in a deposit of the fatal radium-D, which in 40 years is but
half removed. Is the "natural" leak of a brass electroscope due to
an intrinsic radio-activity of brass, or to traces of a radio-active
impurity on its surface? Long and laborious researches have succeeded in
establishing the existence of slight intrinsic radio-activity in a
few metals such as potassium, and have left the wider problem still
unsolved.

It should be noted, however, that, even if ordinary elements are not
radio-active, they may still be undergoing spontaneous disintegration.
The detection of ray-less changes by Rutherford, when those changes
are interposed between two radio-active transformations which can
be followed, show that spontaneous transmutation is possible without
measureable radio-activity. And, indeed, any theory of disintegration,
such as Thomson's corpuscular hypothesis, would suggest that atomic
rearrangements are of much more general occurrence than would be
apparent to one who could observe them only by the effect of the
projectiles, which, in special cases, owing to some peculiarity of
atomic configuration, happened to be shot out with the enormous velocity
needed to ionize the surrounding gas. No evidence for such ray-less
changes in ordinary elements is yet known, perhaps none may ever be
obtained; but the possibility should not be forgotten.

In the strict sense of the word, the process of atomic disintegration
revealed to us by the new science of radio-activity can hardly be called
evolution. In each case radio-active change involves the breaking up of
a heavier, more complex atom into lighter and simpler fragments. Are
we to regard this process as characteristic of the tendencies in accord
with which the universe has reached its present state, and is passing
to its unknown future? Or have we chanced upon an eddy in a backwater,
opposed to the main stream of advance? In the chaos from which the
present universe developed, was matter composed of large highly complex
atoms, which have formed the simpler elements by radio-active or
ray-less disintegration? Or did the primaeval substance consist
of isolated electrons, which have slowly come together to form the
elements, and yet have left here and there an anomaly such as that
illustrated by the unstable family of uranium and radium, or by some
such course are returning to their state of primaeval simplicity?




INDEX.

Abraxas grossulariata.

Acquired characters, transmission of.

Acraea johnstoni.

Adaptation.

Adloff.

Adlumia cirrhosa.

Agassiz, A.

Agassiz, L.

Alexander.

Allen, C.A.

Alternation of generations.

Ameghino.

Ammon, O., Works of.

Ammonites, Descent of.

Amphidesmus analis.

Anaea divina.

Andrews, C.W.

Angiosperms, evolution of.

Anglicus, Bartholomaeus.

Ankyroderma.

Anomma.

Antedon rosacea.

Antennularia antennina.

Anthropops.

Ants, modifications of.

Arber, E.A.N.,--and J. Parkin, on the origin of Angiosperms.

Archaeopteryx.

Arctic regions, velocity of development of life in.

Ardigo.

Argelander.

Argyll, Huxley and the Duke of.

Aristotle.

Arrhenius.

Asterias, Loeb on hybridisation of.

Autogamy.

Avena fatua.

Avenarius.

Bacon, on mutability of species.

Baehr, von, on Cytology.

Baer, law of von.

Bain.

Baldwin, J.M.

Balfour, A.J.

Ball, J.

Barber, Mrs M.E., on Papilio nireus.

Barclay, W.

Barratt.

Bary, de.

Bates, H.W., on Mimicry.--Letters from Darwin to.--elsewhere.

Bateson, A.

BATESON, W., on "Heredity and Variation in Modern lights".--on
discontinuous evolution.--on hybridisation.

Bateson, W. and R.P. Gregory.

Bathmism.

Beche, de la.

Beck, P.

Becquerel, H.

Beebe, C.W., on the plumage of birds.--on sexual selection.

Beguyer de Chancourtois.

Bell's (Sir Charles) "Anatomy of Expression".

Belopolsky.

Belt, T., on Mimicry.

Beneden, E. van.

Benson, M.

Bentham, G., on Darwin's species-theory.--on geographical distribution.

Bentham, Jeremy.

Bergson, H.

Berkeley.

Berthelot.

Betham, Sir W.

Bickford, E., experiments on degeneration by.

Bignonia capreolata.

Biophores.

Birds, geological history of.

Blanford, W.T.

Blaringhem, on wounding.

Blumenbach.

Bodin.

Boltwood, B.B.

Bonald, on war.

Bonnet.

Bonney, T.G.

Bonnier, G.

Bopp, F., on language.

BOUGLE C., on "Darwinism and Sociology".

Bourdeau.

Bourget, P.

Boutroux.

Boveri, T.

Brachiopods, history of.

Brassica, hybrids of.

Brassica Napus.

Broca.

Brock, on Kant.

Brown, Robert.

Brugmann and Osthoff.

Brugmann.

Brunetiere.

Bruno, on Evolution.

Buch, von.

Bucher, K.

Buckland.

Buckle.

Buffon.

Burchell, W.J.

Burck, W.

Burdon-Sanderson, J., letter from.

BURY, J.B., on "Darwinism and History".

Butler, A.G.

Butler, Samuel.

Butschli, O.

Butterflies, mimicry in.--sexual characters in.

Cabanis.

Campbell.

Camels, geological history of.

Camerarius, R.J.

Candolle, A. de.

Cannon and Davenport, experiments on Daphniae by.

Capsella bursapastoris.

Carneri.

Castnia linus.

Catasetum barbatum.

Catasetum tridentatum.

Caterpillars, variation in.

Celosia, variability of.

Cereals, variability in.

Cesnola, experiments on Mantis by.

Chaerocampa, colouring of.

Chambers, R., "The Vestiges of Creation" by.

Chromosomes and Chromomeres.

Chun.

Cieslar, experiments by.

Circumnutation, Darwin on.

Claus.

Cleistogamy.

Clerke, Miss A.

Clodd, E.

Cluer.

Clytus arietis.

Coadaptation.

Codrington.

Cohen and Peter.

Collingwood.

Colobopsis truncata.

Colour, E.B. Poulton on The Value in the Struggle for life
of.--influence and temperature on changes in.--in relation to Sexual
Selection.

Colours, incidental.--warning.

Comte, A.

Condorcet.

Cope.

Coral reefs, Darwin's work on.

Correlation of organisms, Darwin's idea of the.

Correlation of parts.

Corydalis claviculata.

Cournot.

Couteur, Col. Le.

Crooks, Sir William.

Cruger, on Orchids.

Cunningham and Marchand, on the brain.

Curie, M. and Mme.

Cuvier.

Cycadeoidea dacotensis.

Cycads, geological history of.

Cystidea, an ancient group.

Cytology and heredity.

Cytolysis and fertilisation.

Czapek.

Dalton's atomic theory.

Dana, J.D., on marine faunas.

Danaida chrysippus.

Danaida genutia.

Danaida plexippus.

Dante.

Dantec, Le,

Darwin, Charles, as an Anthropologist.--on ants.--and the "Beagle"
Voyage.--on the Biology of Flowers.--as a Botanist.--his influence on
Botany.--and S. Butler.--at Cambridge.--on Cirripedia.--on climbing
plants.--on colour.--on coral reefs.--on the Descent of Man.--his work
on Drosera.--at Edinburgh.--his influence on Animal Embryology.--on
Geographical Distribution.--his work on Earthworms.--evolutionist
authors referred to in the "Origin" by.--and E. Forbes.--on the
geological record.--and Geology.--his early love for geology.--his
connection with the Geological Society of London.--and Haeckel.--and
Henslow.--and History.--and Hooker.--and Huxley.--on ice-action.--on
igneous rocks.--on Lamarck.--on Language.--his Scientific Library.--and
the Linnean Society.--and Lyell.--and Malthus.--on Patrick Matthew.--on
mental evolution.--on Mimicry.--a "Monistic Philosopher."--on the
movements of plants.--on Natural Selection.--a "Naturalist for
Naturalists."--on Paley.

Darwin, Charles, his Pangenesis hypothesis.--on the permanence
of continents.--his personality.--his influence on
Philosophy.--predecessors of.--his views on religion, etc.--his
influence on religious thought.--his influence on the study of
religions.--his methods of research.--and Sedgwick.--on Sexual
Selection.--the first germ of his species theory.--on H.
Spencer.--causes of his success.--on Variation.--on the "Vestiges
of Creation".--on volcanic islands.--and Wallace.--letter to Wallace
from.--letter to E.B. Wilson from.

Darwin, E., on the colour of animals.--Charles Darwin's reference
to.--on evolution.

DARWIN, F., on "Darwin's work on the Movements of Plants".--on Darwin
as a botanist.--observations on Earthworms by.--on Lamarckism.--on
Memory.--on Prichard's "Anticipations".--various.

DARWIN, SIR G., on "The Genesis of Double Stars".--on the earth's mass.

Darwin, H.

Darwin, W.

Darwinism, Sociology, Evolution and.

Davenport and Cannon, experiments on Daphniae by.

David, T.E., his work on Funafuti.

Death, cause of natural.

Debey, on Cretaceous plants.

Debierne.

Degeneration.

Delage, experiments on parthenogenesis by.

Delbruck.

Democritus.

Deniker.

Descartes.

Descent, history of doctrine of.

"Descent of Man", G. Schwalbe on "The".--Darwin on Sexual Selection in
"The".--rejection in Germany of "The".

Desmatippus.

Desmoulins, A., on Geographical Distribution.

Detto.

Development, effect of environment on.

Dianthus caryophyllus.

Diderot.

Digitalis purpurea.

Dimorphism, seasonal.

Dismorphia astynome.

Dismorphia orise.

Distribution, H. Gadow on Geographical.--Sir W. Thiselton-Dyer on.

Dittrick, O.

Dixey, F.A., on the scent of Butterflies.

Dolichonyx oryzivorus.

Dorfmeister.

Down, Darwin at.

Draba verna.

Dragomirov.

Driesch, experiments by.--elsewhere.

Drosera, Darwin's work on.

Dryopithecus.

Dubois, E., on Pithecanthropus.

Duhring.

Duhamel.

Duncan, J.S.

Duncan, P.B.

Duns Scotus.

Duret, C.

Durkheim, on division of labour.

Dutrochet.

Echinoderms, ancestry of.

Ecology.

Eimer.

Ekstam.

Elephants, geological history of.

Elymnias phegea.

E. undularis.

Embleton, A.L.

Embryology, A. Sedgwick on the influence of Darwin on.

Embryology, as a clue to Phylogeny.--the Origin of Species and.

Empedocles.

Engles.

Environment, action of.--Klebs on the influence on plants of.--Loeb on
experimental study in relation to.

Eohippus.

Epicurus, a poet of Evolution.

Eristalis.

Ernst.

Ernst, A., on the Flora of Krakatau.

Eschscholzia californica.

Espinas.

Eudendrium racemosum.

Evolution, in relation to Astronomy.--and creation.--conception
of.--discontinuous.--experimental.--factors of.--fossil plants
as evidence of.--and language.--of matter, W.C.D. Whetham
on.--mental.--Lloyd Morgan on mental factors in.--Darwinism and
Social.--Saltatory.--Herbert Spencer on.--Uniformitarian.--Philosophers
and modern methods of studying.

Expression of the Emotions.

Fabricius, J.C., on geographical distribution.

Farmer, J.B.

Farrer, Lord.

Fearnsides, W.G.

Felton, S., on protective resemblance.

Ferri.

Ferrier, his work on the brain.

Fertilisation, experimental work on animal-.

Fertilisation of Flowers.

Fichte.

Field, Admiral A.M.

Fischer, experiments on Butterflies by.

Fitting.

Flemming, W.

Flourens.

Flowering plants, ancestry of.

Flowers, K. Goebel on the Biology of.

Flowers and Insects.

Flowers, relation of external influences to the production of.

Fol, H.

Forbes, E.--and C. Darwin.

Ford, S.O. and A.C. Seward, on the Araucarieae.

Fossil Animals, W.B. Scott on their bearing on evolution.

Fossil Plants, D.H. Scott on their bearing on evolution.

Fouillee.

Fraipont, on skulls from Spy.

FRAZER, J.G., on "Some Primitive Theories of the Origin of
Man".--various.

Fruwirth.

Fumaria officinalis.

Funafuti, coral atoll of.

Fundulus.

F. heteroclitus.

GADOW, H., on "Geographical Distribution of Animals".--elsewhere.

Gartner, K.F.

Gallus bankiva.

Galton, F.

Gamble, F.W. and F.W. Keeble.

Gasca, La.

Geddes, P.

Geddes, P. and A.W. Thomson.

Gegenbauer.

Geikie, Sir A.

Geitonogamy.

Genetics.

Geographical Distribution of Animals.--of Plants.--influence of "The
Origin of Species" on.--Wallace's contribution to.

Geography of former periods, reconstruction of.

Geology, Darwin and.

Geranium spinosum.

Germ-plasm, continuity of.--Weismann on.

Germinal Selection.

Gibbon.

Gilbert.

GILES, P., on "Evolution and the Science of Language".

Giuffrida-Ruggeri.

Giotto.

Gizycki.

Glossopteris Flora.

Gmelin.

Godlewski, on hybridisation.

GOEBEL, K., on "The Biology of Flowers".--his work on Morphology.

Goethe and Evolution.--on the relation between Man and
Mammals.--elsewhere.

Goldfarb.

Gondwana Land.

Goodricke, J.

Gore, Dr.

Gorjanovic-Kramberger.

Gosse, P.H.

Grabau, A.W., on Fusus.

Grand'Eury, F.C., on fossil plants.

Grapta C. album.

Gravitation, effect on life-phenomena of.

Gray, Asa.

Gregoire, V.

Groom, T.T., on heliotropism.

Groos.

Grunbaum, on the brain.

Guignard, L.

Gulick.

Guppy, on plant-distribution.

Guyau.

Gwynne-Vaughan, D.T., on Osmundaceae.

Gymnadenia conopsea.

Haberlandt, G.

Haddon, A.C.

HAECKEL, E., on "Charles Darwin as an Anthropologist".--on Colour.--and
Darwin.--on the Descent of Man.--contributions to Evolution by.

Haeckel, E., on Lamarck.--on Language.--a leader in the Darwinian
controversy.--on Lyell's influence on Darwin.--various.

Hacker.

Hagedoorn, on hybridisation.

Hales, S.

Hansen.

Harker, A.

HARRISON, J.E., on "The Influence of Darwinism on the Study of
Religions".

Hartmann, von.

Harvey.

Haupt, P., on Language.

Haycraft.

Hays, W.M.

Hegel.

Heliconius narcaea.

Heliotropism in animals.

Henslow, Rev. J.S. and Darwin.

Hensen, Van.

Herbst, his experiments on sea urchins.

Heracleitus.

Herder.

Heredity and Cytology.--Haeckel on.--and Variation.--various.

Hering, E., on Memory.

Herschel, J.

Hertwig, R.

Hertwig, O.

Hertz.

Heteromorphosis.

Heterostylism.

Heuser, E.

Hewitt.

Heyse's theory of language.

Hinde, G.J., his work on Funafuti.

Hipparion.

Hippolyte cranchii.

Hirase.

History, Darwin and.

Hobbes, T.

Hobhouse.

HOFFDING, H., on "The Influence of the Conception of Evolution on Modern
Philosophy".

Hofmeister, W.

Holmes, S.J., on Arthropods.

Holothurians, calcareous bodies in skin of.

Homo heidelbergensis.

Homo neandertalensis.

Homo pampaeus.

Homo primigenius.

Homunculus.

Hooker, Sir J.D., and Darwin.--on Distribution of Plants.--on
Ferns.--Letter to the Editor from.

Horner, L.

Horse, Geological history of the.

Huber.

Hubert and Mauss.

Hubrecht, A.R.W.

Hugel, F. von.

Humboldt, A. von.

Humboldt, W. von.

Hume.

Hutcheson.

Hutton.

Huxley, T.H., and Darwin.--and the Duke of Argyll.--on Embryology.--on
Geographical Distribution.--on Lamarck.--Letter to J.W. Judd from.--on
Lyell.--on Man.--on "The Origin of Species".--on Selection.--on
Teleology.--on transmission of acquired characters.--various.

Hybridisation.

Hybrids, Sterility of.

Hyracodon.

Iberis umbellata.

Ikeno.

Imperfection of the Geological Record.

Ingenhousz, on plant physiology.

Inheritance of acquired characters.

Insects and Flowers.

Instinct.

Instincts, experimental control of animal.

Ipomaea purpurea.

Irish Elk, an example of co-adaptation.

Jacobian figures.

Jacoby, "Studies in Selection" by.

James, W.

Janczewski.

Jeans, J.H.

Jennings, H.S., on Paramoecium.

Jentsch.

Jespersen, Prof., Theory of.

Johannsen, on Species.

Jones, Sir William, on Language.

Jordan.

JUDD, J.W., on "Darwin and Geology".

Kallima, protective colouring of.

Kallima inachis.

Kammerer's experiments on Salamanders.

Kant, I.

Keane, on the Primates.

Keeble, F.W. and F.W. Gamble, on Colour-change.

Keith, on Anthropoid Apes.

Kellogg, V., on heliotropism.

Kepler.

Kerguelen Island.

Kidd.

Kidston, R., on fossil plants.

Killmann, on origin of human races.

King, Sir George.

Klaatsch, on Ancestry of Man.

Klaatsch and Hauser.

KLEBS, G., on "The influence of Environment on the forms of plants".

Kniep.

Knies.

Knight, A., experiments on plants by.--on Geotropism.

Knight-Darwin law.

Knuth.

Kolliker, his views on Evolution.

Kolreuter, J.G.

Kohl.

Korschinsky.

Kowalevsky, on fossil horses.

Krakatau, Ernst on the Flora of.

Krause, E.

Kreft, Dr.

Kropotkin.

Kupelwieser, on hybridisation.

Lagopus hyperboreus.

Lamarck, his division of the Animal Kingdom.--Darwin's opinion of.--on
Evolution.--on Man.--various.

Lamarckian principle.

Lamb, C.

Lamettrie.

Lamprecht.

Lanessan, J.L. de.

Lang.

Lange.

Language, Darwin on.--Evolution and the Science of.--various.

Lankester, Sir E. Ray, on degeneration.--on educability.--on the
germ-plasm theory.--elsewhere.

Lapouge, Vacher de.

Larmor, J.

Lartet, M.E.

Lassalle.

Lathyrus odoratus.

Lavelaye, de.

Lawrence, W.

Lehmann.

Lehmann-Nitsche.

Leibnitz.

Lepidium Draba.

Lepidoptera, variation in.

Leskien, A., on language.

Lessing.

Leucippus.

Levi, E.

Lewes, G.H.

Lewin, Capt.

Liapounoff.

Liddon, H.P.

Light, effect on organisms of.

Limenitis archippus.--arthemis.

Linnaeus.

Livingstone, on plant-forms.

Llamas, geological history of.

Lockyer, Sir N.

Locy, W.A.

LOEB, J., on "The Experimental Study of the influence of environment on
Animals.

Loew, E.

Longstaff, G.B., on the Scents of Butterflies.

Lorentz.

Lotsy, J.P.

Love, A.E.W.

Lovejoy.

Lubbock.

Lucas, K.

Lucretius, a poet of Evolution.

Lumholtz, C.

Luteva macrophthalma.

Lycorea halia.

Lyell, Sir Charles, and Darwin.--the influence of.--on geographical
distribution.--on "The Origin of Species".--on the permanence of
Ocean-basins.--publication of the "Principles" by.--the uniformitarian
teaching of.

Lythrum salicaria.

Macacus, ear of.

MacDougal, on wounding.

Mach, E.

Macromytis flexuosa, colour-change in.

Magic and religion.

Mahoudeau.

Maillet, de.

Majewski.

Malthus, his influence on Darwin.--various.

Mammalia, history of.

Man, Descent of.--J.G. Frazer on some primitive theories of the origin
of.--mental and moral qualities of animals and.--pre-Darwinian views on
the Descent of.--religious views of primitive.--Tertiary flints worked
by.

"Man", G. Schwalbe on Darwin's "Descent of".

Manouvrier.

Mantis religiosa, colour experiments on.

Marett, R.R.

Markwick.

Marshall, G.A.K.

Marx.

Massart.

Masters, M.

Matonia pectinata.

Matthew, P., and Natural Selection.

Maupertuis.

Maurandia semperflorens.

Mauss and Herbert.

Mauthner.

Maxwell.

Maxwell, Clerk.

Mayer, R.

Mechanitis lysimnia.

Meehan, T.

Meldola, R., Letters from Darwin to.

Melinaea ethra.

Mendel.

Mendeleeff.

Merrifield.

Merz, J.T.

Mesembryanthemum truncatum.

Mesohippus.

Mesopithecus.

Metschnikoff.

Mill, J.S.

Mimicry.--H.W. Bates on.--F. Muller on.

Mimulus luteus.

Miquel, F.W.A.

Mobius.

Mohl, H. von.

Moltke, on war.

Monachanthus viridis.

Monkeys, fossil.

Montesquieu.

Montgomery, T.H.

Monstrosoties.

Monticelli.

Moore, J.E.S.

MORGAN, C. LLOYD, on "Mental Factors in Evolution".--on Organic
Selection.

Morgan, T.H.

Morse, E.S., on colour.

Morselli.

Mortillet.

Moseley.

Mottier, M.

Muller, Fritz, "Fur Darwin" by.--on Mimicry.

Muller, Fritz.

Muller, J.

Muller, Max, on language.

Murray, A., on geographical distribution.

Murray, G.

Mutability.

Mutation.

Myanthus barbatus.

Myers, G.W., on Eclipses.

Nageli.

Nathorst, A.G.

Nathusius.

Natural Selection, and adaptation.--Darwin's views on.--Darwin and
Wallace on.--and design.--and educability.--Fossil plants in relation
to.--and human development.--and Mimicry.--and Mutability.--various.

Naudin.

Neandertal skulls.

Nemec.

Neoclytus curvatus.

Neodarwinism.

Neumayr, M.

Newton, A.

Newton, I.

Niebuhr.

Nietzsche.

Nilsson, on cereals.

Nitsche.

Noire.

Noll.

Novicow.

Nuclear division.

Nussbaum, M.

Nuttall, G.H.F.

Occam.

Odin.

Oecology, see Ecology.

Oenothera biennis.

Oenothera gigas.

Oenothera Lamarckiana.

Oenothera muricata.

Oenothera nanella.

Oestergren, on Holothurians.

Oken, L.

Oliver, F.W., on Palaeozoic Seeds.

Ononis minutissima.

Ophyrs apifera.

Orchids, Darwin's work on the fertilisation of.

Organic Selection.

"Origin of Species", first draft of the.--geological chapter in the.

Orthogenesis.

Ortmann, A.E.

Osborn, H.F.--"From the Greeks to Darwin" by.

Osthoff and Brugmann.

Ostwald, W.

Ovibos moschatus.

Owen, Sir Richard.

Oxford, Ashmolean Museum at.

Packard, A.S.

Palaeontological Record, D.H. Scott on the.--W.B. Scott on the.

Palaeopithecus.

Paley.

Palitzch, G.

Palm.

Pangenesis.

Panmixia, Weismann's principle of.

Papilio dardanus.

Papilio meriones.

Papilio merope.

Papilio nireus.

Paramoecium, Jennings on.

Parker, G.H., on Butterflies.

Parkin, J. and E.A.N. Arber, on the origin of Angiosperms.

Parthenogenesis, artificial.

Paul, H. and Wundt.

Pearson, K.

Peckham, Dr and Mrs, on the Attidae.

Penck.

Penzig.

Peripatus, distribution of.

Peridineae.

Permanence of continents.

Perrier, E.

Perrhybris pyrrha.

Perthes, B. de.

Peter, on sea urchin's eggs.

Petunia violacea.

Pfeffer, W.

Pfitzner, W.

Pflueger.

Phillips.

Philosophy, influence of the conception of evolution on modern.

Phryniscus nigricans.

Phylogeny, embryology as a clue to.--Palaeontological evidence on.

Physiology of plants, development of.

Piccard, on Geotropism.

Pickering, spectroscopic observations by.

Piranga erythromelas.

Pisum sativum.

Pithecanthropus.

Pitheculites.

Planema epaea.

Plants, Darwin's work on the movements of.--geographical distribution
of.--Palaeontological record of fossil.

Platanthera bifolia.

Plate.

Plato.

Playfair.

Pliopithecus.

Pocock, R.I.

Poincare.

Polarity, Vochting on.

Polymorphic species.--variability in cereals.

Polypodium incanum.

Porthesia chrysorrhoea.

Potonie, R.

Pouchet, G.

POULTON, E.B., on "The Value of Colour in the Struggle for
Life".--experiments on Butterflies by.--on J.C. Prichard.--on
Mimicry.--various.

Pratt.

Pratz, du.

Premutation.

Preuss, K. Th.

Prichard, J.C.

Primula, heterostylism in.

Primula acaulis.

Primula elatior.

Primula officinalis.

Promeces viridis.

Pronuba yuccasella.

Protective resemblance.

Protocetus.

Protohippus.

Psychology.

Pteridophytes, history of.

Pteridospermeae.

Pucheran.

Pusey.

Quatrefages, A. de.

Quetelet, statistical investigations by.

Rabl, C.

Radio-activity.

Radiolarians.

Raimannia odorata.

Ramsay, Sir W. and Soddy.

Ranke.

Rau, A.

Ray, J.

Reade, Mellard.

Recapitulation, the theory of.

Reduction.

Regeneration.

Reid, C.

Reinke.

Religion, Darwin's attitude towards.--Darwin's influence on the study
of.--and Magic.

Religious thought, Darwin's influence on.

Renard, on Darwin's work on volcanic islands.

Reproduction, effect of environment on.

Reptiles, history of.

Reversion.

Rhinoceros, the history of the.

Ridley, H.N.

Riley, C.V.

Ritchie.

Ritual.

Roberts, A.

Robertson, T.B.

Robinet.

Rolfe, R.A.

Rolph.

Romanes, G.J.

Rothert.

Roux.

Rozwadowski, von.

Ruskin.

Rutherford, E.

Rutot.

Sachs, J.

St Hilaire, E.G. de.

Salamandra atra.

Salamandra maculosa.

Saltatory Evolution, (see also Mutations).

Sanders, experiments on Vanessa by.

Saporta, on the Evolution of Angiosperms.

Sargant, Ethel, on the Evolution of Angiosperms.

Savigny.

Scardafella inca.

Scent, in relation to Sexual Selection.

Scharff, R.F.

Schelling.

Schlegel.

Schleicher, A., on language.

Schleiden and Schwann, Cell-theory of.

Schmarda, L.K., on geographical distribution.

Schoetensack, on Homo heidelbergensis.

Schreiner, K.E.

Schubler, on cereals.

Schultze, O., experiments on Frogs.

Schur.

Schutt.

SCHWALBE, G., on "The Descent of Man".

Sclater, P.L., on geographical distribution.

SCOTT, D.H., on "The Palaeontological Record (Plants)".--elsewhere.

SCOTT, W.B., on "The Palaeontological Record (Animals)".

Scrope.

Scyllaea.

Sechehaye, C.A.

SEDGWICK, A., on "The Influence of Darwin on Animal Embryology".

Sedgwick, A., Darwin's Geological Expedition with.

Seeck, O.

Seed-plants, origin of.

Segregation.

Selection, artificial.--germinal.

Selection, natural (see Natural Selection).--organic.--sexual.--social
and natural.--various.

Selenka.

Semnopithecus.

Semon, R.

Semper.

Senebier.

Senecio vulgaris.

Sergi.

Seward, A.C.--and S.O. Ford.--and J. Gowan.

Sex, recent investigations on.

Sharpe, D.

Sherrington, C.S.

Shirreff, P.

Shrewsbury, Darwin's recollections of.

Sibbern.

Sinapis alba.

Smerinthus ocellata.

Smerinthus populi.

Smerinthus tiliae.

Smith, A.

Smith, W.

Snyder.

Sociology, Darwinism and.--History and.

Soddy.

Sollas, W.J.

Sorley, W.R.

Species, Darwin's early work on transmutation of.--geographical
distribution and origin of.--immutability of.--influence on
environment on.--Lamarck on.--multiple origin of.--the nature of
a.--polymorphic.--production by physico-chemical means of.--and
varieties.--de Vries's work on.

Spencer, H., on evolution.--on Lyell's "Principles".--on the nature of
the living cell.--on primitive man.--on the theory of Selection.--on
Sociology.

Spencer, H., on the transmission of acquired characters.--on
Weismann.--various.

Sphingidae, variation in.

Spinoza.

Sports.

Sprengel, C.K.

Stability, principle of.

Stahl.

Standfuss.

Stars, evolution of double.

Stellaria media.

Stephen, L.

Sterility in hybrids.

Sterne, C.

Stockard, his experiments on fish embryos.

STRASBURBER, E., on "The Minute Structure of Cells in relation to
Heredity".

Strongylocentrotus franciscanus.

Strongylocentrotus purpuratus.

Struggle for existence.

Strutt, R.J.

Stuart, A.

Sturdee, F.C.D.

Sutterlin, L.

Sully.

Sutton, A.W.

Sutton, W.S.

Svalof, agricultural station of.

Swainson, W.

Synapta, calcareous bodies in skin of.

S. lappa.

Syrphus.

Tarde, G.

Teleology and adaptation.

Tennant, F.R.

Teratology.

Tetraprothomo.

THISELTON-DYER, SIR WILLIAM, on "Geographical distribution of
Plants".--on Burchell.--on protective resemblance.--elsewhere.

THOMSON, J.A., on "Darwin's Predecessors.--elsewhere.--and P. Geddes.

Thomson, Sir J.J.

Theology, Darwin and.

Tiedemann, F.

Tooke, Horne.

Totemism.

Treschow.

Treviranus.

Trifolium pratense quinquefolium.

Trigonias.

Trilobites, phylogeny of.

Tschermack.

Turgot.

Turner, Sir W.

Twins, artificial production of.

Tylor.

Tyndall, W.

Tyrrell, G.

Uhlenhuth, on blood reactions.

Underhill, E.

Use and disuse.

Vanessa.

Vanessa antiope.

Vanessa levana.

Vanessa polychloros.

Vanessa urticae.

Van 't Hoff.

Varanus Salvator.

Variability, Darwin's attention directed to.--W. Bateson on.--and
cultivation.--causes of.--polymorphic.

Variation, continuous and discontinuous.--Darwin's views as
an evolutionist, and as a systematist, on.--definite and
indefinite.--environment and.--and heredity.--as seen in the
life-history of an organism.--minute.--mutability and.--in relation to
species.--H. de Vries on.

Varigny, H. de.

Varro, on language.

Veronica chamaedrys.

Verworn.

"Vestiges of Creation", Darwin on "The".

Vierkandt.

Vilmorin, L. de.

Virchow, his opposition to Darwin.

Virchow, on the transmission of acquired characters.

Vochting.

Vogt, C.

Voltaire.

Volvox.

VRIES, H. de, on "Variation"--the Mutation theory of.

WAGGETT, REV. P.N., on "The Influence of Darwin upon religious thought".

Wagner.

Waldeyer, W.

Wallace, A.R., on Malayan Butterflies.--on Colour.--and Darwin.--on
the Descent of Man.--on distribution.--on Malthus.--on Natural
Selection.--on the permanence of continents.--on social reforms.--on
Sexual Selection.

Waller, A.D.

Walton.

Watson, H.C.

Watson, S.

Watt, J., and Natural Selection.

Watts, W.W.

Wedgwood, L.

Weir, J.J.

WEISMANN, A., on "The Selection Theory".--on Amphimixis.

Weismann, A., his germ-plasm theory.--on ontogeny.--and Prichard.--and
Spencer.--on the transmission of acquired characters.--various.

Wells, W.C., and Natural Selection.

Weston, S., on language.

WHETHAM, W.C.D., on "The Evolution of Matter".

Whewell.

White, G.

Wichmann.

Wieland, G.R., on fossil Cycads.

Wiesner, on Darwin's work on plant movements.

Williams, C.M.

Williamson, W.C.

Wilson, E.B., on cytology.--letter from Darwin to.

Wolf.

Wollaston's, T.V. "Variation of Species".

Woltmann.

Woolner.

Wundt, on language.

Xylina vetusta.

Yucca, fertilisation of.

Zeiller, R., on Fossil Plants.

Zeller, E.

Zimmermann, E.A.W.

Zittel, on palaeontological research.

"Zoonomia", Erasmus Darwin's.








