CHAPTER IX.

CONCLUSION.


A few more pages must be given to one or two of Diderot's writings which
have not hitherto been mentioned. An exhaustive survey of his works is
out of the question, nor would any one be repaid for the labour of
criticism. A mere list of the topics that he handled would fill a long
chapter. A redaction of a long treatise on harmony, a vast sheaf of
notes on the elements of physiology, a collection of miscellanea on the
drama, a still more copious collection of miscellanea on a hundred
points in literature and art, a fragment on the exercise of young
Russians, an elaborate plan of studies for a proposed Russian
University,--no less panurgic and less encyclopaedic a critic than
Diderot himself could undertake to sweep with ever so light a wing over
this vast area. Everybody can find something to say about the collection
of tales, in which Diderot thought that he was satirising the manners of
his time, after the fashion of Rabelais, Montaigne, La Mothe-le-Vayer,
and Swift. But not everybody is competent to deal, for instance, with
the five memoirs on different subjects in mathematics (1748), with
which Diderot hoped to efface the scandal of his previous performance.


I.

Decidedly the most important of the pieces of which we have not yet
spoken must be counted the _Thoughts on the Interpretation of Nature_
(1754). His study of Bacon and the composition of the introductory
prospectus of the Encyclopaedia had naturally filled Diderot's mind with
ideas about the universe as a whole. The great problem of man's
knowledge of this universe,--the limits, the instruments, the meaning of
such knowledge, came before him with a force that he could not evade.
Maupertuis had in 1751, under the assumed name of Baumann, an imaginary
doctor of Erlangen, published a dissertation on the _Universal System of
Nature_, in which he seems to have maintained that the mechanism of the
universe is one and the same throughout, modifying itself, or being
modified by some vital element within, in an infinity of diverse
ways.[207] Leibnitz's famous idea, of making nature invariably work with
the minimum of action, was seized by Maupertuis, expressed as the Law of
Thrift, and made the starting-point of speculations that led directly to
Holbach and the _System of Nature_.[208] The _Loi d'Epargne_ evidently
tended to make unity of all the forces of the universe the keynote or
the goal of philosophical inquiry. At this time of his life, Diderot
resisted Maupertuis's theory of the unity of vital force in the
universe, or perhaps we should rather say that he saw how open it was to
criticism. His resistance has none of his usual air of vehement
conviction. However that may be, the theory excited his interest, and
fitted in with the train of meditation which his thoughts about the
Encyclopaedia had already set in motion, and of which the _Pensees
Philosophiques_ of 1746 were the cruder prelude.

    [207] As to the precise drift of Maupertuis's theme, see Lange,
    _Gesch. d. Materialismus_, i. 413, _n._ 37. Also Rosenkranz, i. 134.

    [208] In 1765 Grimm describes the principle of Leibnitz and
    Maupertuis as "gaining on us on every side."--_Corr. Lit._, iv. 186.

The _Thoughts on the Interpretation of Nature_ are, in form as in title,
imitated from those famous _Aphorismi de Interpretatione Naturae et Regni
Hominis_, which are more shortly known to all men as Bacon's _Novum
Organum_.[209] The connection between the aphorisms is very loosely
held. Diderot began by premising that he would let his thoughts follow
one another under his pen, in the order in which the subjects came up in
his mind; and he kept his word. Their general scope, so far as it is
capable of condensed expression, may be described as a reconciliation
between the two great classes into which Diderot found thinkers upon
Nature to be divided; those who have many instruments and few ideas, and
those who have few instruments and many ideas,--in other words, between
men of science without philosophy, and philosophers without knowledge
of experimental science.

    [209] Palissot, in the _Philosophers_, concocted some very strained
    satire on the too pompous opening of the _Interpretation of Nature_.
    Act I. sc. 2.

In the region of science itself, again, Diderot foresees as great a
change as in the relations between science and philosophy. "We touch the
moment of a great revolution in the sciences. From the strong
inclination of men's minds towards morals, literature, the history of
nature and experimental physics, I would almost venture to assert that
before the next hundred years are over, there will not be three great
geometers to be counted in Europe. This science will stop short where
the Bernouillis, the Eulers, the Maupertuis, the Clairauts, the
Fontaines, the D'Alemberts, the Lagranges have left it. They will have
fixed the Pillars of Hercules. People will go no further." Those who
have read Comte's angry denunciations of the perversions of geometry by
means of algebra, and of the waste of intellectual force in modern
analysis,[210] will at least understand how such a view as Diderot's was
possible. And no one will be likely to deny that, whether or not the
pillars of the geometrical Hercules were finally set a hundred years
ago, the great discoveries of the hundred years since Diderot have been,
as he predicted, in the higher sciences. The great misfortune of France
was that the supremacy of geometry coincided with the opening of the
great era of political discussion. The definitions of Montesquieu's
famous book, which opened the political movement in literature, have
been shown to be less those of a jurisconsult than of a geometer.[211]
Social truths, with all their profound complexity, were handled like
propositions in Euclid, and logical deductions from arbitrary premises
were treated as accurate representations of real circumstance. The
repulse of geometry to its proper rank came too late.

    [210] Comte's _System of Positive Polity_, i. 380, etc. English
    translation, 1875.

    [211] By F. Sclopis, quoted in M. Vian's _Hist. de Montesquieu_, p.
    51.

Comte always liberally recognised Diderot's genius, and any reader of
Comte's views on the necessities of subjective synthesis will discern
the germ of that doctrine in the following remarkable section:

     "When we compare the infinite multitude of the phenomena of nature
     with the limits of our understandings and the weakness of our
     organs, can we ever expect anything else from the slowness of our
     work, from the long and frequent interruptions, and from the rarity
     of creative genius than a few broken and separated pieces of the
     great chain that binds all things together? Experimental philosophy
     might work for centuries of centuries, and the materials that it
     had heaped up, finally reaching in their number beyond all
     combination, would still be far removed from an exact enumeration.
     How many volumes would it not need to contain the mere terms by
     which we should designate the distinct collections of phenomena, if
     the phenomena were known? When will the philosophic language be
     complete? If it were complete, who among men would be able to know
     it? If the Eternal, to manifest his power still more plainly than
     by the marvels of nature, had deigned to develop the universal
     mechanism on pages traced by his own hand, do you suppose that this
     great book would be more comprehensible to us than the universe
     itself? How many pages of it all would have been intelligible to
     the philosopher who, with all the force of head that had been
     conferred upon him, was not sure of having grasped all the
     conclusions by which an old geometer determined the relation of the
     sphere to the cylinder? We should have in such pages a fairly good
     measure of the reach of men's minds, and a still more pungent
     satire on our vanity. We should say, Fermat went to such a page,
     Archimedes went a few pages further.

     "What then is our end? The execution of a work that can never be
     achieved, and which would be far beyond human intelligence if it
     were achieved. Are we not more insensate than the first inhabitants
     of the plain of Shinar? We know the immeasurable distance between
     the earth and the heavens, and still we insist on rearing our
     tower.

     "But can we presume that there will not come a time when our pride
     will abandon the work in discouragement? What appearance is there
     that, narrowly lodged and ill at its ease here below, our pride
     should obstinately persist in constructing an uninhabitable palace
     beyond the earth's atmosphere? Even if it should so insist, would
     it not be arrested by the confusion of tongues, which is already
     only too perceptible and too inconvenient in natural history?
     Besides, it is utility that circumscribes all. It will be utility
     that in a few centuries will set bounds to experimental physics, as
     it is on the eve of setting bounds to geometry. I grant centuries
     to this study, because the sphere of its utility is infinitely more
     extensive than that of any abstract science, and it is without
     contradiction the base of our real knowledge."[212]

    [212] _Oeuv._, ii. 12, 13, Sec. 6. See the same idea in the
    Encyclopaedia, above, vol. i. pp. 225-227.

We cannot wonder that when Comte drew up his list of the hundred and
fifty volumes that should form the good Positivist's library in the
nineteenth century, he should have placed Diderot's _Interpretation of
Nature_ on one side of Descartes' _Discourse on Method_, with Bacon's
_Novum Organum_ on the other.

The same spirit finds even stronger and more distinct expression in a
later aphorism:--"Since the reason cannot understand everything,
imagination foresee everything, sense observe everything, nor memory
retain everything; since great men are born at such remote intervals,
and the progress of science is so interrupted by revolution, that whole
ages of study are passed in recovering the knowledge of the centuries
that are gone,--to observe everything in nature without distinction is
to fail in duty to the human race. Men who are beyond the common run in
their talents ought to respect themselves and posterity in the
employment of their time. What would posterity think of us if we had
nothing to transmit to it save a complete insectology, an immense
history of microscopic animals? No--to the great geniuses great objects,
little objects to the little geniuses" (Sec. 54).

Diderot, while thus warning inquirers against danger on one side, was
alive to the advantages of stubborn and unlimited experiment on the
other. "When you have formed in your mind," he says, "one of those
systems which require to be verified by experience, you ought neither to
cling to it obstinately nor abandon it lightly. People sometimes think
their conjectures false, when they have not taken the proper measures to
find them true. Obstinacy, even, has fewer drawbacks than the opposite
excess. By multiplying experiments, if you do not find what you want, it
may happen that you will come on something better. _Never is time
employed in interrogating nature entirely lost_" (Sec. 42). The reader will
not fail to observe that this maxim is limited by the condition of
verifiableness. Of any system that could not be verified by experience
Diderot would have disdained to speak in connection with the
interpretation of nature.

This, of course, did not prevent him from hypothesis and prophecy which
he himself had not the means of justifying. For example, he said that
just as in mathematics, by examining all properties of a curve we find
that they are one and the same property presented under different faces,
so in nature when experimental physics are more advanced, people will
recognise that all the phenomena, whether of weight, or elasticity, or
magnetism, or electricity, are only different sides of the same
affection (Sec. 44). But he was content to leave it to posterity, and to
build no fabric on unproved propositions.

In the same scientific spirit he penetrated the hollowness of every
system dealing with Final Causes:

     "The physicist, whose profession is to instruct and not to edify,
     will abandon the _Why_, and will busy himself only with the
     _How_.... How many absurd ideas, false suppositions, chimerical
     notions in those hymns which some rash defenders of final causes
     have dared to compose in honour of the Creator? Instead of sharing
     the transports of admiration of the prophet, and crying out at the
     sight of the unnumbered stars that light up the midnight sky, _The
     heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament sheweth his
     handiwork_, they have given themselves up to the superstition of
     their conjectures. Instead of adoring the All-Powerful in the
     creation of nature, they have prostrated themselves before the
     phantoms of their imagination. If any one doubts the justice of my
     reproach, I invite him to compare Galen's treatise on the use of
     parts of the human body, with the physiology of Boerhaave, and the
     physiology of Boerhaave with that of Haller; I invite posterity to
     compare the systematic or passing views of Haller with what will be
     the physiology of future times. Man praises the Eternal for his own
     poor views; and the Eternal who hears from the elevation of his
     throne, and who knows his own design, accepts the silly praise and
     smiles at man's vanity" (Sec. 56).

The world has advanced rapidly along this path since Diderot's day, and
has opened out many new and unsuspected meanings by the way. Perhaps the
advance has been less satisfactory in working out, in a scientific way,
the philosophy that is implied in the following adaptation of the
Leibnitzian and Maupertuisian suggestion of the law of economy in
natural forces:--"Astonishment often comes from our supposing several
marvels, where in truth there is only one; from our imagining in nature
as many particular acts as we can count phenomena, whilst _nature has
perhaps in reality never produced more than one single act_. It seem
even that, if nature had been under the necessity of producing several
acts, the different results of such acts would be isolated; that there
would be collections of phenomena independent of one another, and that
the general chain of which philosophy assumes the continuity, would
break in many places. _The absolute independence of a single fact is
incompatible with the idea of an All; and without the idea of a Whole,
there can be no Philosophy_" (Sec. 11).

At length Diderot concludes by a series of questions which he thinks
that philosophers may perhaps count worthy of discussion. What is the
difference, for example, between living matter and dead? Does the energy
of a living molecule vary by itself, or according to the quantity, the
quality, the forms of the dead or living matter with which it is united?
We need not continue the enumeration, because Diderot himself suddenly
brings them to an end with a truly admirable expression of his sense of
how unworthy they are of the attention of serious men, who are able to
measure the difference between a wise and beneficent use of
intelligence, and a foolish and wasteful misuse of it. "When I turn my
eyes," he says, "to the works of men, and see the cities that are built
on every side, all the elements yoked to our service, languages fixed,
nations civilised, harbours constructed, lands and skies measured--then
the world seems to me very old. When I find man uncertain as to the
first principles of medicine and agriculture, as to the properties of
the commonest substances, as to knowledge of the maladies that afflict
him, as to the pruning of trees, as to the best form for the plough,
then it seems as if the earth had only been inhabited yesterday. And if
men were wise, they would at last give themselves up to such inquiries
as bear on their wellbeing, and would not take the trouble to answer my
futile questions for a thousand years at the very soonest; or perhaps,
even, considering the very scanty extent that they occupy in space and
time, they would never deign to answer them at all."


II.

In 1769 Diderot composed three dialogues, of which he said that, with a
certain mathematical memoir, they were the only writings of his own with
which he was contented. The first is a dialogue between himself and
D'Alembert; the second is D'Alembert's Dream, in which D'Alembert in his
sleep continues the discussion, while Mdlle. Lespinasse, who is watching
by his bedside, takes down the dreamer's words; in the third, Mdlle.
Lespinasse and the famous physician, Bordeu, conclude the matter.[213]
It is impossible, Diderot said to Mdlle. Voland, to be more profound and
more mad: it is at once a supreme extravagance, and the most
deep-reaching philosophy. He congratulated himself on the cleverness of
placing his ideas in the mouth of a man who dreams, on the ground that
we must often give to wisdom the air of madness, in order to secure
admittance. Mdlle. Lespinasse was not so complacent. She made D'Alembert
insist that the dialogue should be destroyed, and Diderot believed that
he had burned the only existing copy. As a matter of fact, the
manuscript was not published until 1830, when all the people concerned
had long been reduced to dust. There are five or six pages, Diderot said
to Mdlle. Voland, which would make your sister's hair stand on end. A
man may be much less squeamish than Mdlle. Voland's sister, and still
pronounce the imaginative invention of D'Alembert's Dream, and the
sequel, to be as odious as anything since the freaks of filthy Diogenes
in his tub. Two remarks may be made on this strange production. First,
Diderot never intended the dialogues for the public eye. He would have
been as shocked as the Archbishop of Paris himself, if he had supposed
that they would become accessible to everybody who knows how to read.
Second, though they are in form the most ugly and disgusting piece in
the literature of philosophy, they testify in their own way to Diderot's
sincerity of interest in his subject. Science is essentially unsparing
and unblushing, and D'Alembert's Dream plunged exactly into those parts
of physiology which are least fit to be handled in literature. The
attempt to give an air of polite comedy to functions and secretions must
be pronounced detestable, in spite of the dialectical acuteness and
force with which Diderot pressed his point.

    [213] _Oeuv._, ii.

It would be impossible, in a book not exclusively designed for a public
of professors, to give a full account of these three dialogues. It is
indispensable to describe their drift, because it is here that Diderot
figures definitely as a materialist. Diderot was in no sense the
originator of the French materialism of the eighteenth century. He was
preceded by Maupertuis, by Robinet, and by La Mettrie; and we have
already seen that when he composed the Thoughts on the Interpretation of
Nature (1754), he did not fully accept Maupertuis's materialistic
thesis. Lange has shown that at a very early period in the movement the
most consistent materialism was ready and developed, while such leaders
of the movement as Voltaire and Diderot still leaned either on deism, or
on a mixture of deism and scepticism.[214] The philosophy of
D'Alembert's Dream is definite enough, and far enough removed alike from
deism and scepticism.

    [214] _Gesch. d. Materialismus_, i. 309, 310, etc.

"The thinking man is like a musical instrument. Suppose a clavecin to
have sensibility and memory, and then say whether it would not repeat of
itself the airs that you have played on its keys. We are instruments
endowed with sensibility and memory. Our senses are so many keys,
pressed by the nature that surrounds them, and they often press one
another; and this, according to my judgment, is all that passes in a
clavecin organised as you and I are organised.

"There is only one substance in the world. The marble of the statue
makes the flesh of the man, and conversely. Reduce a block of marble to
impalpable powder; mix this powder with humus, or vegetable earth; knead
them well together; water the mixture; let it rot for a year, two
years--time does not count. In this you sow the plant, the plant
nourishes the man, and hence the passage from marble to tissue.

"Do you see this egg? With that you overturn all the schools of theology
and all the temples of the earth. It is an insensible mass before the
germ is introduced into it; and, after the germ is introduced, there is
still an insensible mass, for the germ itself is only an inert fluid.
How does this mass pass to another organisation, to life, to
sensibility? By heat. What will produce heat? Movement. What will be the
successive effects of movement? First, an oscillating point, a thread
that extends, the flesh, the beak, and so forth."

Then follows the application of the same ideas to the reproduction of
man--a region whither it is not convenient to follow the physiological
inquirer. The result as to the formation of the organic substance in man
is as unflinching as the materialism of Buechner.

     But doctor, cries Mdlle. Lespinasse, what becomes of vice and
     virtue? Virtue, that word so holy in all languages, that idea so
     sacred among all nations?

     BORDEU. We must transform it into beneficence, and its opposite
     into the idea of maleficence. A man is happily or unhappily born;
     people are irresistibly drawn on by the general torrent that
     conducts one to glory, the other to ignominy.

     MDLLE. LESPINASSE. And self-esteem, and shame, and remorse?

     BORDEU. Proclivities, founded on the ignorance or the vanity of a
     being who imputes to himself the merit or the demerit of a
     necessary instant.

     MDLLE. LESPINASSE. And rewards and punishments?

     BORDEU. Means of correcting the modifiable being that we call bad,
     and encouraging the other that we call good.[215]

    [215] _Oeuv._, ii. 176.

The third dialogue we must leave. The fact that German books are written
for a public of specialists allows Dr. Rosenkranz to criticise these
dialogues with a freedom equal to Diderot's own, and his criticism is as
full as usual of candour, patience, and weight. An English writer must
be content to pass on, and his contentment may well be considerable, for
the subject is perhaps that on which, above all others, it is most
difficult to say any wise word.


III.

The Plan of a University for the Government of Russia was the work of
Diderot's last years, but no copy of it was given to the public before
1813-14, when M. Guizot published extracts from an autograph manuscript
confided to him by Suard. Diderot, with a characteristic respect for
competence, with which no egotism can ever interfere in minds of such
strength and veracity as his, began by urging the Empress to consult
Ernesti of Leipsic, the famous editor of Cicero, and no less famous in
his day (1707-1781) for the changes that he introduced into the system
of teaching in the German universities. Of Oxford and Cambridge Diderot
spoke more kindly than they then deserved.

The one strongly marked idea of the plan is what might have been
expected from the editor of the Encyclopaedia, namely, the elevation of
what the Germans call real or technological instruction, and the
banishment of pure literature as a subject of study from the first to
the last place in the course. In the faculty of arts the earliest course
begins with arithmetic, algebra, the calculation of probabilities, and
geometry. Next follow physics and mechanics. Then astronomy. Fourthly,
natural history and experimental physics. In the fifth class, chemistry
and anatomy. In the sixth, logic and grammar. In the seventh, the
language of the country. And it was not until the eighth, that Greek and
Latin, eloquence and poetry, took their place among the objects or
instruments of education. Parallel with this course, the student was to
follow the first principles of metaphysics, of universal morality, and
of natural and revealed religion. Here, too, history and geography had a
place. In a third parallel, perspective and drawing accompanied the
science of the first, and the philosophy and history of the second.

In the thorny field of religious instruction, Diderot expresses no
opinion of his own, beyond saying that it is natural for the Empress's
subjects to conform to her way of thinking. As her majesty thinks that
the fear of pains to come has much influence on men's actions, and is
persuaded that the total of small daily advantages produced by belief
outweighs the total of evils wrought by sectarianism and intolerance,
therefore students ought to be instructed in the mystery of the
distinction of the two substances, in the immortality of the soul, and
so forth.[216]

    [216] _Oeuv._, iii. 490.

There is a story that one evening at St. Petersburg, Diderot was
declaiming with stormy eloquence against the baseness of those who
flatter kings; for such, he said, there ought to be a deeper and a
fiercer hell. "Tell me, Diderot," said the Empress by and by, "what they
say in Paris about the death of my husband." Instead of telling her the
plain truth that everybody said that Peter had been murdered by her
orders, the philosopher poured out a stream of the smoothest things.
"Come now," said Catherine suddenly, "confess, if you are not walking
along the path that leads to your deep hell, you are certainly coming
very close to purgatory." Diderot's elaborate concessions to her
majesty's political religion would, it is to be feared, have brought him
still further in the same sulphureous track.

As we have often had to bewail Diderot's diffuseness, it is as well to
remark that a long passage in the sketch of which we are speaking shows
how close and concentrated he could be upon occasion. The two pages in
which he demolishes the incorrigible superstition about Latin and
Greek,[217] contain a thoroughly exhaustive summary of all the arguments
and the answers. In the immense discussion about Latin and Greek that
has taken place in the hundred years since Diderot's time, it is
tolerably safe to say that not a single point has been brought forward
which Diderot did not in these most pithy and conclusive pages attempt
to deal with. He winds up with the position that, even for the man of
letters, the present system of teaching Latin and Greek is essentially
sterile. I am perfectly sure, he says, that Voltaire, who is not exactly
a mediocrity as a man of letters, knows extremely little Greek, and that
he is not twentieth nor even hundredth among the Latinists of the
day.[218]

    [217] _Ib._ iii. 469-471.

    [218] _Oeuv._, iii. 473.

Following this sketch is printed a letter to the Countess of Forbach on
the education of children. It is full of rich wisdom on its special
subject. Nobody can read it without feeling that quality in Diderot
which made his friends love him. And we see how, when he was called to
practical counsel, he banished into their own sphere the explosive
paradoxes with which he delighted to amuse his hours of speculative
dreaming.


IV.

Romilly has told us that Diderot was bent on converting him from the
error of his religious ways, and with that intention read to him a
Conversation with the Marechale de----.[219] It is believed to be an
idealised version of a real conversation with Madame de Broglie, and was
first printed, almost as soon as written (1777), in the correspondence
in which Metra, in imitation of Grimm, informed a circle of foreign
subscribers what was going on in Paris. The admirers of Diderot profess
to look on this Conversation as one of the most precious pearls in his
philosophic casket. It turns upon the conditions of belief and unbelief,
represented by the two interlocutors respectively, and is a terse and
graphic summary of the rationalistic objections to the creed of the
church. The most conspicuous literary passage in it is a parable which
has been attributed to Rousseau, but with which Rousseau had really
nothing to do, beyond reproducing the spirit of its argument in the ever
famous creed of the Savoyard Vicar.

    [219] _Ib._ ii. 505-528.

     A young Mexican, tired of his work, was sauntering one day on the
     seashore. He spied a plank, with one end resting on the land, and
     the other dipping into the water. He sat down on the plank, and
     there gazing over the vast space that lay spread out before him, he
     said to himself: "It is certain that my old grandmother is talking
     nonsense, with her history of I know not what inhabitants, who, at
     I know not what time, landed here from I know not where, from some
     country far beyond our seas. It is against common sense: do I not
     see the ocean touch the line of the sky? And can I believe, against
     the evidence of my senses, an old fable of which nobody knows the
     date, which everybody arranges according to his fancy, and which is
     only a tissue of absurdities, about which people are ready to tear
     out one another's eyes." As he was reasoning in this way, the
     waters rocked him gently on his plank, and he fell asleep. As he
     slept, the wind rose, the waves carried away the plank on which he
     was stretched out, and behold our youthful reasoner embarked on a
     voyage.

     _La Marechale._--Alas, that is the image of all of us; we are each
     on our plank; the wind blows, and the flood carries us away.

     _C._--He was already far from the mainland when he awoke. No one
     was ever so surprised as our young Mexican, to find himself out on
     the open sea, and he was mightily surprised, too, when having lost
     from sight the shore on which he had been idly walking only an
     instant before, he saw the sea touching the line of the sky on
     every side. Then he began to suspect that he might have been
     mistaken, and that, if the wind remained in the same quarter,
     perhaps he would be borne to that very shore and among those
     dwellers on it, about whom his grandmother had so often told him.

     _La Marechale._--And of his anxiety you say nothing.

     _C._--He had none. He said to himself: "What does it matter,
     provided that I find land? I have reasoned like a giddy-pate,
     granted; but I have been sincere with myself, and that is all that
     can be required of me. If it is no virtue to have understanding, at
     any rate it is no crime to be without it." Meanwhile the wind
     continued, the man and the plank floated on, and the unknown shore
     came into sight. He touched it, and behold him again on land.

     _La Marechale._--Ah, we shall all of us see one another there, one
     of these days.

     _C._--I hope so, madam; wherever it may be, I shall always be very
     proud to pay you my homage. Hardly had he quitted his plank, and
     put his foot on the sand, when he perceived a venerable old man
     standing by his side. He asked him where he was, and to whom he had
     the honour of speaking. "I am the sovereign of the country,"
     replied the old man; "you have denied my existence?"--"Yes, it is
     true."--"And that of my empire?"--"It is true!"--"I forgive you,
     because I am he who sees the bottom of all hearts, and I have read
     at the bottom of yours that you are of good faith; but the rest of
     your thoughts and your actions are not equally innocent." Then the
     old man, who held him by the ear, recalled to him all the errors
     of his life; and as each was mentioned, the young Mexican bowed
     himself upon the ground, beat his breast, and besought forgiveness.


V.

Of Falconet,[220] we have already spoken, as a sculptor of genius, and
as one of Diderot's most intimate friends. Writing to Sophie Voland
(Nov. 21, 1765), Diderot informs her that some pleasantries of
Falconet's have induced him to undertake very seriously the defence of
the sentiment of immortality and respect for posterity.[221] This
apology was carried on in an energetic correspondence which lasted from
the end of 1765 to 1767. Falconet's letters were burned by his
grand-daughter for reasons unknown, and we have only such passages from
them as are more specially referred to by Diderot himself. Falconet
flattered himself that he had the best of the argument, and was eager
that they should be published, but Diderot was sluggish or busy. The
correspondence was imparted to Catherine of Russia, who took a lively
interest in it, and to some others, but it was not given to the
public--and then only partially--until 1830.

    [220] Above, vol. ii. p. 104.

    [221] xix. 200.

Diderot's position in these twelve letters may be described in general
terms as being that the sentiment of immortality and respect for
posterity move the heart and elevate the soul; they are two germs of
great things, two promises as solid as any other, and two delights as
real as most of the delights of life, but more noble, more profitable,
and more virtuous. What Diderot means by immortality is not the
religious dogma, that the individual personality will be objectively
preserved and prolonged in some other mode of existence. On the
contrary, it was his disbelief in this dogma of the churches that gave a
certain keenness to his pleading for that other kind of immortality,
which prolongs our personality only in the grateful and admiring
memories of other people who come after us. He intended by the sentiment
of immortality "the desire to surround one's name with lustre among
posterity; to be the admiration and the talk of centuries to come; to
obtain after death the same honours as we pay to those who have gone
before us; to furnish a fine line to the historian; to inscribe one's
own name by the side of those which we never pronounce without shedding
a tear, heaving a sigh, or being touched by regret; to secure for
ourselves the blessings that we have such a thrill in bestowing on
Sully, Henry IV., and all the other benefactors of the human race."[222]
The sphere that surrounds us, and in which the world admires us, the
time in which we exist and listen to praise, the number of those who
directly address to us the eulogy that we have deserved of them--all
this is too small for the capacity of our ambitious souls. By the side
of those whom we see prostrated before us, we place those who are not
yet in the world. It is only this uncounted throng of adorers that can
satisfy a mind whose impulses are ever towards the infinite. At night it
is sweet to hear a distant concert, of which only snatches reach the
ear, all to be bound into a melodious whole by the imagination, which is
all the more charmed as the work is in the main its own. Even if all
this were but the sweetness of a lovely dream, is then the sweetness of
a dream as nothing? And am I to count for nothing a sweet dream that
lasts as long as my life, and holds me in perpetual intoxication?

    [222] xviii. 94.

Falconet's answer was hard and positive. Contemporary glory suffices.
What is fame, if I am not there to enjoy? The fear of contempt and
disgrace is as strong a motive as you need, to incite men to great work.
Glory after death is chimerical and uncertain. Think of all the great
names that are clean forgotten, of all the great workers whose
achievements are lost or effaced, of all the others whose works are
attributed to those who did not execute them! Your posterity is no
better than a lottery.

No, cries Diderot, with redoubled eloquence, rising to his noblest
height,[223] "the present is an indivisible point that cuts in two the
length of an infinite line. It is impossible to rest on this point and
to glide gently along with it, never looking on in front, and never
turning the head to gaze behind. The more man ascends through the past,
and the more he launches into the future--the greater he will be....
And all these philosophers, and ministers, and truth-telling men, who
have fallen victims to the stupidity of nations, the atrocities of
priests, the fury of tyrants, what consolation was left for them in
death? This, that prejudice would pass, and that posterity would pour
out the vial of ignominy upon their enemies. O posterity, holy and
sacred! Stay of the unhappy and the oppressed, thou who art just, thou
who art incorruptible, who avengest the good man, who unmaskest the
hypocrite, who draggest down the tyrant, may thy sure faith, thy
consoling faith, never, never abandon me! Posterity is for the
philosopher what the other world is for the devout!"

    [223] xviii. pp. 113 and 100.




APPENDIX.

RAMEAU'S NEPHEW: A TRANSLATION.

[See vol. i. p. 348.]


[I have omitted such pages in the following translation as refer simply
to personages who have lost all possibility of interest for our
generation; nor did any object seem to be served by reproducing the
technical points of the musical discussion. Enough is given, and given
as faithfully as I know how, to show the reader what _Rameau's Nephew_
is.]

     In all weathers, wet or fine, it is my practice to go, towards five
     o'clock in the evening, to take a turn in the Palais Royal. I am he
     whom you may see any afternoon sitting by himself and musing in
     D'Argenson's seat. I keep up talk with myself about politics, love,
     taste, or philosophy; I leave my mind to play the libertine
     unchecked; and it is welcome to run after the first idea that
     offers, sage or gay, just as you see our young beaux in the Foy
     passage following the steps of some gay nymph, with her saucy mien,
     face all smiles, eyes all fire, and nose a trifle turned up; then
     quitting her for another, attacking them all, but attaching
     themselves to none. My thoughts,--these are the wantons for me. If
     the weather be too cold or too wet, I take shelter in the Regency
     coffee-house. There I amuse myself by looking on while they play
     chess. Nowhere in the world do they play chess so skilfully as in
     Paris, and nowhere in Paris as they do at this coffee-house; 'tis
     here you see Legal the profound, Philidor the subtle, Mayot the
     solid; here you see the most astounding moves, and listen to the
     sorriest talk, for if a man may be at once a wit and a great
     chess-player, like Legal, you may also be a great chess-player and
     a sad simpleton, like Joubert and Mayot.

     One day I was there after dinner, watching intently, saying little,
     and hearing the very least possible, when there approached me one
     of the most eccentric figures in the country, where God has not
     made them lacking. He is a mixture of elevation and lowness, of
     good sense and madness; the notions of good and bad must be mixed
     up together in strange confusion in his head, for he shows the good
     qualities that nature has bestowed on him without any ostentation,
     and the bad ones without the smallest shame. For the rest, he is
     endowed with a vigorous frame, a particular warmth of imagination,
     and an astonishing strength of lungs. If you ever meet him, and if
     you are not arrested by his originality, you will either stuff your
     fingers into your ears, or else take to your heels. Heavens, what a
     monstrous pipe! Nothing is so little like him as himself. One time
     he is lean and wan, like a patient in the last stage of
     consumption; you could count his teeth through his cheeks; you
     would say he must have passed several days without tasting a
     morsel, or that he is fresh from La Trappe. A month after, he is
     stout and sleek, as if he had been sitting all the time at the
     board of a financier, or had been shut up in a Bernardine
     monastery. To-day in dirty linen, his clothes torn or patched, with
     barely a shoe to his foot, he steals along with a bent head; you
     are tempted to hail him and fling him a shilling. To-morrow all
     powdered, curled, in a fine coat, he marches past with head erect
     and open mien, and you would almost take him for a decent worthy
     creature. He lives from day to day, from hand to mouth, downcast or
     sad, just as things may go. His first care in a morning, when he
     gets up, is to know where he will dine; and after dinner, he begins
     to think where he may pick up a supper. Night brings disquiets of
     its own. Either he climbs to a shabby garret that he has, unless
     the landlady, weary of waiting for her rent, has taken the key away
     from him; or else he slinks to some tavern on the outskirts of the
     town, where he waits for daybreak over a piece of bread and a mug
     of beer. When he has not threepence in his pocket, as sometimes
     happens, he has recourse either to a hackney carriage belonging to
     a friend, or to the coachman of some man of quality, who gives him
     a bed on the straw beside the horses. In the morning, he still has
     bits of his mattress in his hair. If the weather is mild, he
     measures the Champs Elysees all night long. With the day he
     reappears in the town, dressed over night for the morrow, and from
     the morrow sometimes dressed for the rest of the week.

     I do not rate these originals very highly. Other people make
     familiar acquaintances, and even friends, of them. They detain me
     perhaps once in a twelvemonth, if I happen to fall in with them.
     Their character stands out from the rest of the world, and breaks
     that wearisome uniformity which our bringing-up, our social
     conventions, and our arbitrary fashions have introduced. If one of
     them makes his appearance in a company, he is a piece of leaven
     which ferments and restores to each a portion of his natural
     individuality. He stirs people up, moves them, invites to praise or
     blame; he is the means of bringing out the truth, he gives honest
     people a chance of showing themselves, he unmasks the rogues; this
     is the time when a man of sense listens, and distinguishes his
     company.

     I had known my present man long ago. He used to frequent a house to
     which his clever parts had opened the door. There was an only
     daughter. He swore to the father and mother that he would marry
     their daughter. They shrugged their shoulders, laughed in his face,
     told him he was out of his senses, and I saw in an instant that his
     business was done. He wanted to borrow a few crowns from me, which
     I gave him. He worked his way, I cannot tell how, into some houses
     where he had his plate laid for him, but on condition that he
     should never open his lips without leave. He held his tongue and
     ate away in a towering rage: it was excellent to watch him in this
     state of constraint. If he could not resist breaking the treaty,
     and ever began to open his mouth, at the first word all the guests
     called out _Rameau!_ Then fury sparkled in his eyes, and he turned
     to his plate in a worse passion than ever. You were curious to know
     the man's name, and now you know it: 'tis Rameau, pupil of the
     famous man who delivered us from the plain-song that we had been
     used to chant for over a hundred years; who wrote so many
     unintelligible visions and apocalyptic truths on the theory of
     music, of which neither he nor anybody else understood a word; and
     from whom we have a certain number of operas that are not without
     harmony, refrains, random notions, uproar, triumphs, glories,
     murmurs, breathless victories, and dance-tunes that will last to
     all eternity; and who, after burying Lulli, the Florentine, will be
     himself buried by the Italian virtuosi,--a fate that he had a
     presentiment of, which made him gloomy and chagrined; for nobody is
     in such ill-humour, not even a pretty woman who awakes with a
     pimple on her nose, as an author threatened with loss of his
     reputation.

     He comes up to me. Ah, ah! here you are, my philosopher! And what
     are you doing among this pack of idlers? Can it be possible that
     you too waste your time in pushing the wood?...

     _I._--No, but when I have nothing better to do, I amuse myself by
     watching people who push it well.

     _He._--In that case you are amusing yourself with a vengeance.
     Except Philidor and Legal, there is not one of them who knows
     anything about it.

     _I._--What of M. de Bussy?

     _He._--He is as a chess-player what Mademoiselle Clairon is as an
     actress; they know of their playing, one and the other, as much as
     anybody can learn.

     _I._--You are hard to please, and I see you can forgive nothing
     short of the sublimities.

     _He._--True, in chess, women, poetry, eloquence, music, and all
     such fiddle-faddle. What is the use of mediocrity in these matters?

     _I._--Little enough, I agree. But the thing is that there must be a
     great number of men at work, for us to make sure of the man of
     genius: he is one out of a multitude. But let that pass. 'Tis an
     age since I have seen you. Though I do not often think about you
     when you are out of sight, yet it is always a pleasure to me to
     meet you. What have you been about?

     _He._--What you, I, and everybody else are about--some good, some
     bad, and nothing at all. Then, I have been hungry, and I have eaten
     when opportunity offered; after eating, I have been thirsty, and
     now and then have had something to drink. Besides that, my beard
     grew, and as it grew I had it shaved.

     _I._--There you were wrong; it is the only thing wanting to make a
     sage of you.

     _He._--Ay, ay; I have a wide and furrowed brow, a glowing eye, a
     firm nose, broad cheeks, a black and bushy eyebrow, a clean cut
     mouth, a square jaw. Cover this enormous chin with amplitude of
     beard, and I warrant you it would look vastly well in marble or in
     bronze.

     _I._--By the side of a Caesar, a Marcus Aurelius, a Socrates.

     _He._--Nay, I should be better between Diogenes, Lais, and Phryne.
     I am brazenfaced as the one, and I am happy to pay a visit to the
     others.

     _I._--Are you always well?

     _He._--Yes, commonly; but I am no great wonders to-day.

     _I._--Why, you have a paunch like Silenus, and a face like....

     _He._--A face you might take for I don't know what. The ill humour
     that dries up my dear master seems to fatten his dear pupil.

     _I._--And this dear master, do you ever see him now?

     _He._--Yes, passing along the street.

     _I._--Does he do nothing for you?

     _He._--If he has done anything for anybody, it is without knowing
     it. He is a philosopher after his fashion. He thinks of nobody but
     himself. His wife and his daughter may die as soon as they please;
     provided the church bells that toll for them continue to sound the
     _twelfth_ and the _seventeenth_, all will be well. It is lucky for
     him, and that is what I especially prize in your men of genius.
     They are only good for one thing; outside of that, nothing. They do
     not know what it is to be citizens, fathers, mothers, kinsfolk,
     friends. Between ourselves, it is no bad thing to be like them at
     every point, but we should not wish the grain to become common. We
     must have men; but men of genius, no; no, on my word; of them we
     need none. 'Tis they who change the face of the globe; and in the
     smallest things folly is so common and so almighty, that you cannot
     mend it without an infinite disturbance. Part of what they have
     dreamt comes to pass, and part remains as it was; hence two
     gospels, the dress of a harlequin. The wisdom of Rabelais's moral
     is the true wisdom both for his own repose and that of other
     people: to do one's duty so so, always to speak well of the prior,
     and to let the world go as it lists. It must go well, for most
     people are content with it. If I knew history enough, I should
     prove to you that evil has always come about here below through a
     few men of genius, but I do not know history, no more than I know
     anything else. The deuce take me, if I have learnt anything, or if
     I find myself a pin the worse for not having learnt anything. I was
     one day at the table of the minister of the King of----, who has
     brains enough for four, and he showed as plain as one and one make
     two, that nothing was more useful to people than falsehood, nothing
     more mischievous than truth. I don't remember his proofs very
     clearly, but it evidently followed from them that men of genius are
     detestable, and that if a child at its birth bore on its brow the
     mark of that dangerous gift of nature, it ought to be smothered or
     else thrown to the ducks.

     _I._--Yet such people, foes as they are to genius, all lay claim to
     it.

     _He._--I daresay they think so in their own minds, but I doubt if
     they would venture to admit it.

     _I._--Ah, that is their modesty. So you conceived from that a
     frightful antipathy to genius.

     _He._--One that I shall never get over.

     _I._--Yet I have seen the time when you were in despair at the
     thought of being only a common man. You will never be happy if the
     pro and the con distress you alike. You should take your side, and
     keep to it. Though people will agree with you that men of genius
     are usually singular, or as the proverb says, _there are no great
     wits without a grain of madness_, yet they will always look down on
     ages that have produced no men of genius. They will pay honour to
     the nations among whom they have existed; sooner or later, they
     rear statues to them, and regard them as the benefactors of the
     human race. With all deference to the sublime minister whom you
     have cited, I still believe that if falsehood may sometimes be
     useful for a moment, it is surely hurtful in the long-run; and so,
     on the other hand, truth is surely useful in the long-run, though
     it may sometimes chance to be inconvenient for the moment. Whence I
     should be tempted to conclude that the man of genius who cries down
     a general error, or wins credit for a great truth, is always a
     creature that deserves our veneration. It may happen that such an
     one falls a victim to prejudice and the laws; but there are two
     sorts of laws, the one of an equity and generality that is
     absolute, the other of an incongruous kind, which owe all their
     sanction to the blindness or exigency of circumstance. The latter
     only cover the culprit who infringes them with passing ignominy, an
     ignominy that time pours back on the judges and the nations, there
     to remain for ever. Whether is Socrates, or the authority that bade
     him drink the hemlock, in the worst dishonour in our day?

     _He._--Not so fast. Was he any the less for that condemned? Or any
     the less put to death? Or any the less a bad citizen? By his
     contempt for a bad law did he any the less encourage blockheads to
     despise good ones? Or was he any the less an audacious eccentric?
     You were close there upon an admission that would have done little
     for men of genius.

     _I._--But listen to me, my good man. A society ought not to have
     bad laws, and if it had only good ones, it would never find itself
     persecuting a man of genius. I never said to you that genius was
     inseparably bound up with wickedness, any more than wickedness is
     with genius. A fool is many a time far worse than a man of parts.
     Even supposing a man of genius to be usually of a harsh carriage,
     awkward, prickly, unbearable; even if he be thoroughly bad, what
     conclusion do you draw?

     _He._--That he ought to be drowned.

     _I._--Gently, good man. Now I will not take your uncle Rameau for
     an instance; he is harsh, he is brutal, he has no humanity, he is a
     miser, he is a bad father, bad husband, bad uncle; but it has never
     been settled that he is particularly clever, that he has advanced
     his art, or that there will be any talk of his works ten years
     hence. But Racine, now? He at any rate had genius, and did not pass
     for too good a man. And Voltaire?

     _He._--Beware of pressing me, for I am not one to shrink from
     conclusions.

     _I._--Which of the two would you prefer; that he should have been a
     worthy soul, identified with his till, like Briasson, or with his
     yard measure, like Barbier, each year producing a lawful babe, good
     husband, good father, good uncle, good neighbour, decent trader,
     but nothing more; or that he should have been treacherous,
     ambitious, envious, spiteful, but the author of _Andromaque_,
     _Britannicus_, _Iphigenie_, _Phedre_, _Athalie_?

     _He._--For his own sake, on my word, perhaps of the two men it
     would have been a great deal better that he should have been the
     first.

     _I._--That is even infinitely more true than you think.

     _He._--Ah, there you are, you others! If we say anything good and
     to the purpose, 'tis like madmen or creatures inspired, by a
     hazard; it is only you wise people who know what you mean. Yes, my
     philosopher, I know what I mean as well as you do.

     _I._--Let us see. Now why did you say that of him?

     _He._--Because all the fine things he did never brought him twenty
     thousand francs, and if he had been a silk merchant in the Rue
     Saint Denis or Saint Honore, a good wholesale grocer, an apothecary
     with plenty of customers, he would have amassed an immense fortune,
     and in amassing it, he could have enjoyed every pleasure in life;
     he would have thrown a pistole from time to time to a poor devil of
     a droll like me; we should have had good dinners at his house,
     played high play, drunk first-rate wines, first-rate liqueurs,
     first-rate coffee, had glorious excursions into the country. Now
     you see I know what I meant. You laugh? But let me go on. It would
     have been better for everybody about him.

     _I._--No doubt it would, provided that he had not put to unworthy
     use what gain he had made in lawful commerce, and had banished from
     his house all those gamesters, all those parasites, all those idle
     flatterers, all those depraved ne'er-do-wells, and had bidden his
     shop-boys give a sound beating to the officious creature who offers
     to play pander.

     _He._--A beating, sir, a beating! No one is beaten in any
     well-governed town. It is a decent enough trade; plenty of people
     with fine titles meddle with it. And what the deuce would you have
     him do with his money, if he is not to have a good table, good
     company, good wines, handsome women, pleasures of every colour,
     diversion of every sort? I would as lief be a beggar as possess a
     mighty fortune without any of these enjoyments. But go back to
     Racine. He was only good for people who did not know him, and for a
     time when he had ceased to exist.

     _I._--Granted, but weigh the good and bad. A thousand years from
     now he will draw tears, he will be the admiration of men in all the
     countries of the earth; he will inspire compassion, tenderness,
     pity. They will ask who he was, and to what land he belonged, and
     France will be envied. He brought suffering on one or two people
     who are dead, and in whom we take hardly any interest; we have
     nothing to fear from his vices or his foibles. It would have been
     better, no doubt, that he should have received from nature the
     virtues of a good man, instead of the talents of a great one. He is
     a tree which made a few other trees planted near him wither up, and
     which smothered the plants that grew at his feet; but he reared his
     height to the clouds, and his branches spread far; he lends his
     shadow to all who came, or come now, or ever shall come, to repose
     by his majestic trunk; he brought forth fruits of exquisite savour
     which are renewed again and again without ceasing.

     We might wish that Voltaire had the mildness of Duclos, the
     ingenuousness of the Abbe Trublet, the rectitude of the Abbe
     d'Olivet. But as that cannot be, let us look at the thing on the
     side of it that is really interesting; let us forget for an instant
     the point we occupy in space and time, and let us extend our
     vision over centuries to come, and peoples yet unborn, and distant
     lands yet unvisited. Let us think of the good of our race: if we
     are not generous enough, at least let us forgive nature for being
     wiser than ourselves. If you throw cold water on Greuze's head,
     very likely you will extinguish his talent along with his vanity.
     If you make Voltaire less sensitive to criticism, he will lose the
     art that took him to the inmost depths of the soul of Merope, and
     will never stir a single emotion in you more.

     _He._--But if nature be as powerful as she is wise, why did she not
     make them as good as she made them great?

     _I._--Do you not see how such reasoning as that overturns the
     general order, and that if all were excellent here below, then
     there would be nothing excellent.

     _He._--You are right. The important point is that you and I should
     be here; provided only that you and I are you and I, then let all
     besides go as it can. The best order of things, in my notion, is
     that in which I was to have a place, and a plague on the most
     perfect of worlds, if I don't belong to it! I would rather exist,
     and even be a bad hand at reasoning, than not exist at all.

     _I._--There is nobody but thinks as you do, and whoever brings his
     indictment against the order of things, forgets that he is
     renouncing his own existence.

     _He._--That is true.

     _I._--So let us accept things as they are; let us see how much they
     cost us and how much they give us, and leave the whole as it is,
     for we do not know it well enough either to praise or blame it; and
     perhaps after all it is neither good nor ill, if it is necessary,
     as so many good folk suppose.

     _He._--Now you are going beyond me. What you say seems like
     philosophy, and I warn you that I never meddle with that. All that
     I know is that I should be very well pleased to be somebody else,
     on the chance of being a genius and a great man; yes, I must agree.
     I have something here that tells me so. I never in my life heard a
     man praised, that his eulogy did not fill me with secret fury. I am
     full of envy. If I hear something about their private life that is
     a discredit to them, I listen with pleasure: it brings us nearer to
     a level; I bear my mediocrity more comfortably. I say to myself:
     Ah, thou couldst never have done _Mahomet_, nor the eulogy on
     Maupeou. So I have always been, and I always shall be, mortified at
     my own mediocrity. Yes, I tell you I am mediocre, and it provokes
     me. I never heard the overture to the _Indes galantes_ performed,
     nor the _Profonds abimes de Tenare, Nuit, eternelle nuit_, sung
     without saying to myself: That is what thou wilt never do. So I was
     jealous of my uncle.

     _I._--If that is the only thing that chagrins you, it is hardly
     worth the trouble.

     _He._--'Tis nothing, only a passing humour. [Then he set himself to
     hum the overture and the air he had spoken of, and went on:]

     The something which is here and speaks to me says: Rameau, thou
     wouldst fain have written those two pieces: if thou hadst done
     those two pieces, thou wouldst soon do two others; and after thou
     hadst done a certain number, they would play thee and sing thee
     everywhere. In walking, thou wouldst hold thy head erect, thy
     conscience would testify within thy bosom to thy own merit; the
     others would point thee out, There goes the man who wrote the
     pretty gavottes [and he hummed the gavottes. Then with the air of a
     man bathed in delight and his eyes shining with it, he went on,
     rubbing his hands:] Thou shalt have a fine house [he marked out its
     size with his arms], a famous bed [he stretched himself luxuriously
     upon it], capital wines [he sipped them in imagination, smacking
     his lips], a handsome equipage [he raised his foot as if to mount],
     a hundred varlets who will come to offer thee fresh incense every
     day [and he fancied he saw them all around him, Palissot,
     Poinsinet, the two Frerons, Laporte, he heard them, approved of
     them, smiled at them, contemptuously repulsed them, drove them
     away, called them back; then he continued:] And it is thus they
     would tell thee on getting up in a morning that thou art a great
     man; thou wouldst read in the _Histoire des Trois Siecles_ that
     thou art a great man, thou wouldst be convinced of an evening that
     thou art a great man, and the great man Rameau would fall asleep to
     the soft murmur of the eulogy that would ring in his ears; even as
     he slept he would have a complacent air; his chest would expand,
     and rise, and fall with comfort; he would move like a great man ...
     [and as he talked he let himself sink softly on a bench, he closed
     his eyes, and imitated the blissful sleep that his mind was
     picturing. After relishing the sweetness of this repose for a few
     instants he awoke, stretched his arms, yawned, rubbed his eyes, and
     looked about him for his pack of vapid flatterers].

     _I._--You think, then, the happy mortal has his sleep?

     _He._--Think so! A sorry wretch like me! At night when I get back
     to my garret, and burrow in my truckle-bed, I shrink up under my
     blanket, my chest is all compressed, and I can hardly breathe; it
     seems like a moan that you can barely hear. Now a banker makes the
     room ring and astonishes a whole street. But what afflicts me
     to-day, is not that I snore and sleep meanly and shabbily, like a
     paltry outcast.

     _I._--Yet that is a sorry thing enough.

     _He._--What has befallen me is still more so.

     _I._--What is that?

     _He._--You have always taken some interest in me, because I am a
     _bon diable_, whom you rather despise at bottom, but who diverts
     you.

     _I._--Well, that is the plain truth.

     _He._--I will tell you. [Before beginning he heaved a profound
     sigh, and clasped his brow with his two hands. Then he recovers his
     tranquillity and says:]

     You know that I am an ignoramus, a fool, a madman, an impertinent,
     a sluggard, a glutton....

     _I._--What a panegyric!

     _He._--'Tis true to the letter, there is not a word to take away;
     prithee, no debate on that. No one knows me better. I know myself
     and I do not tell the whole.

     _I._--I have no wish to cross you, and I will agree to anything.

     _He._--Well, I used to live with people, who took a liking for me,
     plainly because I was gifted with all these qualities to such a
     rare degree.

     _I._--That is curious. Until now I always thought that people hid
     these things even from themselves, or else that they granted
     themselves pardon, while they despised them in others.

     _He._--Hide them from themselves! Can men do that? You may be sure
     that when Palissot is all alone and returns upon himself, he tells
     a very different tale; you may be sure that when he talks quietly
     with his colleague, they candidly admit that they are only a pair
     of mighty rogues. Despise such things in others! My people were far
     more equitable, and they took my character for a perfect nonesuch;
     I was in clover; they feasted me, they did not lose me from their
     sight for a single instant without sighing for my return. I was
     their excellent Rameau, their dear Rameau, their Rameau the mad,
     the impertinent, the lazy, the greedy, the merry-man, the lout.
     There was not one of these epithets which did not bring me a smile,
     a caress, a tap on the shoulder, a cuff, a kick; at table, a titbit
     tossed on to my plate; away from the table, a freedom that I took
     without consequences, for, do you see, I am a man without
     consequence. They do with me and before me and at me whatever they
     like, without my standing on any ceremony. And the little presents
     that showered on me! The great hound that I am, I have lost all! I
     have lost all for having had common sense once, one single time in
     my life. Ah! if that ever chances again!

     _I._--What was the matter, then?

     _He._--Rameau, Rameau, did they ever take you for that? The folly
     of having had a little taste, a trifle of wit, a spice of reason;
     Rameau, my friend, that will teach you the difference between what
     God made you, and what your protectors wanted you to be. So they
     took you by the shoulder, they led you to the door, and cried: "Be
     off, rascal; never appear more. He would fain have sense, reason,
     wit, I declare! Off with you; we have all these qualities and to
     spare!" You went away biting your thumb; it was your infernal
     tongue, that you ought to have bitten before all this. For not
     bethinking you of that, here you are in the gutter without a
     farthing, or a place to lay your head. You were well housed, and
     now you will be lucky if you get your garret again; you had a good
     bed, and now a truss of straw awaits you between M. de Soubise's
     coachman and friend Robbe. Instead of the gentle quiet slumber that
     you had, you will have the neighing and stamping of horses all
     night long--you wretch, idiot, possessed by a million devils!

     _I._--But is there no way of setting things straight? Is the fault
     you committed so unpardonable? If I were you, I should go find my
     people again. You are more indispensable to them than you suppose.

     _He._--Oh, as for that, I know that now they have me no longer to
     make fun for them, they are dull as ditch-water.

     _I._--Then I should go back: I would not give them time enough to
     learn how to get on without me, or to turn to some more decent
     amusement. For who knows what may happen?

     _He._--That is not what I am afraid of: that will never come to
     pass.

     _I._--But sublime as you may be, some one else may replace you.

     _He._--Hardly.

     _I._--Hardly, it is true. Still I would go with that lacklustre
     face, those haggard eyes, that open breast, that tumbled hair, in
     that downright tragic state in which you are now. I would throw
     myself at the feet of the divinity, and without rising I would say
     with a low and sobbing voice: "Forgive me, madam! Forgive me! I am
     the vilest of creatures. It was only one unfortunate moment, for
     you know I am not subject to common sense, and I promise you, I
     will never have it again so long as I live."

     [The diverting part of it was that, while I discoursed to him in
     this way, he executed it pantomimically, and threw himself on the
     ground; with his eyes fixed on the earth, he seemed to hold between
     his two hands the tip of a slipper, he wept, he sobbed, he cried:
     "Yes, my queen, yes, I promise, I never will, so long as I live, so
     long as ever I live...." Then recovering himself abruptly, he went
     on in a serious and deliberate tone:]

     _He._--Yes, you are right; I see it is the best. Yet to go and
     humiliate one's self before a hussy, cry for mercy at the feet of a
     little actress with the hisses of the pit for ever in her ears! I,
     Rameau, son of Rameau, the apothecary of Dijon, who is a good man
     and never yet bent his knee to a creature in the world! I, Rameau,
     who have composed pieces for the piano that nobody plays, but which
     will perhaps be the only pieces ever to reach posterity, and
     posterity will play them--I, I, must go! Stay, sir, it cannot be
     [and striking his right hand on his breast, he went on:] I feel
     here something that rises and tells me: Never, Rameau, never. There
     must be a certain dignity attached to human nature that nothing can
     stifle; it awakes _a propos des bottes_; you cannot explain it; for
     there are other days when it would cost me not a pang to be as vile
     as you like, and for a halfpenny there is nothing too dirty for me
     to do.

     _I._--Then if the expedient I have suggested to you is not to your
     taste, have courage enough to remain a beggar.

     _He._--'Tis hard being a beggar, while there are so many rich
     fools at whose expense one can live. And the contempt for one's
     self, it is insupportable.

     _I._--Do you know that sentiment?

     _He._--Know it! How many times have I said to myself: What, Rameau,
     there are ten thousand good tables in Paris, with fifteen or twenty
     covers apiece, and of these covers not one for thee! There are
     purses full of gold which is poured out right and left, and not a
     crown of it falls to thee! A thousand witlings without parts and
     without worth, a thousand paltry creatures without a charm, a
     thousand scurvy intriguers, are all well clad, while thou must go
     bare! Canst thou be such a nincompoop as all this? Couldst thou not
     flatter as well as anybody else? Couldst thou not find out how to
     lie, swear, forswear, promise, keep or break, like anybody else?
     Couldst thou not favour the intrigue of my lady, and carry the
     love-letter of my lord, like anybody else? Couldst thou not find
     out the trick of making some shopkeeper's daughter understand how
     shabbily dressed she is, how two fine earrings, a touch of rouge,
     some lace, and a Polish gown would make her ravishing; that those
     little feet were not made for trudging through the mud; that there
     is a handsome gentleman, young, rich, in a coat covered with lace,
     with a superb carriage and six fine lackeys, who once saw her as he
     passed, who thought her charming and wonderful, and that ever since
     that day he has taken neither bite nor sup, cannot sleep at nights,
     and will surely die of it?... He comes, he pleases, the little maid
     vanishes, and I pocket my two thousand crowns. What, thou hast a
     talent like this, and yet in want of bread? Shame on thee, wretch!
     I recalled a crowd of scoundrels who were not a patch upon me, and
     yet were rolling in money. There was I in serge, and they in
     velvet; they leaned on gold-headed canes, and had fine rings on
     their fingers. And what were they? Wretched bungling strummers, and
     now they are a kind of fine gentlemen. At such times I felt full of
     courage, my soul inflamed and elevated, my wits alert and subtle,
     and capable of anything in the world. But this happy turn did not
     last, it would seem, for so far I have not been able to make much
     way. However that may be, there is the text of my frequent
     soliloquies, which you may paraphrase as you choose, provided you
     are sure that I know what self-contempt is, and that torture of
     conscience which comes of the usefulness of the gifts that heaven
     has bestowed on us; that is the cruellest stroke of all. A man
     might almost as well never have been born.

     [I had listened to him all the time, and as he enacted the scene
     with the poor girl, with my heart moved by two conflicting
     emotions, I did not know whether to give myself up to the longing I
     had to laugh, or to a transport of indignation. I was distressingly
     perplexed between two humours; twenty times an uncontrollable burst
     of laughter kept my anger back, and twenty times the anger that was
     rising from the bottom of my soul suddenly ended in a burst of
     laughter. I was confounded by so much shrewdness and so much
     vileness, by ideas now so just and then so false, by such general
     perversity of sentiments, such complete turpitude, and such
     marvellously uncommon frankness. He perceived the struggle going on
     within me:] What ails you? said he.

     _I._--Nothing.

     _He._--You seem to be disturbed.

     _I._--And I am.

     _He._--But now, after all, what do you advise me to do?

     _I._--To change your way of talking. You unfortunate soul, to what
     abject state have you fallen!

     _He._--I admit it. And yet, do not let my state touch you too
     deeply; I had no intention, in opening my mind to you, to give you
     pain. I managed to scrape up a few savings when I was with the
     people. Remember that I wanted nothing, not a thing, and they made
     me a certain allowance for pocket-money.

     [He again began to tap his brow with one of his fists, to bite his
     lips, and to roll his eyes towards the ceiling, going on to say:]

     But 'tis all over; I have put something aside; time has passed, and
     that is always so much gained.

     _I._--So much lost, you mean.

     _He._--No, no; gained. People grow rich every moment; a day less to
     live, or a crown to the good, 'tis all one. When the last moment
     comes, one is as rich as another; Samuel Bernard, who by pillaging
     and stealing and playing bankrupt, leaves seven and twenty million
     francs in gold, is just like Rameau, who leaves not a penny, and
     will be indebted to charity for a shroud to wrap round him. The
     dead man hears not the tolling of the bell; 'tis in vain that a
     hundred priests bawl dirges for him, and that a long file of
     blazing torches go before: his soul walks not by the side of the
     master of the ceremonies. To moulder under marble, or to moulder
     under clay, 'tis still to moulder. To have around one's bier
     children in red and children in blue, or to have not a creature,
     what matters it? And then, look at this wrist, it was stiff as the
     devil; the ten fingers, they were so many sticks fastened into a
     metacarpus made of wood; and these muscles were like old strings of
     catgut, drier, stiffer, harder to bend than if that they had been
     used for a turner's wheel; but I have so twisted and broken and
     bent them. What, thou wilt not go? And I say that thou shalt....

     [And at this, with his right hand he seized the fingers and wrist
     of his left hand, and turned them first up and then down. The
     extremity of the fingers touched the arm, till the joints cracked
     again. I was afraid every instant that the bones would remain
     dislocated.]

     _I._--Take care, you will do yourself a mischief.

     _He._--Don't be afraid, they are used to it. For ten years I have
     given it them in a very different style. They had to accustom
     themselves to it, however they liked it, and to learn to find their
     place on the keys and to leap over the strings. So now they go
     where they must.

     [At the same moment he threw himself into the attitude of a
     violin-player; he hummed an allegro of Locatelli's; his right arm
     imitated the movement of the bow; his left hand and his fingers
     seemed to be feeling along the handle. If he makes a false note, he
     stops, tightens or slackens his string, and strikes it with his
     nail, to make sure of its being in tune, and then takes up the
     piece where he left off. He beats time with his foot, moves his
     head, his feet, his hands, his arms, his body, as you may have seen
     Ferrari or Chiabran, or some other virtuoso in the same
     convulsions, presenting the image of the same torture, and giving
     me nearly as much pain; for is it not a painful thing to watch the
     torture of a man who is busy painting pleasure for my benefit? Draw
     a curtain to hide the man from me, if he must show me the spectacle
     of a victim on the rack. In the midst of all these agitations and
     cries, if there occurred one of those harmonious passages where the
     bow moves slowly over several of the strings at once, his face put
     on an air of ecstasy, his voice softened, he listened to himself
     with perfect ravishment; it is undoubted that the chorus sounded
     both in his ears and mine. Then replacing his imaginary instrument
     under his left arm with the same hand by which he held it, and
     letting his right hand drop with the bow in it, said:]

     Well, what do you think of it?

     _I._--Wonderful!

     _He._--Not bad, I fancy; it sounds pretty much like the others....
     [And then he stooped down, like a musician placing himself at the
     piano.]

     _I._--Nay, I beg you to be merciful both to me and to yourself.

     _He._--No, no; now that I have got you, you shall hear me. I will
     have no vote that is given without your knowing why. You will say a
     good word for me with more confidence, and that will be worth a
     new pupil to me.

     _I._--But I am so little in the world, and you will tire yourself
     all to no purpose.

     _He._--I am never tired.

     [As I saw that it was useless to have pity on my man, for the
     sonata on the violin had bathed him in perspiration, I resolved to
     let him do as he would. So behold him seated at the piano, his legs
     bent, his head thrown back towards the ceiling, where you would
     have thought he saw a score written up, humming, preluding, dashing
     off a piece of Alberti's or Galuppi's, I forget which. His voice
     went like the wind, and his fingers leapt over the imaginary keys.
     The various passions succeeded one another on his face; you
     observed on it tenderness, anger, pleasure, sorrow; you felt the
     piano notes, the forte notes, and I am sure that a more skilful
     musician than myself would have recognised the piece by the
     movement and the character, by his gestures, and by a few notes of
     airs which escaped from him now and again. But the absurd thing was
     to see him from time to time hesitate and take himself up as if he
     had gone wrong.]

     Now, you perceive, said he, rising and wiping away the drops of
     sweat which rolled down his cheeks, that we know how to place our
     third, our superfluous fifth, and that we know all about our
     dominants. Those enharmonic passages, about which the dear uncle
     makes such fuss, they are not like having the sea to swallow; we
     can manage them well enough.

     _I._--You have given yourself a great deal of trouble to show me
     that you are uncommonly clever; but I would have taken your word
     for it.

     _He._--Uncommonly clever; oh no! For my trade, I know it decently,
     and that is more than one wants; for in this country is one obliged
     to know all that one shows?

     _I._--No more than to know all that one teaches.

     _He._--That is true, most thoroughly true. Now, sir philosopher,
     your hand on your conscience, speak the truth; there was a time
     when you were not a man of such substance as you are to-day.

     _I._--I am not so very substantial even now.

     _He._--But you would not go now to the Luxembourg in
     summer-time.... You remember?

     _I._--No more of that. Yes, I do remember.

     _He._--In an overcoat of gray shag?

     _I._--Ay, ay.

     _He._--Terribly worn at one side, with one of the sleeves torn; and
     black woollen stockings mended at the back with white thread.

     _I._--Yes, anything you like.

     _He._--What were you doing in the alley of Sighs?

     _I._--Cutting a shabby figure enough, I daresay.

     _He._--You used to give lessons in mathematics?

     _I._--Without knowing a word about them. Is not that what you want
     to come to?

     _He._--Exactly so.

     _I._--I learnt by teaching others, and I turned out some good
     pupils.

     _He_--That may be; but music is not like algebra or geometry. Now
     that you are a substantial personage....

     _I._--Not so substantial, I tell you.

     _He._--And have a good lining to your purse....

     _I._--Not so good.

     _He._--Let your daughter have masters.

     _I._--Not yet; it is her mother who looks to her education, for one
     must have peace in one's house.

     _He._--Peace in one's house? You have only that, when you are
     either master or servant, and it should be master. I had a
     wife--may heaven bless her soul--but when it happened sometimes
     that she played malapert, I used to mount the high horse, and bring
     out my thunder. I used to say like the Creator: Let there be light,
     and there was light. So for four years we had not ten times in all
     one word higher than another. How old is your child?

     _I._--That has nothing to do with the matter.

     _He._--How old is your child, I say?

     _I._--The devil take you, leave my child and her age alone, and
     return to the master she is to have.

     _He._--I know nothing so pig-headed as a philosopher. In all
     humility and supplication, might one not know from his highness the
     philosopher, about what age her ladyship, his daughter, may be?

     _I._--I suppose she is eight.

     _He._--Eight! Then four years ago she ought to have had her fingers
     on the keys.

     _I._--But perhaps I have no fancy for including in the scheme of
     her education a study that takes so much time and is good for so
     little.

     _He._--And what will you teach her, if you please?

     _I._--To reason justly, if I can; a thing so uncommon among men,
     and more uncommon still among women.

     _He._--Oh, let her reason as ill as she chooses, if she is only
     pretty, amusing, and coquettish.

     _I._--As nature has been unkind enough to give her a delicate
     organisation with a very sensitive soul, and to expose her to the
     same troubles in life as if she had a strong organisation and a
     heart of bronze, I will teach her, if I can, to bear them
     courageously.

     _He._--Let her weep and give herself airs, and have nerves all on
     edge like the rest, if only she is pretty, amusing, and coquettish.
     What, is she to learn no dancing nor deportment?

     _I._--Yes, just enough to make a curtsey, to have a good carriage,
     to enter a room gracefully, and to know how to walk.

     _He._--No singing?

     _I._--Just enough to pronounce her words well.

     _He._--No music?

     _I._--If there were a good teacher of harmony, I would gladly
     entrust her to him two hours a day for two or three years, not any
     more.

     _He._--And instead of the essential things that you are going to
     suppress?...

     _I._--I place grammar, fables, history, geography, a little
     drawing, and a great deal of morality.

     _He._--How easy it would be for me to prove to you the uselessness
     of all such knowledge in a world like ours? Uselessness, do I say?
     Perhaps even the danger! But I will for the moment ask you a single
     question, will she not require one or two masters?

     _I._--No doubt.

     _He._--And you hope that these masters will know the grammar, the
     fables, the history, the geography, the morality, in which they
     will give her lessons? Moonshine, my dear mentor, sheer moonshine!
     If they knew these things well enough to teach them to other
     people, they never would teach them?

     _I._--And why?

     _He._--Because they would have spent all their lives in studying
     them. It is necessary to be profound in art and science, to know
     its elements thoroughly. Classical books can only be well done by
     those who have grown gray in harness; it is the middle and the end
     which light up the darkness of the beginning. Ask your friend
     D'Alembert, the coryphaeus of mathematics, if he thinks himself too
     good to write about the elements. It was not till after thirty or
     forty years of practice that my uncle got a glimpse of the
     profundities and the first rays of light in musical theory.

     _I._--O madman, arch-madman, I cried, how comes it that in thine
     evil head such just ideas go pell-mell with such a mass of
     extravagances?

     _He._--Who on earth can find that out? 'Tis chance that flings them
     to you, and they remain. If you do not know the whole of a thing,
     you know none of it well; you do not know whither one thing leads,
     nor whence another has come, where this and that should be placed,
     which ought to pass the first, and where the second would be best.
     Can you teach well without method? And method, whence comes that? I
     vow to you, my dear philosopher, I have a notion that physics will
     always be a poor science, a drop of water raised by a needle-point
     from the vast ocean, a grain loosened from an Alpine chain. And
     then, seeking the reasons of phenomena! In truth, one might every
     whit as well be ignorant, as know so little and know it so ill; and
     that was exactly my doctrine when I gave myself out for a
     music-master. What are you musing over?

     _I._--I am thinking that all you have told me is more specious than
     solid. But that is no matter. You taught, you say, accompaniment
     and composition.

     _He._--Yes.

     _I._--And you knew nothing about either.

     _He._--No, i' faith; and that is why there were worse than I was,
     namely those who fancied they knew something. At any rate, I did
     not spoil either the child's taste or its hands. When they passed
     from me to a good master, if they had learnt nothing, at all events
     they had nothing to unlearn, and that was always so much time and
     so much money saved.

     _I._--What did you do?

     _He._--What they all do! I got there, I threw myself into a chair.
     "What shocking weather! How tiring the streets are!" Then some
     gossip: "Mademoiselle Lemierre was to have taken the part of Vestal
     in the new opera, but she is in an interesting condition for the
     second time, and they do not know who will take her place.
     Mademoiselle Arnould has just left her little Count: they say she
     is negotiating with Bertin.... That poor Dumesnil no longer knows
     either what he is saying or what he is doing.... Now, Miss, take
     your book." While Miss, who is in no hurry, is looking for her
     book, which is lost, while they call the housemaid and scold and
     make a great stir, I continue--"The Clairon is really
     incomprehensible. They talk of a marriage which is outrageously
     absurd: 'tis that of Miss ... what is her name? a little creature
     that used to live with so and so, etcetera, etcetera:--Come,
     Rameau, you are talking nonsense; it is impossible.--I don't talk
     nonsense at all; they even say it is done. There is a rumour that
     Voltaire is dead, and so much the better.--And pray, why so much
     the better?--Because he must be going to give us something more
     laughable than usual; it is always his custom to die a fortnight
     before." What more shall I tell you? I used to tell certain
     naughtinesses that I brought from houses where I had been, for we
     are all of us great fetchers and carriers. I played the madman,
     they listened to me, they laughed, they called out: How charming he
     is! Meanwhile Missy's book had been found under the sofa, where it
     had been pulled about, gnawed, torn by a puppy or a kitten. She sat
     down to the piano. At first she made a noise on it by herself; then
     I went towards her, after giving her mother a sign of approbation.
     The mother: "That is not bad; people have only to be in earnest,
     but they are not in earnest; they would rather waste their time in
     chattering, in disarranging things, in gadding hither and thither,
     and I know not what besides. Your back is no sooner turned, M.
     Rameau, than the book is shut up, not to be opened until your next
     visit; still you never scold her." Then, as something had to be
     done, I took hold of her hands and placed them differently; I got
     out of temper, I called out "_Sol, Sol, Sol_, Miss, it is a _Sol_."
     The mother: "Have you no ear? I am not at the piano, and I can't
     see your book, yet I know it ought to be a _Sol_. You are most
     troublesome to your teacher; I can't tell how he is so patient; you
     do not remember a word of what he says to you; you make no
     progress...." Then I would lower my tone rather, and throwing my
     head on one side, would say: "Pardon me, madam, all would go very
     well if the young lady liked, if she only studied a little more;
     but it is not bad." The mother: "If I were you, I should keep her
     at one piece for a whole year." "Oh, as for that, she shall not
     leave it before she has mastered every difficulty, and that will
     not be as long as you may think." "Monsieur Rameau, you flatter
     her, you are too good. That is the only part of the lesson which
     she will keep in mind, and she will take care to repeat it to me
     upon occasion...." And so the time got over; my pupil presented me
     my little fee, with the curtsey she had learnt from the dancing
     master. I put it into my pocket while the mother said: "Very well
     done, mademoiselle; if Favillier were here, he would applaud you."
     I chattered a moment or two for politeness' sake, and behold, that
     was what they call a music lesson.

     _I._--Well, and now it is quite another thing?

     _He._--Another thing! I should think so, indeed. I get there. I am
     deadly grave; I take off my cuffs hastily, I open the piano, I run
     my fingers over the keys, I am always in a desperate hurry. If they
     keep me waiting a moment, I cry out as if they were robbing me of a
     crown piece: in an hour from now I must be so and so; in two hours,
     with the duchess of so and so; I am expected to dine with a
     handsome marchioness, and then, on leaving her, there is a concert
     at the baron's....

     _I._--And all the time nobody is expecting you anywhere at all?

     _He._--No.

     _I._--What vile arts!

     _He._--Vile, forsooth! Why vile? They are customary among people
     like me; I don't lower myself in doing like everybody else. I was
     not the inventor of them, and it would be most absurd and stupid in
     me not to conform to them. Of course, I know very well that if you
     go to certain principles of some morality or other, which all the
     world have in their mouths, and which none of them practise, you
     will find black is white, and white will become black. But, my
     philosopher, there is a general conscience, just as there is a
     general grammar; and then the exceptions in each language that you
     learned people call--what is it you call them?

     _I._--Idioms.

     _He._--Ah, exactly; well, each condition of life has its exceptions
     to the general conscience, to which I should like to give the title
     of idioms of vocation.

     _I._--I understand. Fontenelle speaks well, writes well, though his
     style swarms with French _idioms_.

     _He._--And the sovereign, the minister, the banker, the magistrate,
     the soldier, the man of letters, the lawyer, the merchant, the
     artisan, the singing master, the dancing master, are all most
     worthy folk, though their practice strays in some points from the
     general conscience, and abounds in moral idioms. The older the
     institution, the more the idioms; the worse the times, the more do
     idioms multiply. The man is worth so much, his trade is worth the
     same; and reciprocally. At last, the trade counts for so much, the
     man for the same. So people take care to make the trade go for as
     much as they can.

     _I._--All that I gather clearly from this twisted stuff is, that
     there are very few callings honestly carried on, and very few
     honest men in their callings.

     _He._--Good, there are none at all; but in revenge, there are few
     rogues out of their own shops; and all would go excellently but for
     a certain number of persons who are called assiduous, exact,
     fulfilling their strict duty most rigorously, or, what comes to the
     same thing, for ever in their shops, and carrying on their trade
     from morning until night, and doing nothing else in the world. So
     they are the only people who grow rich and are esteemed.

     _I._--By force of idioms.

     _He._--That is it; I see you understand me. Now, an idiom that
     belongs to nearly all conditions--for there are some that are
     common to all countries and all times, just as there are follies
     that are universal--a common idiom, is to procure for one's self as
     many customers as one possibly can; a common folly is to believe
     that he is cleverest who has most of them. There are two
     exceptions to the general conscience, with which you must comply.
     There is a kind of credit; it is nothing in itself, but it is made
     worth something by opinion. They say, _good character is better
     than golden girdle_: yet the man who has a good character has not a
     golden girdle, and I see nowadays that the golden girdle hardly
     stands in much need of character. One ought, if possible, to have
     both girdle and character, and that is my object when I give myself
     importance by what you describe as vile arts, and poor unworthy
     tricks. I give my lesson and I give it well; behold the general
     rule. I make them think I have more lessons to give than the day
     has hours; behold the idiom.

     _I._--And the lesson; you do give it well?

     _He._--Yes, not ill; passably. The thorough bass of the dear master
     has simplified all that. In old days I used to steal my pupil's
     money. Yes, I stole it, that is certain; now I earn it, at least
     like my neighbours.

     _I._--And did you steal it without remorse?

     _He._--Oh, without remorse. They say that if one thief pilfers from
     another, the devil laughs. The parents were bursting with a
     fortune, which had been got the Lord knows how. They were people
     about the court, financiers, great merchants, bankers. I helped to
     make them disgorge, I and the rest of the people they employed. In
     nature, all species devour one another; so all ranks devour one
     another in society. We do justice on one another, without any
     meddling from the law. The other day it was Deschamps, now it is
     Guimard, who avenges the prince of the financier; and it is the
     milliner, the jeweller, the upholsterer, the hosier, the draper,
     the lady's-maid, the cook, the saddler, who avenge the financier of
     Deschamps. In the midst of it all, there is only the imbecile or
     the sloth who suffers injury without inflicting it. Whence you see
     that these exceptions to the general conscience, or these moral
     idioms about which they make such a stir, are nothing, after all,
     and that you only need to take a clear survey of the whole.

     _I._--I admire yours.

     _He._--And then misery! The voice of conscience and of honour is
     terribly weak, when the stomach calls out. Enough to say that if
     ever I grow rich I shall be bound to restore, and I have made up my
     mind to restore in every possible fashion, by eating, drinking,
     gambling, and whatever else you please.

     _I._--I have some fears about your ever growing rich.

     _He._--I have suspicions myself.

     _I._--But if things should fall so, what then?

     _He._--I would do like all other beggars set on horseback: I would
     be the most insolent ruffler that has ever been seen. Then I should
     recall all that they have made me go through, and should pay them
     back with good interest all the advances that they have been good
     enough to make me. I am fond of command, and I will command. I am
     fond of praise, and I will make them praise me. I will have in my
     pay the whole troop of flatterers, parasites, and buffoons, and
     I'll say to them, as has been said to me: "Come, knaves, let me be
     amused," and amused I shall be; "Pull me some honest folk to
     pieces," and so they will be, if honest folk can be found. We will
     be jolly over our cups, we will have all sorts of vices and
     whimsies; it will be delicious. We will prove that Voltaire has no
     genius; that Buffon, everlastingly perched upon his stilts, is only
     a turgid declaimer; that Montesquieu is nothing more than a man
     with a touch of ingenuity; we will send D'Alembert packing to his
     fusty mathematics. We will welcome before and behind all the pigmy
     Catos like you, whose modesty is the prop of pride, and whose
     sobriety is a fine name for not being able to help yourselves.

     _I._--From the worthy use to which you would put your riches, I
     perceive what a pity it is that you are a beggar. You would live
     thus in a manner that would be eminently honourable to the human
     race, eminently useful to your countrymen, and eminently glorious
     for yourself.

     _He._--You are mocking me, sir philosopher. But you do not know
     whom you are laughing at. You do not suspect that at this moment I
     represent the most important part of the town and the court. Our
     millionaires in all ranks have, or have not, said to themselves
     exactly the same things as I have just confided to you; but the
     fact is, the life that I should lead is precisely their life. What
     a notion you people have; you think that the same sort of happiness
     is made for all the world. What a strange vision! Yours supposes a
     certain romantic spirit that we know nothing of, a singular
     character, a peculiar taste. You adorn this incongruous mixture
     with the name of philosophy; but now, are virtue and philosophy
     made for all the world? He has them who can get them, and he keeps
     them who can. Imagine the universe sage and philosophical; agree
     that it would be a most diabolically gloomy spot. Come, long live
     philosophy! The wisdom of Solomon for ever! To drink good wines, to
     cram one's self with dainty dishes, to rest in beds of down: except
     that, all, all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

     _I._--What, to defend one's native land?

     _He._--Vanity; there is native land no more; I see nought from pole
     to pole but tyrants and slaves.

     _I._--To help one's friends?

     _He._--Vanity; has one any friends? If one had, ought we to turn
     them into ingrates? Look well, and you will see that this is all
     you get by doing services. Gratitude is a burden, and every burden
     is made to be shaken off.

     _I._--To have a position in society and fulfil its duties?

     _He._--Vanity; what matters it whether you have a position or not,
     provided you are rich, since you only seek a position to become
     rich? To fulfil one's duties, what does that lead to? To jealousy,
     trouble, persecution. Is that the way to get on? Nay, indeed: to
     see the great, to court them, study their taste, bow to their
     fancies, serve their vices, praise their injustice--there is the
     secret.

     _I._--To watch the education of one's children?

     _He._--Vanity; that is a tutor's business.

     _I._--But if this tutor, having picked up his principles from you,
     happens to neglect his duties, who will pay the penalty?

     _He._--Not I, at any rate, but most likely the husband of my
     daughter, or the wife of my son.

     _I._--But suppose that they both plunge into vice and debauchery?

     _He._--That belongs to their position.

     _I._--Suppose they bring themselves into dishonour?

     _He._--You never come into dishonour, if you are rich, whatever you
     do.

     _I._--Suppose they ruin themselves?

     _He._--So much the worse for them.

     _I._--You will not pay much heed to your wife?

     _He._--None whatever, if you please. The best compliment, I think,
     that a man can pay his dearer half, is to do what pleases himself.
     In your opinion, would not society be mightily amusing if everybody
     in it was always attending to his duties?

     _I._--Why not? The evening is never so fair to me as when I am
     satisfied with my morning.

     _He._--And to me also.

     _I._--What makes the men of the world so dainty in their
     amusements, is their profound idleness.

     _He._--Pray do not think that; they are full of trouble.

     _I._--As they never tire themselves, they are never refreshed.

     _He._--Don't suppose that either. They are incessantly worn out.

     _I._--Pleasure is always a business for them, never the
     satisfaction of a necessity.

     _He._--So much the better; necessity is always a trouble.

     _I._--They wear everything out. Their soul gets blunted, weariness
     seizes them. A man who should take their life in the midst of all
     their crushing abundance would do them a kindness. The only part of
     happiness that they know is the part that loses its edge. I do not
     despise the pleasures of the senses: I have a palate, too, and it
     is tickled by a well-seasoned dish or a fine wine; I have a heart
     and eyes, and I like to see a handsome woman. Sometimes with my
     friends, a gay party, even if it waxes somewhat tumultuous, does
     not displease me. But I will not dissemble from you that it is
     infinitely pleasanter to me to have succoured the unfortunate, to
     have ended some thorny business, to have given wholesome counsel,
     done some pleasant reading, taken a walk with some man or woman
     dear to me, passed instructive hours with my children, written a
     good page, fulfilled the duties of my position, said to the woman
     that I love a few soft things that bring her arm round my neck. I
     know actions which I would give all that I possess to have done.
     _Mahomet_ is a sublime work; I would a hundred times rather have
     got justice for the memory of the Calas. A person of my
     acquaintance fled to Carthagena; he was the younger son in a
     country where custom transfers all the property to the eldest.
     There he learns that his eldest brother, a petted son, after having
     despoiled his father and mother of all that they possessed, had
     driven them out of the castle, and that the poor old souls were
     languishing in indigence in some small country town. What does he
     do--this younger son who in consequence of the harsh treatment he
     had received at the hand of his parents had gone to seek his
     fortune far away? He sends them help; he makes haste to set his
     affairs in order, he returns with his riches, he restores his
     father and mother to their home, and finds husbands for his
     sisters. Ah, my dear Rameau, that man looked upon this period as
     the happiest in his life; he had tears in his eyes when he spoke to
     me of it, and even as I tell you the story, I feel my heart beat
     faster, and my tongue falter for sympathy.

     _He._--Singular beings, you are!

     _I._--'Tis you who are beings much to be pitied, if you cannot
     imagine that one rises above one's lot, and that it is impossible
     to be unhappy under the shelter of good actions.

     _He._--That is a kind of felicity with which I should find it hard
     to familiarise myself, for we do not often come across it. But,
     then, according to you, we should be good.

     _I._--To be happy, assuredly.

     _He._--Yet I see an infinity of honest people who are not happy,
     and an infinity of people who are happy without being honest.

     _I._--You think so.

     _He._--And is it not for having had common sense and frankness for
     a moment, that I don't know where to go for a supper to-night?

     _I._--Nay, it is for not having had it always; it is because you
     did not perceive in good time that one ought first and foremost to
     provide a resource independent of servitude.

     _He._--Independent or not, the resource I had provided is at any
     rate the most comfortable.

     _I._--And the least sure and least decent.

     _He._--But the most conformable to my character of sloth, madman,
     and good-for-nought.

     _I._--Just so.

     _He._--And since I can secure my happiness by vices which are
     natural to me, which I have acquired without labour, which I
     preserve without effort, which go well with the manners of my
     nation, which are to the taste of those who protect me, and are
     more in harmony with their small private necessities than virtues
     which would weary them by being a standing accusation against them
     from morning to night, why, it would be very singular for me to go
     and torment myself like a lost spirit, for the sake of making
     myself into somebody other than I am, to put on a character
     foreign to my own, and qualities which I will admit to be highly
     estimable, in order to avoid discussion, but which it would cost me
     a great deal to acquire, and a great deal to practise, and would
     lead to nothing, or possibly to worse than nothing, through the
     continual satire of the rich among whom beggars like me have to
     seek their subsistence. We praise virtue, but we hate it, and shun
     it, and know very well that it freezes the marrow of our bones--and
     in this world one must have one's feet warm. And then all that
     would infallibly fill me with ill-humour; for why do we so
     constantly see religious people so harsh, so querulous, so
     unsociable? 'Tis because they have imposed a task upon themselves
     which is not natural to them. They suffer, and when people suffer,
     they make others suffer too. That is not my game, nor that of my
     protectors either; I have to be gay, supple, amusing, comical.
     Virtue makes itself respected, and respect is inconvenient; virtue
     insists on being admired, and admiration is not amusing. I have to
     do with people who are bored, and I must make them laugh. Now it is
     absurdity and madness which make people laugh, so mad and absurd I
     must be; and even if nature had not made me so, the simplest plan
     would still be to feign it. Happily, I have no need to play
     hypocrite; there are so many already of all colours, without
     reckoning those who play hypocrite with themselves.... If your
     friend Rameau were to apply himself to show his contempt for
     fortune, and women, and good cheer, and idleness, and to begin to
     Catonise, what would he be but a hypocrite? Rameau must be what he
     is--a lucky rascal among rascals swollen with riches, and not a
     mighty paragon of virtue, or even a virtuous man, eating his dry
     crust of bread, either alone, or by the side of a pack of beggars.
     And, to cut it short, I do not get on with your felicity, or with
     the happiness of a few visionaries like yourself.

     _I._--I see, my friend, that you do not even know what it is, and
     that you are not even made to understand it.

     _He._--So much the better, I declare; so much the better. It would
     make me burst with hunger and weariness, and may be, with remorse.

     _I._--Very well, then, the only advice I have to give you, is to
     find your way back as quickly as you can into the house from which
     your impudence drove you out.

     _He._--And to do what you do not disapprove absolutely and yet is a
     little repugnant to me relatively?

     _I._--What a singularity!

     _He._--Nothing singular in it at all; I wish to be abject, but I
     wish to be so without constraint. I do not object to descend from
     my dignity.... You laugh?

     _I._--Yes, your dignity makes me laugh.

     _He._--Everybody has his own dignity. I do not object to come down
     from mine, but it must be in my own way, and not at the bidding of
     others. Must they be able to say to me, Crawl--and behold me,
     forced to crawl? That is the worm's way, and it is mine; we both of
     us follow it--the worm and I--when they leave us alone, but we turn
     when they tread on our tails. They have trodden on my tail, and I
     mean to turn. And then you have no idea of the creature we are
     talking about. Imagine a sour and melancholy person, eaten up by
     vapours, wrapped twice or thrice round in his dressing-gown,
     discontented with himself, and discontented with every one else;
     out of whom you hardly wring a smile, if you put your body and soul
     out of joint in a hundred different ways; who examines with a cold
     considering eye the droll grimaces of my face, and those of my
     mind, which are droller still. I may torment myself to attain the
     highest sublime of the lunatic asylum, nothing comes of it. Will he
     laugh, or will he not? That is what I am obliged to keep saying to
     myself in the midst of my contortions; and you may judge how
     damaging this uncertainty is to one's talent. My hypochondriac,
     with his head buried in a night-cap that covers his eyes, has the
     air of an immovable pagod, with a string tied to its chin, and
     going down under his chair. You wait for the string to be pulled,
     and it is not pulled; or if by chance the jaws open, it is only to
     articulate some word that shows he has not seen you, and that all
     your drolleries have been thrown away. This word is the answer to
     some question which you put to him four days before; the word
     spoken, the mastoid muscle contracts, and the jaw sticks.

     [Then he set himself to imitate his man. He placed himself on a
     chair, his head fixed, his hat coming over his eyebrows, his eyes
     half-shut, his arms hanging down, moving his jaw up and down like
     an automaton:] Gloomy, obscure, oracular as destiny itself--such is
     our patron.

     At the other side of the room is a prude who plays at importance,
     to whom one could bring one's self to say that she is pretty,
     because she is pretty, though she has a blemish or two upon her
     face. _Item_, she is more spiteful, more conceited, and more silly
     than a goose. _Item_, she insists on having wit. _Item_, you have
     to persuade her that you believe she has more of it than anybody
     else in the world. _Item_, she knows nothing, and she has a turn
     for settling everything out of hand. _Item_, you must applaud her
     decisions with feet and hands, jump for joy, and scream with
     admiration:--"How fine that is, how delicate, well said, subtly
     seen, singularly felt! Where do women get that? Without study, by
     mere force of instinct, and pure light of nature! That is really
     like a miracle! And then they want us to believe that experience,
     study, reflection, education, have anything to do with the
     matter!..." And other fooleries to match, and tears and tears of
     joy; ten times a day to kneel down, one knee bent in front of the
     other, the other leg drawn back, the arms extended towards the
     goddess, to seek one's desire in her eyes, to hang on her lips, to
     wait for her command, and then start off like a flash of lightning.
     Where is the man who would subject himself to play such a part, if
     it is not the wretch, who finds there two or three times a week the
     wherewithal to still the tribulation of his inner parts?

     _I._--I should never have thought you were so fastidious.

     _He._--I am not. In the beginning I watched the others, and I did
     as they did, even rather better, because I am more frankly
     impudent, a better comedian, hungrier, and better off for lungs. I
     descend apparently in a direct line from the famous Stentor....

     [And to give me a just idea of the force of his organ, he set off
     laughing, with violence enough to break the windows of the
     coffee-house, and to interrupt the chess-players.]

     _I._--But what is the good of this talent?

     _He._--You cannot guess?

     _I._--No; I am rather slow.

     _He._--Suppose the debate opened, and victory uncertain; I get up,
     and, displaying my thunder, I say: "That is as mademoiselle
     asserts.... That is worth calling a judgment. There is genius in
     the expression." But one must not always approve in the same
     manner; one would be monotonous, and seem insincere, and become
     insipid. You only escape that by judgment and resource; you must
     know how to prepare and place your major and most peremptory tones,
     to seize the occasion and the moment. When, for instance, there is
     a difference in feeling, and the debate has risen to its last
     degree of violence, and you have ceased to listen to one another,
     and all speak at the same time, you ought to have your place at the
     corner of the room which is farthest removed from the field of
     battle, to have prepared the way for your explosion by a long
     silence, and then suddenly to fall like a thunder-clap over the
     very midst of the combatants. Nobody possesses this art as I do.
     But where I am truly surprising is in the opposite way--I have low
     tones that I accompany with a smile, and an infinite variety of
     approving tricks of face; nose, lips, brow, eyes, all make play; I
     have a suppleness of reins, a manner of twisting the spine, of
     shrugging the shoulders, extending the fingers, inclining the head,
     closing the eyes, and throwing myself into a state of stupefaction,
     as if I had heard a divine angelic voice come down from heaven;
     that is what flatters. I do not know whether you seize rightly all
     the energy of that last attitude. I did not invent it, but nobody
     has ever surpassed me in its execution. Behold, behold!

     _I._--Truly, it is unique.

     _He._--Think you there is a woman's brain that could stand that?

     _I._--It must be admitted that you have carried the talent of
     playing the madman, and of self-debasement, as far as it can
     possibly be carried.

     _He._--Try as hard as they will, they will never touch me--not the
     best of them. Palissot, for instance, will never be more than a
     good learner. But if this part is amusing at first, and if you have
     some relish in inwardly mocking at the folly of the people whom you
     are intoxicating, in the long run that ceases to be exciting, and
     then after a certain number of discoveries one is obliged to repeat
     one's self. Wit and art have their limits. 'Tis only God Almighty
     and some rare geniuses, for whom the career widens as they advance.

     _I._--With this precious enthusiasm for fine things, and this
     facility of genius of yours, is it possible that you have invented
     nothing?

     _He._--Pardon me; for instance, that admiring attitude of the back,
     of which I spoke to you; I regard it as my own, though envy may
     contest my claim. I daresay it has been employed before: but who
     has felt how convenient it was for laughing in one's sleeve at the
     ass for whom one was dying of admiration! I have more than a
     hundred ways of opening fire on a girl under the very eyes of her
     mother, without the latter suspecting a jot of it; yes, and even of
     making her an accomplice. I had hardly begun my career before I
     disdained all the vulgar fashions of slipping a _billet-doux_; I
     have ten ways of having them taken from me, and out of the number I
     venture to flatter myself there are some that are new. I possess in
     an especial degree the gift of encouraging a timid young man; I
     have secured success for some who had neither wit nor good looks.
     If all that was written down, I fancy people would concede me some
     genius.

     _I._--And would do you singular honour.

     _He._--I don't doubt it.

     _I._--In your place, I would put those famous methods on paper. It
     would be a pity for them to be lost.

     _He._--It is true; but you could never suppose how little I think
     of method and precepts. He who needs a protocol will never go far.
     Your genius reads little, experiments much, and teaches himself.
     Look at Caesar, Turenne, Vauban, the Marquise de Tencin, her brother
     the cardinal, and the cardinal's secretary, the Abbe Trublet, and
     Bouret! Who is it that has given lessons to Bouret? Nobody; 'tis
     nature that forms these rare men.

     _I._--Well, but you might do this in your lost hours, when the
     anguish of your empty stomach, or the weariness of your stomach
     overloaded, banishes slumber.

     _He._--I'll think of it. It is better to write great things than to
     execute small ones. Then the soul rises on wings, the imagination
     is kindled; whereas it shrivels in amazement at the applause which
     the absurd public lavishes so perversely on that mincing creature
     of a Dangeville, who plays so flatly, who walks the stage nearly
     bent double, who stares affectedly and incessantly into the eyes of
     every one she talks to, and who takes her grimaces for finesse, and
     her little strut for grace; or on that emphatic Clairon, who
     becomes more studied, more pretentious, more elaborately heavy,
     than I can tell you. That imbecile of a pit claps hands to the
     echo, and never sees that we are a mere worsted ball of
     daintinesses ('Tis true the ball grows a trifle big, but what does
     it matter?), that we have the finest skin, the finest eyes, the
     prettiest bill; little feeling inside, in truth; a step that is not
     exactly light, but which for all that is not as awkward as they
     say. As for sentiment, on the other hand, there is not one of these
     stage dames whom we cannot cap.

     _I._--What do you mean by all that? Is it irony or truth?

     _He._--The worst of it is that this deuced sentiment is all
     internal, and not a glimpse of it appears outside; but I who am now
     talking to you, I know, and know well, that she has it. If it is
     not that, you should see, if a fit of ill-humour comes on, how we
     treat the valets, how the waiting-maids are cuffed and trounced,
     what kicks await our good friend, if he fails in an atom of that
     respect which is our due. 'Tis a little demon, I tell you, full of
     sentiment and dignity. Ah, you don't quite know where you are, eh?

     _I._--I confess I can hardly make out whether you are speaking in
     good faith or in malice. I am a plain man. Be kind enough to be a
     little more outspoken, and to leave your art behind for once....

     _He._--What is it? why it is what we retail before our little
     patroness about the Dangeville or the Clairon, mixed up here and
     there with a word or two to put you on the scent. I will allow you
     to take me for a good-for-nothing, but not for a fool; and 'tis
     only a fool, or a man eaten up with conceit, who could say such a
     parcel of impertinences seriously.

     _I._--But how do people ever bring themselves to say them?

     _He._--It is not done all at once, but little by little you come to
     it. _Ingenii largitor venter._

     _I._--Then hunger must press you very hard.

     _He._--That may be; yet strong as you may think them, be sure that
     those to whom they are addressed are much more accustomed to listen
     to them than we are to hazard them.

     _I._--Is there anybody who has courage to be of your opinion?

     _He._--What do you mean by anybody? It is the sentiment and
     language of the whole of society.

     _I._--Those of you who are not great rascals must be great fools.

     _He._--Fools! I assure you there is only one, and that is he who
     feasts us to cheat him.

     _I._--But how can people allow themselves to be cheated in such
     gross fashion? For surely the superiority of the Dangeville and the
     Clairon is a settled thing.

     _He._--We swallow until we are full to the throat any lie that
     flatters us, and take drop by drop a truth that is bitter to us.
     And then we have the air of being so profoundly penetrated, so
     true.

     _I._--Yet you must once, at any rate, have sinned against the
     principles of art, and let slip, by an oversight, some of those
     bitter truths that wound; for, in spite of the wretched, abject,
     vile, abominable part you play, I believe you have at bottom some
     delicacy of soul.

     _He._--I! not the least in the world. Deuce take me if I know what
     I am! In a general way, I have a mind as round as a ball, and a
     character fresh as a water-willow. Never false, little interest as
     I have in being true; never true, little interest as I have in
     being false. I say things just as they come into my head; sensible
     things, then so much the better; impertinent things, then people
     take no notice. I let my natural frankness have full play. I never
     in all my life gave a thought, either beforehand, what to say, or
     while I was saying it, or after I had said it. And so I offend
     nobody.

     _I._--Still that did happen with the worthy people among whom you
     used to live, and who were so kind to you.

     _He._--What would you have? It is a mishap, an unlucky moment, such
     as there always are in life; there is no such thing as unbroken
     bliss: I was too well off, it could not last. We have, as you
     know, the most numerous and the best chosen company. It is a school
     of humanity, the renewal of hospitality after the antique. All the
     poets who fall, we pick them up; all decried musicians, all the
     authors who are never read, all the actresses who are hissed, a
     parcel of beggarly, disgraced, stupid, parasitical souls, and at
     the head of them all I have the honour of being the brave chief of
     a timorous flock. It is I who exhort them to eat the first time
     they come, and I who ask for drink for them--they are so shy. A few
     young men in rags who do not know where to lay their heads, but who
     have good looks; a few scoundrels who bamboozle the master of the
     house, and put him to sleep, for the sake of gleaning after him in
     the fields of the mistress of the house. We seem gay, but at bottom
     we are devoured by spleen and a raging appetite. Wolves are not
     more famishing, nor tigers more cruel. Like wolves when the ground
     has been long covered with snow, we raven over our food, and
     whatever succeeds we rend like tigers. Never was seen such a
     collection of soured, malignant, venomous beasts. You hear nothing
     but the names of Buffon, Duclos, Montesquieu, Rousseau, Voltaire,
     D'Alembert, Diderot; and God knows the epithets that bear them
     company! Nobody can have any parts if he is not as stupid as
     ourselves. That is the plan on which Palissot's play of _The
     Philosophers_ has been conceived. And you are not spared in it, any
     more than your neighbours.

     _I._--So much the better. Perhaps they do me more honour than I
     deserve. I should be humiliated if those who speak ill of so many
     clever and worthy people took it into their heads to speak well of
     me.

     _He._--Everybody must pay his scot. After sacrificing the greater
     animals, then we immolate the others.

     _I._--Insulting science and virtue for a living, that is
     dearly-earned bread!

     _He._--I have already told you, we are without any consistency; we
     insult all the world, and afflict nobody. We have sometimes the
     heavy Abbe d'Olivet, the big Abbe Le Blanc, the hypocrite Batteux.
     The big abbe is only spiteful before he has had his dinner; his
     coffee taken, he throws himself into an arm-chair, his feet against
     the ledge of the fireplace, and sleeps like an old parrot on its
     perch. If the noise becomes violent he yawns, stretches his arms,
     rubs his eyes, and says: "Well, well, what is it?" "It is whether
     Piron has more wit than Voltaire." "Let us understand; is it wit
     that you are talking about, or is it taste? For as to taste, your
     Piron has not a suspicion of it." "Not a suspicion of it?" "No."
     And there we are, embarked in a dissertation upon taste. Then the
     patron makes a sign with his hand for people to listen to him, for
     if he piques himself upon one thing more than another, it is taste.
     "Taste," he says, "taste is a thing...." But, on my soul, I don't
     know what thing he said that it was, nor does he.

     Then sometimes we have friend Robbe. He regales us with his
     equivocal stories, with the miracles of the convulsionnaires which
     he has seen with his own eyes, and with some cantos of a poem on a
     subject that he knows thoroughly. His verses I detest, but I love
     to hear him recite them--he has the air of an energumen. They all
     cry out around him: "There is a poet worth calling a poet!..."

     Then there comes to us also a certain noodle with a dull and stupid
     air, but who has the keenness of a demon, and is more mischievous
     than an old monkey. He is one of those figures that provoke
     pleasantries and sarcasms, and that God made for the chastisement
     of those who judge by appearances, and who ought to have learnt
     from the mirror that it is as easy to be a wit with the air of a
     fool as to hide a fool under the air of a wit. 'Tis a very common
     piece of cowardice to immolate a good man to the amusement of the
     others; people never fail to turn to this man; he is a snare that
     we set for the new-comers, and I have scarcely known one of them
     who was not caught ...

     [I was sometimes amazed at the justice of my madman's observations
     on men and characters, and I showed him my surprise.] That is, he
     answered, because one derives good out of bad company, as one does
     out of libertinism. You are recompensed for the loss of your
     innocence by that of your prejudices; in the society of the bad,
     where vice shows itself without a mask, you learn to understand
     them. And then I have read a little.

     _I._--What have you read?

     _He._--I have read, and I read, and I read over and over again
     Theophrastus and La Bruyere and Moliere.

     _I._--Excellent works, all of them.

     _He._--They are far better than people suppose; but who is there
     who knows how to read them?

     _I._--Everybody does, according to the measure of his intelligence.

     _He._--No; hardly anybody. Could you tell me what people look for
     in them?

     _I._--Amusement and instruction.

     _He._--But what instruction, for that is the point?

     _I._--The knowledge of one's duties, the love of virtue, the hatred
     of vice.

     _He._--For my part, I gather from them all that one ought to do,
     and all that one ought not to say. Thus, when I read the _Avare_, I
     say to myself: "Be a miser if thou wilt, but beware of talking like
     the miser." When I read _Tartufe_, I say: "Be a hypocrite if thou
     wilt, but do not talk like a hypocrite. Keep the vices that are
     useful to thee, but avoid their tone and the appearances that would
     make thee laughable." To preserve thyself from such a tone and such
     appearances, it is necessary to know what they are. Now these
     authors have drawn excellent pictures of them. I am myself, and I
     remain what I am, but I act and I speak as becomes the character. I
     am not one of those who despise moralists; there is a great deal
     of profit to be got from them, especially with those who have
     applied morality to action. Vice only hurts men from time to time;
     the characteristics of vice hurt them from morning to night.
     Perhaps it would be better to be insolent than to have an insolent
     expression. One who is insolent in character only insults people
     now and again; one who is insolent in expression insults them
     incessantly. And do not imagine that I am the only reader of my
     kind. I have no other merit in this respect than having done on
     system, from a natural integrity of understanding, and with true
     and reasonable vision, what most others do by instinct. And so
     their readings make them no better than I am, and they remain
     ridiculous in spite of themselves, while I am only so when I
     choose, and always leave them a vast distance behind me; for the
     same art which teaches me how to escape ridicule on certain
     occasions teaches me also on certain others how to incur it
     happily. Then I recall to myself all that the others said, and all
     that I read, and I add all that issues from my own originality,
     which is in this kind wondrous fertile.

     _I._--You have done well to reveal these mysteries to me, for
     otherwise I should have thought you self-contradictory.

     _He._--I am not so in the least, for against a single time when one
     has to avoid ridicule, happily there are a hundred when one has to
     provoke it. There is no better part among the great people than
     that of fool. For a long time there was the king's fool; at no time
     was there ever the king's sage, officially so styled. Now I am the
     fool of Bertin and many others, perhaps yours at the present
     moment, or perhaps you are mine. A man who meant to be a sage would
     have no fool, so he who has a fool is no sage; if he is not a sage
     he is a fool, and perhaps, even were he the king himself, the fool
     of his fool. For the rest, remember that in a matter so variable as
     manners, there is nothing absolutely, essentially, and universally
     true or false; if not that one must be what interest would have us
     be, good or bad, wise or mad, decent or ridiculous, honest or
     vicious. If virtue had happened to be the way to fortune, then I
     should either have been virtuous, or I should have pretended
     virtue, like other persons. As it was, they wanted me to be
     ridiculous, and I made myself so; as for being vicious, nature
     alone had taken all the trouble that was needed in that. When I use
     the term vicious, it is for the sake of talking your language; for,
     if we came to explanations, it might happen that you called vice
     what I call virtue, and virtue what I call vice.

     Then we have the authors of the Opera Comique, their actors and
     their actresses, and oftener still their managers, all people of
     resource and superior merit. And I forget the whole clique of
     scribblers in the gazettes, the _Avant Coureur_, the _Petites
     Affiches_, the _Annee litteraire_, the _Observateur litteraire_.

     _I._--The _Annee litteraire_, the _Observateur litteraire_! But
     they detest one another.

     _He._--Quite true, but all beggars are reconciled at the porringer.
     That cursed _Observateur litteraire_, I wish the devil had had both
     him and his sheet! It was that dog of a miserly priest who caused
     my disaster. He appeared on our horizon for the first time; he
     arrived at the hour that drives us all out of our dens, the hour
     for dinner. When it is bad weather, lucky the man among us who has
     a shilling in his pocket to pay for a hackney-coach! He is free to
     laugh at a comrade for coming besplashed up to his eyes and wet to
     the skin, though at night he goes to his own home in just the same
     plight. There was one of them some months ago who had a violent
     brawl with the Savoyard at the door. They had a running account;
     the creditor insisted on being paid, and the debtor was not in
     funds, and yet he could not go upstairs without passing through the
     hands of the other.

     Dinner is served; they do the honours of the table to the
     abbe--they place him at the upper end. I come in and see this.
     "What, abbe, you preside? That is all very well for to-day, but
     to-morrow you will come down, if you please, by one plate; the day
     after by another plate, and so on from plate to plate, now to right
     and now to left, until from the place that I occupied one time
     before you, Freron once after me, Dorat once after Freron, Palissot
     once after Dorat, you become stationary beside me, poor rascal as
     you are--_che siedo sempre come_"--[an Italian proverb not to be
     decently reproduced].

     The abbe, who is a good fellow, and takes everything in good part,
     bursts out laughing; Mademoiselle, struck by my observation and by
     the aptness of my comparison, bursts out laughing; everybody to
     right and left burst out laughing, except the master of the house,
     who flies into a huff, and uses language that would have meant
     nothing if we had been by ourselves--

     "Rameau, you are an impertinent."

     "I know I am, and it is on that condition that I was received
     here."

     "You are a scoundrel."

     "Like anybody else."

     "A beggar."

     "Should I be here, if I were not?"

     "I will have you turned out of doors."

     "After dinner I will go of my own will."

     "I recommend you to go."

     We dined: I did not lose a single toothful. After eating well and
     drinking amply, for after all Messer Gaster is a person with whom I
     have never sulked, I made up my mind what to do, and I prepared to
     go; I had pledged my word in presence of so many people that I was
     bound to keep it. For a considerable time I hunted up and down the
     room for my hat and cane in every corner where they were not likely
     to be, reckoning all the time that the master of the house would
     break out into a new torrent of injuries, that somebody would
     interpose, and that we should at last make friends by sheer dint of
     altercation. I turned on this side and that, for I had nothing on
     my heart; but the master, more sombre and dark-browed than Homer's
     Apollo as he lets his arrows fly among the Greeks, with his cap
     plucked farther over his head than usual, marched backwards and
     forwards up and down the room. Mademoiselle approaches me: "But,
     mademoiselle," say I, "what has happened beyond what happens every
     day? Have I been different from what I am on other days?"

     "I insist on his leaving the house."--"I am leaving.... But I have
     given no ground of offence."--"Pardon me; we invite the abbe
     and...." It was he who was wrong to invite the abbe, while at the
     same time he was receiving me, and with me so many other creatures
     of my sort.--"Come, friend Rameau, you must beg the abbe's
     pardon."--"I shall not know what to do with his pardon."--"Come,
     come, all will be right."--They take me by the hand, and drag me
     towards the abbe's chair; I look at him with a kind of admiring
     wonder, for who before ever asked pardon of the abbe? "All this is
     very absurd, abbe; confess, is it not?" And then I laugh, and the
     abbe laughs too. So that is my forgiveness on that side; but I had
     next to approach the other, and that was a very different thing. I
     forget exactly how it was that I framed my apology.--"Sir, here is
     the madman...."--"He has made me suffer too long; I wish to hear no
     more about him."--"He is sorry."--"Yes, I am very sorry."--"It
     shall not happen again."--"Until the first rascal...."--I do not
     know whether he was in one of those days of ill-humour when
     mademoiselle herself dreads to go near him, or whether he
     misunderstood what I said, or whether I said something wrong:
     things were worse than before. Good heavens, does he not know me?
     Does he not know that I am like children, and that there are some
     circumstances in which I let anything and everything escape me? And
     then, God help me, am I not to have a moment of relief? Why, it
     would wear out a puppet made of steel, to keep pulling the string
     from night to morning, and from morning to night! I must amuse
     them, of course, that is the condition; but I must now and then
     amuse myself. In the midst of these distractions there came into my
     head a fatal idea, an idea that gave me confidence, that inspired
     me with pride and insolence: it was that they could not do without
     me, and that I was indispensable.

     _I._--Yes, I daresay that you are very useful to them, but that
     they are still more useful to you. You will not find as good a
     house every day; but they, for one madman who falls short, will
     find a hundred to take his place.

     _He._--A hundred madmen like me, sir philosopher; they are not so
     common, I can tell you! Flat fools--yes. People are harder to
     please in folly than in talent or virtue. I am a rarity in my own
     kind, a great rarity. Now that they have me no longer, what are
     they doing? They find time as heavy as if they were dogs. I am an
     inexhaustible bagful of impertinences. Every minute I had some
     fantastic notion that made them laugh till they cried; I was a
     whole Bedlam in myself.

     _I._--Well, at any rate you had bed and board, coat and breeches,
     shoes, and a pistole a month.

     _He._--That is the profit side of the account; you say not a word
     of the cost of it all. First, if there was a whisper of a new piece
     (no matter how bad the weather), one had to ransack all the garrets
     in Paris, until one had found the author; then to get a reading of
     the play, and adroitly to insinuate that there was a part in it
     which would be rendered in a superior manner by a certain person of
     my acquaintance.--"And by whom, if you please?"--"By whom? a pretty
     question! There are graces, finesse, elegance."--"Ah, you mean
     Mademoiselle Dangeville? Perhaps you know her?"--"Yes, a little;
     but 'tis not she."--"Who is it, then?"--I whispered the name very
     low. "She?"--"Yes, she," I repeated with some shame, for sometimes
     I do feel a touch of shame; and at this name you should have seen
     how long the poet's face grew, if indeed he did not burst out
     laughing in my face. Still, whether he would or not, I was bound to
     take my man to dine; and he, being naturally afraid of pledging
     himself, drew back, and tried to say "No, thank you." You should
     have seen how I was treated, if I did not succeed in my
     negotiation! I was a blockhead, a fool, a rascal; I was not good
     for a single thing; I was not worth the glass of water which they
     gave me to drink. It was still worse at their performance, when I
     had to go intrepidly amid the cries of a public that has a good
     judgment of its own, whatever may be said about it, and make my
     solitary clap of the hand audible, draw every eye to me, and
     sometimes save the actress from hisses, and hear people murmur
     around me--"He is one of the valets in disguise belonging to the
     man who.... Will that knave be quiet?" They do not know what brings
     a man to that; they think it is stupidity, but there is one motive
     that excuses anything.

     _I._--Even the infraction of the civil laws.

     _He._--At length, however, I became known, and people used to say:
     "Oh, it is Rameau!" My resource was to throw out some words of
     irony to save my solitary applause from ridicule, by making them
     interpret it in an opposite sense.

     Now agree that one must have a mighty interest to make one thus
     brave the assembled public, and that each of these pieces of hard
     labour was worth more than a paltry crown? And then at home there
     was a pack of dogs to tend, and cats for which I was responsible. I
     was only too happy if Micou favoured me with a stroke of his claw
     that tore my cuff or my wrist. Criquette is liable to colic; 'tis I
     who have to rub her. In old days mademoiselle used to have the
     vapours; to-day, it is her nerves. She is beginning to grow a
     little stout; you should hear the fine tales they make out of this.

     _I._--You do not belong to people of this sort, at any rate?

     _He._--Why not?

     _I._--Because it is indecent to throw ridicule on one's
     benefactors.

     _He._--But is it not worse still to take advantage of one's
     benefits to degrade the receiver of them?

     _I._--But if the receiver of them were not vile in himself, nothing
     would give the benefactor the chance.

     _He._--But if the personages were not ridiculous in themselves they
     would not make subjects for good tales. And then, is it my fault if
     they mix with rascaldom? Is it my fault if, after mixing themselves
     up with rascaldom, they are betrayed and made fools of? When people
     resolve to live with people like us, if they have common sense,
     there is an infinite quantity of blackness for which they must make
     up their minds. When they take us, do they not know us for what we
     are, for the most interested, vile, and perfidious of souls. Then
     if they know us, all is well. There is a tacit compact that they
     shall treat us well, and that sooner or later we shall treat them
     ill in return for the good that they have done us. Does not such an
     agreement subsist between a man and his monkey or his parrot?... If
     you take a young provincial to the menagerie at Versailles, and he
     takes it into his head for a freak to push his hands between the
     bars of the cage of the tiger or the panther, whose fault is it? It
     is all written in the silent compact, and so much the worse for the
     man who forgets or ignores it. How I could justify by this
     universal and sacred compact the people whom you accuse of
     wickedness, whereas it is in truth yourselves whom you ought to
     accuse of folly.... But while we execute the just decrees of
     Providence on folly, you who paint us as we are, you execute its
     just decrees on us. What would you think of us, if we claimed, with
     our shameless manners, to enjoy public consideration? That we are
     out of our senses. And those who look for decent behaviour from
     people who are born vicious and with vile and bad characters--are
     they in their senses? Everything has its true wages in this world.
     There are two Public Prosecutors, one at your door, chastising
     offences against society; nature is the other. Nature knows all the
     vices that escape the laws. Give yourself up to debauchery, and you
     will end with dropsy; if you are crapulous, your lungs will find
     you out; if you open your door to ragamuffins, and live in their
     company, you will be betrayed, laughed at, despised. The shortest
     way is to resign, one's self to the equity of these judgments, and
     to say to one's self: That is as it should be; to shake one's ears
     and turn over a new leaf, or else to remain what one is, but on the
     conditions aforesaid....

     _I._--You cannot doubt what judgment I pass on such a character as
     yours?

     _He._--Not at all; I am in your eyes an abject and most despicable
     creature; and I am sometimes the same in my own eyes, though not
     often: I more frequently congratulate myself on my vices than blame
     myself for them; you are more constant in your contempt.

     _I._--True; but why show me all your turpitude?

     _He._--First, because you already know a good deal of it, and I saw
     that there was more to gain than to lose, by confessing the rest.

     _I._--How so, if you please?

     _He._--It is important in some lines of business to reach
     sublimity; it is especially so in evil. People spit upon a small
     rogue, but they cannot refuse a kind of consideration to a great
     criminal; his courage amazes you, his atrocity makes you shudder.
     In all things, what people prize is unity of character.

     _I._--But this estimable unity of character you have not quite got:
     I find you from time to time vacillating in your principles; it is
     uncertain whether you get your wickedness from nature or study, and
     whether study has brought you as far as possible.

     _He._--I agree with you, but I have done my best. Have I not had
     the modesty to recognise persons more perfect in my own line than
     myself. Have I not spoken to you of Bouret with the deepest
     admiration? Bouret is the first person in the world for me.

     _I._--But after Bouret you come.

     _He._--No.

     _I._--Palissot, then?

     _He._--Palissot, but not Palissot alone.

     _I._--And who is worthy to share the second rank with him?

     _He._--The Renegade of Avignon.

     _I._--I never heard of the Renegade of Avignon, but he must be an
     astonishing man.

     _He._--He is so, indeed.

     _I._--The history of great personages has always interested me.

     _He._--I can well believe it. This hero lived in the house of a
     good and worthy descendant of Abraham, promised to the father of
     the faithful in number equal to the stars in the heavens.

     _I._--In the house of a Jew?

     _He._--In the house of a Jew. He had at first surprised pity, then
     goodwill, then entire confidence, for that is how it always
     happens: we count so strongly on our kindness, that we seldom hide
     our secrets from anybody on whom we have heaped benefits. How
     should there not be ingrates in the world, when we expose this man
     to the temptation of being ungrateful with impunity? That is a just
     reflection which our Jew failed to make. He confided to the
     renegade that he could not conscientiously eat pork. You will see
     the advantage that a fertile wit knew how to get from such a
     confession. Some months passed, during which our renegade redoubled
     his attentions; when he believed his Jew thoroughly touched,
     thoroughly captivated, thoroughly convinced that he had no better
     friend among all the tribes of Israel ... now admire the
     circumspection of the man! He is in no hurry; he lets the pear
     ripen before he shakes the branch; too much haste might have
     ruined his design. It is because greatness of character usually
     results from the natural balance between several opposite
     qualities.

     _I._--Pray leave your reflections, and go straight on with your
     story.

     _He._--That is impossible. There are days when I cannot help
     reflecting; 'tis a malady that must be allowed to run its course.
     Where was I?

     _I._--At the intimacy that had been established between the Jew and
     the renegade.

     _He._--Then the pear was ripe.... But you are not listening; what
     are you dreaming about?

     _I._--I am thinking of the curious inequality in your tone, now so
     high, now so low.

     _He._--How can a man made of vices be one and the same?... He
     reaches his friend's house one night, with an air of violent
     perturbation, with broken accents, a face as pale as death, and
     trembling in every limb. "What is the matter with you?"--"We are
     ruined." "Ruined, how?"--"Ruined, I tell you, beyond all
     help."--"Explain."--"One moment, until I have recovered from my
     fright."--"Come, then, recover yourself," says the Jew.... "A
     traitor has informed against us before the Holy Inquisition, you as
     a Jew, me as a renegade, an infamous renegade...." Mark how the
     traitor does not blush to use the most odious expressions. It needs
     more courage than you may suppose to call one's self by one's right
     name; you do not know what an effort it costs to come to that.

     _I._--No, I daresay not. But "the infamous renegade----"

     _He._--He is false, but his falsity is adroit enough. The Jew takes
     fright, tears his beard, rolls on the ground, sees the officers at
     his door, sees himself clad in the _Sanbenito_, sees his
     _auto-da-fe_ all made ready. "My friend," he cries, "my good,
     tender friend, my only friend, what is to be done?"

     "What is to be done? Why show ourselves, affect the greatest
     security, go about our business just as we usually do. The
     procedure of the tribunal is secret but slow; we must take
     advantage of its delays to sell all you have. I will hire a boat,
     or I will have it hired by a third person--that will be best; in it
     we will deposit your fortune, for it is your fortune that they are
     most anxious to get at; and then we will go, you and I, and seek
     under another sky the freedom of serving our God, and following in
     security the law of Abraham and our own consciences. The important
     point in our present dangerous situation is to do nothing
     imprudent."

     No sooner said than done. The vessel is hired, victualled, and
     manned, the Jew's fortune put on board; on the morrow, at dawn,
     they are to sail, they are free to sup gaily and to sleep in all
     security; on the morrow they escape their prosecutors. In the
     night, the renegade gets up, despoils the Jew of his portfolio, his
     purse, his jewels, goes on board, and sails away. And you think
     that this is all? Good: you are not awake to it. Now when they told
     me the story, I divined at once what I have not told you, in order
     to try your sagacity. You were quite right to be an honest man; you
     would never have made more than a fifth-rate scoundrel. Up to this
     point the renegade is only that; he is a contemptible rascal whom
     nobody would consent to resemble. The sublimity of his wickedness
     is this, that he was himself the informer against his good friend
     the Israelite, of whom the Inquisition took hold when he awoke the
     next morning, and of whom a few days later they made a famous
     bonfire. And it was in this way that the renegade became the
     tranquil possessor of the fortune of the accursed descendant of
     those who crucified our Lord.

     _I._--I do not know which of the two is most horrible to me--the
     vileness of your renegade, or the tone in which you speak of it.

     _He._--And that is what I said: the atrocity of the action carries
     you beyond contempt, and hence my sincerity. I wished you to know
     to what a degree I excelled in my art, to extort from you the
     admission that I was at least original in my abasement, to rank me
     in your mind on the line of the great good-for-noughts, and to hail
     me henceforth--_Vivat Mascarillus, fourbum imperator_!

[Here the discussion is turned aside, by Rameau's pantomimic performance
of a fugue, to various topics in music.[224]]

    [224] Vol. v. pp. 457-468.

     _I._--How does it happen that with such fine tact, such great
     sensibility for the beauties of the musical art, you are so blind
     to the fine things of morality, so insensible to the charms of
     virtue?

     _He._--It must be because there is for the one a sense that I have
     not got, a fibre that has not been given to me, a slack string that
     you may play upon as much as you please, but it never vibrates. Or
     it may be because I have always lived with those who were good
     musicians but bad men, whence it has come to pass that my ear has
     grown very fine, and my heart has grown very deaf. And then there
     is something in race. The blood of my father and the blood of my
     uncle is the same blood; my blood is the same as that of my father;
     the paternal molecule was hard and obtuse, and that accursed first
     molecule has assimilated to itself all the rest.

     _I._--Do you love your child?

     _He._--Do I love it, the little savage! I dote on it.

     _I._--Will you not then seriously set to work to arrest in it the
     consequences of the accursed paternal molecule?

     _He._--I shall labour in vain, I fancy. If he is destined to grow
     into a good man, I shall not hurt him; but if the molecule meant
     him for a ne'er-do-well like his father, then all the pains that I
     might have taken to make a decent man of him would only be very
     hurtful to him, Education incessantly crossing the inclination of
     the molecule, he would be drawn as it were by two contrary forces,
     and would walk in zigzags along the path of life, as I see an
     infinity of other people doing, equally awkward in good and evil.
     These are what we call _especes_, of all epithets the most to be
     dreaded, because it marks mediocrity and the very lowest degree of
     contempt. A great scoundrel is a great scoundrel, but he is not an
     _espece_. Before the paternal molecule had got the upper hand, and
     had brought him to the perfect abjection at which I have arrived,
     it would take endless time, and he would lose his best years. I do
     not meddle at present; I let him come on. I examine him; he is
     already greedy, cunning, idle, lying, and a cheat; I'm much afraid
     that he is a chip of the old block.

     _I._--And you will make him a musician, so that the likeness may be
     exact?

     _He._--A musician! Sometimes I look at him and grind my teeth,
     saying: If thou wert ever to know a note of music, I believe I
     would wring thy neck.

     _I._--And why so, if you please?

     _He._--Music leads to nothing.

     _I._--It leads to everything.

     _He._--Yes, when people are first-rate. But who can promise himself
     that his child shall be first-rate. The odds are ten thousand to
     one that he will never be anything but a wretched scraper of
     catgut. Are you aware that it would perhaps be easier to find a
     child fit to govern a realm, fit to be a great king, than one fit
     for a great violin player.

     _I._--It seems to me that agreeable talents, even if they are
     mediocre, among a people who are without morals, and are lost in
     debauchery and luxury, get a man rapidly on in the path of fortune.

     _He._--No doubt, gold and gold; gold is everything, and all the
     rest without gold is nothing. So instead of cramming his head with
     fine maxims which he would have to forget, on pain of remaining a
     beggar all the days of his life, what I do is this: when I have a
     louis, which does not happen to me often, I plant myself in front
     of him, I pull the louis out of my pocket, I show it to him with
     signs of admiration, I raise my eyes to heaven, I kiss the louis
     before him, and to make him understand still better the importance
     of the sacred coin, I point to him with my finger all that he can
     get with it, a fine frock, a pretty cap, a rich cake; then I thrust
     the louis into my pocket, I walk proudly up and down, I raise the
     lappet of my waistcoat, I strike my fob; and in that way I make him
     see that it is the louis in it that gives me all this assurance.

     _I._--Nothing could be better. But suppose it were to come to pass
     that, being so profoundly penetrated by the value of the louis, he
     were one day....

     _He._--I understand you. One must close one's eyes to that; there
     is no moral principle without its own inconvenience. At the worst
     'tis a bad quarter of an hour, and then all is over.

     _I._--Even after hearing views so wise and so bold, I persist in
     thinking that it would be good to make a musician of him. I know no
     other means of getting so rapidly near great people, of serving
     their vices better, or turning your own to more advantage.

     _He._--That is true; but I have plans for a speedier and surer
     success. Ah, if it were only a girl! But as we cannot do all that
     we should like, we must take what comes, and make the best of it,
     and not be such idiots as most fathers, who could literally do
     nothing worse, supposing them to have deliberately planned the
     misery of their children--namely, give the education of Lacedaemon
     to a child who is destined to live in Paris. If the education is
     bad, the morals of my country are to blame for that, not I. Answer
     for it who may; I wish my son to be happy, or what is the same
     thing, rich, honoured, and powerful. I know something about the
     easiest ways of reaching this end, and I will teach them to him
     betimes. If you blame me, you sages, the multitude and success
     will acquit me. He will put money in his purse, I can tell you. If
     he has plenty of that, he will lack nothing else, not even your
     esteem and respect.

     _I._--You may be mistaken.

     _He._--Then perhaps he will do very well without it, like many
     other people.

            *       *       *       *       *

     [There was in all this a good deal of what passes through many
     people's minds, and much of the principle according to which they
     shape their own conduct; but they never talk about it. There, in
     short, is the most marked difference between my man and most of
     those about us. He avowed the vices that he had, and that others
     have; but he was no hypocrite. He was neither more nor less
     abominable than they; he was only more frank, and more consistent,
     and sometimes he was profound in the midst of his depravity. I
     trembled to think what his child might become under such a master.
     It is certain that after ideas of bringing-up, so strictly traced
     on the pattern of our manners, he must go far, unless prematurely
     stopped on the road.]

     _He._--Oh, fear nothing. The important point, the difficult point,
     to which a good father ought to attend before everything else, is
     not to give to his child vices that enrich, or comical tricks such
     as make him valuable to people of quality--all the world does that,
     if not on system as I do, at least by example and precept. The
     important thing is to impress on him the just proportion, the art
     of keeping out of disgrace and the arm of the law. There are
     certain discords in the social harmony that you must know exactly
     how to place, to prepare, and to hold. Nothing so tame as a
     succession of perfect chords; there needs something that
     stimulates, that resolves the beam, and scatters its rays.

     _I._--Quite so; by your image you bring me back from morals to
     music, and I am very glad, for, to be quite frank with, you, I
     like you better as musician than as moralist.

     _He._--Yet, I am a mere subaltern in music, and a really superior
     figure in morals.

     _I._--I doubt that; but even if it were so, I am an honest man, and
     your principles are not mine.

     _He._--So much the worse for you. Ah, if I only had your talents!

     _I._--Never mind my talents; let us return to yours.

     _He._--If I could only express myself like you! But I have an
     infernally absurd jargon--half the language of men of the world and
     of letters, half of Billingsgate.

     _I._--Nay, I am a poor talker enough. I only know how to speak the
     truth, and that does not always answer, as you know.

     _He._--But it is not for speaking the truth--on the contrary, it is
     for skilful lying that I covet your gift. If I knew how to write,
     to cook up a book, to turn a dedicatory epistle, to intoxicate a
     fool as to his own merits, to insinuate myself into the good graces
     of women!

     _I._--And you do know all that a thousand times better than I. I
     should not be worthy to be so much as your pupil.

     _He._--How many great qualities lost, of which you do not know the
     price.

     _I._--I get the price that I ask.

     _He._--If that were true, you would not be wearing that common
     suit, that rough waistcoat, those worsted stockings, those thick
     shoes, that ancient wig.

     _I._--I grant that; a man must be very maladroit not to be rich, if
     he sticks at nothing in order to become rich. But the odd thing is
     that there are people like me who do not look on riches as the most
     precious thing in the world; bizarre people, you know.

     _He._--Bizarre enough. A man is not born with such a twist as that.
     He takes the trouble to give it to himself, for it is not in
     nature.

     _I._--In the nature of man?

     _He._--No; for everything that lives, without exception, seeks its
     own wellbeing at the expense of any prey that is proper to its
     purpose; and I am perfectly sure that if I let my little savage
     grow up without saying a word to him on the matter, he would wish
     to be richly clad, sumptuously fed, cherished by men, loved by
     women, and to heap upon himself all the happiness of life.

     _I._--If your little savage were left to himself, let him only
     preserve all his imbecility, and add to the scanty reason of the
     child in the cradle the violent passions of a man of thirty--why he
     would strangle his father and dishonour his own mother.

     _He._--That proves the necessity of a good education, and who
     denies it? And what is a good education but one that leads to all
     sorts of enjoyments without danger and without inconvenience?

     _I._--I am not so far from your opinion, only let us keep clear of
     explanations.

     _He._--Why?

     _I._--Because I am afraid that we only agree in appearance, and
     that if we once begin to discuss what are the dangers and the
     inconveniences to avoid, we should cease to understand one another.

     _He._--What of that?

     _I._--Let us leave all this, I tell you; what I know about it I
     shall never get you to learn, and you will more easily teach me
     what I do not know, and you do know, in music. Let us talk about
     music, dear Rameau, and tell me how it has come about that with the
     faculty for feeling, retaining, and rendering the finest passages
     in the great masters, with the enthusiasm that they inspire in you,
     and that you transmit to others, you have done nothing that is
     worth....

     Instead of answering me, he shrugged his shoulders, and pointing to
     the sky with his finger, he cried: The star! the star! When Nature
     made Leo, Vinci, Pergolese, Duni, she smiled. She put on a grave
     and imposing air in shaping my dear uncle Rameau, who for half a
     score years they will have called the great Rameau, and of whom
     very soon nobody will say a word. When she tricked up his nephew,
     she made a grimace, and a grimace, and again a grimace. [And as he
     said this, he put on all sorts of odd expressions: contempt,
     disdain, irony; and he seemed to be kneading between his fingers a
     piece of paste, and to be smiling at the ridiculous shapes that he
     gave it; that done, he flung the incongruous pagod[225] away from
     him, and said:] It was thus she made me, and flung me by the side
     of the other pagods, some with huge wrinkled paunches, and short
     necks, and great eyes projecting out of their heads, stamped with
     apoplexy; others with wry necks; some again with wizened faces,
     keen eyes, hooked noses. All were ready to split with laughing when
     they espied me, and I put my hands to my sides and split with
     laughter when I espied them, for fools and madmen tickle one
     another; they seek and attract one another. If when I got among
     them, I had not found ready-made the proverb about _the money of
     fools being the patrimony of people with wits_, they would have
     been indebted to me for it. I felt that nature had put my lawful
     inheritance into the purses of the pagods, and I devised a thousand
     means of recovering my rights.

    [225] These little china images of gods, with nodding heads, were
    then a fashionable toy in Paris.

     _I._--Yes, I know all about your thousand means; you have told me
     of them, and I have admired them vastly. But with so many
     resources, why not have tried that of a fine work?...

     _He._--When I am alone I take up my pen and intend to write; I bite
     my nails and rub my brow; your humble servant, good-bye, the god is
     absent. I had convinced myself that I had genius; at the end of the
     time I discover that I am a fool, a fool, and nothing but a fool.
     But how is one to feel, to think, to rise to heights, to paint in
     strong colours, while haunting with such creatures as those whom
     one must see if one is to live; in the midst of such talk as one
     has to make and to hear, and such idle gossip: "How charming the
     boulevard was to-day!" "Have you heard the little Marmotte? Her
     playing is ravishing." "Mr. So-and-so had the handsomest pair of
     grays in his carriage that you can possibly imagine." "The
     beautiful Mrs. So-and-so is beginning to fade; who at the age of
     five-and-forty would wear a headdress like that?" "Young
     Such-and-such is covered with diamonds, and she gets them cheap."

     "You mean she gets them dear."

     "No, I do not."

     "Where did you see her?"

     "At the play."

     "The scene of despair was played as it had never been played
     before." "The Polichinelle of the Fair has a voice, but no
     delicacy, no soul." "Madame So-and-so has produced two at a birth;
     each father will have his own child...." And yet you suppose that
     this kind of thing, said and said again, and listened to every day
     of the week, sets the soul aglow and leads to mighty things.

     _I._--Nay, it were better to turn the key of one's garret, drink
     cold water, eat dry bread, and seek one's true self.

     _He._--Maybe, but I have not the courage. And then the idea of
     sacrificing one's happiness for the sake of a success that is
     doubtful! And the name that I bear? Rameau! It is not with talents
     as it is with nobility; nobility transmits itself, and increases in
     lustre by passing from grandfather to father, and from father to
     son, and from son to grandson, without the ancestor impressing a
     spark of merit on his descendant; the old stock ramifies into an
     enormous crop of fools; but what matter? It is not so with talents.
     Merely to obtain the renown of your father, you must be cleverer
     than he was; you must have inherited his fibre. The fibre has
     failed me, but the wrist is nimble, the fiddle-bow scrapes away,
     and the pot boils; if there is not glory, there is broth.

     _I._--If I were in your place, I would not take it for granted; I
     would try.... Whatever it be that a man applies himself to, nature
     meant him for it.

     _He._--She makes mighty blunders. For my part, I do not look down
     from heights, whence all seems confused and blurred,--the man who
     prunes a tree with his knife, all one with the caterpillar who
     devours its leaf; a couple of insects, each at his proper task. Do
     you, if you choose, perch yourself on the epicycle of the planet
     Mercury, and thence distribute creation, in imitation, of Reaumur;
     he, the classes of flies into seamstresses, surveyors, reapers;
     you, the human species into joiners, dancers, singers, tilers. That
     is your affair, and I will not meddle with it. I am in this world,
     and in this world I rest. But if it is in nature to have an
     appetite--for it is always to appetite that I come back, and to the
     sensation that is ever present to me--then I find that it is by no
     means consistent with good order not to have always something to
     eat. What a precious economy of things! Men who are over-crammed
     with everything under the sun, while others, who have a stomach
     just as importunate as they, a hunger that recurs as regularly as
     theirs, have not a bite. The worst is the constrained posture to
     which want pins us down. The needy man does not walk like anybody
     else; he jumps, he crawls, he wriggles, he limps, he passes his
     whole life in taking and executing artificial postures.

     _I._--What are postures?

     _He._--Ask Noverre.[226] The world offers far more of them than his
     art can imitate.

     [226] A famous dancing-master of the time.

     _I._--Ah, there are you too--to use your expression or
     Montaigne's--_perched on the epicycle of Mercury_, and eyeing the
     various pantomimes of the human race.

     _He._--No, no, I tell you; I'm too heavy to raise myself so high.
     No sojourn in the fogs for me. I look about me, and I assume my
     postures, or I amuse myself with the postures that I see others
     taking. I am an excellent pantomime as you shall judge.

            *       *       *       *       *

     [Then he set himself to smile, to imitate the admirer, the
     suppliant, the fawning complaisant; he expects a command, receives
     it, starts off like an arrow, returns, the order is executed, he
     reports what he has done; he is attentive to everything; he picks
     up something that has fallen; he places a pillow or a footstool; he
     holds a saucer; he brings a chair, opens a door, closes a window,
     draws the curtains, gazes on the master and mistress; he stands
     immovable, his arms hanging by his side, his legs exactly straight;
     he listens, he seeks to read their faces, and then he adds:--That
     is my pantomime, very much the same as that of all flatterers,
     courtiers, valets, and beggars.

     The buffooneries of this man, the stories of the abbe Galiani, the
     extravagances of Rabelais, have sometimes thrown me into profound
     reveries. They are three stores whence I have provided myself with
     ridiculous masks that I place on the faces of the gravest
     personages, and I see Pantaloon in a prelate, a satyr in a
     president, a pig in a monk, an ostrich in a minister, a goose in
     his first clerk.]

            *       *       *       *       *

     _I._--But according to your account, I said to my man, there are
     plenty of beggars in the world, and yet I know nobody who is not
     acquainted with some of the steps of your dance.

     _He._--You are right. In a whole kingdom there is only one man who
     walks, and that is the sovereign.

     _I._--The sovereign? There is something to be said on that. For do
     you suppose that one may not from time to time find even by the
     side of him, a dainty foot, a pretty neck, a bewitching nose, that
     makes him execute his pantomime. Whoever has need of another is
     indigent, and assumes a posture. The king postures before his
     mistress, and before God he treads his pantomimic measure. The
     minister dances the step of courtier, flatterer, valet, and beggar
     before his king. The crowd of the ambitious cut a hundred capers,
     each viler than the rest, before the minister. The abbe, with his
     bands and long cloak, postures at least once a week before the
     patron of livings. On my word, what you call the pantomime of
     beggars is only the whole huge bustle of the earth....

     _He._--But let us bethink ourselves what o'clock it is, for I must
     go to the opera.

     _I._--What is going on?

     _He._--Dauvergne's _Trocqueurs_. There are some tolerable things in
     the music; the only pity is that he has not been the first to say
     them. Among those dead, there are always some to dismay the living.
     What would you have? _Quisque suos patimur manes._ But it is
     half-past five, I hear the bell ringing my vespers. Good day, my
     philosopher; always the same, am I not?

     _I._--Alas, you are; worse luck.

     _He._--Only let me have that bad luck for forty years to come! Who
     laughs last has the best of the laugh.


     THE END.


_Printed by_ R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, _Edinburgh._

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  | COLLECTED EDITION OF THE                                     |
  | WORKS OF JOHN MORLEY                                         |
  |                                                              |
  | In 12 Vols. Globe 8vo. 4s. net each.                         |
  |                                                              |
  | [_Eversley Series._                                          |
  |                                                              |
  | |=VOLTAIRE.=                       |1 Vol.  |                |
  | |=ROUSSEAU.=                       |2 Vols. |                |
  | |=DIDEROT AND THE ENCYCLOPAEDISTS.= |2 Vols. |                |
  | |=ON COMPROMISE.=                  |1 Vol.  |                |
  | |=MISCELLANIES.=                   |3 Vols. |                |
  | |=BURKE.=                          |1 Vol.  |                |
  | |=STUDIES IN LITERATURE.=          |1 Vol.  |                |
  | |=OLIVER CROMWELL.=                |1 Vol   |                |
  |                                                              |
  | =THE LIFE OF WILLIAM EWART GLADSTONE.= 3 Vols. 8vo. 42s.     |
  | net.                                                         |
  |                                                              |
  | =OLIVER CROMWELL.= 8vo. 10s. net. Illustrated Edition. Extra |
  | Crown 8vo. 14s. net                                          |
  |                                                              |
  | =LIFE OF WALPOLE.= Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.                        |
  |   [_Twelve English Statesmen._                               |
  |                                                              |
  | =LIFE OF BURKE.= Crown 8vo. Library Edition, 2s. net;        |
  | Popular Edition, 1s. 6d.; sewed, 1s.                         |
  |   [_English Men of Letters._                                 |
  |                                                              |
  | =MACHIAVELLI.= 8vo. 2s. 6d. net.                             |
  |                                                              |
  | MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD., LONDON.                             |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  | Transcriber's Notes & Errata                                 |
  |                                                              |
  | Italic text is enclosed in underscores (_).                  |
  |                                                              |
  | Bold text is enclosed in 'equals' signs (=).                 |
  |                                                              |
  | 'OE' and 'oe' ligatures have been transcribed as 'o' and     |
  | 'e', and 'O' and 'e'.                                        |
  |                                                              |
  | The following words were found in both unhyphenated and      |
  | hyphenated forms. The number of instances of each are given  |
  | in parentheses.                                              |
  |                                                              |
  | |apiece (1)    |a-piece (1)    |                             |
  | |demigods (1)  |demi-gods (2)  |                             |
  | |nightcap (1)  |night-cap (1)  |                             |
  | |wellbeing (4) |well-being (3) |                             |
  |                                                              |
  | The following typographical errors have been corrected.      |
  |                                                              |
  | |Error                        |Correction                   ||
  | |                             |                             ||
  | |sociey                       |society                      ||
  | |                             |                             ||
  | |It would, as Mill has said,  |It would, as Mill has said,  ||
  | |  imply ignorance of the     |  imply ignorance of the     ||
  | |  history of philosophy and  |  history of philosophy and  ||
  | |  of general literature not  |  of general literature not  ||
  | |  to be aware that in all    |  to be aware that in all    ||
  | |  ages of philosophy and of  |  ages of philosophy one of  ||
  | |  general literature, not    |  its schools has been       ||
  | |  to be aware that in all    |  utilitarian, not only from ||
  | |  ages of philosophy one of  |  the time of Epicurus, but  ||
  | |  its schools has been       |  long before.               ||
  | |  utilitarian, not only      |                             ||
  | |  from the time of Epicurus, |                             ||
  | |  but long before.           |                             ||
  | |                             |                             ||
  | |beween                       |between                      ||
  | |                             |                             ||
  | |sense how                    |sense of how                 ||
  | |                             |                             ||
  | |arbitary                     |arbitrary                    ||
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+






End of Project Gutenberg's Diderot and the Encyclopaedists, by John Morley



