CHAPTER IX

JUSTIFICATION OF ART


[Sidenote: Art is subject to moral censorship.]

It is no longer the fashion among philosophers to decry art. Either its
influence seems to them too slight to excite alarm, or their systems are
too lax to subject anything to censure which has the least glamour or
ideality about it. Tired, perhaps, of daily resolving the conflict
between science and religion, they prefer to assume silently a harmony
between morals and art. Moral harmonies, however, are not given; they
have to be made. The curse of superstition is that it justifies and
protracts their absence by proclaiming their invisible presence. Of
course a rational religion could not conflict with a rational science;
and similarly an art that was wholly admirable would necessarily play
into the hands of progress. But as the real difficulty in the former
case lies in saying what religion and what science would be truly
rational, so here the problem is how far extant art is a benefit to
mankind, and how far, perhaps, a vice or a burden.

[Sidenote: Its initial or specific excellence is not enough.]

That art is _prima facie_ and in itself a good cannot be doubted. It is
a spontaneous activity, and that settles the question. Yet the function
of ethics is precisely to revise _prima facie_ judgments of this kind
and to fix the ultimate resultant of all given interests, in so far as
they can be combined. In the actual disarray of human life and desire,
wisdom consists in knowing what goods to sacrifice and what simples to
pour into the supreme mixture. The extent to which æsthetic values are
allowed to colour the resultant or highest good is a point of great
theoretic importance, not only for art but for general philosophy. If
art is excluded altogether or given only a trivial rôle, perhaps as a
necessary relaxation, we feel at once that a philosophy so judging human
arts is ascetic or post-rational. It pretends to guide life from above
and from without; it has discredited human nature and mortal interests,
and has thereby undermined itself, since it is at best but a partial
expression of that humanity which it strives to transcend. If, on the
contrary, art is prized as something supreme and irresponsible, if the
poetic and mystic glow which it may bring seems its own complete
justification, then philosophy is evidently still prerational or,
rather, non-existent; for the beasts that listened to Orpheus belong to
this school.

To be bewitched is not to be saved, though all the magicians and
æsthetes in the world should pronounce it to be so. Intoxication is a
sad business, at least for a philosopher; for you must either drown
yourself altogether, or else when sober again you will feel somewhat
fooled by yesterday’s joys and somewhat lost in to-day’s vacancy. The
man who would emancipate art from discipline and reason is trying to
elude rationality, not merely in art, but in all existence. He is vexed
at conditions of excellence that make him conscious of his own
incompetence and failure. Rather than consider his function, he
proclaims his self-sufficiency. A way foolishness has of revenging
itself is to excommunicate the world.

It is in the world, however, that art must find its level. It must
vindicate its function in the human commonwealth. What direct acceptable
contribution does it make to the highest good? What sacrifices, if any,
does it impose? What indirect influence does it exert on other
activities? Our answer to these questions will be our apology for art,
our proof that art belongs to the Life of Reason.

[Sidenote: All satisfactions, however hurtful, have an initial worth.]

When moralists deprecate passion and contrast it with reason, they do
so, if they are themselves rational, only because passion is so often
“guilty,” because it works havoc so often in the surrounding world and
leaves, among other ruins, “a heart high-sorrowful and cloyed.” Were
there no danger of such after-effects within and without the sufferer,
no passion would be reprehensible. Nature is innocent, and so are all
her impulses and moods when taken in isolation; it is only on meeting
that they blush. If it be true that matter is sinful, the logic of this
truth is far from being what the fanatics imagine who commonly propound
it. Matter is sinful only because it is insufficient, or is wastefully
distributed. There is not enough of it to go round among the legion of
hungry ideas. To embody or enact an idea is the only way of making it
actual; but its embodiment may mutilate it, if the material or the
situation is not propitious. So an infant may be maimed at birth, when
what injures him is not being brought forth, but being brought forth in
the wrong manner. Matter has a double function in respect to existence;
essentially it enables the spirit to be, yet chokes it incidentally. Men
sadly misbegotten, or those who are thwarted at every step by the times’
penury, may fall to thinking of matter only by its defect, ignoring the
material ground of their own aspirations. All flesh will seem to them
weak, except that forgotten piece of it which makes their own spiritual
strength. Every impulse, however, had initially the same authority as
this censorious one, by which the others are now judged and condemned.

[Sidenote: But, on the whole, artistic activity is innocent.]

If a practice can point to its innocence, if it can absolve itself from
concern for a world with which it does not interfere, it has justified
itself to those who love it, though it may not yet have recommended
itself to those who do not. Now art, more than any other considerable
pursuit, more even than speculation, is abstract and inconsequential.
Born of suspended attention, it ends in itself. It encourages sensuous
abstraction, and nothing concerns it less than to influence the world.
Nor does it really do so in a notable degree. Social changes do not
reach artistic expression until after their momentum is acquired and
their other collateral effects are fully predetermined. Scarcely is a
school of art established, giving expression to prevailing sentiment,
when this sentiment changes and makes that style seem empty and
ridiculous. The expression has little or no power to maintain the
movement it registers, as a waterfall has little or no power to bring
more water down. Currents may indeed cut deep channels, but they cannot
feed their own springs—at least not until the whole revolution of
nature is taken into account.

In the individual, also, art registers passions without stimulating
them; on the contrary, in stopping to depict them it steals away their
life; and whatever interest and delight it transfers to their expression
it subtracts from their vital energy. This appears unmistakably in
erotic and in religious art. Though the artist’s avowed purpose here be
to arouse a practical impulse, he fails in so far as he is an artist in
truth; for he then will seek to move the given passions only through
beauty, but beauty is a rival object of passion in itself. Lascivious
and pious works, when beauty has touched them, cease to give out what is
wilful and disquieting in their subject and become altogether
intellectual and sublime. There is a high breathlessness about beauty
that cancels lust and superstition. The artist, in taking the latter for
his theme, renders them innocent and interesting, because he looks at
them from above, composes their attitudes and surroundings harmoniously,
and makes them food for the mind. Accordingly it is only in a refined
and secondary stage that active passions like to amuse themselves with
their æsthetic expression. Unmitigated lustiness and raw fanaticism will
snarl at pictures. Representations begin to interest when crude passions
recede, and feel the need of conciliating liberal interests and adding
some intellectual charm to their dumb attractions. Thus art, while by
its subject it may betray the preoccupations among which it springs up,
embodies a new and quite innocent interest.

[Sidenote: It is liberal.]

This interest is more than innocent, it is liberal. Not being concerned
with material reality so much as with the ideal, it knows neither
ulterior motives nor quantitative limits; the more beauty there is the
more there can be, and the higher one artist’s imagination soars the
better the whole flock flies. In æsthetic activity we have accordingly
one side of rational life; sensuous experience is dominated there as
mechanical or social realities ought to be dominated in science and
politics. Such dominion comes of having faculties suited to their
conditions and consequently finding an inherent satisfaction in their
operation. The justification of life must be ultimately intrinsic; and
wherever such self-justifying experience is attained, the ideal has been
in so far embodied. To have realised it in a measure helps us to realise
it further; for there is a cumulative fecundity in those goods which
come not by increase of force or matter, but by a better organisation
and form.

[Sidenote: and typical of perfect activity.]

Art has met, on the whole, with more success than science or morals.
Beauty gives men the best hint of ultimate good which their experience
as yet can offer; and the most lauded geniuses have been poets, as if
people felt that those seers, rather than men of action or thought, had
lived ideally and known what was worth knowing. That such should be the
case, if the fact be admitted, would indeed prove the rudimentary state
of human civilisation. The truly comprehensive life should be the
statesman’s, for whom perception and theory might be expressed and
rewarded in action. The ideal dignity of art is therefore merely
symbolic and vicarious. As some people study character in novels, and
travel by reading tales of adventure, because real life is not yet so
interesting to them as fiction, or because they find it cheaper to make
their experiments in their dreams, so art in general is a rehearsal of
rational living, and recasts in idea a world which we have no present
means of recasting in reality. Yet this rehearsal reveals the glories of
a possible performance better than do the miserable experiments until
now executed on the reality.

When we consider the present distracted state of government and
religion, there is much relief in turning from them to almost any art,
where what is good is altogether and finally good, and what is bad is at
least not treacherous. When we consider further the senseless rivalries,
the vanities, the ignominy that reign in the “practical” world, how
doubly blessed it becomes to find a sphere where limitation is an
excellence, where diversity is a beauty, and where every man’s ambition
is consistent with every other man’s and even favourable to it! It is
indeed so in art; for we must not import into its blameless labours the
bickerings and jealousies of criticism. Critics quarrel with other
critics, and that is a part of philosophy. With an artist no sane man
quarrels, any more than with the colour of a child’s eyes. As nature,
being full of seeds, rises into all sorts of crystallisations, each
having its own ideal and potential life, each a nucleus of order and a
habitation for the absolute self, so art, though in a medium poorer than
pregnant matter, and incapable of intrinsic life, generates a semblance
of all conceivable beings. What nature does with existence, art does
with appearance; and while the achievement leaves us, unhappily, much
where we were before in all our efficacious relations, it entirely
renews our vision and breeds a fresh world in fancy, where all form has
the same inner justification that all life has in the real world. As no
insect is without its rights and every cripple has his dream of
happiness, so no artistic fact, no child of imagination, is without its
small birthright of beauty. In this freer element, competition does not
exist and everything is Olympian. Hungry generations do not tread down
the ideal but only its spokesmen or embodiments, that have cast in their
lot with other material things. Art supplies constantly to contemplation
what nature seldom affords in concrete experience—the union of life and
peace.

[Sidenote: The ideal, when incarnate, becomes subject to civil society.]

[Sidenote: Plato’s strictures: he exaggerates the effect of myths.]

The ideal, however, would not come down from the empyrean and be
conceived unless somebody’s thought were absorbed in the conception. Art
actually segregates classes of men and masses of matter to serve its
special interests. This involves expense; it impedes some possible
activities and imposes others. On this ground, from the earliest times
until our own, art has been occasionally attacked by moralists, who have
felt that it fostered idolatry or luxury or irresponsible dreams. Of
these attacks the most interesting is Plato’s, because he was an artist
by temperament, bred in the very focus of artistic life and discussion,
and at the same time a consummate moral philosopher. His æthetic
sensibility was indeed so great that it led him, perhaps, into a
relative error, in that he overestimated the influence which art can
have on character and affairs. Homer’s stories about the gods can
hardly have demoralised the youths who recited them. No religion has
ever given a picture of deity which men could have imitated without the
grossest immorality. Yet these shocking representations have not had a
bad effect on believers. The deity was opposed to their own vices; those
it might itself be credited with offered no contagious example. In spite
of the theologians, we know by instinct that in speaking of the gods we
are dealing in myths and symbols. Some aspect of nature or some law of
life, expressed in an attribute of deity, is what we really regard, and
to regard such things, however sinister they may be, cannot but chasten
and moralise us. The personal character that such a function would
involve, if it were exercised willingly by a responsible being, is
something that never enters our thoughts. No such painful image comes to
perplex the plain sense of instinctive, poetic religion. To give moral
importance to myths, as Plato tended to do, is to take them far too
seriously and to belittle what they stand for. Left to themselves they
float in an ineffectual stratum of the brain. They are understood and
grow current precisely by not being pressed, like an idiom or a
metaphor. The same æsthetic sterility appears at the other end of the
scale, where fancy is anything but sacred. A Frenchman once saw in
“Punch and Judy” a shocking proof of British brutality, destined further
to demoralise the nation; and yet the scandal may pass. That black
tragedy reflects not very pretty manners, but puppets exercise no
suasion over men.

[Sidenote: His deeper moral objections.]

To his supersensitive censure of myths Plato added strictures upon music
and the drama: to excite passions idly was to enervate the soul. Only
martial or religious strains should be heard in the ideal republic.
Furthermore, art put before us a mere phantom of the good. True
excellence was the function things had in use; the horseman knew the
bridle’s value and essence better than the artisan did who put it
together; but a painted bridle would lack even this relation to utility.
It would rein in no horse, and was an impertinent sensuous reduplication
of what, even when it had material being, was only an instrument and a
means.

This reasoning has been little understood, because Platonists so soon
lost sight of their master’s Socratic habit and moral intent. They
turned the good into an existence, making it thereby unmeaning. Plato’s
dialectic, if we do not thus abolish the force of its terms, is
perfectly cogent: representative art has indeed no utility, and, if the
good has been identified with efficiency in a military state, it can
have no justification. Plato’s Republic was avowedly a fallen state, a
church militant, coming sadly short of perfection; and the joy which
Plato as much as any one could feel in sensuous art he postponed, as a
man in mourning might, until life should be redeemed from baseness.

[Sidenote: Their rightness.]

Never have art and beauty received a more glowing eulogy than is implied
in Plato’s censure. To him nothing was beautiful that was not beautiful
to the core, and he would have thought to insult art—the remodelling of
nature by reason—if he had given it a narrower field than all practice.
As an architect who had fondly designed something impossible, or which
might not please in execution, would at once erase it from the plan and
abandon it for the love of perfect beauty and perfect art, so Plato
wished to erase from pleasing appearance all that, when its operation
was completed, would bring discord into the world. This was done in the
ultimate interest of art and beauty, which in a cultivated mind are
inseparable from the vitally good. It is mere barbarism to feel that a
thing is æsthetically good but morally evil, or morally good but hateful
to perception. Things partially evil or partially ugly may have to be
chosen under stress of unfavourable circumstances, lest some worse thing
come; but if a thing were ugly it would _thereby_ not be wholly good,
and if it were _altogether_ good it would perforce be beautiful.

To criticise art on moral grounds is to pay it a high compliment by
assuming that it aims to be adequate, and is addressed to a
comprehensive mind. The only way in which art could disallow such
criticism would be to protest its irresponsible infancy, and admit that
it was a more or less amiable blatancy in individuals, and not _art_ at
all. Young animals often gambol in a delightful fashion, and men also
may, though hardly when they intend to do so. Sportive self-expression
can be prized because human nature contains a certain elasticity and
margin for experiment, in which waste activity is inevitable and may be
precious: for this license may lead, amid a thousand failures, to some
real discovery and advance. Art, like life, should be free, since both
are experimental. But it is one thing to make room for genius and to
respect the sudden madness of poets through which, possibly, some god
may speak, and it is quite another not to judge the result by rational
standards. The earth’s bowels are full of all sorts of rumblings; which
of the oracles drawn thence is true can be judged only by the light of
day. If an artist’s inspiration has been happy, it has been so because
his work can sweeten or ennoble the mind and because its total effect
will be beneficent. Art being a part of life, the criticism of art is a
part of morals.

[Sidenote: Importance of æsthetic alternatives.]

Maladjustments in human society are still so scandalous, they touch
matters so much more pressing than fine art, that maladjustments in the
latter are passed over with a smile, as if art were at any rate an
irresponsible miraculous parasite that the legislator had better not
meddle with. The day may come, however, if the state is ever reduced to
a tolerable order, when questions of art will be the most urgent
questions of morals, when genius at last will feel responsible, and the
twist given to imagination will seem the most crucial thing in life.
Under a thin disguise, the momentous character of imaginative choices
has already been fully recognised by mankind. Men have passionately
loved their special religions, languages, and manners, and preferred
death to a life flowering in any other fashion. In justifying this
attachment forensically, with arguments on the low level of men’s named
and consecrated interests, people have indeed said, and perhaps come to
believe, that their imaginative interests were material interests at
bottom, thinking thus to give them more weight and legitimacy; whereas
in truth material life itself would be nothing worth, were it not, in
its essence and its issue, ideal.

It was stupidly asserted, however, that if a man omitted the prescribed
ceremonies or had unauthorised dreams about the gods, he would lose his
battles in this world and go to hell in the other. He who runs can see
that these expectations are not founded on any evidence, on any
observation of what actually occurs; they are obviously a _mirage_
arising from a direct ideal passion, that tries to justify itself by
indirection and by falsehoods, as it has no need to do. We all read
facts in the way most congruous with our intellectual habit, and when
this habit drives us to effulgent creations, absorbing and expressing
the whole current of our being, it not merely biasses our reading of
this world but carries us into another world altogether, which we posit
instead of the real one, or beside it.

Grotesque as the blunder may seem by which we thus introduce our poetic
tropes into the sequence of external events or existences, the blunder
is intellectual only; morally, zeal for our special rhetoric may not be
irrational. The lovely Phoebus is no fact for astronomy, nor does he
stand behind the material sun, in some higher heaven, physically
superintending its movements; but Phoebus is a fact in his own region, a
token of man’s joyful piety in the presence of the forces that really
condition his welfare. In the region of symbols, in the world of poetry,
Phoebus has his inalienable rights. Forms of poetry are forms of human
life. Languages express national character and enshrine particular ways
of seeing and valuing events. To make substitutions and extensions in
expression is to give the soul, in her inmost substance, a somewhat new
constitution. A method of apperception is a spontaneous variation in
mind, perhaps the origin of a new moral species.

The value apperceptive methods have is of course largely representative,
in that they serve more or less aptly to dominate the order of events
and to guide action; but quite apart from this practical value,
expressions possess a character of their own, a sort of vegetative life,
as languages possess euphony. Two reports of the same fact may be
equally trustworthy, equally useful as information, yet they may embody
two types of mental rhetoric, and this diversity in genius may be of
more intrinsic importance than the raw fact it works upon. The
non-representative side of human perception may thus be the most
momentous side of it, because it represents, or even constitutes, the
man. After all, the chief interest we have in things lies in what we can
make of them or what they can make of us. There is consequently nothing
fitted to colour human happiness more pervasively than art does, nor to
express more deeply the mind’s internal habit. In educating the
imagination art crowns all moral endeavour, which from the beginning is
a species of art, and which becomes a fine art more completely as it
works in a freer medium.

[Sidenote: The importance of æsthetic goods varies with temperaments.]

How great a portion of human energies should be spent on art and its
appreciation is a question to be answered variously by various persons
and nations. There is no ideal _à priori_; an ideal can but express, if
it is genuine, the balance of impulses and potentialities in a given
soul. A mind at once sensuous and mobile will find its appropriate
perfection in studying and reconstructing objects of sense. Its
rationality will appear chiefly on the plane of perception, to render
the circle of visions which makes up its life as delightful as possible.
For such a man art will be the most satisfying, the most significant
activity, and to load him with material riches or speculative truths or
profound social loyalties will be to impede and depress him. The
irrational is what does not justify itself in the end; and the born
artist, repelled by the soberer and bitterer passions of the world, may
justly call them irrational. They would not justify themselves in his
experience; they make grievous demands and yield nothing in the end
which is intelligible to him. His picture of them, if he be a dramatist,
will hardly fail to be satirical; fate, frailty, illusion will be his
constant themes. If his temperament could find political expression, he
would minimise the machinery of life and deprecate any calculated
prudence. He would trust the heart, enjoy nature, and not frown too
angrily on inclination. Such a Bohemia he would regard as an ideal world
in which humanity might flourish congenially.

[Sidenote: The æsthetic temperament requires tutelage.]

A puritan moralist, before condemning such an infantile paradise, should
remember that a commonwealth of butterflies actually exists. It is not
any inherent wrongness in such an ideal that makes it unacceptable, but
only the fact that human butterflies are not wholly mercurial and that
even imperfect geniuses are but an extreme type in a society whose
guiding ideal is based upon a broader humanity than the artist
represents. Men of science or business will accuse the poet of folly,
on the very grounds on which he accuses them of the same. Each will seem
to the other to be obeying a barren obsession. The statesman or
philosopher who should aspire to adjust their quarrel could do so only
by force of intelligent sympathy with both sides, and in view of the
common conditions in which they find themselves. What ought to be done
is that which, when done, will most nearly justify itself to all
concerned. Practical problems of morals are judicial and political
problems. Justice can never be pronounced without hearing the parties
and weighing the interests at stake.

[Sidenote: Æsthetic values everywhere interfused.]

A circumstance that complicates such a calculation is this: æesthetic
and other interests are not separable units, to be compared externally;
they are rather strands interwoven in the texture of everything.
Æsthetic sensibility colours every thought, qualifies every allegiance,
and modifies every product of human labour. Consequently the love of
beauty has to justify itself not merely intrinsically, or as a
constituent part of life more or less to be insisted upon; it has to
justify itself also as an influence. A hostile influence is the most
odious of things. The enemy himself, the alien creature, lies in his own
camp, and in a speculative moment we may put ourselves in his place and
learn to think of him charitably; but his spirit in our own souls is
like a private tempter, a treasonable voice weakening our allegiance to
our own duty. A zealot might allow his neighbours to be damned in
peace, did not a certain heretical odour emitted by them infect the
sanctuary and disturb his own dogmatic calm. In the same way practical
people might leave the artist alone in his oasis, and even grant him a
pittance on which to live, as they feed the animals in a zoological
garden, did he not intrude into their inmost conclave and vitiate the
abstract cogency of their designs. It is not so much art in its own
field that men of science look askance upon, as the love of glitter and
rhetoric and false finality trespassing upon scientific ground; while
men of affairs may well deprecate a rooted habit of sensuous absorption
and of sudden transit to imaginary worlds, a habit which must work havoc
in their own sphere. In other words, there is an element of poetry
inherent in thought, in conduct, in affection; and we must ask ourselves
how far this ingredient is an obstacle to their proper development.

[Sidenote: They are primordial.]

The fabled dove who complained, in flying, of the resistance of the air,
was as wise as the philosopher who should lament the presence and
influence of sense. Sense is the native element and substance of
experience; all its refinements are still parts of it existentially; and
whatever excellence belongs specifically to sense is a preliminary
excellence, a value antecedent to any which thought or action can
achieve. Science and morals have but representative authority; they are
principles of ideal synthesis and safe transition; they are bridges
from moment to moment of sentience. Their function is indeed universal
and their value overwhelming, yet their office remains derivative or
secondary, and what they serve to put in order has previously its
intrinsic worth. An æsthetic bias is native to sense, being indeed
nothing but its form and potency; and the influence which æsthetic
habits exercise on thought and action should not be regarded as an
intrusion to be resented, but rather as an original interest to be built
upon and developed. Sensibility contains the distinctions which reason
afterward carries out and applies; it is sensibility that involves and
supports primitive diversities, such as those between good and bad, here
and there, fast and slow, light and darkness. There are complications
and harmonies inherent in these oppositions, harmonies which æsthetic
faculty proceeds to note; and from these we may then construct others,
not immediately presentable, which we distinguish by attributing them to
reason. Reason may well outflank and transform æsthetic judgments, but
can never undermine them. Its own materials are the perceptions which if
full and perfect are called beauties. Its function is to endow the parts
of sentience with a consciousness of the system in which they lie, so
that they may attain a mutual relevance and ideally support one another.
But what could relevance or support be worth if the things to be
buttressed were themselves worthless? It is not to organise pain,
ugliness, and boredom that reason can be called into the world.

[Sidenote: To superpose them adventitiously is to destroy them.]

When a practical or scientific man boasts that he has laid aside
æsthetic prejudices and is following truth and utility with a single
eye, he can mean, if he is judicious, only that he has not yielded to
æsthetic preference after his problem was fixed, nor in an arbitrary and
vexatious fashion. He has not consulted taste when it would have been in
bad taste to do so. If he meant that he had rendered himself altogether
insensible to æsthetic values, and that he had proceeded to organise
conduct or thought in complete indifference to the beautiful, he would
be simply proclaiming his inhumanity and incompetence. A right
observance of æsthetic demands does not obstruct utility nor logic; for
utility and logic are themselves beautiful, while a sensuous beauty that
ran counter to reason could never be, in the end, pleasing to an
exquisite sense. Æsthetic vice is not favourable to æsthetic faculty: it
is an impediment to the greatest æsthetic satisfactions. And so when by
yielding to a blind passion for beauty we derange theory and practice,
we cut ourselves off from those beauties which alone could have
satisfied our passion. What we drag in so obstinately will bring but a
cheap and unstable pleasure, while a double beauty will thereby be lost
or obscured—first, the unlooked-for beauty which a genuine and stable
system of things could not but betray, and secondly the coveted beauty
itself, which, being imported here into the wrong context, will be
rendered meretricious and offensive to good taste. If a jewel worn on
the wrong finger sends a shiver through the flesh, how disgusting must
not rhetoric be in diplomacy or unction in metaphysics!

[Sidenote: They flow naturally from perfect function.]

The poetic element inherent in thought, affection, and conduct is prior
to their prosaic development and altogether legitimate. Clear,
well-digested perception and rational choices follow upon those primary
creative impulses, and carry out their purpose systematically. At every
stage in this development new and appropriate materials are offered for
æsthetic contemplation. Straightness, for instance, symmetry, and rhythm
are at first sensuously defined; they are characters arrested by
æsthetic instinct; but they are the materials of mathematics. And long
after these initial forms have disowned their sensuous values, and
suffered a wholly dialectical expansion or analysis, mathematical
objects again fall under the æsthetic eye, and surprise the senses by
their emotional power. A mechanical system, such as astronomy in one
region has already unveiled, is an inexhaustible field for æsthetic
wonder. Similarly, in another sphere, sensuous affinity leads to
friendship and love, and makes us huddle up to our fellows and feel
their heart-beats; but when human society has thereupon established a
legal and moral edifice, this new spectacle yields new imaginative
transports, tragic, lyric, and religious. Æsthetic values everywhere
precede and accompany rational activity, and life is, in one aspect,
always a fine art; not by introducing inaptly æsthetic vetoes or
æsthetic flourishes, but by giving to everything a form which, implying
a structure, implies also an ideal and a possible perfection. This
perfection, being felt, is also a beauty, since any process, though it
may have become intellectual or practical, remains for all that a vital
and sentient operation, with its inherent sensuous values. Whatever is
to be representative in import must first be immediate in existence;
whatever is transitive in operation must be at the same time actual in
being. So that an æsthetic sanction sweetens all successful living;
animal efficiency cannot be without grace, nor moral achievement without
a sensible glory.

[Sidenote: Even inhibited functions, when they fall into a new rhythm,
yield new beauties.]

These vital harmonies are natural; they are neither perfect nor
preordained. We often come upon beauties that need to be sacrificed, as
we come upon events and practical necessities without number that are
truly regrettable. There are a myriad conflicts in practice and in
thought, conflicts between rival possibilities, knocking inopportunely
and in vain at the door of existence. Owing to the initial
disorganisation of things, some demands continually prove to be
incompatible with others arising no less naturally. Reason in such cases
imposes real and irreparable sacrifices, but it brings a stable
consolation if its discipline is accepted. Decay, for instance, is a
moral and æsthetic evil; but being a natural necessity it can become the
basis for pathetic and magnificent harmonies, when once imagination is
adjusted to it. The hatred of change and death is ineradicable while
life lasts, since it expresses that self-sustaining organisation in a
creature which we call its soul; yet this hatred of change and death is
not so deeply seated in the nature of things as are death and change
themselves, for the flux is deeper than the ideal. Discipline may attune
our higher and more adaptable part to the harsh conditions of being, and
the resulting sentiment, being the only one which can be maintained
successfully, will express the greatest satisfactions which can be
reached, though not the greatest that might be conceived or desired. To
be interested in the changing seasons is, in this middling zone, a
happier state of mind than to be hopelessly in love with spring. Wisdom
discovers these possible accommodations, as circumstances impose them;
and education ought to prepare men to accept them.

[Sidenote: He who loves beauty must chasten it.]

It is for want of education and discipline that a man so often insists
petulantly on his random tastes, instead of cultivating those which
might find some satisfaction in the world and might produce in him some
pertinent culture. Untutored self-assertion may even lead him to deny
some fact that should have been patent, and plunge him into needless
calamity. His Utopias cheat him in the end, if indeed the barbarous
taste he has indulged in clinging to them does not itself lapse before
the dream is half formed. So men have feverishly conceived a heaven only
to find it insipid, and a hell to find it ridiculous. Theodicies that
were to demonstrate an absolute cosmic harmony have turned the universe
into a tyrannous nightmare, from which we are glad to awake again in
this unintentional and somewhat tractable world. Thus the fancies of
effeminate poets in violating science are false to the highest art, and
the products of sheer confusion, instigated by the love of beauty, turn
out to be hideous. A rational severity in respect to art simply weeds
the garden; it expresses a mature æsthetic choice and opens the way to
supreme artistic achievements. To keep beauty in its place is to make
all things beautiful.




