CHAPTER V

PSYCHOLOGY


[Sidenote: Mind reading not science.]

If psychology is a science, many things that books of psychology contain
should be excluded from it. One is social imagination. Nature, besides
having a mechanical form and wearing a garment of sensible qualities,
makes a certain inner music in the beholder’s mind, inciting him to
enter into other bodies and to fancy the new and profound life which he
might lead there. Who, as he watched a cat basking in the sun, has not
passed into that vigilant eye and felt all the leaps potential in that
luxurious torpor? Who has not attributed some little romance to the
passer-by? Who has not sometimes exchanged places even with things
inanimate, and drawn some new moral experience from following the
movement of stars or of daffodils? All this is idle musing or at best
poetry; yet our ordinary knowledge of what goes on in men’s minds is
made of no other stuff. True, we have our own mind to go by, which
presumably might be a fair sample of what men’s minds are; but
unfortunately our notion of ourselves is of all notions the most biassed
and idealistic. If we attributed to other men only such obvious
reasoning, sound judgment, just preferences, honest passions, and
blameless errors as we discover in ourselves, we should take but an
insipid and impractical view of mankind.

In fact, we do far better: for what we impute to our fellow-men is
suggested by their conduct or by an instant imitation of their gesture
and expression. These manifestations, striking us in all their novelty
and alien habit, and affecting our interests in all manner of awkward
ways, create a notion of our friends’ natures which is extremely vivid
and seldom extremely flattering.

Such romancing has the cogency proper to dramatic poetry; it is
persuasive only over the third person, who has never had, but has always
been about to have, the experience in question. Drawn from the potential
in one’s self, it describes at best the possible in others. The thoughts
of men are incredibly evanescent, merely the foam of their labouring
natures; and they doubtless vary much more than our trite
classifications allow for. This is what makes passions and fashions,
religions and philosophies, so hard to conceive when once the trick of
them is a little antiquated. Languages are hardly more foreign to one
another than are the thoughts uttered in them. We should give men credit
for originality at least in their dreams, even if they have little of it
to show elsewhere; and as it was discovered but recently that all
memories are not furnished with the like material images, but often
have no material images whatever, so it may have to be acknowledged that
the disparity in men’s soliloquies is enormous, and that some races,
perhaps, live content without soliloquising at all.

[Sidenote: Experience a reconstruction.]

Nevertheless, in describing what happens, or in enforcing a given view
of things, we constantly refer to universal experience as if everybody
was agreed about what universal experience is and had personally
gathered it all since the days of Adam. In fact, each man has only his
own, the remnant saved from his personal acquisitions. On the basis of
this his residual endowment, he has to conceive all nature, with
whatever experiences may have fallen there to the lot of others.
Universal experience is a comfortable fiction, a distinctly ideal
construction, and no fund available for any one to draw from; which of
course is not to deny that tradition and books, in transmitting
materially the work of other generations, tend to assimilate us also to
their mind. The result of their labours, in language, learning, and
institutions, forms a hothouse in which to force our seedling fancy to a
rational growth; but the influence is physical, the environment is
material, and its ideal background or significance has to be inferred by
us anew, according to our imaginative faculty and habits. Past
experience, apart from its monuments, is fled for ever out of mortal
reach. It is now a parcel of the motionless ether, of the ineffectual
truth about what once was. To know it we must evoke it within ourselves,
starting from its inadequate expressions still extant in the world. This
reconstruction is highly speculative and, as Spinoza noted, better
evidence of what we are than of what other men have been.

[Sidenote: The honest art of education.]

When we appeal to general experience, then, what we really have to deal
with is our interlocutor’s power of imagining that experience; for the
real experience is dead and ascended into heaven, where it can neither
answer nor hear. Our agreements or divergences in this region do not
touch science; they concern only friendship and unanimity. All our
proofs are, as they say in Spain, pure conversation; and as the purpose
and best result can be only to kindle intelligence and propagate an
ideal art, the method should be Socratic, genial, literary. In these
matters, the alternative to imagination is not science but sophistry. We
may perhaps entangle our friends in their own words, and force them for
the moment to say what they do not mean, and what it is not in their
natures to think; but the bent bow will spring back, perhaps somewhat
sharply, and we shall get little thanks for our labour. There would be
more profit in taking one another frankly by the hand and walking
together along the outskirts of real knowledge, pointing to the material
facts which we all can see, nature, the monuments, the texts, the actual
ways and institutions of men; and in the presence of such a stimulus,
with the contagion of a common interest, the plastic mind would respond
of itself to the situation, and we should be helping one another to
understand whatever lies within the range of our fancy, be it in
antiquity or in the human heart. That would be a true education; and
while the result could not possibly be a science, not even a science of
people’s states of mind, it would be a deepening of humanity in
ourselves and a wholesome knowledge of our ignorance.

[Sidenote: Arbitrary readings of the mind.]

In what is called psychology this loose, imaginative method is often
pursued, although the field covered may be far narrower. Any generic
experience of which a writer pretends to give an exact account must be
reconstructed _ad hoc_; it is not the experience that necessitates the
description, but the description that recalls the experience, defining
it in a novel way. When La Rochefoucauld says, for instance, that there
is something about our friend’s troubles that secretly pleases us, many
circumstances in our own lives, or in other people’s, may suddenly recur
to us to illustrate that _aperçu_; and we may be tempted to say, There
is a truth. But is it a scientific truth? Or is it merely a bit of
satire, a ray from a literary flashlight, giving a partial clearness for
a moment to certain jumbled memories? If the next day we open a volume
of Adam Smith, and read that man is naturally benevolent, that he cannot
but enact and share the vicissitudes of his fellow-creatures, and that
another man’s imminent danger or visible torment will cause in him a
distress little inferior to that felt by the unfortunate sufferer, we
shall probably think this a truth also, and a more normal and a
profounder truth than the other. But is it a law? Is it a scientific
discovery that can lead us to definite inferences about what will happen
or help us to decompose a single event, accurately and without
ambiguity, into its component forces? Not only is such a thing
impossible, but the Scotch philosopher’s amiable generalities, perhaps
largely applicable to himself and to his friends of the eighteenth
century, may fail altogether to fit an earlier or a later age; and every
new shade of brute born into the world will ground a new “theory of the
moral sentiments.”

The whole cogency of such psychology, therefore, lies in the ease with
which the hearer, on listening to the analysis, recasts something in his
own past after that fashion. These endless rival apperceptions regard
facts that, until they are referred to their mechanical ground, show no
continuity and no precision in their march. The apperception of them,
consequently, must be doubly arbitrary and unstable, for there is no
method in the subject-matter and there is less in the treatment of it.
The views, however, are far from equal in value. Some may be more
natural, eloquent, enlightening, than others; they may serve better the
essential purpose of reflection, which is to pick out and bring forward
continually out of the past what can have a value for the present. The
spiritual life in which this value lies is practical in its
associations, because it understands and dominates what touches action;
yet it is contemplative in essence, since successful action consists in
knowing what you are attempting and in attempting what you can find
yourself achieving. Plan and performance will alike appeal to
imagination and be appreciated through it; so that what trains
imagination refines the very stuff that life is made of. Science is
instrumental in comparison, since the chief advantage that comes of
knowing accurately is to be able, with safety, to imagine freely. But
when it is science and accurate knowledge that we pursue, we should not
be satisfied with literature.

[Sidenote: Human nature appealed to rather than described.]

When discourse on any subject would be persuasive, it appeals to the
interlocutor to think in a certain dynamic fashion, inciting him, not
without leading questions, to give shape to his own sentiments.
Knowledge of the soul, insight into human nature and experience, are no
doubt requisite in such an exercise; yet this insight is in these cases
a vehicle only, an instinctive method, while the result aimed at is
agreement on some further matter, conviction and enthusiasm, rather than
psychological information. Thus if I declare that the storms of winter
are not so unkind as benefits forgot, I say something which if true has
a certain psychological value, for it could be inferred from that
assertion that resentment is generally not proportionate to the injury
received but rather to the surprise caused, so that it springs from our
own foolishness more than from other people’s bad conduct. Yet my
observation was not made in the interest of any such inferences: it was
made to express an emotion of my own, in hopes of kindling in others a
similar emotion. It was a judgment which others were invited to share.
There was as little exact science about it as if I had turned it into
frank poetry and exclaimed, “Blow, blow, thou winter’s wind!” Knowledge
of human nature might be drawn even from that apostrophe, and a very
fine shade of human feeling is surely expressed in it, as Shakespeare
utters it; but to pray or to converse is not for that reason the same
thing as to pursue science.

Now it constantly happens in philosophic writing that what is supposed
to go on in the human mind is described and appealed to in order to
support some observation or illustrate some argument—as continually,
for instance, in the older English critics of human nature, or in these
very pages. What is offered in such cases is merely an invitation to
think after a certain fashion. A way of grasping or interpreting some
fact is suggested, with a more or less civil challenge to the reader to
resist the suasion of his own experience so evoked and represented. Such
a method of appeal may be called psychological, in the sense that it
relies for success on the total movement of the reader’s life and mind,
without forcing a detailed assent through ocular demonstration or pure
dialectic; but the psychology of it is a method and a resource rather
than a doctrine. The only doctrine aimed at in such philosophy is a
general reasonableness, a habit of thinking straight from the elements
of experience to its ultimate and stable deliverance. This is what in
his way a poet or a novelist would do. Fiction swarms with such sketches
of human nature and such renderings of the human mind as a critical
philosopher depends upon for his construction. He need not be interested
in the pathology of individuals nor even in the natural history of man;
his effort is wholly directed toward improving the mind’s economy and
infusing reason into it as one might religion, not without diligent
self-examination and a public confession of sin. The human mind is
nobody’s mind in particular, and the science of it is necessarily
imaginative. No one can pretend in philosophic discussion any more than
in poetry that the experience described is more than typical. It is
given out not for a literal fact, existing in particular moments or
persons, but for an imaginative expression of what nature and life have
impressed on the speaker. In so far as others live in the same world
they may recognise the experience so expressed by him and adopt his
interpretation; but the aptness of his descriptions and analyses will
not constitute a science of mental states, but rather—what is a far
greater thing—the art of stimulating and consolidating reflection in
general.

[Sidenote: Dialectic in psychology.]

There is a second constituent of current psychology which is indeed a
science, but not a science of matters of fact—I mean the dialectic of
ideas. The character of father, for example, implies a son, and this
relation, involved in the ideas both of son and of father, implies
further that a transmitted essence or human nature is shared by both.
Every idea, if its logical texture is reflected upon, will open out into
a curious world constituted by distinguishing the constituents of that
idea more clearly and making explicit its implicit structure and
relations. When an idea has practical intent and is a desire, its
dialectic is even more remarkable. If I love a man I thereby love all
those who share whatever makes me love him, and I thereby hate whatever
tends to deprive him of this excellence. If it should happen, however,
that those who resembled him most in amiability—say by flattering me no
less than he did—were precisely his mortal enemies, the logic of my
affections would become somewhat involved. I might end either by
striving to reconcile the rivals or by discovering that what I loved was
not the man at all, but only an office exercised by him in my regard
which any one else might also exercise.

These inner lucubrations, however, while they lengthen the moment’s
vista and deepen present intent, give no indication whatever about the
order or distribution of actual feelings. They are out of place in a
psychology that means to be an account of what happens in the world. For
these dialectical implications do not actually work themselves out. They
have no historical or dynamic value. The man that by mistake or courtesy
I call a father may really have no son, any more than Herodotus for
being the father of history; or having had a son, he may have lost him;
or the creature sprung from his loins may be a misshapen idiot, having
nothing ideal in common with his parent. Similarly my affection for a
friend, having causes much deeper than discourse, may cling to him
through all transformations in his qualities and in his attitude toward
me; and it may never pass to others for resembling him, nor take, in all
its days, a Platonic direction. The impulse on which that dialectic was
based may exhaust its physical energy, and all its implications may be
nipped in the bud and be condemned for ever to the limbo of things
unborn.

[Sidenote: Spinoza on the passions.]

Spinoza’s account of the passions is a beautiful example of dialectical
psychology, beautiful because it shows so clearly the possibilities and
impossibilities in such a method. Spinoza began with self-preservation,
which was to be the principle of life and the root of all feelings. The
violence done to physics appears in this beginning. Self-preservation,
taken strictly, is a principle not illustrated in nature, where
everything is in flux, and where habits destructive or dangerous to the
body are as conspicuous as protective instincts. Physical mechanism
requires reproduction, which implies death, and it admits suicide.
Spinoza himself, far too noble a mind to be fixed solely on preserving
its own existence, was compelled to give self-preservation an
extravagant meaning in order to identify it with “intellectual love of
God” or the happy contemplation of that natural law which destroyed all
individuals. To find the self-preserving man you must take him after he
has ceased to grow and before he has begun to love. Self-preservation,
being thus no principle of natural history, the facts or estimations
classed under that head need to be referred instead to one of two other
principles—either to mechanical equilibrium and habit, or to
dialectical consistency in judgment.

Self-preservation might express, perhaps, the values which conceived
events acquire in respect to a given attitude of will, to an arrested
momentary ideal. The actual state of any animal, his given instincts and
tensions, are undoubtedly the point of origin from which all changes and
relations are morally estimated; and if this attitude is afterward
itself subjected to estimation, that occurs by virtue of its affinity or
conflict with the living will of another moment. Valuation is
dialectical, not descriptive, nor contemplative of a natural process. It
might accordingly be developed by seeing what is implied in the
self-preservation, or rather expression, of a will which by that
dialectic would discover its ideal scope.

Such a principle, however, could never explain the lapse of that
attitude itself. A natural process cannot be governed by the ideal
relations which conceived things acquire by being represented in one of
its moments. Spinoza, however, let himself wander into this path and
made the semblance of an attempt, indeed not very deceptive, to trace
the sequence of feelings by their mutual implication. The changes in
life were to be explained by what the crystallised posture of life might
be at a single instant. The arrow’s flight was to be deduced from its
instantaneous position. A passion’s history was to be the history of
what would have been its expression if it had had no history at all.

[Sidenote: A principle of estimation cannot govern events.]

A man suffered by destiny to maintain for ever a single unchanged
emotion might indeed think out its multifarious implications much in
Spinoza’s way. It is in that fashion that parties and sects, when
somewhat stable, come to define their affinities and to know their
friends and enemies all over the universe of discourse. Suppose, for
instance, that I feel some titillation on reading a proposition
concerning the contrast between Paul’s idea of Peter and Peter’s idea of
himself, a titillation which is accompanied by the idea of Spinoza, its
external cause. Now he who loves an effect must proportionately love
its cause, and titillation accompanied by the idea of its external cause
is, Spinoza has proved, what men call love. I therefore find that I love
Spinoza. Having got so far, I may consider further, referring to another
demonstration in the book, that if some one gives Spinoza joy—Hobbes,
for instance—my delight in Spinoza’s increased perfection, consequent
upon his joy and my love of him, accompanied by the idea of Hobbes, its
external cause, constitutes love on my part for the redoubtable Hobbes
as well. Thus the periphery of my affections may expand indefinitely,
till it includes the infinite, the ultimate external cause of all my
titillations. But how these interesting discoveries are interrupted
before long by a desire for food, or by an indomitable sense that Hobbes
and the infinite are things I do _not_ love, is something that my
dialectic cannot deduce; for it was the values radiating from a given
impulse, the implications of its instant object, that were being
explicated, not at all the natural forces that carry a man through that
impulse and beyond it to the next phase of his dream, a phase which if
it continues the former episode must continue it spontaneously, by grace
of mechanical forces.

When dialectic is thus introduced into psychology, an intensive
knowledge of the heart is given out for distributive knowledge of
events. Such a study, when made by a man of genius, may furnish good
spiritual reading, for it will reveal what our passions mean and what
sentiments they would lead to if they could remain fixed and dictate all
further action. This insight may make us aware of strange
inconsistencies in our souls, and seeing how contrary some of our ideals
are to others and how horrible, in some cases, would be their ultimate
expression, we may be shocked into setting our house in order; and in
trying to understand ourselves we may actually develop a self that can
be understood. Meantime this inner discipline will not enlighten us
about the march of affairs. It will not give us a key to evolution,
either in ourselves or in others. Even while we refine our aspirations,
the ground they sprang from will be eaten away beneath our feet. Instead
of developing yesterday’s passion, to-day may breed quite another in its
place; and if, having grown old and set in our mental posture, we are
incapable of assuming another, and are condemned to carrying on the
dialectic of our early visions into a new-born world, to be a
schoolmaster’s measuring-rod for life’s infinite exuberance, we shall
find ourselves at once in a foreign country, speaking a language that
nobody understands. No destiny is more melancholy than that of the
dialectical prophet, who makes more rigid and tyrannous every day a
message which every day grows less applicable and less significant.

[Sidenote: Scientific psychology a part of biology.]

That remaining portion of psychology which is a science, and a science
of matters of fact, is physiological; it belongs to natural history and
constitutes the biology of man. Soul, which was not originally
distinguished from life, is there studied in its natural operation in
the body and in the world. Psychology then remains what it was in
Aristotle’s _De Anima_—an ill-developed branch of natural science,
pieced out with literary terms and perhaps enriched by occasional
dramatic interpretations. The specifically mental or psychic element
consists in the feeling which accompanies bodily states and natural
situations. This feeling is discovered and distributed at the same time
that bodies and other material objects are defined; for when a man
begins to decipher permanent and real things, and to understand that
they are merely material, he thereby sets apart, in contrast with such
external objects, those images and emotions which can no longer enter
into the things’ texture. The images and emotions remain, however,
attached to those things, for they are refractions of them through
bodily organs, or effects of their presence on the will, or passions
fixed upon them as their object.

In parts of biology which do not deal with man observers do not hesitate
to refer in the same way to the pain, the desire, the intention, which
they may occasionally read in an animal’s aspect. Darwin, for instance,
constantly uses psychical language: his birds love one another’s plumage
and their æsthetic charms are factors in natural selection. Such little
fables do not detract from the scientific value of Darwin’s
observations, because we see at once what the fables mean. The
description keeps close enough to the facts observed for the reader to
stop at the latter, rather than at the language in which they are
stated. In the natural history of man such interpretation into mental
terms, such microscopic romance, is even easier and more legitimate,
because language allows people, perhaps before their feelings are long
past, to describe them in terms which are understood to refer directly
to mental experience. The sign’s familiarity, to be sure, often hides in
these cases a great vagueness and unseizableness in the facts; yet a
beginning in defining distinctly the mental phase of natural situations
has been made in those small autobiographies which introspective writers
sometimes compose, or which are taken down in hospitals and laboratories
from the lips of “subjects.” What a man under special conditions may say
he feels or thinks adds a constituent phase to his natural history; and
were these reports exact and extended enough, it would become possible
to enumerate the precise sensations and ideas which accompany every
state of body and every social situation.

[Sidenote: Confused attempt to detach the psychic element.]

This advantage, however, is the source of that confusion and sophistry
which distinguish the biology of man from the rest of physics. Attention
is there arrested at the mental term, in forgetfulness of the situation
which gave it warrant, and an invisible world, composed of these
imagined experiences, begins to stalk behind nature and may even be
thought to exist independently. This metaphysical dream may be said to
have two stages: the systematic one, which is called idealism, and an
incidental one which pervades ordinary psychology, in so far as mental
facts are uprooted from their basis and deprived of their expressive or
spiritual character, in order to be made elements in a dynamic scheme.
This battle of feelings, whether with atoms or exclusively with their
own cohorts, might be called a primitive materialism, rather than an
idealism, if idealism were to retain its Platonic sense; for forms and
realisations are taken in this system for substantial elements, and are
made to figure either as a part or as the whole of the world’s matter.

[Sidenote: Differentia of the psychic.]

Phenomena specifically mental certainly exist, since natural phenomena
and ideal truths are concentrated and telescoped in apprehension,
besides being weighted with an emotion due to their effect on the person
who perceives them. This variation, which reality suffers in being
reported to perception, turns the report into a mental fact
distinguishable from its subject-matter. When the flux is partly
understood and the natural world has become a constant presence, the
whole flux itself, as it flowed originally, comes to be called a mental
flux, because its elements and method are seen to differ from the
elements and method embodied in material objects or in ideal truth. The
primitive phenomena are now called mental because they all deviate from
the realities to be ultimately conceived. To call the immediate mental
is therefore correct and inevitable when once the ultimate is in view;
but if the immediate were all, to call it mental would be unmeaning.

The visual image of a die, for instance, has at most three faces, none
of them quite square; no hired artificer is needed to produce it; it
cannot be found anywhere nor shaken in any box; it lasts only for an
instant; thereafter it disappears without a trace—unless it flits back
unaccountably through the memory—and it leaves no ponderable dust or
ashes to attest that it had a substance. The opposite of all this is
true of the die itself. But were no material die in existence, the image
itself would be material; for, however evanescent, it would occupy
space, have geometrical shape, colour, and magic dynamic destinies. Its
transformations as it rolled on the idea of a table would be
transformations in nature, however unaccountable by any steady law. Such
material qualities a mental fact can retain only in the spiritual form
of representation. A representation of matter is immaterial, but a
material image, when no object exists, is a material fact. If the
Absolute, to take an ultimate case, perceived nothing but space and
atoms (perceiving itself, if you will, therein), space and atoms would
be its whole nature, and it would constitute a perfect materialism. The
fact that materialism was true would not of itself constitute an
idealism worth distinguishing from its opposite. For a vehicle or locus
exists only when it makes some difference to the thing it carries,
presenting it in a manner not essential to its own nature.

[Sidenote: Approach to irrelevant sentience.]

The qualification of being by the mental medium may be carried to any
length. As the subject-matter recedes the mental datum ceases to have
much similarity or inward relevance to what is its cause or its meaning.
The report may ultimately become, like pure pain or pleasure, almost
wholly blind and irrelevant to any world; yet such emotion is none the
less immersed in matter and dependent on natural changes both for its
origin and for its function, since a significant pleasure or pain makes
comments on the world and involves ideals about what ought to be
happening there.

Mental facts synchronise with their basis, for no thought hovers over a
dead brain and there is no vision in a dark chamber; but their tenure of
life is independent of that of their objects, since thought may be
prophetic or reminiscent and is intermittent even when its object enjoys
a continuous existence. Mental facts are similar to their objects, since
things and images have, intrinsically regarded, the same constitution;
but images do not move in the same plane with things and their parts are
in no proportionate dynamic relation to the parts of the latter.
Thought’s place in nature is exiguous, however broad the landscape it
represents; it touches the world tangentially only, in some ferment of
the brain. It is probably no atom that supports the soul (as Leibnitz
imagined), but rather some cloud of atoms shaping or remodelling an
organism. Mind in this case would be, in its physical relation to
matter, what it feels itself to be in its moral attitude toward the
same; a witness to matter’s interesting aspects and a realisation of its
forms.

[Sidenote: Perception represents things in their practical relation to
the body.]

Mental facts, moreover, are highly selective; especially does this
appear in respect to the dialectical world, which is in itself infinite,
while the sum of human logic and mathematics, though too long for most
men’s patience, is decidedly brief. If we ask ourselves on what
principle this selection and foreshortening of truth takes place in the
mind, we may perhaps come upon the real bond and the deepest contrast
between mind and its environment. The infinity of formal truth is
disregarded in human thought when it is irrelevant to practice and to
happiness; the infinity of nature is represented there in violent
perspective, centring about the body and its interests. The seat and
starting-point of every mental survey is a brief animal life. A mind
seems, then, to be a consciousness of the body’s interests, expressed in
terms of what affects that body, as if in the Babel of nature a man
heard only the voices that pronounced his name. A mind is a private
view; it is gathered together in proportion as physical sensibility
extends its range and makes one stretch of being after another tributary
to the animal’s life, and in proportion also as this sensibility is
integrated, so that every organ in its reaction enlists the resources of
every other organ as well. A personal will and intelligence thus arise;
and they direct action from within with a force and freedom which are
exactly proportionate to the material forces, within and without the
body, which the soul has come to represent.

In other words, mind raises to an actual existence that _form_ in
material processes which, had the processes remained wholly material,
would have had only ideal or imputed being—as the stars would not have
been divided into the signs of the Zodiac but for the fanciful eye of
astrologers. Automata might arise and be destroyed without any value
coming or going; only a form-loving observer could say that anything
fortunate or tragic had occurred, as poets might at the budding or
withering of a flower. Some of nature’s automata, however, love
themselves, and comment on the form they achieve or abandon; these
constellations of atoms are genuine beasts. Their consciousness and
their interest in their own individuality rescues that individuality
from the realm of discourse and from having merely imputed limits.

[Sidenote: Mind the existence in which form becomes actual.]

That the basis of mind lies in the body’s interests rather than in its
atoms may seem a doctrine somewhat too poetical for psychology; yet may
not poetry, superposed on material existence and supported by it, be
perhaps the key to mind? Such a view hangs well together with the
practical and prospective character of consciousness, with its total
dependence on the body, its cognitive relevance to the world, and its
formal disparity from material being. Mind does not accompany body like
a useless and persistent shadow; it is significant and it is
intermittent. Much less can it be a link in physiological processes,
processes irrelevant to its intent and incompatible with its immaterial
essence. Consciousness seems to arise when the body assumes an attitude
which, being an attitude, supervenes upon the body’s elements and cannot
be contained within them. This attitude belongs to the whole body in its
significant operation, and the report of this attitude, its expression,
requires survey, synthesis, appreciation—things which constitute what
we call mentality. This remains, of course, the mentality of that
material situation; it is the voice of that particular body in that
particular pass. The mind therefore represents its basis, but this basis
(being a _form_ of material existence and not matter itself) is neither
vainly reduplicated by representation nor used up materially in the
process.

Representation is far from idle, since it brings to focus those
mechanical unities which otherwise would have existed only potentially
and at the option of a roving eye. In evoking consciousness nature makes
this delimination real and unambiguous; there are henceforth actual
centres and actual interests in the mechanical flux. The flux continues
to be mechanical, but the representation of it supervening has created
values which, being due to imputation, could not exist without being
imputed, while at the same time they could not have been imputed without
being attached to one object or event rather than to another. Material
dramas are thus made moral and raised to an existence of their own by
being expressed in what we call the souls of animals and men; a mind is
the entelechy of an organic body.[E] It is a region where form breeds an
existence to express it, and destiny becomes important by being felt.
Mind adds to being a new and needful witness so soon as the constitution
of being gives foothold to apperception of its movement, and offers
something in which it is possible to ground an interest.

That Aristotle has not been generally followed in views essentially so
natural and pregnant as these is due no doubt to want of thoroughness in
conceiving them, not only on the part of his readers but even on his
own part; for he treated the soul, which should be on his own theory
only an expression and an unmoved mover, as a power and an efficient
cause. Analysis had not gone far enough in his day to make evident that
all dynamic principles are mechanical and that mechanism can obtain only
among objects; but by this time it should no longer seem doubtful that
mental facts can have no connection except through their material basis
and no mutual relevance except through their objects.

[Sidenote: Attempt at idealistic physics.]

There is indeed a strange half-assumption afloat, a sort of reserved
faith which every one seems to respect but nobody utters, to the effect
that the mental world has a mechanism of its own, and that ideas
intelligently produce and sustain one another. Systematic idealists, to
be sure, have generally given a dialectical or moral texture to the
cosmos, so that the passage from idea to idea in experience need not be
due, in their physics, to any intrinsic or proportionate efficacy in
these ideas themselves. The march of experience is not explained at all
by such high cosmogonies. They abandon that practical calculation to
some science of illusion that has to be tolerated in this provisional
life. Their own understanding is of things merely in the gross, because
they fall in with some divine plan and produce, unaccountably enough,
some interesting harmony. Empirical idealists, on the contrary, in
making a metaphysics out of psychology, hardly know what they do. The
laws of experience which they refer to are all laws of physics. It is
only the “possibilities” of sensation that stand and change according to
law; the sensations themselves, if not referred to those permanent
possibilities, would be a chaos worse than any dream.

Correct and scrupulous as empiricism may be when it turns its face
backward and looks for the seat, the criterion, and the elements of
knowledge, it is altogether incoherent and self-inhibited when it looks
forward. It can believe in nothing but in what it conceives, if it would
rise at all above a stupid immersion in the immediate; yet the relations
which attach the moments of feeling together are material relations,
implying the whole frame of nature. Psychology can accordingly conceive
nothing but the natural world, with its diffuse animation, since this is
the only background that the facts suggest or that, in practice, anybody
can think of. If empiricism trusted the intellect, and consented to
immerse flying experience in experience understood, it would become
ordinary science and ordinary common sense. Deprecating this result, for
no very obvious reason, it has to balance itself on the thin edge of an
unwilling materialism, with a continual protestation that it does not
believe in anything that it thinks. It is wholly entangled in the
prevalent sophism that a man must renounce a belief when he discovers
how he has formed it, and that our ancestors—at least the remoter
ones—begin to exist when we discover them.

When Descartes, having composed a mechanical system of the world, was
asked by admiring ladies to say something about the passions, what came
into his mind was characteristically simple and dialectical. Life, he
thought, was a perpetual conflict between reason and the emotions. The
soul had its own natural principle to live by, but was diverted from
that rational path by the waves of passion that beat against it and
sometimes flooded it over. That was all his psychology. Ideal entities
in dramatic relations, in a theatre which had to be borrowed, of course,
from the other half of the world; because while a material mechanism
might be conceived without minds in it, minds in action could not be
conceived without a material mechanism—at least a represented
one—lying beneath and between. Spinoza made a great improvement in the
system by attaching the mind more systematically to the body, and
studying the parts which organ and object played in qualifying
knowledge; but his conception of mental unities and mental processes
remained literary, or at best, as we have seen, dialectical. No shadow
of a principle at once psychic and genetic appeared in his philosophy.
All mind was still a transcript of material facts or a deepening of
moral relations.

[Sidenote: Association not efficient]

The idea of explaining the flow of ideas without reference to bodies
appeared, however, in the principle of association. This is the nearest
approach that has yet been made to a physics of disembodied
mind—something which idealism sadly needs to develop. A terrible
incapacity, however, appears at once in the principle of association;
for even if we suppose that it could account for the flow of ideas, it
does not pretend to supply any basis for sensations. And as the more
efficient part of association—association by contiguity—is only a
repetition in ideas of the order once present in impressions, the whole
question about the march of mental experience goes back to what
association does not touch, namely, the origin of sensations. What
everybody assumed, of course, was that the order and quality of
sensations were due to the body; but their derivation was not studied.
Hume ignored it as much as possible, and Berkeley did not sacrifice a
great deal when he frankly suggested that the production of sensation
must be the direct work of God.

This tendency not to recognise the material conditions of mind showed
itself more boldly in the treatment of ideation. We are not plainly
aware (in spite of headaches, fatigue, sleep, love, intoxication, and
madness) that the course of our thoughts is as directly dependent on the
body as is their inception. It was therefore possible, without glaring
paradox, to speak as if ideas caused one another. They followed, in
recurring, the order they had first had in experience, as when we learn
something by heart. Why, a previous verse being given, we should
sometimes be unable to repeat the one that had often followed it before,
there was no attempt to explain: it sufficed that reverie often seemed
to retrace events in their temporal order. Even less dependent on
material causes seemed to be the other sort of association, association
by similarity. This was a feat for the wit and the poet, to jump from
China to Peru, by virtue of some spark of likeness that might flash out
between them.

[Sidenote: It describes coincidences.]

Much natural history has been written and studied with the idea of
finding curious facts. The demand has not been for constant laws or
intelligibility, but for any circumstance that could arrest attention or
divert the fancy. In this spirit, doubtless, instances of association
were gathered and classified. It was the young ladies’ botany of mind.
Under association could be gathered a thousand interesting anecdotes, a
thousand choice patterns of thought. Talk of the wars, says Hobbes, once
led a man to ask what was the value of a Roman penny. But why only once?
The wars must have been often mentioned when the delivering up of King
Charles did not enter any mind; and when it did, this would not have led
any one to think of Judas and the thirty pence, unless he had been a
good royalist and a good Christian—and then only by a curious accident.
It was not these ideas, then, in their natural capacity that suggested
one another; but some medium in which they worked, once in the world,
opened those particular avenues between them. Nevertheless, no one cared
to observe that each fact had had many others, never recalled,
associated with it as closely as those which were remembered. Nor was
the matter taken so seriously that one needed to ask how, among all
similar things, similarity could decide which should be chosen; nor how
among a thousand contiguous facts one rather than another should be
recalled for contiguity’s sake.

[Sidenote: Understanding is based on instinct and expressed in
dialectic.]

The best instance, perhaps, of regular association might be found in
language and its meaning; for understanding implies that each word
habitually calls up its former associates. Yet in what, psychologically
considered, does understanding a word consist? What concomitants does
the word “horse” involve in actual sentience? Hardly a clear image such
as a man might paint; for the name is not confined to recalling one view
of one animal obtained at one moment. Perhaps all that recurs is a vague
sense of the environment, in nature and in discourse, in which that
object lies. The word “kite” would immediately make a different region
warm in the world through which the mind was groping. One would turn in
idea to the sky rather than to the ground, and feel suggestions of a
more buoyant sort of locomotion.

Understanding has to be described in terms of its potential outcome,
since the incandescent process itself, as it exists in transit, will
not suffer stable terms to define it. Potentiality is something which
each half of reality reproaches the other with; things are potential to
feeling because they are not life, and feelings are potential to science
because they elude definition. To understand, therefore, is to know what
to do and what to say in the sign’s presence; and this practical
knowledge is far deeper than any echo casually awakened in fancy at the
same time. Instinctive recognition has those echoes for the most
superficial part of its effect. Because I understand what “horse” means,
the word can make me recall some episode in which a horse once figured.
This understanding is instinctive and practical and, if the phrase may
be pardoned, it is the body that understands. It is the body, namely,
that contains the habit and readiness on which understanding hangs; and
the sense of understanding, the instant rejection of whatever clashes
and makes nonsense in that context, is but a transcript of the body’s
education. Actual mind is all above board; it is all speculative,
vibrant, the fruit and gift of those menial subterranean processes. Some
generative processes may be called psychic in that they minister to mind
and lend it what little continuity it can boast of; but they are not
processes in consciousness. Processes in consciousness are æsthetic or
dialectical processes, focussing a form rather than ushering in an
existence. Mental activity has a character altogether alien to
association: it is spiritual, not mechanical; an entelechy, not a
genesis.

[Sidenote: Suggestion a fancy name for automatism,]

For these and other reasons association has fallen into some disrepute;
but it is not easy to say what, in absolute psychology, has come to take
its place. If we speak of suggestion, a certain dynamic turn seems to be
given to the matter; yet in what sense a perception suggests its future
development remains a mystery. That a certain ripening and expansion of
consciousness goes on in man, not guided by former collocations of
ideas, is very true; for we do not fall in love for the first time
because this person loved and these ardent emotions have been habitually
associated in past experience. And any impassioned discourse, opening at
every turn into new vistas, shows the same sort of vegetation. Yet to
observe that consciousness is automatic is not to disclose the mechanism
by which it evolves. The theory of spontaneous growth offers less
explanation of events, if that be possible, than the theory of
association. It is perhaps a better description of the facts, since at
least it makes no attempt to deduce them from one another.

[Sidenote: and will another.]

If, on the contrary, a relation implied in the burden or will of the
moment be invoked, the connection established, so far as it goes, is
dialectical. Where a dialectical correspondence is not found, a material
cause would have to be appealed to, Such a half-dialectical psychology
would be like Schopenhauer’s, quite metaphysical. It might be a great
improvement on an absolute psychology, because it would restore, even if
in mythical terms, a background and meaning to life. The unconscious
Absolute Will, the avid Genius of the Species, the all-attracting
Platonic Ideas are fabulous; but beneath them it is not hard to divine
the forces of nature. This volitional school supplies a good
stepping-stone from metaphysics back to scientific psychology. It
remains merely to substitute instinct for will, and to explain that
instinct—or even will, if the term be thought more consoling—is merely
a word covering that operative organisation in the body which controls
action, determines affinities, dictates preferences, and sustains
ideation.

[Sidenote: Double attachment of mind to nature.]

What scientific psychology has to attempt—for little has been
accomplished—may be reduced to this: To develop physiology and
anthropology until the mechanism of life becomes clear, at least in its
general method, and then to determine, by experiment and by well-sifted
testimony, what conscious sublimation each of those material situations
attains, if indeed it attains any. There will always remain, no doubt,
many a region where the machinery of nature is too fine for us to trace
or eludes us by involving agencies that we lack senses to perceive. In
these regions where science is denied we shall have to be satisfied with
landscape-painting. The more obvious results and superficial harmonies
perceived in those regions will receive names and physics will be
arrested at natural history. Where these unexplained facts are mental it
will not be hard to do more systematically what common sense has done
already, and to attach them, as we attach love or patriotism, to the
natural crises that subtend them.

This placing of mental facts is made easy by the mental facts
themselves, since the connection of mind with nature is double, and even
when the derivation of a feeling is obscure we have but to study its
meaning, allowing it to tell us what it is interested in, for a
roundabout path to lead us safely back to its natural basis. It is
superfluous to ask a third person what circumstances produce hunger:
hunger will lead you unmistakably enough to its point of origin, and its
extreme interest in food will not suffer you long to believe that want
of nourishment has nothing to do with its cause. And it is not otherwise
with higher emotions and ideas. Nothing but sophistry can put us in
doubt about what conscience represents; for conscience does not say,
square the circle, extinguish mankind so as to stop its sufferings, or
steal so as to benefit your heirs. It says, Thou shalt not kill, and it
also says, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God who brought thee out of
the land of Egypt. So that conscience, by its import and incidence,
clearly enough declares what it springs from—a social tradition; and
what it represents—the interests, real or imaginary, of the community
in which you were reared.

Where psychology depends on literature, where both its units and its
method are poetical, there can be no talk of science. We may as justly,
or as absurdly, speak of the spirit of an age or of a religion as of a
man’s character or a river’s god. Particulars in illustration may have
good historic warrant, but the unities superimposed are ideal. Such
metaphors may be very useful, for a man may ordinarily be trusted to
continue his practices and a river its beneficent or disastrous floods;
and since those rhetorical forms have no existence in nature we may
continue to frame them as may be most convenient for discourse.

[Sidenote: Is the subject-matter of psychology absolute being?]

When psychology is a science, then, it describes the flying
consciousness that accompanies bodily life. It is the science of feeling
or absolute appearance, taken exactly as it seems or feels. Does such a
psychology, we may be tempted to ask, constitute scientific knowledge of
reality? Is it at last the true metaphysics? This question would have to
be answered in the negative, yet not without some previous
discriminations. There is honesty in the conviction that sentience is a
sort of absolute; it is something which certainly exists. The first
Cartesian axiom applies to it, and to feel, even doubtfully, that
feeling existed would be to posit its existence. The science that
describes sentience describes at least a part of existence. Yet this
self-grounding of consciousness is a suspicious circumstance: it renders
it in one sense the typical reality and in another sense perhaps the
sorriest illusion.

[Sidenote: Sentience is representable only in fancy]

“Reality” is an ambiguous term. If we mean by it the immediate, then
sentience would be a part if not the whole of reality; for what we mean
by sentience or consciousness is the immediate in so far as we contain
it, and whatever self-grounded existence there may be elsewhere can be
conceived by us only mythically and on that analogy, as if it were an
extension or variation of sentience. Psychology would then be knowledge
of reality, for even when consciousness contains elaborate thoughts that
might be full of illusions, psychology takes them only as so much
feeling, and in that capacity they are real enough. At the same time,
while our science terminates upon mere feeling, it can neither discover
nor describe that feeling except in terms of something quite different;
and the only part of psychology that perhaps penetrates to brute
sentience is the part that is not scientific. The knowledge that science
reaches about absolute states of mind is relative knowledge; these
states of mind are approached from without and are defined by their
surrounding conditions and by their ideal objects. They are known by
being enveloped in processes of which they themselves are not aware.
Apart from this setting, the only feeling known is that which is
endured. After the fact, or before, or from any other point of vantage,
it cannot be directly revealed; at best it may be divined and
re-enacted. Even this possible repetition would not constitute knowledge
unless the imaginative reproduction were identified with or attributed
to some natural fact; so that an adventitious element would always
attach to any recognised feeling, to any feeling reported to another
mind. It could not be known at all unless something were known about it,
so that it might not pass, as otherwise it would, for a mere ingredient
of present sentience.

It is precisely by virtue of this adventitious element that the
re-enacted feeling takes its place in nature and becomes an object of
knowledge. Science furnishes this setting; the jewel—precious or
false—must be supplied by imagination. Romance, dramatic myth, is the
only instrument for knowing this sort of “reality.” A flying moment, if
at all _understood_ or underpinned, or if seen in its context, would be
not known absolutely as it had been felt, but would be known
scientifically and as it lay in nature. But dramatic insight, striving
to pierce through the machinery of the world and to attain and repeat
what dreams may be going on at its core, is no science; and the very
notion that the dreams are internal, that they make the interior or
substance of bodies, is a crude materialistic fancy. Body, on the
contrary, is the substance or instrument of mind, and has to be looked
for beneath it. The mind is itself ethereal and plays about the body as
music about a violin, or rather as the sense of a page about the print
and paper. To look for it _within_ is not to understand what we are
looking for.

Knowledge of the immediate elsewhere is accordingly visionary in its
method, and furthermore, if, by a fortunate chance, it be true in fact,
it is true only of what in itself is but appearance; for the immediate,
while absolutely real in its stress or presence, is indefinitely
ignorant and false in its deliverance. It knows itself, but in the worst
sense of the word knowledge; for it knows nothing of what is true about
it, nothing of its relations and conditions. To pierce to this blind
“reality” or psychic flux, which is nothing but flying appearance, we
must rely on fortune, or an accidental harmony between imitative fancy
in us now and original sentience elsewhere. It is accordingly at least
misleading to give the name of “reality” to this appearance, which is
entirely lost and inconsequential in its being, without trace of its own
status, and consequently approachable or knowable only by divination, as
a dream might call to another dream.

[Sidenote: The conditions and objects of sentience, which are not
sentience, are also real.]

It is preferable to give a more Platonic meaning to the word and to let
“reality” designate not what is merely felt diffusely but what is true
about those feelings. Then dramatic fancy, psychology of the sympathetic
sort, would not be able to reach reality at all. On the other hand
scientific psychology, together with all other sciences, would have
reality for its object; for it would disclose what really was true about
sentient moments, without stopping particularly to sink abstractedly
into their inner quality or private semblance. It would approach and
describe the immediate as a sentient factor in a natural situation, and
show us to what extent that situation was represented in that feeling.
This representation, by which the dignity and interest of pure sentience
would be measured, might be either pictorial or virtual; that is, a
conscious moment might represent the environing world either
scientifically, by understanding its structure, or practically, by
instinctive readiness to meet it.

[Sidenote: Mind knowable and important in so far as it represents other
things.]

What, for instance, is the reality of Napoleon? Is it what a telepathic
poet, a complete Browning, might reconstruct? Is it Napoleon’s life-long
soliloquy? Or to get at the reality should we have to add, as scientific
psychology would, the conditions under which he lived, and their
relation to his casual feelings? Obviously if Napoleon’s thoughts had
had no reference to the world we should not be able to recover them; or
if by chance such thoughts fell some day to our share, we should
attribute them to our own mental luxuriance, without suspecting that
they had ever visited another genius. Our knowledge of his life, even
where it is imaginative, depends upon scientific knowledge for its
projection; and his fame and immortality depend on the degree to which
his thoughts, being rooted in the structure of the world and pertinent
to it, can be rationally reproduced in others and attributed to him.
Napoleon’s consciousness might perhaps be more justly identified with
the truth or reality of him than could that of most people, because he
seems to have been unusually cognisant of his environment and master of
the forces at work in it and in himself. He understood his causes and
function, and knew that he had _arisen_, like all the rest of history,
and that he stood for the transmissible force and authority of greater
things. Such a consciousness can be known in proportion as we, too,
possess knowledge, and is worth the pains; something which could not be
said of the absolute sentience of Dick or Harry, which has only material
being, brute existence, without relevance to anything nor understanding
of itself.

The circumstances, open to science, which surround consciousness are
thus real attributes of a man by which he is truly known and
distinguished. Appearances are the qualities of reality, else realities
would be without place, time, character, or interrelation. In knowing
that Napoleon was a Corsican, a short man with a fine countenance, we
know appearances only; but these appearances are true of the reality.
And if the presumable inner appearances, Napoleon’s long soliloquy, were
separated from the others, those inner appearances would not belong to
Napoleon nor have any home in the knowable world. That which physics,
with its concomitant psychology, might discover in a man is the sum of
what is true about him, seeing that a man is a concretion in existence,
the fragment of a world, and not a definition. Appearances define the
constituent elements of his reality, which could not be better known
than through their means.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote E: Aristotle called the soul the first entelechy of such a
body. This first entelechy is what we should call life, since it is
possessed by a man asleep. The French I know but do not use is in its
first entelechy; the French I am actually speaking is in its second.
Consciousness is therefore the second or actualised entelechy of its
body.]




