CHAPTER V

SPEECH AND SIGNIFICATION


[Sidenote: Sounds well fitted to be symbols.]

Music rationalises sound, but a more momentous rationalising of sound is
seen in language. Language is one of the most useful of things, yet the
greater part of it still remains (what it must all have been in the
beginning) useless and without ulterior significance. The musical side
of language is its primary and elementary side. Man is endowed with
vocal organs so plastic as to emit a great variety of delicately varied
sounds; and by good fortune his ear has a parallel sensibility, so that
much vocal expression can be registered and confronted by auditory
feeling. It has been said that man’s pre-eminence in nature is due to
his possessing hands; his modest participation in the ideal world may
similarly be due to his possessing tongue and ear. For when he finds
shouting and vague moaning after a while fatiguing, he can draw a new
pleasure from uttering all sorts of labial, dental, and gutteral sounds.
Their rhythms and oppositions can entertain him, and he can begin to use
his lingual gamut to designate the whole range of his perceptions and
passions.

Here we touch upon one of the great crises in creation. As nutrition at
first established itself in the face of waste, and reproduction in the
face of death, so representation was able, by help of vocal symbols, to
confront that dispersion inherent in experience, which is something in
itself ephemeral. Merely to associate one thing with another brings
little gain; and merely to have added a vocal designation to fleeting
things—a designation which of course would have been taken for a part
of their essence—would in itself have encumbered phenomena without
rendering them in any way more docile to the will. But the encumbrance
in this instance proved to be a wonderful preservative and means of
comparison. It actually gave each moving thing its niche and cenotaph in
the eternal. For the universe of vocal sounds was a field, like that of
colour or number, in which the elements showed relations and transitions
easy to dominate. It was a key-board over which attention could run back
and forth, eliciting many implicit harmonies. Henceforth when various
sounds had been idly associated with various things, and identified with
them, the things could, by virtue of their names, be carried over
mentally into the linguistic system; they could be manipulated there
ideally, and vicariously preserved in representation. Needless to say
that the things themselves remained unchanged all the while in their
efficacy and mechanical succession, just as they remain unchanged in
those respects when they pass for the mathematical observer into their
measure or symbol; but as this reduction to mathematical form makes them
calculable, so their earlier reduction to words rendered them comparable
and memorable, first enabling them to figure in discourse at all.

[Sidenote: Language has a structure independent of things.]

Language had originally no obligation to subserve an end which we may
sometimes measure it by now, and depute to be its proper function,
namely, to stand for things and adapt itself perfectly to their
structure. In language as in every other existence idealism precedes
realism, since it must be a part of nature living its own life before it
can become a symbol for the rest and bend to external control. The vocal
and musical medium is, and must always remain, alien, to the spatial.
What makes terms correspond and refer to one another is a relation
eternally disparate from the relation of propinquity or derivation
between existences. Yet when sounds were attached to an event or
emotion, the sounds became symbols for that disparate fact. The net of
vocal relations caught that natural object as a cobweb might catch a
fly, without destroying or changing it. The object’s quality passed to
the word at the same time that the word’s relations enveloped the
object; and thus a new weight and significance was added to sound,
previously nothing but a dull music. A conflict at once established
itself between the drift proper to the verbal medium and that proper to
the designated things; a conflict which the whole history of language
and thought has embodied and which continues to this day.

[Sidenote: Words remaining identical, serve to identify things that
change.]

Suppose an animal going down to a frozen river which he had previously
visited in summer. Marks of all sorts would awaken in him an old train
of reactions; he would doubtless feel premonitions of satisfied thirst
and the splash of water. On finding, however, instead of the fancied
liquid, a mass of something like cold stone, he would be disconcerted.
His active attitude would be pulled up short and contradicted. In his
fairyland of faith and magic the old river would have been simply
annihilated, the dreamt-of water would have become a vanished ghost, and
this ice for the moment the hard reality. He would turn away and live
for a while on other illusions. When this shock was overgrown by time
and it was summer again, the original habit might, however, reassert
itself once more. If he revisited the stream, some god would seem to
bring back something from an old familiar world; and the chill of that
temporary estrangement, the cloud that for a while had made the good
invisible, would soon be gone and forgotten.

If we imagine, on the contrary, that this animal could speak and had
from the first called his haunt _the river_, he would have repeated its
name on seeing it even when it was frozen, for he had not failed to
recognise it in that guise. The variation afterwards noticed, upon
finding it hard, would seem no total substitution, but a _change_; for
it would be the same river, once flowing, that was now congealed. An
identical word, covering all the identical qualities in the phenomena
and serving to abstract them, would force the inconsistent qualities in
those phenomena to pass for accidents; and the useful proposition could
at once be framed that the same river may be sometimes free and
sometimes frozen.

[Sidenote: Language the dialectical garment of facts.]

This proposition is true, yet it contains much that is calculated to
offend a scrupulous dialectician. Its language and categories are not
purely logical, but largely physical and representative. The notion that
what changes nevertheless endures is a remarkable hybrid. It arises when
rigid ideal terms are imposed on evanescent existence. Feelings, taken
alone, would show no identities; they would be lost in changing, or be
woven into the infinite feeling of change. Notions, taken alone, would
allow no lapse, but would merely lead attention about from point to
point over an eternal system of relations. Power to understand the
world, logical or scientific mastery of existence, arises only by the
forced and conventional marriage of these two essences, when the actual
flux is ideally suspended and an ideal harness is loosely flung upon
things. For this purpose words are an admirable instrument. They have
dialectical relations based on an ideal import, or tendency to
definition, which makes their essence their signification; yet they can
be freely bandied about and applied for a moment to the ambiguous things
that pass through existence.

[Sidenote: Words are wise men’s counters.]

Had men been dumb, an exchange and circulation of images need not have
been wanting, and associations might have arisen between ideals in the
mind and corresponding reactive habits in the body. What words add is
not power of discernment or action, but a medium of intellectual
exchange. Language is like money, without which specific relative values
may well exist and be felt, but cannot be reduced to a common
denominator. And as money must have a certain intrinsic value of its own
in order that its relation to other values may be stable, so a word, by
which a thing is represented in discourse, must be a part of that
thing’s context, an ingredient in the total apparition it is destined to
recall. Words, in their existence, are no more universal than gold by
nature is a worthless standard of value in other things. Words are a
material accompaniment of phenomena, at first an idle accompaniment, but
one which happens to subserve easily a universal function. Some other
element in objects might conceivably have served for a common
denominator between them; but words, just by virtue of their
adventitious, detachable status, and because they are so easily compared
and manipulated in the world of sound, were singularly well fitted for
this office. They are not vague, as any common quality abstracted from
things would necessarily become; and though vagueness is a quality only
too compatible with perception, so that vague ideas can exist without
end, this vagueness is not what makes them universal in their functions.
It is one thing to perceive an ill-determined form and quite another to
attribute to it a precise general predicate. Words, distinct in their
own category and perfectly recognisable, can accordingly perform very
well the function of embodying a universal; for they can be identified
in turn with many particulars and yet remain throughout particular
themselves.

[Sidenote: Nominalism right in psychology and realism in logic]

The psychology of nominalism is undoubtedly right where it insists that
every image is particular and every term, in its existential aspect, a
_flatum vocis_; but nominalists should have recognised that images may
have any degree of vagueness and generality when measured by a
conceptual standard. A figure having obviously three sides and three
corners may very well be present to the mind when it is impossible to
say whether it is an equilateral or a rectangular triangle. Functional
or logical universality lies in another sphere altogether, being a
matter of intent and not of existence. When we say that “universals
alone exist in the mind” we mean by “mind” something unknown to
Berkeley; not a bundle of psychoses nor an angelic substance, but quick
intelligence, the faculty of discourse. Predication is an act,
understanding a spiritual and transitive operation: its existential
basis may well be counted in psychologically and reduced to a stream of
immediate presences; but its meaning can be caught only by another
meaning, as life only can exemplify life. Vague or general images are as
little universal as sounds are; but a sound better than a flickering
abstraction can serve the intellect in its operation of comparison and
synthesis. Words are therefore the body of discourse, of which the soul
is understanding.

[Sidenote: Literature moves between the extremes of music and
denotation.]

The categories of discourse are in part merely representative, in part
merely grammatical, and in part attributable to both spheres. Euphony
and phonetic laws are principles governing language without any
reference to its meaning; here speech is still a sort of music. At the
other extreme lies that ultimate form of prose which we see in
mathematical reasoning or in a telegraphic style, where absolutely
nothing is rhetorical and speech is denuded of every feature not
indispensable to its symbolic rôle. Between these two extremes lies the
broad field of poetry, or rather of imaginative or playful expression,
where the verbal medium is a medium indeed, having a certain
transparency, a certain reference to independent facts, but at the same
time elaborates the fact in expressing it, and endows it with affinities
alien to its proper nature. A pun is a grotesque example of such
diremption, where ambiguities belonging only to speech are used to
suggest impossible substitutions in ideas. Less frankly, language
habitually wrests its subject-matter in some measure from its real
context and transfers it to a represented and secondary world, the world
of logic and reflection. Concretions in existence are subsumed, when
named, under concretions in discourse. Grammar lays violent hands upon
experience, and everything becomes a prey to wit and fancy, a material
for fiction and eloquence. Man’s intellectual progress has a poetic
phase, in which he imagines the world; and then a scientific phase, in
which he sifts and tests what he has imagined.

[Sidenote: Sound and object, in their sensuous presence, may have
affinity.]

In what measure do inflection and syntax represent anything in the
subject-matter of discourse? In what measure are they an independent
play of expression, a quasi-musical, quasi-mathematical veil interposed
between reflection and existence? One who knows only languages of a
single family can give but a biassed answer to this question. There are
doubtless many approaches to correct symbolism in language, which
grammar may have followed up at different times in strangely different
ways. That the medium in every art has a character of its own, a
character limiting its representative value, may perhaps be safely
asserted, and this intrinsic character in the medium antedates and
permeates all representation. Phonetic possibilities and phonetic habits
belong, in language, to this indispensable vehicle; what the throat and
lips can emit easily and distinguishably, and what sequences can appeal
to the ear and be retained, depend alike on physiological conditions;
and no matter how convenient or inconvenient these conditions may be for
signification, they will always make themselves felt and may sometimes
remain predominant. In poetry they are still conspicuous. Euphony,
metre, and rhyme colour the images they transmit and add a charm wholly
extrinsic and imputed. In this immersion of the message in the medium
and in its intrinsic movement the magic of poetry lies; and the miracle
grows as there is more or less native analogy between the medium’s
movement and that of the subject-matter.

Both language and ideas involve processes in the brain. The two
processes may be wholly disparate if we regard their objects only and
forget their seat, as Athena is in no way linked to an elephant’s tusk;
yet in perception all processes are contiguous and exercise a single
organism, in which they may find themselves in sympathetic or
antipathetic vibration. On this circumstance hangs that subtle congruity
between subject and vehicle which is otherwise such a mystery in
expression. If to think of Athena and to look on ivory are congruous
physiological processes, if they sustain or heighten each other, then to
represent Athena in ivory will be a happy expedient, in which the very
nature of the medium will already be helping us forward. Scent and form
go better together, for instance, in the violet or the rose than in the
hyacinth or the poppy: and being better compacted for human perception
they seem more expressive and can be linked more unequivocally with
other sources of feeling. So a given vocal sound may have more or less
analogy to the thing it is used to signify; this analogy may be obvious,
as in onomatopoeia, or subtle, as when short, sharp sounds go with
decision, or involved rhythms and vague reverberations with a floating
dream. What seems exquisite to one poet may accordingly seem vapid to
another, when the texture of experience in the two minds differs, so
that a given composition rustles through one man’s fancy as a wind might
through a wood, but finds no sympathetic response in the other organism,
nerved as it may be, perhaps, to precision in thought and action.

[Sidenote: Syntax positively representative.]

The structure of language, when it passes beyond the phonetic level,
begins at once to lean upon existences and to imitate the structure of
things. We distinguish the parts of speech, for instance, in
subservience to distinctions which we make in ideas. The feeling or
quality represented by an adjective, the relation indicated by a verb,
the substance or concretion of qualities designated by a noun, are
diversities growing up in experience, by no means attributable to the
mere play of sound. The parts of speech are therefore representative.
Their inflection is representative too, since tenses mark important
practical differences in the distribution of the events described, and
cases express the respective rôles played by objects in the operation.
“I struck him and he will strike me,” renders in linguistic symbols a
marked change in the situation; the variation in phrase is not
rhetorical. Language here, though borrowed no doubt from ancestral
poetry, has left all revery far behind, and has been submerged in the
Life of Reason.

[Sidenote: Yet it vitiates what it represents.]

The medium, however, constantly reasserts itself. An example may be
found in gender, which, clearly representative in a measure, cuts loose
in language from all genuine representation and becomes a feature in
abstract linguistic design, a formal characteristic in expression.
Contrasted sentiments permeate an animal’s dealings with his own sex and
with the other; nouns and adjectives represent this contrast by taking
on masculine and feminine forms. The distinction is indeed so important
that wholly different words—man and woman, bull and cow—stand for the
best-known animals of different sex; while adjectives, where declension
is extinct, as in English, often take on a connotation of gender and are
applied to one sex only—as we say a beautiful woman, but hardly a
beautiful man. But gender in language extends much farther than sex, and
even if by some subtle analogy all the masculine and feminine nouns in a
language could be attached to something suggesting sex in the objects
they designate, yet it can hardly be maintained that the elaborate
concordance incident upon that distinction is representative of any felt
quality in the things. So remote an analogy to sex could not assert
itself pervasively. Thus Horace says:

  Quis _multa_ gracilis te puer in _rosa_
  perfusis liquidis urget odoribus
  _grato_, Pyrrha, sub _antro_?

Here we may perceive why the rose was instinctively made feminine, and
we may grant that the bower, though the reason escape us, was somehow
properly masculine; but no one would urge that a _profusion_ of roses
was also intrinsically feminine, or that the _pleasantness_ of a bower
was ever specifically masculine to sense. The epithets _multa_ and
_grato_ take their gender from the nouns, even though the quality they
designate fails to do so. Their gender is therefore non-representative
and purely formal; it marks an intra-linguistic accommodation. The
medium has developed a syntactical structure apart from any intrinsic
significance thereby accruing to its elements. Artificial concordance in
gender does not express gender: it merely emphasises the grammatical
links in the phrases and makes greater variety possible in the
arrangement of words.

[Sidenote: Difficulty in subduing a living medium.]

This example may prepare us to understand a general principle: that
language, while essentially significant viewed in its function, is
indefinitely wasteful, being mechanical and tentative in its origin. It
overloads itself, and being primarily music, and a labyrinth of sounds,
it develops an articulation and method of its own, which only in the
end, and with much inexactness, reverts to its function of expression.
How great the possibilities of effect are in developing a pure medium we
can best appreciate in music; but in language a similar development goes
on while it is being applied to representing things. The organ is
spontaneous, the function adventitious and superimposed. Rhetoric and
utility keep language going, as centrifugal and centripetal forces keep
a planet in its course. Euphony, verbal analogy, grammatical fancy,
poetic confusion, continually drive language afield, in its own
tangential direction; while the business of life, in which language is
employed, and the natural lapse of rhetorical fashions, as continually
draw it back towards convenience and exactitude.

[Sidenote: Language foreshortens experience.]

Between music and bare symbolism language has its florid expansion.
Until music is subordinated, speech has little sense; it can hardly tell
a story or indicate an object unequivocally. Yet if music were left
behind altogether, language would pass into a sort of algebra or vocal
shorthand, without literary quality; it would become wholly indicative
and record facts without colouring them ideally. This medium and its
intrinsic development, though they make the bane of reproduction, make
the essence of art; they give representation a new and specific value
such as the object, before representation, could not have possessed.
Consciousness itself is such a medium in respect to diffuse existence,
which it foreshortens and elevates into synthetic ideas. Reason, too, by
bringing the movement of events and inclinations to a head in single
acts of reflection, thus attaining to laws and purposes, introduces into
life the influence of a representative medium, without which life could
never pass from a process into an art. Language acquires scope in the
same way, by its kindly infidelities; its metaphors and syntax lend
experience perspective. Language vitiates the experience it expresses,
but thereby makes the burden of one moment relevant to that of another.
The two experiences, identified roughly with the same concretion in
discourse, are pronounced similar or comparable in character. Thus a
proverb, by its verbal pungency and rhythm, becomes more memorable than
the event it first described would ever have been if not translated into
an epigram and rendered, so to speak, applicable to new cases; for by
that translation the event has become an idea.

[Sidenote: It is a perpetual mythology.]

To turn events into ideas is the function of literature. Music, which in
a certain sense is a mass of pure forms, must leave its “ideas” imbedded
in their own medium—they are musical ideas—and cannot impose them on
any foreign material, such as human affairs. Science, on the contrary,
seeks to disclose the bleak anatomy of existence, stripping off as much
as possible the veil of prejudice and words. Literature takes a middle
course and tries to subdue music, which for its purposes would be
futile and too abstract, into conformity with general experience, making
music thereby significant. Literary art in the end rejects all unmeaning
nourishes, all complications that have no counterpart in things or no
use in expressing their relations; at the same time it aspires to digest
that reality to which it confines itself, making it over into ideal
substance and material for the mind. It looks at things with an
incorrigibly dramatic eye, turning them into permanent unities (which
they never are) and almost into persons, grouping them by their
imaginative or moral affinities and retaining in them chiefly what is
incidental to their being, namely, the part they may chance to play in
man’s adventures.

Such literary art demands a subject-matter other than the literary
impulse itself. The literary man is an interpreter and hardly succeeds,
as the musician may, without experience and mastery of human affairs.
His art is half genius and half fidelity. He needs inspiration; he must
wait for automatic musical tendencies to ferment in his mind, proving it
to be fertile in devices, comparisons, and bold assimilations. Yet
inspiration alone will lead him astray, for his art is relative to
something other than its own formal impulse; it comes to clarify the
real world, not to encumber it; and it needs to render its native
agility practical and to attach its volume of feeling to what is
momentous in human life. Literature has its piety, its conscience; it
cannot long forget, without forfeiting all dignity, that it serves a
burdened and perplexed creature, a human animal struggling to persuade
the universal Sphinx to propose a more intelligible riddle.
Irresponsible and trivial in its abstract impulse, man’s simian chatter
becomes noble as it becomes symbolic; its representative function lends
it a serious beauty, its utility endows it with moral worth.

[Sidenote: It may be apt or inapt, with equal richness.]

[Sidenote: Absolute language a possible but foolish art.]

These relations, in determining the function of language, determine the
ideal which its structure should approach. Any sort of grammar and
rhetoric, the most absurd and inapplicable as well as the most
descriptive, can be spontaneous; fit organisms are not less natural than
those that are unfit. Felicitous genius is so called because it meets
experience half-way. A genius which flies in the opposite direction,
though not less fertile internally, is externally inept and is called
madness. Ineptitude is something which language needs to shake off.
Better surrender altogether some verbal categories and start again, in
that respect, with a clean slate, than persist in any line of
development that alienates thought from reality. The language of birds
is excellent in its way, and those ancient sages who are reported to
have understood it very likely had merely perceived that it was not
meant to be intelligible; for it is not to understand nature to reduce
her childishly to a human scale. Man, who is merged in universal nature
at the roots of his being, is not without profound irrational intuitions
by which he can half divine her secret processes; and his heart, in its
own singing and fluttering, might not wholly misinterpret the birds. But
human discourse is not worth having if it is mere piping, and helps not
at all in mastering things; for man is intelligent, which is another way
of saying that he aspires to envisage in thought what he is dealing with
in action. Discourse that absolved itself from that observant duty would
not be cognitive; and in failing to be cognitive it would fail to redeem
the practical forces it ignored from their brute externality, and to
make them tributary to the Life of Reason. Thus its own dignity and
continued existence depend on its learning to express momentous facts,
facts important for action and happiness; and there is nothing which so
quickly discredits itself as empty rhetoric and dialectic, or poetry
that wanders in dim and private worlds. If pure music, even with its
immense sensuous appeal, is so easily tedious, what a universal yawn
must meet the verbiage which develops nothing but its own iridescence.
Absolute versification and absolute dialectic may have their place in
society; they give play to an organ that has its rights like any other,
and that, after serving for a while in the economy of life, may well
claim a holiday in which to disport itself irresponsibly among the fowls
of the air and the lilies of the field. But the exercise is trivial;
and if its high priests go through their mummeries with a certain
unction, and pretend to be wafted by them into a higher world, the
phenomenon is neither new nor remarkable. Language is a wonderful and
pliant medium, and why should it not lend itself to imposture? A
systematic abuse of words, as of other things, is never without some
inner harmony or propriety that makes it prosper; only the man who looks
beyond and sees the practical results awakes to the villainy of it. In
the end, however, those who play with words lose their labour, and
pregnant as they feel themselves to be with new and wonderful universes,
they cannot humanise the one in which they live and rather banish
themselves from it by their persistent egotism and irrelevance.




