CHAPTER IV

HESITATIONS IN METHOD


[Sidenote: Mechanism restricted to one-half of existence.]

When Democritus proclaimed the sovereignty of mechanism, he did so in
the oracular fashion proper to an ancient sage. He found it no harder to
apply his atomic theory to the mind and to the gods than to solids and
fluids. It sufficed to conceive that such an explanation might be
possible, and to illustrate the theory by a few scattered facts and
trenchant hypotheses. When Descartes, after twenty centuries of verbal
physics, reintroduced mechanism into philosophy, he made a striking
modification in its claims. He divided existence into two independent
regions, and it was only in one, in the realm of extended things, that
mechanism was expected to prevail. Mental facts, which he approached
from the side of abstracted reflection and Platonic ideas, seemed to him
obviously non-extended, even when they represented extension; and with
them mechanism could have nothing to do. Descartes had recovered in the
science of mechanics a firm nucleus for physical theory, a stronghold
from which it had become impossible to dislodge scientific methods.
There, at any rate, form, mass, distance, and other mathematical
relations governed the transformation of things. Yet the very clearness
and exhaustiveness of this mechanical method, as applied to gross masses
in motion, made it seem essentially inapplicable to anything else.
Descartes was far too radical and incisive a thinker, however, not to
feel that it must apply throughout nature. Imaginative difficulties due
to the complexity of animal bodies could not cloud his rational insight.
Animal bodies, then, were mere machines, cleancut and cold engines like
so many anatomical manikins. They explained themselves and all their
operations, talking and building temples being just as truly a matter of
physics as the revolution of the sky. But the soul had dropped out, and
Descartes was the last man to ignore the soul. There had dropped out
also the secondary qualities of matter, all those qualities, namely,
which are negligible in mechanical calculations. Mechanism was in truth
far from universal; all mental facts and half the properties of matter,
as matter is revealed to man, came into being without asking leave; they
were interlopers in the intelligible universe. Indeed, Descartes was
willing to admit that these inexplicable bystanders might sometimes put
their finger in the pie, and stir the material world judiciously so as
to give it a new direction, although without adding to its substance or
to its force.

The situation so created gave the literary philosophers an excellent
chance to return to the attack and to swallow and digest the new-born
mechanism in their facile systems. Theologians and metaphysicians in one
quarter and psychologists in another found it easy and inevitable to
treat the whole mechanical world as a mere idea. In that case, it is
true, the only existences that remained remained entirely without
calculable connections; everything was a divine trance or a shower of
ideas falling by chance through the void. But this result might not be
unwelcome. It fell in well enough with that love of emotional issues,
that want of soberness and want of cogency, which is so characteristic
of modern philosophers. Christian theology still remained the background
and chief point of reference for speculation; if its eclectic dogmas
could be in part supported or in part undermined, that constituted a
sufficient literary success, and what became of science was of little
moment in comparison.

[Sidenote: Men of science not speculative.]

Science, to be sure, could very well take care of itself and proceeded
in its patient course without caring particularly what status the
metaphysicians might assign to it. Not to be a philosopher is even an
advantage for a man of science, because he is then more willing to adapt
his methods to the state of knowledge in his particular subject, without
insisting on ultimate intelligibility; and he has perhaps more joy of
his discoveries than he might have if he had discounted them in his
speculations. Darwin, for instance, did more than any one since Newton
to prove that mechanism is universal, but without apparently believing
that it really was so, or caring about the question at all. In natural
history, observation has not yet come within range of accurate
processes; it merely registers habits and traces empirical derivations.
Even in chemistry, while measure and proportion are better felt, the
ultimate units and the radical laws are still problematical. The recent
immense advances in science have been in acquaintance with nature rather
than in insight. Greater complexity, greater regularity, greater
_naturalness_ have been discovered everywhere; the profound analogies in
things, their common evolution, have appeared unmistakably; but the
inner texture of the process has not been laid bare.

This cautious peripheral attack, which does so much honour to the
scientific army and has won it so many useful victories, is another
proof that science is nothing but common knowledge extended. It is
willing to reckon in any terms and to study any subject-matter; where it
cannot see necessity it will notice law; where laws cannot be stated it
will describe habits; where habits fail it will classify types; and
where types even are indiscernible it will not despise statistics. In
this way studies which are scientific in spirit, however loose their
results, may be carried on in social matters, in political economy, in
anthropology, in psychology. The historical sciences, also, philology
and archæology, have reached tentatively very important results; it is
enough that an intelligent man should gather in any quarter a rich fund
of information, for the movement of his subject to pass somehow to his
mind: and if his apprehension follows that movement—not breaking in
upon it with extraneous matter—it will be scientific apprehension.

[Sidenote: Confusion in semi-moral subjects.]

What confuses and retards science in these ambiguous regions is the
difficulty of getting rid of the foreign element, or even of deciding
what the element native to the object is. In political economy, for
instance, it is far from clear whether the subject is moral, and
therefore to be studied and expressed dialectically, or whether it is
descriptive, and so in the end a matter of facts and of mechanics. Are
you formulating an interest or tracing a sequence of events? And if both
simultaneously, are you studying the world in order to see what acts, in
a given situation, would serve your purpose and so be right, or are you
taking note of your own intentions, and of those of other people, in
order to infer from them the probable course of affairs? In the first
case you are a moralist observing nature in order to use it; you are
defining a policy, and that definition is not knowledge of anything
except of your own heart. Neither you nor any one else may ever take
such a single-minded and unchecked course in the world as the one you
are excogitating. No one may ever have been guided in the past by any
such absolute plan.

For this same reason, if (to take up the other supposition) you are a
naturalist studying the actual movement of affairs, you would do well
not to rely on the conscious views or intentions of anybody. A natural
philosopher is on dangerous ground when he uses psychological or moral
terms in his calculation. If you use such terms—and to forbid their use
altogether would be pedantic—you should take them for conventional
literary expressions, covering an unsolved problem; for these views and
intentions have a brief and inconsequential tenure of life and their
existence is merely a sign for certain conjunctions in nature, where
processes hailing from afar have met in a man, soon to pass beyond him.
If they figure as causes in nature, it is only because they represent
the material processes that have brought them into being. The
existential element in mental facts is not so remote from matter as
Descartes imagined. Even if we are not prepared to admit with Democritus
that matter is what makes them up (as it well might if “matter” were
taken in a logical sense)[B] we should agree that their substance is in
mechanical flux, and that their form, by which they become moral
unities, is only an ideal aspect of that moving substance. Moral
unities are created by a point of view, as right and left are, and for
that reason are not efficacious; though of course the existences they
enclose, like the things lying to the left and to the right, move in
unison with the rest of nature.

People doubtless do well to keep an eye open for morals when they study
physics, and _vice versa_, since it is only by feeling how the two
spheres hang together that the Life of Reason can be made to walk on
both feet. Yet to discriminate between the two is no scholastic
subtlety. There is the same practical inconvenience in taking one for
the other as in trying to gather grapes from thistles. A hybrid science
is sterile. If the reason escapes us, history should at least convince
us of the fact, when we remember the issue of Aristotelian physics and
of cosmological morals. Where the subject-matter is ambiguous and the
method double, you have scarcely reached a result which seems plausible
for the moment, when a rival school springs up, adopting and bringing
forward the submerged element in your view, and rejecting your
achievement altogether. A seesaw and endless controversy thus take the
place of a steady, co-operative advance. This disorder reigns in morals,
metaphysics, and psychology, and the conflicting schools of political
economy and of history loudly proclaim it to the world.

[Sidenote: “Physic of metaphysic begs defence.”]

The modesty of men of science, their aversion (or incapacity) to carry
their principles over into speculation, has left the greater part of
physics or the theory of existence to the metaphysicians. What they have
made of it does not concern us here, since the result has certainly not
been a science; indeed they have obscured the very notion that there
should be a science of all existence and that metaphysics, if it is more
than a name for ultimate physics, can be nothing but dialectic, which
does not look toward existence at all. But the prevalence of a mythical
physics, purporting to describe the structure of the universe in terms
quite other than those which scientific physics could use, has affected
this scientific physics and seriously confused it. Its core, in
mechanics, to be sure, could not be touched; and the detail even of
natural history and chemistry could not be disfigured: but the general
aspect of natural history could be rendered ambiguous in the doctrine of
evolution; while in psychology, which attempted to deal with that half
of the world which Descartes had not subjected to mechanism, confusion
could hold undisputed sway.

[Sidenote: Evolution by mechanism.]

There is a sense in which the notion of evolution is involved in any
mechanical system. Descartes indeed had gone so far as to describe, in
strangely simple terms, how the world, with all its detail, might have
been produced by starting any motion anywhere in the midst of a plenum
at rest. The idea of evolution could not be more curtly put forth; so
much so that Descartes had to arm himself against the inevitable charge
that he was denying the creation, by protesting that his doctrine was a
supposition contrary to fact, and that though the world _might_ have
been so formed, it was really created as Genesis recorded. Moreover, in
antiquity, every Ionian philosopher had conceived a gradual
crystallisation of nature; while Empedocles, in his magnificent oracles,
had anticipated Darwin’s philosophy without Darwin’s knowledge. It is
clear that if the forces that hold an organism together are mechanical,
and therefore independent of the ideal unities they subtend, those
forces suffice to explain the origin of the organism, and can have
produced it. Darwin’s discoveries, like every other advance in physical
insight, are nothing but filling for that abstract assurance. They show
us how the supposed mechanism really works in one particular field, in
one stage of its elaboration. As earlier naturalists had shown us how
mechanical causes might produce the miracle of the sunrise and the
poetry of the seasons, so Darwin showed us how similar causes might
secure the adaptation of animals to their habitat. Evolution, so
conceived, is nothing but a detailed account of mechanical origins.

[Sidenote: Evolution by ideal attraction.]

At the same time the word evolution has a certain pomp and glamour about
it which fits ill with so prosaic an interpretation. In the unfolding of
a bud we are wont to see, as it were, the fulfilment of a predetermined
and glorious destiny; for the seed was an epitome or condensation of a
full-blown plant and held within it, in some sort of potential guise,
the very form which now peeps out in the young flower. Evolution
suggests a prior involution or contraction and the subsequent
manifestation of an innate ideal. Evolution should move toward a fixed
consummation the approaches to which we might observe and measure. Yet
evolution, in this prophetic sense of the word, would be the exact
denial of what Darwin, for instance, was trying to prove. It would be a
return to Aristotelian notions of heredity and potential being; for it
was the essence of Aristotle’s physics—of which his theology was an
integral part and a logical capping—that the forms which beings
approached pre-existed in other beings from which they had been
inherited, and that the intermediate stages during which the butterfly
shrank to a grub could not be understood unless we referred them to
their origin and their destiny. The physical essence and potency of
seeds lay in their ideal relations, not in any actual organisation they
might possess in the day of their eclipse and slumber. An egg evolved
into a chicken not by mechanical necessity—for an egg had a
comparatively simple structure—but by virtue of an ideal harmony in
things; since it was natural and fitting that what had come from a hen
should lead on to a hen again. The ideal nature possessed by the parent,
hovering over the passive seed, magically induced it to grow into the
parent’s semblance; and growth was the gradual approach to the
perfection which this ancestral essence prescribed. This was why
Aristotle’s God, though in character an unmistakable ideal, had to be at
the same time an actual existence; since the world would not have known
which way to move or what was its inner ideal, unless this ideal,
already embodied somewhere else, drew it on and infused movement and
direction into the world’s structureless substance.

The underlying Platonism in this magical physics is obvious, since the
natures that Aristotle made to rule the world were eternal natures. An
individual might fail to be a perfect man or a perfect monkey, but the
specific human or simian ideal, by which he had been formed in so far as
he was formed at all, was not affected by this accidental resistance in
the matter at hand, as an adamantine seal, even if at times the wax by
defect or impurity failed to receive a perfect impression, would remain
unchanged and ready to be stamped perpetually on new material.

[Sidenote: If species are evolved they cannot guide evolution.]

The contrast is obvious between this Platonic physics and a naturalism
like that of Darwin. The point of evolution, as selection produces it,
is that new species may arise. The very title of Darwin’s book “The
Origin of Species” is a denial of Aristotelianism and, in the pregnant
sense, of evolution. It suggests that the type approached by each
generation may differ from that approached by the previous one; that
not merely the degree of perfection, but the direction of growth, may
vary. The individual is not merely unfolded from an inner potentiality
derived from a like ancestor and carrying with it a fixed eternal ideal,
but on the contrary the very ground plan of organisation may gradually
change and a new form and a new ideal may appear. Spontaneous
variations—of course mechanically caused[C]—may occur and may modify
the hereditary form of animals. These variations, superposed upon one
another, may in time constitute a nature wholly unlike its first
original. This accidental, cumulative evolution accordingly justifies a
declaration of moral liberty. I am not obliged to aspire to the nature
my father aspired to, for the ground of my being is partly new. In me
nature is making a novel experiment. I am the adoring creator of a new
spiritual good. My duties have shifted with my shifting faculties, and
the ideal which I propose to myself, and alone can honestly propose, is
unprecedented, the expression of a moving existence and without
authority beyond the range of existences congruous with mine.

[Sidenote: Intrusion of optimism.]

All that is scientific or Darwinian in the theory of evolution is
accordingly an application of mechanism, a proof that mechanism lies at
the basis of life and morals. The Aristotelian notion of development,
however, was too deeply rooted in tradition for it to disappear at a
breath. Evolution as conceived by Hegel, for instance, or even by
Spencer, retained Aristotelian elements, though these were disguised and
hidden under a cloud of new words. Both identify evolution with
progress, with betterment; a notion which would naturally be prominent
in any one with enlightened sympathies living in the nineteenth century,
when a new social and intellectual order was forcing itself on a world
that happened largely to welcome the change, but a notion that has
nothing to do with natural science. The fittest to live need not be
those with the most harmonious inner life nor the best possibilities.
The fitness might be due to numbers, as in a political election, or to
tough fibre, as in a tropical climate. Of course a form of being that
circumstances make impossible or hopelessly laborious had better dive
under and cease for the moment to be; but the circumstances that render
it inopportune do not render it essentially inferior. Circumstances
have no power of that kind; and perhaps the worst incident in the
popular acceptance of evolution has been a certain brutality thereby
introduced into moral judgment, an abdication of human ideals, a mocking
indifference to justice, under cover of respect for what is bound to be,
and for the rough economy of the world. Disloyalty to the good in the
guise of philosophy had appeared also among the ancients, when their
political ethics had lost its authority, just as it appeared among us
when the prestige of religion had declined. The Epicureans sometimes
said that one should pursue pleasure because all the animals did so, and
the Stoics that one should fill one’s appointed place in nature, because
such was the practice of clouds and rivers.

[Sidenote: Evolution according to Hegel.]

Hegel possessed a keen scent for instability in men’s attitudes and
opinions; he had no need of Darwin’s facts to convince him that in moral
life, at least, there were no permanent species and that every posture
of thought was an untenable half-way station between two others. His
early contact with Protestant theology may have predisposed him to that
opinion. At any rate he had no sympathy with that Platonism that allowed
everything to have its eternal ideal, with which it might ultimately be
identified. Such ideals would be finite, they would arrest the flux, and
they would try to break loose from their enveloping conditions. Hegel
was no moralist in the Socratic sense, but a naturalist seeking
formulas for the growth of moral experience. Instead of questioning the
heart, he somewhat satirically described its history. At the same time
he was heir to that mythology which had deified the genetic or physical
principle in things, and though the traditional myths suffered cruel
operations at his hands, and often died of explanation, the mythical
principle itself remained untouched and was the very breath of his
nostrils. He never doubted that the formula he might find for the growth
of experience would be also the ultimate good. What other purpose could
the world have than to express the formula according to which it was
being generated?

In this honest conviction we see the root, perhaps, of that distaste for
correct physics that prevails among many who call themselves idealists.
If physics were for some reason to be adored, it would be disconcerting
to find in physics nothing but atoms and a void. It is hard to
understand, however, why a fanciful formula expressing the evolution of
this perturbed universe, and painting it no better than it is, should be
more worshipful than an exact formula meant to perform the same office.
A myth that enlarged the world and promised a complete transformation of
its character might have its charms; but the improvement is not obvious
that accrues by making the drift of things, just as it drifts, its own
standard. Yet for Hegel it mattered nothing how unstable all ideals
might be, since the only use of them was to express a principle of
transition, and this principle was being realised, eternally and
unawares, by the self-devouring and self-transcending purposes rolling
in the flux.

[Sidenote: The conservative interpretation.]

This philosophy might not be much relished if it were more frankly
expressed; yet something of the sort floats vaguely before most minds
when they think of evolution. The types of being change, they say: in
this sense the Aristotelian notion of a predetermined form unfolding
itself in each species has yielded to a more correct and more dynamic
physics. But the changes, so people imagine, express a predetermined
ideal, no longer, of course, the ideal of these specific things, but one
overarching the cosmic movement. The situation might be described by
saying that this is Aristotle’s view adapted to a world in which there
is only one species or only one individual. The earlier phases of life
are an imperfect expression of the same nature which the later phases
express more fully. Hence the triumphant march of evolution and the
assumption that whatever is later is necessarily better than what went
before. If a child were simply the partial expression of a man, his
single desire would be to grow up, and when he was grown up he would
embody all he had been striving for and would be happy for ever after.
So if man were nothing but a halting reproduction of divinity and
destined to become God, his whole destiny would be fulfilled by
apotheosis. If this apotheosis, moreover, were an actual future event,
something every man and animal was some day to experience, evolution
might really have a final goal, and might lead to a new and presumably
better sort of existence—existence in the eternal. Somewhat in this
fashion evolution is understood by the party that wish to combine it
with a refreshed patristic theology.

[Sidenote: The radical one.]

There is an esoteric way, however, of taking these matters which is more
in sympathy both with natural evolution and with transcendental
philosophy. If we assert that evolution is infinite, no substantive goal
can be set to it. The goal will be the process itself, if we could only
open our eyes upon its beauty and necessity. The apotheosis will be
retroactive, nay, it has already taken place. The insight involved is
mystical, yet in a way more just to the facts than any promise of
ulterior blisses. For it is not really true that a child has no other
ideal than to become a man. Childhood has many an ideal of its own, many
a beauty and joy irrelevant to manhood, and such that manhood is
incapable of retaining or containing them. If the ultimate good is
really to contain and retain all the others, it can hardly be anything
but their totality—the infinite history of experience viewed under the
form of eternity. At that remove, however, the least in the kingdom of
Heaven is even as the greatest, and the idea of evolution, as of time,
is “taken up into a higher unity.” There could be no real pre-eminence
in one man’s works over those of another; and if faith, or insight into
the equal service done by all, still seemed a substantial privilege
reserved for the elect, this privilege, too, must be an illusion, since
those who do not know how useful and necessary they are must be as
useful and necessary as those who do. An absolute preference for
knowledge or self-consciousness would be an unmistakably human and
finite ideal—something to be outgrown.

[Sidenote: Megalomania.]

What practically survives in these systems, when their mysticism and
naturalism have had time to settle, is a clear enough standard. It is a
standard of inclusion and quantity. Since all is needful, and the
justifying whole is infinite, there would seem to be a greater dignity
in the larger part. As the best copy of a picture, other things being
equal, would be one that represented it all, so the best expression of
the world, next to the world itself, would be the largest portion of it
any one could absorb. Progress would then mean annexation. Growth would
not come by expressing better an innate soul which involved a particular
ideal, but by assimilating more and more external things till the
original soul, by their influence, was wholly recast and unrecognisable.
This moral agility would be true merit; we should always be “striving
onward.” Life would be a sort of demonic vortex, boiling at the centre
and omnivorous at the circumference, till it finally realised the
supreme vocation of vortices, to have “their centre everywhere and their
circumference nowhere.” This somewhat troubled situation might seem
sublime to us, transformed as we too should be; and so we might reach
the most remarkable and doubtless the “highest” form of
optimism—optimism in hell.

[Sidenote: Chaos in the theory of mind.]

Confusing as these cross-currents and revulsions may prove in the field
where mechanism is more or less at home, in the field of material
operations, they are nothing to the primeval chaos that still broods
over the other hemisphere, over the mental phase of existence. The
difficulty is not merely that no mechanism is discovered or acknowledged
here, but that the phenomena themselves are ambiguous, and no one seems
to know when he speaks of mind whether he means something formal and
ideal, like Platonic essences and mathematical truths, or reflection and
intelligence, or sensation possessing external causes and objects, or
finally that ultimate immediacy or brute actuality which is
characteristic of any existence. Other even vaguer notions are doubtless
often designated by the word psychical; but these may suffice for us to
recognise the initial dilemmas in the subject and the futility of trying
to build a science of mind, or defining the relation of mind to matter,
when it is not settled whether mind means the form of matter, as with
the Platonists, or the effect of it, as with the materialists, or the
seat and false knowledge of it, as with the transcendentalists, or
perhaps after all, as with the pan-psychists, mind means exactly matter
itself.[D]

[Sidenote: Origin of self-consciousness.]

To see how equivocal everything is in this region, and possibly to catch
some glimpse of whatever science or sciences might some day define it,
we may revert for a moment to the origin of human notions concerning the
mind. If either everything or nothing that men came upon in their
primitive day-dream had been continuous in its own category and
traceable through the labyrinth of the world, no mind and no
self-consciousness need ever have appeared at all. The world might have
been as magical as it pleased; it would have remained single, one
budding sequence of forms with no transmissible substance beneath them.
These forms might have had properties we now call physical and at the
same time qualities we now call mental or emotional; there is nothing
originally incongruous in such a mixture, chaotic and perverse as it may
seem from the vantage-ground of subsequent distinctions. Existence might
as easily have had any other form whatsoever as the one we discover it
to have in fact. And primitive men, not having read Descartes, and not
having even distinguished their waking from their dreaming life nor
their passions from their environment, might well stand in the presence
of facts that seem to us full of inward incongruity and contradiction;
indeed, it is only because original data were of that chaotic sort that
we call ourselves intelligent for having disentangled them and assigned
them to distinct sequences and alternative spheres.

The ambiguities and hesitations of theory, down to our own day, are not
all artificial or introduced gratuitously by sophists. Even where
prejudice obstructs progress, that prejudice itself has some ancient and
ingenuous source. Our perplexities are traces of a primitive total
confusion; our doubts are remnants of a quite gaping ignorance. It was
impossible to say whether the phantasms that first crossed this earthly
scene were merely instinct with passion or were veritable passions
stalking through space. Material and mental elements, connections
natural and dialectical, existed mingled in that chaos. Light was as yet
inseparable from inward vitality and pain drew a visible cloud across
the sky. Civilised life is that early dream partly clarified; science is
that dense mythology partly challenged and straightened out.

The flux, however, was meantime full of method, if only discrimination
and enlarged experience could have managed to divine it. Its
inconstancy, for one thing, was not so entire that no objects could be
fixed within it, or marshalled in groups, like the birds that flock
together. Animals could be readily distinguished from the things about
them, their rate of mobility being so much quicker; and one animal in
particular would at once be singled out, a more constant follower than
any dog, and one whose energies were not merely felt but often
spontaneously exerted—a phenomenon which appeared in no other part of
the world. This singular animal every one called himself. One object was
thus discovered to be the vehicle for perceiving and affecting all the
others, a movable seat or tower from which the world might be surveyed.

[Sidenote: The notion of spirit.]

The external influences to which this body, with its discoursing mind,
seemed to be subject were by no means all visible and material. Just as
one’s own body was moved by passions and thoughts which no one else
could see—and this secrecy was a subject for much wonder and
self-congratulation—so evidently other things had a spirit within or
above them to endow them with wit and power. It was not so much to
contain sensation that this spirit was needed (for the body could very
well feel) as to contrive plans of action and discharge sudden force
into the world on momentous occasions. How deep-drawn, how far-reaching,
this spirit might be was not easily determined; but it seemed to have
unaccountable ways and to come and go from distant habitations. Things
past, for instance, were still open to its inspection; the mind was not
credited with constructing a fresh image of the past which might more or
less resemble that past; a ray of supernatural light, rather, sometimes
could pierce to the past itself and revisit its unchangeable depths. The
future, though more rarely, was open to spirit in exactly the same
fashion; destiny could on occasion be observed. Things distant and
preternatural were similarly seen in dreams. There could be no doubt
that all those objects existed; the only question was where they might
lie and in what manner they might operate. A vision was a visitation and
a dream was a journey. The spirit was a great traveller, and just as it
could dart in every direction over both space and time, so it could
come thence into a man’s presence or even into his body, to take
possession of it. Sense and fancy, in a word, had not been
distinguished. As to be aware of vision is a great sign of imagination,
so to be aware of imagination is a great sign of understanding.

The spirit had other prerogatives, of a more rational sort. The truth,
the right were also spirits; for though often invisible and denied by
men, they could emerge at times from their invisible lairs to deal some
quick blow and vindicate their divinity. The intermittance proper to
phenomena is universal and extreme; only the familiar conception of
nature, in which the flux becomes continuous, now blinds us in part to
that fact. But before the days of scientific thinking only those things
which were found unchanged and which seemed to lie passive were
conceived to have had in the interval a material existence. More
stirring apparitions, instead of being referred to their material
constituents and continuous basis in nature, were referred to spirit. We
still say, for instance, that war _comes on_. That phrase would once
have been understood literally. War, being something intermittent, must
exist somehow unseen in the interval, else it would not return; that
rage, so people would have fancied, is therefore a spirit, it is a god.
Mars and Ares long survived the phase of thought to which they owed
their divinity; and believers had to rely on habit and the witness of
antiquity to support their irrational faith. They little thought how
absolutely simple and inevitable had been the grammar by which those
figures, since grown rhetorical, had been first imposed upon the world.

[Sidenote: The notion of sense.]

Another complication soon came to increase this confusion. When material
objects were discovered and it became clear that they had comparatively
fixed natures, it also became clear that with the motions of one’s body
all other things seemed to vary in ways which did not amount to a
permanent or real metamorphosis in them; for these things might be found
again unchanged. Objects, for instance, seemed to grow smaller when we
receded from them, though really, as we discovered by approaching and
measuring them anew, they had remained unchanged. These private aspects
or views of things were accordingly distinguished from the things
themselves, which were lodged in an intelligible sphere, raised above
anybody’s sensibility and existing independently. The variable aspects
were due to the body; they accompanied its variations and depended on
its presence and organs. They were conceived vaguely to exist in one’s
head or, if they were emotional, in one’s heart; but anatomy would have
had some difficulty in finding them there. They constituted what is
properly called the mind—the region of sentience, emotion, and
soliloquy.

The mind was the region where those aspects which real things present
to the body might live and congregate. So understood, it was avowedly
and from the beginning a realm of mere appearance and depended entirely
on the body. It should be observed, however, that the limbo of divine
and ideal things, which is sometimes also called the mind, is very far
from depending obviously on the body and is said to do so only by a late
school of psychological sceptics. To primitive apprehension spirit, with
its ideal prerogatives, was something magical and oracular. Its
prophetic intuitions were far from being more trivial than material
appearances. On the contrary those intuitions were momentous and
inspiring. Their scope was indefinite and their value incalculable in
every sense of the word. The disembodied spirit might well be immortal,
since absent and dead things were familiar to it. It was by nature
present wherever truth and reality might be found. It was prophetic; the
dreams it fell into were full of auguries and secret affinities with
things to come. Myth and legend, hatched in its womb, were felt to be
divinely inspired, and genius seemed to be the Muses’ voice heard in a
profound abstraction, when vulgar perception yielded to some kind of
clairvoyance having a higher authority than sense. Such a spirit might
naturally be expected to pass into another world, since it already dwelt
there at intervals, and brought thence its mysterious reports. Its
incursions into the physical sphere alone seemed miraculous and sent a
thrill of awe through the unaccustomed flesh.

[Sidenote: Competition between the two.]

The ideal element in the world was accordingly regarded at first as
something sacred and terrifying. It was no vulgar presence or private
product, and though its destiny might be to pass half the time, like
Persephone, under ground, it could not really be degraded. The human
mind, on the other hand, the region of sentience and illusion, was a
familiar affair enough. This familiarity, indeed, for a long time bred
contempt and philosophers did not think the personal equation of
individuals, or the refraction of things in sense, a very important or
edifying subject for study. In time, however, sentience had its revenge.
As each man’s whole experience is bound to his body no less than is the
most trivial optical illusion, the sphere of sense is the transcendental
ground or _ratio cognoscendi_ of every other sphere. It suffices,
therefore, to make philosophy retrospective and to relax the practical
and dogmatic stress under which the intellect operates, for all the
discoveries made through experience to collapse into the experience in
which they were made. A complete collapse of objects is indeed
inconvenient, because it would leave no starting-point for reasoning and
no faith in the significance of reason itself; but partial collapses,
now in the region of physics, now in that of logic and morals, are very
easy and exciting feats for criticism to perform.

Passions when abstracted from their bodily causes and values when
removed from their objects will naturally fall into the body’s mind, and
be allied with appearances. Shrewd people will bethink themselves to
attribute almost all the body’s acts to some preparatory intention or
motive in its mind, and thus attain what they think knowledge of human
nature. They will encourage themselves to live among dramatic fictions,
as when absorbed in a novel; and having made themselves at home in this
upper story of their universe, they will find it amusing to deny that it
has a ground floor. The chance of conceiving, by these partial reversals
of science, a world composed entirely without troublesome machinery is
too tempting not to be taken up, whatever the ulterior risks; and
accordingly, when once psychological criticism is put in play, the
sphere of sense will be enlarged at the expense of the two rational
worlds, the material and the ideal.

[Sidenote: The rise of scepticism.]

Consciousness, thus qualified by all the sensible qualities of things,
will exercise an irresistible attraction over the supernatural and ideal
realm, so that all the gods, all truths, and all ideals, as they have no
place among the sufficing causes of experience, will be identified with
decaying sensations. And presently those supposed causes themselves will
be retraced and drawn back into the immediate vortex, until the sceptic
has packed away nature, with all space and time, into the sphere of
sensuous illusion, the distinguishing characteristic of which was that
it changed with the changes in the human body. The personal idealists
will declare that all body is a part of some body’s mind. Thus, by a
curious reversion, the progress of reflection has led to hopeless
contradictions. Sense, which was discovered by observing the refraction
and intermittence to which appearances were subject, in seeming to be
quite different from what things were, now tries to subsist when the
things it was essentially contrasted with have been abolished. The
intellect becomes a Penelope, whose secret pleasure lies in undoing its
ostensible work; and science, becoming pensive, loves to relapse into
the dumb actuality and nerveless reverie from which it had once
extricated a world.

The occasion for this sophistication is worth noting; for if we follow
the thread which we have trailed behind us in entering the labyrinth we
shall be able at any moment to get out; especially as the omnivorous
monster lurking in its depths is altogether harmless. A moral and truly
transcendental critique of science, as of common sense, is never out of
place, since all such a critique does is to assign to each conception or
discovery its place and importance in the Life of Reason. So
administered, the critical cathartic will not prove a poison and will
not inhibit the cognitive function it was meant to purge. Every belief
will subsist that finds an empirical and logical warrant; while that a
belief is a belief and not a sensation will not seem a ground for not
entertaining it, nor for subordinating it to some gratuitous assurance.
But a psychological criticism, if it is not critical of psychology
itself, and thinks to substitute a science of absolute sentience for
physics and dialectic, would rest on sophistry and end wholly in
bewilderment. The subject-matter of an absolute psychology would vanish
in its hands, since there is no sentience which is not at once the
effect of something physical and the appearance of something ideal. A
calculus of feelings, uninterpreted and referred to nothing ulterior,
would furnish no alternative system to substitute for the positive
sciences it was seeking to dislodge. In fact, those who call ordinary
objects unreal do not, on that account, find anything else to think
about. Their exorcism does not lay the ghost, and they are limited to
addressing it in uncivil language. It was not idly that reason in the
beginning excogitated a natural and an ideal world, a labour it might
well have avoided if appearance as it stands made a thinkable or a
practical universe.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote B: The term “matter” (which ought before long to reappear in
philosophy) has two meanings. In popular science and theology it
commonly means a group of things in space, like the atoms of Democritus
or the human body and its members. Such matter plainly exists. Its
particles are concretions in existence like the planets; and if a given
hypothesis describing them turns out to be wrong, it is wrong only
because this matter exists so truly and in such discoverable guise that
the hypothesis in question may be shown to misrepresent its
constitution.

On the other hand, in Aristotle and in literary speech, matter means
something good to make other things out of. Here it is a concretion in
discourse, a dialectical term; being only an aspect or constituent of
every existence, it cannot exist by itself. A state of mind, like
everything not purely formal, has matter of this sort in it. Actual
love, for instance, differs _materially_ from the mere idea or
possibility of love, which is all love would be if the matter or body of
it were removed. This matter is what idealists, bent on giving it a
grander name, call pure feeling, absolute consciousness, or metaphysical
will. These phrases are all used improperly to stand for the existence
or presence of things apart from their character, or for the mere strain
and dead weight of being. Matter is a far better term to use in the
premises, for it suggests the method as well as the fact of brute
existence. The surd in experience—its non-ideal element—is not an
indifferent vehicle for what it brings, as would be implied by calling
it pure feeling or absolute consciousness. Nor is it an act accepting or
rejecting objects, as would be implied by calling it will. In truth, the
surd conditions not merely the being of objects but their possible
quantity, the time and place of their appearance, and their degree of
perfection compared with the ideals they suggest. These important
factors in whatever exists are covered by the term matter and give it a
serious and indispensable rôle in describing and feeling the world.

Aristotle, it may be added, did not adhere with perfect consistency to
the dialectical use of this word. Matter is sometimes used by him for
substance or for actual beings having both matter and form. The excuse
for this apparent lapse is, of course, that what taken by itself is a
piece of formed matter or an individual object may be regarded as mere
material for something else which it helps to constitute, as wheat is
matter for flour, and flour for bread. Thus the dialectical and
non-demonstrative use of the term to indicate one aspect of everything
could glide into its vulgar acceptation, to indicate one class of
things.]

[Footnote C: It has been suggested—what will not party spirit
contrive?—that these variations, called spontaneous by Darwin because
not predetermined by heredity, might be spontaneous in a metaphysical
sense, free acts with no material basis or cause whatsoever. Being free,
these acts might deflect evolution—like Descartes’ soul acting on the
pineal gland—into wonderful new courses, prevent dissolution, and
gradually bring on the kingdom of Heaven, all as the necessary
implication of the latest science and the most atheistic philosophy. It
may not be needless to observe that if the variations were absolutely
free, _i.e._, intrusions of pure chance, they would tend every which way
quite as much as if they were mechanically caused; while if they were
kept miraculously in line with some far-off divine event, they would not
be free at all, but would be due to metaphysical attraction and a magic
destiny prepared in the eternal; and so we should be brought round to
Aristotelian physics again.]

[Footnote D: The monads of Leibniz could justly be called minds, because
they had a dramatic destiny, and the most complex experience imaginable
was the state of but one monad, not an aggregate view or effect of a
multitude in fusion. But the recent improvements on that system take the
latter turn. Mind-stuff, or the material of mind, is supposed to be
contained in large quantities within any known feeling. Mind-stuff, we
are given to understand, is diffused in a medium corresponding to
apparent space (what else would a real space be?); it forms quantitative
aggregates, its transformations or aggregations are mechanically
governed, it endures when personal consciousness perishes, it is the
substance of bodies and, when duly organised, the potentiality of
thought. One might go far for a better description of matter. That any
material must be material might have been taken for an axiom; but our
idealists, in their eagerness to show that _Gefuehl ist Alles_, have
thought to do honour to feeling by forgetting that it is an expression
and wishing to make it a stuff.

There is a further circumstance showing that mind-stuff is but a bashful
name for matter. Mind-stuff, like matter, can be only an element in any
actual being. To make a thing or a thought out of mind-stuff you have to
rely on the _system_ into which that material has fallen; the
substantive ingredients, from which an actual being borrows its
intensive quality, do not contain its individuating form. This form
depends on ideal relations subsisting between the ingredients, relations
which are not feelings but can be rendered only by propositions.]




