CHAPTER IX

RATIONAL ETHICS


[Sidenote: Moral passions represent private interests.]


In moral reprobation there is often a fanatical element, I mean that
hatred which an animal may sometimes feel for other animals on account
of their strange aspect, or because their habits put him to serious
inconvenience, or because these habits, if he himself adopted them,
might be vicious in him. Such aversion, however, is not a rational
sentiment. No fault can be justly found with a creature merely for not
resembling another, or for nourishing in a different physical or moral
environment. It has been an unfortunate consequence of mythical
philosophies that moral emotions have been stretched to objects with
which a man has only physical relations, so that the universe has been
filled with monsters more or less horrible, according as the forces they
represented were more or less formidable to human life. In the same
spirit, every experiment in civilisation has passed for a crime among
those engaged in some other experiment. The foreigner has seemed an
insidious rascal, the heretic a pestilent sinner, and any material
obstacle a literal devil; while to possess some unusual passion,
however innocent, has brought obloquy on every one unfortunate enough
not to be constituted like the average of his neighbours.

Ethics, if it is to be a science and not a piece of arbitrary
legislation, cannot pronounce it sinful in a serpent to be a serpent; it
cannot even accuse a barbarian of loving a wrong life, except in so far
as the barbarian is supposed capable of accusing himself of barbarism.
If he is a perfect barbarian he will be inwardly, and therefore morally,
justified. The notion of a barbarian will then be accepted by him as
that of a true man, and will form the basis of whatever rational
judgments or policy he attains. It may still seem dreadful to him to be
a serpent, as to be a barbarian might seem dreadful to a man imbued with
liberal interests. But the degree to which moral science, or the
dialectic of will, can condemn any type of life depends on the amount of
disruptive contradiction which, at any reflective moment, that life
brings under the unity of apperception. The discordant impulses therein
confronted will challenge and condemn one another; and the court of
reason in which their quarrel is ventilated will have authority to
pronounce between them.

The physical repulsion, however, which everybody feels to habits and
interests which he is incapable of sharing is no part of rational
estimation, large as its share may be in the fierce prejudices and
superstitions which prerational morality abounds in. The strongest
feelings assigned to the conscience are not moral feelings at all; they
express merely physical antipathies.

Toward alien powers a man’s true weapon is not invective, but skill and
strength. An obstacle is an obstacle, not a devil; and even a moral
life, when it actually exists in a being with hostile activities, is
merely a hostile power. It is not hostile, however, in so far as it is
moral, but only in so far as its morality represents a material
organism, physically incompatible with what the thinker has at heart.

[Sidenote: Common ideal interests may supervene.]

Material conflicts cannot be abolished by reason, because reason is
powerful only where they have been removed. Yet where opposing forces
are able mutually to comprehend and respect one another, common ideal
interests at once supervene, and though the material conflict may remain
irrepressible, it will be overlaid by an intellectual life, partly
common and unanimous. In this lies the chivalry of war, that we
acknowledge the right of others to pursue ends contrary to our own.
Competitors who are able to feel this ideal comity, and who leading
different lives in the flesh lead the same life in imagination, are
incited by their mutual understanding to rise above that material
ambition, perhaps gratuitous, that has made them enemies. They may
ultimately wish to renounce that temporal good which deprives them of
spiritual goods in truth infinitely greater and more appealing to the
soul—innocence, justice, and intelligence. They may prefer an enlarged
mind to enlarged frontiers, and the comprehension of things foreign to
the destruction of them. They may even aspire to detachment from those
private interests which, as Plato said,[H] do not deserve to be taken
too seriously; the fact that we must take them seriously being the
ignoble part of our condition.

Of course such renunciations, to be rational, must not extend to the
whole material basis of life, since some physical particularity and
efficiency are requisite for bringing into being that very rationality
which is to turn enemies into friends. The need of a material basis for
spirit is what renders partial war with parts of the world the
inevitable background of charity and justice. The frontiers at which
this warfare is waged may, however, be pushed back indefinitely. Within
the sphere organised about a firm and generous life a Roman peace can be
established. It is not what is assimilated that saps a creative will,
but what remains outside that ultimately invades and disrupts it. In
exact proportion to its vigour, it wins over former enemies, civilises
the barbarian, and even tames the viper, when the eye is masterful and
sympathetic enough to dispel hatred and fear. The more rational an
institution is the less it suffers by making concessions to others; for
these concessions, being just, propagate its essence. The ideal
commonwealth can extend to the limit at which such concessions cease to
be just and are thereby detrimental. Beyond or below that limit strife
must continue for physical ascendancy, so that the power and the will to
be reasonable may not be undermined. Reason is an operation in nature,
and has its root there. Saints cannot arise where there have been no
warriors, nor philosophers where a prying beast does not remain hidden
in the depths.

[Sidenote: To this extent there is rational society.]

Perhaps the art of politics, if it were practised scientifically, might
obviate open war, religious enmities, industrial competition, and human
slavery; but it would certainly not leave a free field for all animals
nor for all monstrosities in men. Even while admitting the claims of
monsters to be treated humanely, reason could not suffer them to absorb
those material resources which might be needed to maintain rational
society at its highest efficiency. We cannot, at this immense distance
from a rational social order, judge what concessions individual genius
would be called upon to make in a system of education and government in
which all attainable goods should be pursued scientifically. Concessions
would certainly be demanded, if not from well-trained wills, still from
inevitable instincts, reacting on inevitable accidents. There is tragedy
in perfection, because the universe in which perfection arises is
itself imperfect. Accidents will always continue to harass the most
consummate organism; they will flow in both from the outer world and
from the interstices, so to speak, of its own machinery; for a rational
life touches the irrational at its core as well as at its periphery. In
both directions it meets physical force and can subsist only by
exercising physical force in return. The range of rational ethics is
limited to the intermediate political zone, in which existences have
attained some degree of natural unanimity.

It should be added, perhaps, that the frontiers between moral and
physical action are purely notional. Real existences do not lie wholly
on one or the other side of them. Every man, every material object, has
moral affinities enveloping an indomitable vital nucleus or brute
personal kernel; this moral essence is enveloped in turn by untraceable
relations, radiating to infinity over the natural world. The stars enter
society by the light and knowledge they afford, the time they keep, and
the ornament they lavish; but they are mere dead weights in their
substance and cosmological puzzles in their destiny. You and I possess
manifold ideal bonds in the interests we share; but each of us has his
poor body and his irremediable, incommunicable dreams. Beyond the little
span of his foresight and love, each is merely a physical agency,
preparing the way quite irresponsibly for undreamt-of revolutions and
alien lives.

[Sidenote: A rational morality not attainable,]

A truly rational morality, or social regimen, has never existed in the
world and is hardly to be looked for. What guides men and nations in
their practice is always some partial interest or some partial
disillusion. A rational morality would imply perfect self-knowledge, so
that no congenial good should be needlessly missed—least of all
practical reason or justice itself; so that no good congenial to other
creatures would be needlessly taken from them. The total value which
everything had from the agent’s point of view would need to be
determined and felt efficaciously; and, among other things, the total
value which this point of view, with the conduct it justified, would
have for every foreign interest which it affected. Such knowledge, such
definition of purpose, and such perfection of sympathy are clearly
beyond man’s reach. All that can be hoped for is that the advance of
science and commerce, by fostering peace and a rational development of
character, may bring some part of mankind nearer to that goal; but the
goal lies, as every ultimate ideal should, at the limit of what is
possible, and must serve rather to measure achievements than to prophesy
them.

[Sidenote: but its principle clear.] In lieu of a rational morality,
however, we have rational ethics; and this mere idea of a rational
morality is something valuable. While we wait for the sentiments,
customs, and laws which should embody perfect humanity and perfect
justice, we may observe the germinal principle of these ideal things; we
may sketch the ground-plan of a true commonwealth. This sketch
constitutes rational ethics, as founded by Socrates, glorified by Plato,
and sobered and solidified by Aristotle. It sets forth the method of
judgment and estimation which a rational morality would apply
universally and express in practice. The method, being very simple, can
be discovered and largely illustrated in advance, while the complete
self-knowledge and sympathy are still wanting which might avail to
embody that method in the concrete and to discover unequivocally where
absolute duty and ultimate happiness may lie.

[Sidenote: It is the logic of an autonomous will.]

This method, the Socratic method, consists in accepting any estimation
which any man may sincerely make, and in applying dialectic to it, so as
to let the man see what he really esteems. What he really esteems is
what ought to guide his conduct; for to suggest that a rational being
ought to do what he feels to be wrong, or ought to pursue what he
genuinely thinks is worthless, would be to impugn that man’s rationality
and to discredit one’s own. With what face could any man or god say to
another: Your duty is to do what you cannot know you ought to do; your
function is to suffer what you cannot recognise to be worth suffering?
Such an attitude amounts to imposture and excludes society; it is the
attitude of a detestable tyrant, and any one who mistakes it for moral
authority has not yet felt the first heart-throb of philosophy.

[Sidenote: Socrates’ science.]

More even than natural philosophy, moral philosophy is something Greek:
it is the appanage of freemen. The Socratic method is the soul of
liberal conversation; it is compacted in equal measure of sincerity and
courtesy. Each man is autonomous and all are respected; and nothing is
brought forward except to be submitted to reason and accepted or
rejected by the self-questioning heart. Indeed, when Socrates appeared
in Athens mutual respect had passed into democracy and liberty into
license; but the stalwart virtue of Socrates saved him from being a
sophist, much as his method, when not honestly and sincerely used, might
seem to countenance that moral anarchy which the sophists had expressed
in their irresponsible doctrines. Their sophistry did not consist in the
private _seat_ which they assigned to judgment; for what judgment is
there that is not somebody’s judgment at some moment? The sophism
consisted in ignoring the living moment’s _intent_, and in suggesting
that no judgment could refer to anything ulterior, and therefore that no
judgment could be wrong: in other words that each man at each moment was
the theme and standard, as well as the seat, of his judgment.

Socrates escaped this folly by force of honesty, which is what saves
from folly in dialectic. He built his whole science precisely on that
intent which the sophists ignored; he insisted that people should
declare sincerely what they meant and what they wanted; and on that
living rock he founded the persuasive and ideal sciences of logic and
ethics, the necessity of which lies all in free insight and in actual
will. This will and insight they render deliberate, profound,
unshakable, and consistent. Socrates, by his genial midwifery, helped
men to discover the truth and excellence to which they were naturally
addressed. This circumstance rendered his doctrine at once moral and
scientific; scientific because dialectical, moral because expressive of
personal and living aspirations. His ethics was not like what has since
passed under that name—a spurious physics, accompanied by commandments
and threats. It was a pliant and liberal expression of ideals, inwardly
grounded and spontaneously pursued. It was an exercise in
self-knowledge.

[Sidenote: Its opposition to sophistry and moral anarchy.]

Socrates’ liberality was that of a free man ready to maintain his will
and conscience, if need be, against the whole world. The sophists, on
the contrary, were sycophants in their scepticism, and having inwardly
abandoned the ideals of their race and nation—which Socrates defended
with his homely irony—they dealt out their miscellaneous knowledge, or
their talent in exposition, at the beck and for the convenience of
others. Their theory was that each man having a right to pursue his own
aims, skilful thinkers might, for money, furnish any fellow-mortal with
instruments fitted to his purpose. Socrates, on the contrary, conceived
that each man, to achieve his aims must first learn to distinguish them
clearly; he demanded that rationality, in the form of an examination and
clarification of purposes, should precede any selection of external
instruments. For how should a man recognise anything useful unless he
first had established the end to be subserved and thereby recognised the
good? True science, then, was that which enabled a man to disentangle
and attain his natural good; and such a science is also the art of life
and the whole of virtue.

The autonomous moralist differs from the sophist or ethical sceptic in
this: that he retains his integrity. In vindicating his ideal he does
not recant his human nature. In asserting the initial right of every
impulse in others, he remains the spokesman of his own. Knowledge of the
world, courtesy, and fairness do not neutralise his positive life. He is
thoroughly sincere, as the sophist is not; for every man, while he
lives, embodies and enacts some special interest; and this truth, which
those who confound psychology with ethics may think destructive of all
authority in morals, is in fact what alone renders moral judgment
possible and respectable. If the sophist declares that what his nature
attaches him to is not “really” a good, because it would not be a good,
perhaps, for a different creature, he is a false interpreter of his own
heart, and rather discreditably stultifies his honest feelings and
actions by those theoretical valuations which, in guise of a mystical
ethics, he gives out to the world. Socratic liberality, on the contrary,
is consistent with itself, as Spinozistic naturalism is also; for it
exercises that right of private judgment which it concedes to others,
and avowedly builds up the idea of the good on that natural inner
foundation on which everybody who has it at all must inevitably build
it. This functional good is accordingly always relative and good for
something; it is the ideal which a vital and energising soul carries
with it as it moves. It is identical, as Socrates constantly taught,
with the useful, the helpful, the beneficent. It is the complement
needed to perfect every art and every activity after its own kind.

[Sidenote: Its vitality]

Rational ethics is an embodiment of volition, not a description of it.
It is the expression of living interest, preference, and categorical
choice. It leaves to psychology and history a free field for the
description of moral phenomena. It has no interest in slipping
far-fetched and incredible myths beneath the facts of nature, so as to
lend a non-natural origin to human aspirations. It even recognises, as
an emanation of its own force, that uncompromising truthfulness with
which science assigns all forms of moral life to their place in the
mechanical system of nature. But the rational moralist is not on that
account reduced to a mere spectator, a physicist acknowledging no
interest except the interest in facts and in the laws of change. His own
spirit, small by the material forces which it may stand for and express,
is great by its prerogative of surveying and judging the universe;
surveying it, of course, from a mortal point of view, and judging it
only by its kindliness or cruelty to some actual interest, yet, even so,
determining unequivocally a part of its constitution and excellence. The
rational moralist represents a force energising in the world,
discovering its affinities there and clinging to them to the exclusion
of their hateful opposites. He represents, over against the chance
facts, an ideal embodying the particular demands, possibilities, and
satisfactions of a specific being.

This dogmatic position of reason is not uncritically dogmatic; on the
contrary, it is the sophistical position that is uncritically neutral.
All criticism needs a dogmatic background, else it would lack objects
and criteria for criticism. The sophist himself, without confessing it,
enacts a special interest. He bubbles over with convictions about the
pathological and fatal origin of human beliefs, as if that could prevent
some of them from being more trustworthy and truer than others. He is
doubtless right in his psychology; his own ideas have their natural
causes and their chance of signifying something real. His scepticism
may represent a wider experience than do the fanaticisms it opposes. But
this sceptic also lives. Nature has sent her saps abundantly into him,
and he cannot but nod dogmatically on that philosophical tree on which
he is so pungent a berry. His imagination is unmistakably fascinated by
the pictures it happens to put together. His judgment falls unabashed,
and his discourse splashes on in its dialectical march, every
stepping-stone an unquestioned idea, every stride a categorical
assertion. Does he deny this? Then his very denial, in its promptness
and heat, audibly contradicts him and makes him ridiculous. Honest
criticism consists in being consciously dogmatic, and conscientiously
so, like Descartes when he said, “I am.” It is to sift and harmonise all
assertions so as to make them a faithful expression of actual experience
and inevitable thought.

[Sidenote: Genuine altruism is natural self-expression.]

Now will, no less than that reason which avails to render will
consistent and far-reaching, animates natural bodies and expresses their
functions. It has a radical bias, a foregone, determinate direction,
else it could not be a will nor a principle of preference. The knowledge
of what other people desire does not abolish a man’s own aims. Sympathy
and justice are simply an expansion of the soul’s interests, arising
when we consider other men’s lives so intently that something in us
imitates and re-enacts their experience, so that we move partly in
unison with their movement, recognise the reality and initial legitimacy
of their interests, and consequently regard their aims in our action, in
so far as our own status and purposes have become identical with theirs.
We are not less ourselves, nor less autonomous, for this assimilation,
since we assimilate only what is in itself intelligible and congruous
with our mind and obey only that authority which can impose itself on
our reason.

The case is parallel to that of knowledge. To know all men’s experience
and to comprehend their beliefs would constitute the most cogent and
settled of philosophies. Thought would then be reasonably adjusted to
all the facts of history, and judgment would grow more authoritative and
precise by virtue of that enlightenment. So, too, to understand all the
goods that any man, nay, that any beast or angel, may ever have pursued,
would leave man still necessitous of food, drink, sleep, and shelter; he
would still love; the comic, the loathsome, the beautiful would still
affect him with unmistakable direct emotions. His taste might no doubt
gain in elasticity by those sympathetic excursions into the polyglot
world; the plastic or dramatic quality which had enabled him to feel
other creatures’ joys would grow by exercise and new overtones would be
added to his gamut. But the foundations of his nature would stand; and
his possible happiness, though some new and precious threads might be
woven into it, would not have a texture fundamentally different.

The radical impulses at work in any animal must continue to speak while
he lives, for they are his essence. A true morality does not have to be
adopted; the parts of it best practised are those which are never
preached. To be “converted” would be to pass from one self-betrayal to
another. It would be to found a new morality on a new artifice. The
morality which has genuine authority exists inevitably and speaks
autonomously in every common judgment, self-congratulation, ambition, or
passion that fills the vulgar day. The pursuit of those goods which are
the only possible or fitting crown of a man’s life is predetermined by
his nature; he cannot choose a law-giver, nor accept one, for none who
spoke to the purpose could teach him anything but to know himself.
Rational life is an art, not a slavery; and terrible as may be the
errors and the apathy that impede its successful exercise, the standard
and goal of it are given intrinsically. Any task imposed externally on a
man is imposed by force only, a force he has the right to defy so soon
as he can do so without creating some greater impediment to his natural
vocation.

[Sidenote: Reason expresses impulses.]

Rational ethics, then, resembles prerational precepts and half-systems
in being founded on impulse. It formulates a natural morality. It is a
settled method of achieving ends to which man is drawn by virtue of his
physical and rational constitution. By this circumstance rational ethics
is removed from the bad company of all artificial, verbal, and unjust
systems of morality, which in absolving themselves from relevance to
man’s endowment and experience merely show how completely irrelevant
they are to life. Once, no doubt, each of these arbitrary systems
expressed (like the observance of the Sabbath) some practical interest
or some not unnatural rite; but so narrow a basis of course has to be
disowned when the precepts so originating have been swollen into
universal tyrannical laws. A rational ethics reduces them at once to
their slender representative rôle; and it surrounds and buttresses them
on every side with all other natural ideals.

[Sidenote: but impulses reduced to harmony.]

Rational ethics thus differs from the prerational in being complete.
There is one impulse which intuitive moralists ignore: the impulse to
reflect. Human instincts are ignorant, multitudinous, and contradictory.
To satisfy them as they come is often impossible, and often disastrous,
in that such satisfaction prevents the satisfaction of other instincts
inherently no less fecund and legitimate. When we apply reason to life
we immediately demand that life be consistent, complete, and
satisfactory when reflected upon and viewed as a whole. This view, as it
presents each moment in its relations, extends to all moments affected
by the action or maxim under discussion; it has no more ground for
stopping at the limits of what is called a single life than at the
limits of a single adventure. To stop at selfishness is not particularly
rational. The same principle that creates the ideal of a self creates
the ideal of a family or an institution.

[Sidenote: Self-love artificial.]

The conflict between selfishness and altruism is like that between any
two ideal passions that in some particular may chance to be opposed; but
such a conflict has no obstinate existence for reason. For reason the
person itself has no obstinate existence. The _character_ which a man
achieves at the best moment of his life is indeed something ideal and
significant; it justifies and consecrates all his coherent actions and
preferences. But _the man’s life_, the circle drawn by biographers
around the career of a particular body, from the womb to the
charnel-house, and around the mental flux that accompanies that career,
is no significant unity. All the substances and efficient processes that
figure within it come from elsewhere and continue beyond; while all the
rational objects and interests to which it refers have a trans-personal
status. Self-love itself is concerned with public opinion; and if a man
concentrates his view on private pleasures, these may qualify the
fleeting moments of his life with an intrinsic value, but they leave the
life itself shapeless and infinite, as if sparks should play over a
piece of burnt paper.

The limits assigned to the mass of sentience attributed to each man are
assigned conventionally; his prenatal feelings, his forgotten dreams,
and his unappropriated sensations belong to his body and for that reason
only are said to belong to him. Each impulse included within these
limits may be as directly compared with the represented impulses of
other people as with the represented impulses expected to arise later in
the same body. Reason lives among these represented values, all of which
have their cerebral seat and present efficacy over the passing thought;
and reason teaches this passing thought to believe in and to respect
them equally. Their right is not less clear, nor their influence less
natural, because they may range over the whole universe and may await
their realisation at the farthest boundaries of time. All that is
physically requisite to their operation is that they should be vividly
represented; while all that is requisite rationally, to justify them in
qualifying actual life by their influence, is that the present act
should have some tendency to bring the represented values about. In
other words, a rational mind would consider, in its judgment and action,
every interest which that judgment or action at all affected; and it
would conspire with each represented good in proportion, not to that
good’s intrinsic importance, but to the power which the present act
might have of helping to realise that good.

[Sidenote: The sanction of reason is happiness.]

If pleasure, because it is commonly a result of satisfied instinct, may
by a figure of speech be called the aim of impulse, happiness, by a like
figure, may be called the aim of reason. The direct aim of reason is
harmony; yet harmony, when made to rule in life, gives reason a noble
satisfaction which we call happiness. Happiness is impossible and even
inconceivable to a mind without scope and without pause, a mind driven
by craving, pleasure, and fear. The moralists who speak disparagingly of
happiness are less sublime than they think. In truth their philosophy is
too lightly ballasted, too much fed on prejudice and quibbles, for
happiness to fall within its range. Happiness implies resource and
security; it can be achieved only by discipline. Your intuitive moralist
rejects discipline, at least discipline of the conscience; and he is
punished by having no lien on wisdom. He trusts to the clash of blind
forces in collision, being one of them himself. He demands that virtue
should be partisan and unjust; and he dreams of crushing the adversary
in some physical cataclysm.

Such groping enthusiasm is often innocent and romantic; it captivates us
with its youthful spell. But it has no structure with which to resist
the shocks of fortune, which it goes out so jauntily to meet. It turns
only too often into vulgarity and worldliness. A snow-flake is soon a
smudge, and there is a deeper purity in the diamond. Happiness is hidden
from a free and casual will; it belongs rather to one chastened by a
long education and unfolded in an atmosphere of sacred and perfected
institutions. It is discipline that renders men rational and capable of
happiness, by suppressing without hatred what needs to be suppressed to
attain a beautiful naturalness. Discipline discredits the random
pleasures of illusion, hope, and triumph, and substitutes those which
are self-reproductive, perennial, and serene, because they express an
equilibrium maintained with reality. So long as the result of endeavour
is partly unforeseen and unintentional, so long as the will is partly
blind, the Life of Reason is still swaddled in ignominy and the animal
barks in the midst of human discourse. Wisdom and happiness consist in
having recast natural energies in the furnace of experience. Nor is this
experience merely a repressive force. It enshrines the successful
expressions of spirit as well as the shocks and vetoes of circumstance;
it enables a man to know himself in knowing the world and to discover
his ideal by the very ring, true or false, of fortune’s coin.

[Sidenote: Moral science impeded by its chaotic data.]

With this brief account we may leave the subject of rational ethics. Its
development is impossible save in the concrete, when a legislator,
starting from extant interests, considers what practices serve to render
those interests vital and genuine, and what external alliances might
lend them support and a more glorious expression. The difficulty in
carrying rational policy very far comes partly from the refractory
materials at hand, and partly from the narrow range within which moral
science is usually confined. The materials are individual wills
naturally far from unanimous, lost for the most part in frivolous
pleasures, rivalries, and superstitions, and little inclined to listen
to a law-giver that, like a new Lycurgus, should speak to them of
unanimity, simplicity, discipline, and perfection. Devotion and
singlemindedness, perhaps possible in the cloister, are hard to
establish in the world; yet a rational morality requires that all lay
activities, all sweet temptations, should have their voice in the
conclave. Morality becomes rational precisely by refusing either to
accept human nature, as it sprouts, altogether without harmony, or to
mutilate it in the haste to make it harmonious. The condition,
therefore, of making a beginning in good politics is to find a set of
men with well-knit character and cogent traditions, so that there may be
a firm soil to cultivate and that labour may not be wasted in ploughing
the quicksands.

[Sidenote: and its unrecognised scope.]

When such a starting-point is given, moral values radiate from it to the
very ends of the universe; and a failure to appreciate the range over
which rational estimation spreads is a second obstacle to sound ethics.
Because of this failure the earnest soul is too often intent on escaping
to heaven, while the gross politician is suffered to declaim about the
national honour, and to promise this client an office, this district a
favour, and this class an iniquitous advantage. Politics is expected to
be sophistical; and in the soberest parliaments hardly an argument is
used or an ideal invoked which is not an insult to reason. Majorities
work by a system of bribes offered to the more barren interests of men
and to their more blatant prejudices. The higher direction of their
lives is relegated to religion, which, unhappily, is apt to suffer from
hereditary blindness to natural needs and to possible progress. The idea
that religion, as well as art, industry, nationality, and science,
should exist only for human life’s sake and in order that men may live
better in this world, is an idea not even mooted in politics and perhaps
opposed by an official philosophy. The enterprise of individuals or of
small aristocratic bodies has meantime sown the world which we call
civilised with some seeds and nuclei of order. There are scattered about
a variety of churches, industries, academies, and governments. But the
universal order once dreamt of and nominally almost established, the
empire of universal peace, all-permeating rational art, and
philosophical worship, is mentioned no more. An unformulated conception,
the prerational ethics of private privilege and national unity, fills
the background of men’s minds. It represents feudal traditions rather
than the tendency really involved in contemporary industry, science, or
philanthropy. Those dark ages, from which our political practice is
derived, had a political theory which we should do well to study; for
their theory about a universal empire and a catholic church was in turn
the echo of a former age of reason, when a few men conscious of ruling
the world had for a moment sought to survey it as a whole and to rule it
justly.

Modern rational ethics, however, or what approaches most nearly to such
a thing, has one advantage over the ancient and mediæval; it has
profited by Christian discipline and by the greater gentleness of modern
manners. It has recognised the rights of the dumb majority; it has
revolted against cruelty and preventable suffering and has bent itself
on diffusing well-being—the well-being that people want, and not the
so-called virtues which a supercilious aristocracy may find it
convenient to prescribe for them. It has based ethics on the foundation
on which actual morality rests; on nature, on the necessities of social
life, on the human instincts of sympathy and justice.

[Sidenote: Fallacy in democratic hedonism.]

It is all the more to be regretted that the only modern school of ethics
which is humane and honestly interested in progress should have given a
bad technical expression to its generous principles and should have
substituted a dubious psychology for Socratic dialectic. The mere fact
that somebody somewhere enjoys or dislikes a thing cannot give
direction to a rational will. That fact indicates a moral situation but
does not prescribe a definite action. A partial harmony or maladjustment
is thereby proved to exist, but the method is not revealed by which the
harmony should be sustained or the maladjustment removed. A given
harmony can be sustained by leaving things as they are or by changing
them together. A maladjustment can be removed by altering the
environment or by altering the man. Pleasures may be attached to
anything, and to pursue them in the abstract does not help to define any
particular line of conduct. The particular ideal pre-exists in the
observer; the mathematics of pleasure and pain cannot oblige him, for
instance, to prefer a hundred units of mindless pleasure enjoyed in
dreams to fifty units diffused over labour and discourse. He need not
limit his efforts to spreading needless comforts and silly pleasures
among the million; he need not accept for a goal a child’s caprices
multiplied by infinity. Even these caprices, pleasures, and comforts
doubtless have their claims; but these claims have to be adjudicated by
the agent’s autonomous conscience, and he will give them the place they
fill in his honest ideal of what it would be best to have in the world,
not the place which they might pretend to usurp there by a sort of
physical pressure. A conscience is a living function, expressing a
particular nature; it is not a passive medium where heterogeneous values
can find their balance by virtue of their dead weight and number.

A moralist is called upon, first of all, to decide in what things
pleasure ought to be found. Of course his decision, if he is rational,
will not be arbitrary; it will conscientiously express his own
nature—on which alone honest ideals can rest—without attempting to
speak for the deafening and inconstant convocation of the whole sentient
universe. Duty is a matter of self-knowledge, not of statistics. A
living and particular will therein discovers its affinities, broadens
its basis, acknowledges its obligations, and co-operates with everything
that will co-operate with it; but it continues throughout to unfold a
particular life, finding its supports and extensions in the state, the
arts, and the universe. It cannot for a moment renounce its autonomy
without renouncing reason and perhaps decreeing the extinction both of
its own bodily basis and of its ideal method and policy.

[Sidenote: Sympathy a conditional duty.]

Utilitarianism needs to be transferred to Socratic and dialectical
ground, so that interest in absent interests may take its place in a
concrete ideal. It is a noble thing to be sensitive to others’
hardships, and happy in their happiness; but it is noble because it
refines the natural will without enfeebling it, offering it rather a new
and congenial development, one entirely predetermined by the fundamental
structure of human nature. Were man not gregarious, were he not made to
be child, friend, husband, and father by turns, his morality would not
be social, but, like that of some silk-worm or some seraph, wholly
industrious or wholly contemplative. Parental and sexual instincts,
social life and the gift of co-operation carry sympathy implicitly with
them, as they carry the very faculty to recognise a fellow-being. To
make this sympathy explicit and to find one’s happiness in exercising it
is to lay one’s foundations deeper in nature and to expand the range of
one’s being. Its limits, however, would be broken down and moral
dissolution would set in if, forgetting his humanity, a man should bid
all living creatures lapse with him into a delicious torpor, or run into
a cycle of pleasant dreams, so intense that death would be sure to
precede any awakening out of them. Great as may be the advance in
charity since the days of Socrates, therefore, the advance is within the
lines of his method; to trespass beyond them would be to recede.

This situation is repeated on a broader stage. A statesman entrusted
with power should regard nothing but his country’s interests; to regard
anything else would be treason. He cannot allow foreign sentiment or
private hobbies to make him misapply the resources of his
fellow-countrymen to their own injury. But he may well have an
enlightened view of the interests which he serves; he might indeed be
expected to take a more profound and enlightened view of them than his
countrymen were commonly capable of, else he would have no right to his
eminent station. He should be the first to feel that to inflict injury
or foster hatred among other populations should not be a portion of a
people’s happiness. A nation, like a man, is something ideal.
Indestructible mountains and valleys, crawled over by any sort of race,
do not constitute its identity. Its essence is a certain spirit, and
only what enters into this spirit can bind it morally, or preserve it.

[Sidenote: All life, and hence right life, finite and particular.]

If a drop of water contains a million worlds which I, in swallowing, may
ruin or transform, that is Allah’s business; mine is to clarify my own
intent, to cling to what ideals may lie within the circle of my
experience and practical imagination, so that I may have a natural
ground for my loyalties, and may be constant in them. It would not be a
rational ambition to wish to multiply the population of China by two, or
that of America by twenty, after ascertaining that life there contained
an overplus of pleasure. To weed a garden, however, would be rational,
though the weeds and their interests would have to be sacrificed in the
process. Utilitarianism took up false ground when it made right conduct
terminate in miscellaneous pleasures and pains, as if in their isolation
they constituted all that morality had to consider, and as if respect
offered to them, somehow in proportion to their quantity, were the true
conscience. The true conscience is rather an integrated natural will,
chastened by clear knowledge of what it pursues and may attain. What
morality has to consider is the form of life, not its quantity. In a
world that is perhaps infinite, moral life can spring only from definite
centres and is neither called upon nor able to estimate the whole, nor
to redress its balance. It is the free spirit of a part, finding its
affinities and equilibrium in the material whole which it reacts on, and
which it is in that measure enabled to understand.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote H: Laws. VII. 803. B.]




