CHAPTER X

THE CRITERION OF TASTE


[Sidenote: Dogmatism is inevitable but may be enlightened.]

Dogmatism in matters of taste has the same status as dogmatism in other
spheres. It is initially justified by sincerity, being a systematic
expression of a man’s preferences; but it becomes absurd when its basis
in a particular disposition is ignored and it pretends to have an
absolute or metaphysical scope. Reason, with the order which in every
region it imposes on life, is grounded on an animal nature and has no
other function than to serve the same; and it fails to exercise its
office quite as much when it oversteps its bounds and forgets whom it is
serving as when it neglects some part of its legitimate province and
serves its master imperfectly, without considering all his interests.

Dialectic, logic, and morals lose their authority and become inept if
they trespass upon the realm of physics and try to disclose existences;
while physics is a mere idea in the realm of poetic meditation. So the
notorious diversities which human taste exhibits do not become
conflicts, and raise no moral problem, until their basis or their
function has been forgotten, and each has claimed a right to assert
itself exclusively. This claim is altogether absurd, and we might fail
to understand how so preposterous an attitude could be assumed by
anybody did we not remember that every young animal thinks himself
absolute, and that dogmatism in the thinker is only the speculative side
of greed and courage in the brute. The brute cannot surrender his
appetites nor abdicate his primary right to dominate his environment.
What experience and reason may teach him is merely how to make his
self-assertion well balanced and successful. In the same way taste is
bound to maintain its preferences but free to rationalise them. After a
man has compared his feelings with the no less legitimate feelings of
other creatures, he can reassert his own with more complete authority,
since now he is aware of their necessary ground in his nature, and of
their affinities with whatever other interests his nature enables him to
recognise in others and to co-ordinate with his own.

[Sidenote: Taste gains in authority as it is more and more widely
based.]

A criterion of taste is, therefore, nothing but taste itself in its more
deliberate and circumspect form. Reflection refines particular
sentiments by bringing them into sympathy with all rational life. There
is consequently the greatest possible difference in authority between
taste and taste, and while delight in drums and eagle’s feathers is
perfectly genuine and has no cause to blush for itself, it cannot be
compared in scope or representative value with delight in a symphony or
an epic. The very instinct that is satisfied by beauty prefers one
beauty to another; and we have only to question and purge our æsthetic
feelings in order to obtain our criterion of taste. This criterion will
be natural, personal, autonomous; a circumstance that will give it
authority over our own judgment—which is all moral science is concerned
about—and will extend its authority over other minds also, in so far as
their constitution is similar to ours. In that measure what is a genuine
instance of reason in us, others will recognise for a genuine expression
of reason in themselves also.

[Sidenote: Different æsthetic endowments may be compared in quantity or
force.]

Æsthetic feeling, in different people, may make up a different fraction
of life and vary greatly in volume. The more nearly insensible a man is
the more incompetent he becomes to proclaim the values which sensibility
might have. To beauty men are habitually insensible, even while they are
awake and rationally active. Tomes of æsthetic criticism hang on a few
moments of real delight and intuition. It is in rare and scattered
instants that beauty smiles even on her adorers, who are reduced for
habitual comfort to remembering her past favours. An æsthetic glow may
pervade experience, but that circumstance is seldom remarked; it figures
only as an influence working subterraneously on thoughts and judgments
which in themselves take a cognitive or practical direction. Only when
the æsthetic ingredient becomes predominant do we exclaim, How
beautiful! Ordinarily the pleasures which formal perception gives remain
an undistinguished part of our comfort or curiosity.

[Sidenote: Authority of vital over verbal judgments]

Taste is formed in those moments when æsthetic emotion is massive and
distinct; preferences then grown conscious, judgments then put into
words, will reverberate through calmer hours; they will constitute
prejudices, habits of apperception, secret standards for all other
beauties. A period of life in which such intuitions have been frequent
may amass tastes and ideals sufficient for the rest of our days. Youth
in these matters governs maturity, and while men may develop their early
impressions more systematically and find confirmations of them in
various quarters, they will seldom look at the world afresh or use new
categories in deciphering it. Half our standards come from our first
masters, and the other half from our first loves. Never being so deeply
stirred again, we remain persuaded that no objects save those we then
discovered can have a true sublimity. These high-water marks of æsthetic
life may easily be reached under tutelage. It may be some eloquent
appreciations read in a book, or some preference expressed by a gifted
friend, that may have revealed unsuspected beauties in art or nature;
and then, since our own perception was vicarious and obviously inferior
in volume to that which our mentor possessed, we shall take his
judgments for our criterion, since they were the source and exemplar of
all our own. Thus the volume and intensity of some appreciations,
especially when nothing of the kind has preceded, makes them
authoritative over our subsequent judgments. On those warm moments hang
all our cold systematic opinions; and while the latter fill our days and
shape our careers it is only the former that are crucial and alive.

A race which loves beauty holds the same place in history that a season
of love or enthusiasm holds in an individual life. Such a race has a
pre-eminent right to pronounce upon beauty and to bequeath its judgments
to duller peoples. We may accordingly listen with reverence to a Greek
judgment on that subject, expecting that what might seem to us wrong
about it is the expression of knowledge and passion beyond our range; it
will suffice that we learn to live in the world of beauty, instead of
merely studying its relics, for us to understand, for instance, that
imitation is a fundamental principle in art, and that any rational
judgment on the beautiful must be a moral and political judgment,
enveloping chance æsthetic feelings and determining their value. What
most German philosophers, on the contrary, have written about art and
beauty has a minimal importance: it treats artificial problems in a
grammatical spirit, seldom giving any proof of experience or
imagination. What painters say about painting and poets about poetry is
better than lay opinion; it may reveal, of course, some petty jealousy
or some partial incapacity, because a special gift often carries with it
complementary defects in apprehension; yet what is positive in such
judgments is founded on knowledge and avoids the romancing into which
litterateurs and sentimentalists will gladly wander. The specific values
of art are technical values, more permanent and definite than the
adventitious analogies on which a stray observer usually bases his
views. Only a technical education can raise judgments on musical
compositions above impertinent auto-biography. The Japanese know the
beauty of flowers, and tailors and dressmakers have the best sense for
the fashions. We ask them for suggestions, and if we do not always take
their advice, it is not because the fine effects they love are not
genuine, but because they may not be effects which we care to produce.

[Sidenote: Tastes differ also in purity or consistency.]

This touches a second consideration, besides the volume and vivacity of
feeling, which enters into good taste. What is voluminous may be
inwardly confused or outwardly confusing. Excitement, though on the
whole and for the moment agreeable, may verge on pain and may be, when
it subsides a little, a cause of bitterness. A thing’s attractions may
be partly at war with its ideal function. In such a case what, in our
haste, we call a beauty becomes hateful on a second view, and according
to the key of our dissatisfaction we pronounce that effect meretricious,
harsh, or affected. These discords appear when elaborate things are
attempted without enough art and refinement; they are essentially in bad
taste. Rudimentary effects, on the contrary, are pure, and though we may
think them trivial when we are expecting something richer, their defect
is never intrinsic; they do not plunge us, as impure excitements do,
into a corrupt artificial conflict. So wild-flowers, plain chant, or a
scarlet uniform are beautiful enough; their simplicity is a positive
merit, while their crudity is only relative. There is a touch of
sophistication and disease in not being able to fall back on such things
and enjoy them thoroughly, as if a man could no longer relish a glass of
water. Your true epicure will study not to lose so genuine a pleasure.
Better forego some artificial stimulus, though that, too, has its charm,
than become insensible to natural joys. Indeed, ability to revert to
elementary beauties is a test that judgment remains sound.

Vulgarity is quite another matter. An old woman in a blonde wig, a dirty
hand covered with jewels, ostentation without dignity, rhetoric without
cogency, all offend by an inner contradiction. To like such things we
should have to surrender our better intuitions and suffer a kind of
dishonour. Yet the elements offensively combined may be excellent in
isolation, so that an untrained or torpid mind will be at a loss to
understand the critic’s displeasure. Oftentimes barbaric art almost
succeeds, by dint of splendour, in banishing the sense of confusion and
absurdity; for everything, even reason, must bow to force. Yet the
impression remains chaotic, and we must be either partly inattentive or
partly distressed. Nothing could show better than this alternative how
mechanical barbaric art is. Driven by blind impulse or tradition, the
artist has worked in the dark. He has dismissed his work without having
quite understood it or really justified it to his own mind. It is rather
his excretion than his product. Astonished, very likely, at his own
fertility, he has thought himself divinely inspired, little knowing that
clear reason is the highest and truest of inspirations. Other men,
observing his obscure work, have then honoured him for profundity; and
so mere bulk or stress or complexity have produced a mystical wonder by
which generation after generation may be enthralled. Barbaric art is
half necromantic; its ascendancy rests in a certain measure on
bewilderment and fraud.

To purge away these impurities nothing is needed but quickened
intelligence, a keener spiritual flame. Where perception is adequate,
expression is so too, and if a man will only grow sensitive to the
various solicitations which anything monstrous combines, he will
thereby perceive its monstrosity. Let him but enact his sensations, let
him pause to make explicit the confused hints that threaten to stupefy
him; he will find that he can follow out each of them only by rejecting
and forgetting the others. To free his imagination in any direction he
must disengage it from the contrary intent, and so he must either purify
his object or leave it a mass of confused promptings. Promptings
essentially demand to be carried out, and when once an idea has become
articulate it is not enriched but destroyed if it is still identified
with its contrary. Any complete expression of a barbarous theme will,
therefore, disengage its incompatible elements and turn it into a number
of rational beauties.

[Sidenote: They differ, finally, in pertinence, and in width of appeal.]

When good taste has in this way purified and digested some turgid
medley, it still has a progress to make. Ideas, like men, live in
society. Not only has each a will of its own and an inherent ideal, but
each finds itself conditioned for its expression by a host of other
beings, on whose co-operation it depends. Good taste, besides being
inwardly clear, has to be outwardly fit. A monstrous ideal devours and
dissolves itself, but even a rational one does not find an immortal
embodiment simply for being inwardly possible and free from
contradiction. It needs a material basis, a soil and situation
propitious to its growth. This basis, as it varies, makes the ideal vary
which is simply its expression; and therefore no ideal can be
ultimately fixed in ignorance of the conditions that may modify it. It
subsists, to be sure, as an eternal possibility, independently of all
further earthly revolutions. Once expressed, it has revealed the
inalienable values that attach to a certain form of being, whenever that
form is actualised. But its expression may have been only momentary, and
that eternal ideal may have no further relevance to the living world. A
criterion of taste, however, looks to a social career; it hopes to
educate and to judge. In order to be an applicable and a just law, it
must represent the interests over which it would preside.

There are many undiscovered ideals. There are many beauties which
nothing in this world can embody or suggest. There are also many once
suggested or even embodied, which find later their basis gone and
evaporate into their native heaven. The saddest tragedy in the world is
the destruction of what has within it no inward ground of dissolution,
death in youth, and the crushing out of perfection. Imagination has its
bereavements of this kind. A complete mastery of existence achieved at
one moment gives no warrant that it will be sustained or achieved again
at the next. The achievement may have been perfect; nature will not on
that account stop to admire it. She will move on, and the meaning which
was read so triumphantly in her momentary attitude will not fit her new
posture. Like Polonius’s cloud, she will always suggest some new ideal,
because she has none of her own.

In lieu of an ideal, however, nature has a constitution, and this, which
is a necessary ground for ideals, is what it concerns the ideal to
reckon with. A poet, spokesman of his full soul at a given juncture,
cannot consider eventualities or think of anything but the message he is
sent to deliver, whether the world can then hear it or not. God, he may
feel sure, understands him, and in the eternal the beauty he sees and
loves immortally justifies his enthusiasm. Nevertheless, critics must
view his momentary ebullition from another side. They do not come to
justify the poet in his own eyes; he amply relieves them, of such a
function. They come only to inquire how significant the poet’s
expressions are for humanity at large or for whatever public he
addresses. They come to register the social or representative value of
the poet’s soul. His inspiration may have been an odd cerebral rumbling,
a perfectly irrecoverable and wasted intuition; the exquisite quality it
doubtless had to his own sense is now not to the purpose. A work of art
is a public possession; it is addressed to the world. By taking on a
material embodiment, a spirit solicits attention and claims some kinship
with the prevalent gods. Has it, critics should ask, the affinities
needed for such intercourse? Is it humane, is it rational, is it
representative? To its inherent incommunicable charms it must add a
kind of courtesy. If it wants other approval than its own, it cannot
afford to regard no other aspiration.

This scope, this representative faculty or wide appeal, is necessary to
good taste. All authority is representative; force and inner consistency
are gifts on which I may well congratulate another, but they give him no
right to speak for me. Either æsthetic experience would have remained a
chaos—which it is not altogether—or it must have tended to conciliate
certain general human demands and ultimately all those interests which
its operation in any way affects. The more conspicuous and permanent a
work of art is, the more is such an adjustment needed. A poet or
philosopher may be erratic and assure us that he is inspired; if we
cannot well gainsay it, we are at least not obliged to read his works.
An architect or a sculptor, however, or a public performer of any sort,
that thrusts before us a spectacle justified only in his inner
consciousness, makes himself a nuisance. A social standard of taste must
assert itself here, or else no efficacious and cumulative art can exist
at all. Good taste in such matters cannot abstract from tradition,
utility, and the temper of the world. It must make itself an interpreter
of humanity and think esoteric dreams less beautiful than what the
public eye might conceivably admire.

[Sidenote: Art may grow classic by idealising the familiar.]

There are various affinities by which art may acquire a representative
or classic quality. It may do so by giving form to objects which
everybody knows, by rendering experiences that are universal and
primary. The human figure, elementary passions, common types and crises
of fate—these are facts which pass too constantly through apperception
not to have a normal æthetic value. The artist who can catch that effect
in its fulness and simplicity accordingly does immortal work. This sort
of art immediately becomes popular; it passes into language and
convention so that its æsthetic charm is apparently worn down. The old
images after a while hardly stimulate unless they be presented in some
paradoxical way; but in that case attention will be diverted to the
accidental extravagance, and the chief classic effect will be missed. It
is the honourable fate or euthanasia of artistic successes that they
pass from the field of professional art altogether and become a portion
of human faculty. Every man learns to be to that extent an artist;
approved figures and maxims pass current like the words and idioms of a
mother-tongue, themselves once brilliant inventions. The lustre of such
successes is not really dimmed, however, when it becomes a part of man’s
daily light; a retrogression from that habitual style or habitual
insight would at once prove, by the shock it caused, how precious those
ingrained apperceptions continued to be.

[Sidenote: or by reporting the ultimate.]

Universality may also be achieved, in a more heroic fashion, by art that
expresses ultimate truths, cosmic laws, great human ideals. Virgil and
Dante are classic poets in this sense, and a similar quality belongs to
Greek sculpture and architecture. They may not cause enthusiasm in
everybody; but in the end experience and reflection renew their charm;
and their greatness, like that of high mountains, grows more obvious
with distance. Such eminence is the reward of having accepted discipline
and made the mind a clear anagram of much experience. There is a great
difference between the depth of expression so gained and richness or
realism in details. A supreme work presupposes minute study, sympathy
with varied passions, many experiments in expression; but these
preliminary things are submerged in it and are not displayed side by
side with it, like the foot-notes to a learned work, so that the
ignorant may know they have existed.

Some persons, themselves inattentive, imagine, for instance, that Greek
sculpture is abstract, that it has left out all the detail and character
which they cannot find on the surface, as they might in a modern work.
In truth it contains those features, as it were, in solution and in the
resultant which, when reduced to harmony, they would produce. It
embodies a finished humanity which only varied exercises could have
attained, for as the body is the existent ground for all possible
actions, in which as actions they exist only potentially, so a perfect
body, such as a sculptor might conceive, which ought to be ready for all
excellent activities, cannot present them all in act but only the
readiness for them. The features that might express them severally must
be absorbed and mastered, hidden like a sword in its scabbard, and
reduced to a general dignity or grace. Though such immersed eloquence be
at first overlooked and seldom explicitly acknowledged, homage is
nevertheless rendered to it in the most unmistakable ways. When lazy
artists, backed by no great technical or moral discipline, think they,
too, can produce masterpieces by summary treatment, their failure shows
how pregnant and supreme a thing simplicity is. Every man, in proportion
to his experience and moral distinction, returns to the simple but
inexhaustible work of finished minds, and finds more and more of his own
soul responsive to it.

Human nature, for all its margin of variability, has a substantial core
which is invariable, as the human body has a structure which it cannot
lose without perishing altogether; for as creatures grow more complex a
greater number of their organs become vital and indispensable. Advanced
forms will rather die than surrender a tittle of their character; a fact
which is the physical basis for loyalty and martyrdom. Any deep
interpretation of oneself, or indeed of anything, has for that reason a
largely representative truth. Other men, if they look closely, will make
the same discovery for themselves. Hence distinction and profundity, in
spite of their rarity, are wont to be largely recognised. The best men
in all ages keep classic traditions alive. These men have on their side
the weight of superior intelligence, and, though they are few, they
might even claim the weight of numbers, since the few of all ages, added
together, may be more than the many who in any one age follow a
temporary fashion. Classic work is nevertheless always national, or at
least characteristic of its period, as the classic poetry of each people
is that in which its language appears most pure and free. To translate
it is impossible; but it is easy to find that the human nature so
inimitably expressed in each masterpiece is the same that, under
different circumstance, dictates a different performance. The deviations
between races and men are not yet so great as is the ignorance of self,
the blindness to the native ideal, which prevails in most of them. Hence
a great man of a remote epoch is more intelligible than a common man of
our own time.

[Sidenote: Good taste demands that art should be rational, _i.e._,
harmonious with all other interests.]

Both elementary and ultimate judgments, then, contribute to a standard
of taste; yet human life lies between these limits, and an art which is
to be truly adjusted to life should speak also for the intermediate
experience. Good taste is indeed nothing but a name for those
appreciations which the swelling incidents of life recall and
reinforce. Good taste is that taste which is a good possession, a friend
to the whole man. It must not alienate him from anything except to ally
him to something greater and more fertile in satisfactions. It will not
suffer him to dote on things, however seductive, which rob him of some
nobler companionship. To have a foretaste of such a loss, and to reject
instinctively whatever will cause it, is the very essence of refinement.
Good taste comes, therefore, from experience, in the best sense of that
word; it comes from having united in one’s memory and character the
fruit of many diverse undertakings. Mere taste is apt to be bad taste,
since it regards nothing but a chance feeling. Every man who pursues an
art may be presumed to have some sensibility; the question is whether he
has breeding, too, and whether what he stops at is not, in the end,
vulgar and offensive. Chance feeling needs to fortify itself with
reasons and to find its level in the great world. When it has added
fitness to its sincerity, beneficence to its passion, it will have
acquired a right to live. Violence and self-justification will not pass
muster in a moral society, for vipers possess both, and must
nevertheless be stamped out. Citizenship is conferred only on creatures
with human and co-operative instincts. A civilised imagination has to
understand and to serve the world.

The great obstacle which art finds in attempting to be rational is its
functional isolation. Sense and each of the passions suffers from a
similar independence. The disarray of human instincts lets every
spontaneous motion run too far; life oscillates between constraint and
unreason. Morality too often puts up with being a constraint and even
imagines such a disgrace to be its essence. Art, on the contrary, as
often hugs unreason for fear of losing its inspiration, and forgets that
it is itself a rational principle of creation and order. Morality is
thus reduced to a necessary evil and art to a vain good, all for want of
harmony among human impulses. If the passions arose in season, if
perception fed only on those things which action should be adjusted to,
turning them, while action proceeded, into the substance of ideas—then
all conduct would be voluntary and enlightened, all speculation would be
practical, all perceptions beautiful, and all operations arts. The Life
of Reason would then be universal.

To approach this ideal, so far as art is concerned, would involve
diffusing its processes and no longer confining them to a set of dead
and unproductive objects called works of art.

[Sidenote: A mere “work of art” a baseless artifice.]

Why art, the most vital and generative of activities, should produce a
set of abstract images, monuments to lost intuitions, is a curious
mystery. Nature gives her products life, and they are at least equal to
their sources in dignity. Why should mind, the actualisation of nature’s
powers, produce something so inferior to itself, reverting in its
expression to material being, so that its witnesses seem so many fossils
with which it strews its path? What we call museums—mausoleums, rather,
in which a dead art heaps up its remains—are those the places where the
Muses intended to dwell? We do not keep in show-cases the coins current
in the world. A living art does not produce curiosities to be collected
but spiritual necessaries to be diffused.

Artificial art, made to be exhibited, is something gratuitous and
sophisticated, and the greater part of men’s concern about it is
affectation. There is a genuine pleasure in planning a work, in
modelling and painting it; there is a pleasure in showing it to a
sympathetic friend, who associates himself in this way with the artist’s
technical experiment and with his interpretation of some human episode;
and there might be a satisfaction in seeing the work set up in some
appropriate space for which it was designed, where its decorative
quality might enrich the scene, and the curious passer-by might stop to
decipher it. The pleasures proper to an ingenuous artist are spontaneous
and human; but his works, once delivered to his patrons, are household
furniture for the state. Set up to-day, they are outworn and replaced
to-morrow, like trees in the parks or officers in the government. A
community where art was native and flourishing would have an
uninterrupted supply of such ornaments, furnished by its citizens in
the same modest and cheerful spirit in which they furnish other
commodities. Every craft has its dignity, and the decorative and
monumental crafts certainly have their own; but such art is neither
singular nor pre-eminent, and a statesman or reformer who should raise
somewhat the level of thought or practice in the state would do an
infinitely greater service.

[Sidenote: Human uses give to works of art their highest expression and
charm.]

The joys of creating are not confined, moreover, to those who create
things without practical uses. The merely æsthetic, like rhyme and
fireworks, is not the only subject that can engage a playful fancy or be
planned with a premonition of beautiful effects. Architecture may be
useful, sculpture commemorative, poetry reflective, even, music, by its
expression, religious or martial. In a word, practical exigencies, in
calling forth the arts, give them moral functions which it is a pleasure
to see them fulfil. Works may not be æsthetic in their purpose, and yet
that fact may be a ground for their being doubly delightful in execution
and doubly beautiful in effect. A richer plexus of emotions is concerned
in producing or contemplating something humanly necessary than something
idly conceived. What is very rightly called a _sense_ for fitness is a
vital experience, involving æsthetic satisfactions and æsthetic shocks.
The more numerous the rational harmonies are which are present to the
mind, the more sensible movements will be going on there to give
immediate delight; for the perception or expectation of an ulterior good
is a present good also. Accordingly nothing can so well call forth or
sustain attention as what has a complex structure relating it to many
complex interests. A work woven out of precious threads has a deep
pertinence and glory; the artist who creates it does not need to
surrender his practical and moral sense in order to indulge his
imagination.

The truth is that mere sensation or mere emotion is an indignity to a
mature human being. When we eat, we demand a pleasant vista, flowers, or
conversation, and failing these we take refuge in a newspaper. The
monks, knowing that men should not feed silently like stalled oxen,
appointed some one to read aloud in the refectory; and the Fathers,
obeying the same civilised instinct, had contrived in their theology
intelligible points of attachment for religious emotion. A refined mind
finds as little happiness in love without friendship as in sensuality
without love; it may succumb to both, but it accepts neither. What is
true of mere sensibility is no less true of mere fancy. The Arabian
Nights—futile enough in any case—would be absolutely intolerable if
they contained no Oriental manners, no human passions, and no convinced
epicureanism behind their miracles and their tattle. Any absolute work
of art which serves no further purpose than to stimulate an emotion has
about it a certain luxurious and visionary taint. We leave it with a
blank mind, and a pang bubbles up from the very fountain of pleasures.
Art, so long as it needs to be a dream, will never cease to prove a
disappointment. Its facile cruelty, its narcotic abstraction, can never
sweeten the evils we return to at home; it can liberate half the mind
only by leaving the other half in abeyance. In the mere artist, too,
there is always something that falls short of the gentleman and that
defeats the man.

[Sidenote: The sad values of appearance.]

Surely it is not the artistic impulse in itself that involves such lack
of equilibrium. To impress a meaning and a rational form on matter is
one of the most masterful of actions. The trouble lies in the barren and
superficial character of this imposed form: fine art is a play of
appearance. Appearance, for a critical philosophy, is distinguished from
reality by its separation from the context of things, by its immediacy
and insignificance. A play of appearance is accordingly some little
closed circle in experience, some dream in which we lose ourselves by
ignoring most of our interests, and from which we awake into a world in
which that lost episode plays no further part and leaves no heirs. Art
as mankind has hitherto practised it falls largely under this head and
too much resembles an opiate or a stimulant. Life and history are not
thereby rendered better in their principle, but a mere ideal is
extracted out of them and presented for our delectation in some cheap
material, like words or marble. The only precious materials are flesh
and blood, for these alone can defend and propagate the ideal which has
once informed them.

Artistic creation shows at this point a great inferiority to natural
reproduction, since its product is dead. Fine art shapes inert matter
and peoples the mind with impotent ghosts. What influence it has—for
every event has consequences—is not pertinent to its inspiration. The
art of the past is powerless even to create similar art in the present,
unless similar conditions recur independently. The moments snatched for
art have been generally interludes in life and its products parasites in
nature, the body of them being materially functionless and the soul
merely represented. To exalt fine art into a truly ideal activity we
should have to knit it more closely with other rational functions, so
that to beautify things might render them more useful and to represent
them most imaginatively might be to see them in their truth. Something
of the sort has been actually attained by the noblest arts in their
noblest phases. A Sophocles or a Leonardo dominates his dreamful vehicle
and works upon the real world by its means. These small centres, where
interfunctional harmony is attained, ought to expand and cover the whole
field. Art, like religion, needs to be absorbed in the Life of Reason.

[Sidenote: They need to be made prophetic of practical goods.]

What might help to bring about this consummation would be, on the one
side, more knowledge; on the other, better taste. When a mind is filled
with important and true ideas and sees the actual relations of things,
it cannot relish pictures of the world which wantonly misrepresent it.
Myth and metaphor remain beautiful so long as they are the most adequate
or graphic means available for expressing the facts, but so soon as they
cease to be needful and sincere they become false finery. The same thing
happens in the plastic arts. Unless they spring from love of their
subject, and employ imagination only to penetrate into that subject and
interpret it with a more inward sympathy and truth, they become
conventional and overgrown with mere ornament. They then seem ridiculous
to any man who can truly conceive what they represent. So in putting
antique heroes on the stage we nowadays no longer tolerate a modern
costume, because the externals of ancient life are too well known to us;
but in the seventeenth century people demanded in such personages
intelligence and nobleness, since these were virtues which the ancients
were clothed with in their thought. A knowledge that should be at once
full and appreciative would evidently demand fidelity in both matters.
Knowledge, where it exists, undermines satisfaction in what does
violence to truth, and it renders such representations grotesque. If
knowledge were general and adequate the fine arts would accordingly be
brought round to expressing reality.

[Sidenote: which in turn would be suffused with beauty.]

At the same time, if the rendering of reality is to remain artistic, it
must still study to satisfy the senses; but as this study would now
accompany every activity, taste would grow vastly more subtle and
exacting. Whatever any man said or did or made, he would be alive to its
æsthetic quality, and beauty would be a pervasive ingredient in
happiness. No work would be called, in a special sense, a work of art,
for all works would be such intrinsically; and even instinctive mimicry
and reproduction would themselves operate, not when mischief or idleness
prompted, but when some human occasion and some general utility made the
exercise of such skill entirely delightful. Thus there would need to be
no division of mankind into mechanical blind workers and half-demented
poets, and no separation of useful from fine art, such as people make
who have understood neither the nature nor the ultimate reward of human
action. All arts would be practised together and merged in the art of
life, the only one wholly useful or fine among them.




