CHAPTER X

POST-RATIONAL MORALITY


[Sidenote: Socratic ethics retrospective.]

When Socrates and his two great disciples composed a system of rational
ethics they were hardly proposing practical legislation for mankind. One
by his irony, another by his frank idealism, and the third by his
preponderating interest in history and analysis, showed clearly enough
how little they dared to hope. They were merely writing an eloquent
epitaph on their country. They were publishing the principles of what
had been its life, gathering piously its broken ideals, and interpreting
its momentary achievement. The spirit of liberty and co-operation was
already dead. The private citizen, debauched by the largesses and petty
quarrels of his city, had become indolent and mean-spirited. He had
begun to question the utility of religion, of patriotism, and of
justice. Having allowed the organ for the ideal to atrophy in his soul,
he could dream of finding some sullen sort of happiness in unreason. He
felt that the austere glories of his country, as a Spartan regimen might
have preserved them, would not benefit that baser part of him which
alone remained. Political virtue seemed a useless tax on his material
profit and freedom. The tedium and distrust proper to a disintegrated
society began to drive him to artificial excitements and superstitions.
Democracy had learned to regard as enemies the few in whom public
interest was still represented, the few whose nobler temper and
traditions still coincided with the general good. These last patriots
were gradually banished or exterminated, and with them died the spirit
that rational ethics had expressed. Philosophers were no longer suffered
to have illusions about the state. Human activity on the public stage
had shaken off all allegiance to art or reason.

[Sidenote: Rise of disillusioned moralities.]

The biographer of reason might well be tempted to ignore the subsequent
attitudes into which moral life fell in the West, since they all
embodied a more or less complete despair, and, having abandoned the
effort to express the will honestly and dialectically, they could
support no moral science. The point was merely to console or deceive the
soul with some substitute for happiness. Life is older and more
persistent than reason, and the failure of a first experiment in
rationality does not deprive mankind of that mental and moral vegetation
which they possessed for ages in a wild state before the advent of
civilisation. They merely revert to their uncivil condition and espouse
whatever imaginative ideal comes to hand, by which some semblance of
meaning and beauty may be given to existence without the labour of
building this meaning and beauty systematically out of its positive
elements.

Not to study these imaginative ideals, partial and arbitrary as they
are, would be to miss one of the most instructive points of view from
which the Life of Reason may be surveyed: the point of view of its
satirists. For moral ideals may follow upon philosophy, just as they may
precede it. When they follow, at least so long as they are consciously
embraced in view of reason’s failure, they have a quite particular
value. Aversion to rational ideals does not then come, as the
intuitionist’s aversion does, from moral incoherence or religious
prejudice. It does not come from lack of speculative power. On the
contrary, it may come from undue haste in speculation, from a too ready
apprehension of the visible march of things. The obvious irrationality
of nature as a whole, too painfully brought home to a musing mind, may
make it forget or abdicate its own rationality. In a decadent age, the
philosopher who surveys the world and sees that the end of it is even as
the beginning, may not feel that the intervening episode, in which he
and all he values after all figure, is worth consideration; and he may
cry, in his contemplative spleen, that _all_ is vanity.

If you should still confront him with a theory of the ideal, he would
not be reduced, like the pre-rational moralists in a similar case, to
mere inattention and bluster. If you told him that every art and every
activity involves a congruous good, and that the endeavour to realise
the ideal in every direction is an effort of which reason necessarily
approves, since reason is nothing but the method of that endeavour, he
would not need to deny your statements in order to justify himself. He
might admit the naturalness, the spontaneity, the ideal sufficiency of
your conceptions; but he might add, with the smile of the elder and the
sadder man, that he had experience of their futility. “You Hellenisers,”
he might say, “are but children; you have not pondered the little
history you know. If thought were conversant with reality, if virtue
were stable and fruitful, if pains and policy were ultimately justified
by a greater good arising out of them—then, indeed, a life according to
reason might tempt a philosopher. But unfortunately not one of those
fond assumptions is true. Human thought is a meaningless phantasmagoria.
Virtue is a splendid and laborious folly, when it is not a pompous
garment that only looks respectable in the dark, being in truth full of
spots and ridiculous patches. Men’s best laid plans become, in the
casual cross-currents of being, the occasion of their bitterest
calamities. How, then, live? How justify in our eyes, let us not say the
ways of God, but our own ways?”

[Sidenote: The illusion subsisting in them.]

Such a position may be turned dialectically by invoking whatever
positive hopes or convictions the critic may retain, who while he lives
cannot be wholly without them. But the position is specious and does not
collapse, like that of the intuitionist, at the first breath of
criticism. Pessimism, and all the moralities founded on despair, are not
pre-rational but post-rational. They are the work of men who more or
less explicitly have conceived the Life of Reason, tried it at least
imaginatively, and found it wanting. These systems are a refuge from an
intolerable situation: they are experiments in redemption. As a matter
of fact, animal instincts and natural standards of excellence are never
eluded in them, for no moral experience has other terms; but the part of
the natural ideal which remains active appears in opposition to all the
rest and, by an intelligible illusion, seems to be no part of that
natural ideal because, compared with the commoner passions on which it
reacts, it represents some simpler or more attenuated hope—the appeal
to some very humble or very much chastened satisfaction, or to an utter
change in the conditions of life.

Post-rational morality thus constitutes, in intention if not in fact, a
criticism of all experience. It thinks it is not, like pre-rational
morality, an arbitrary selection from among co-ordinate precepts. It is
an effort to subordinate all precepts to one, that points to some single
eventual good. For it occurs to the founders of these systems that by
estranging oneself from the world, or resting in the moment’s pleasure,
or mortifying the passions, or enduring all sufferings in patience, or
studying a perfect conformity with the course of affairs, one may gain
admission to some sort of residual mystical paradise; and this thought,
once conceived, is published as a revelation and accepted as a panacea.
It becomes in consequence (for such is the force of nature) the
foundation of elaborate institutions and elaborate philosophies, into
which the contents of the worldly life are gradually reintroduced.

When human life is in an acute crisis, the sick dreams that visit the
soul are the only evidence of her continued existence. Through them she
still envisages a good; and when the delirium passes and the normal
world gradually re-establishes itself in her regard, she attributes her
regeneration to the ministry of those phantoms, a regeneration due, in
truth, to the restored nutrition and circulation within her. In this way
post-rational systems, though founded originally on despair, in a later
age that has forgotten its disillusions may come to pose as the only
possible basis of morality. The philosophers addicted to each sect, and
brought up under its influence, may exhaust criticism and sophistry to
show that all faith and effort would be vain unless their particular
nostrum was accepted; and so a curious party philosophy arises in which,
after discrediting nature and reason in general, the sectary puts
forward some mythical echo of reason and nature as the one saving and
necessary truth. The positive substance of such a doctrine is
accordingly pre-rational and perhaps crudely superstitious; but it is
introduced and nominally supported by a formidable indictment of
physical and moral science, so that the wretched idol ultimately offered
to our worship acquires a spurious halo and an imputed majesty by being
raised on a pedestal of infinite despair.

[Sidenote: Epicurean refuge in pleasure.]

Socrates was still living when a school of post-rational morality arose
among the Sophists, which after passing quickly through various phases,
settled down into Epicureanism and has remained the source of a certain
consolation to mankind, which if somewhat cheap, is none the less
genuine. The pursuit of pleasure may seem simple selfishness, with a
tendency to debauchery; and in this case the pre-rational and
instinctive character of the maxim retained would be very obvious.
Pleasure, to be sure, is not the direct object of an unspoiled will; but
after some experience and discrimination, a man may actually guide
himself by a foretaste of the pleasures he has found in certain objects
and situations. The criticism required to distinguish what pays from
what does not pay may not often be carried very far; but it may
sometimes be carried to the length of suppressing every natural instinct
and natural hope, and of turning the philosopher, as it turned Hegesias
the Cyrenaic, into a eulogist of death.

The post-rational principle in the system then comes to the fore, and we
see clearly that to sit down and reflect upon human life, picking out
its pleasant moments and condemning all the rest, is to initiate a
course of moral retrenchment. It is to judge what is worth doing, not by
the innate ambition of the soul, but by experience of incidental
feelings, which to a mind without creative ideas may seem the only
objects worthy of pursuit. That life ought to be accompanied by pleasure
and exempt from pain is certain; for this means that what is agreeable
to the whole process of nature would have become agreeable also to the
various partial impulses involved—another way of describing organic
harmony and physical perfection. But such a desirable harmony cannot be
defined or obtained by picking out and isolating from the rest those
occasions and functions in which it may already have been reached. These
partial harmonies may be actual arrests or impediments in the whole
which is to be made harmonious; and even when they are innocent or
helpful they cannot serve to determine the form which the general
harmony might take on. They merely illustrate its principle. The
organism in which this principle of harmony might find pervasive
expression is still potential, and the ideal is something of which, in
its concrete form, no man has had experience. It involves a propitious
material environment, perfect health, perfect arts, perfect government,
a mind enlarged to the knowledge and enjoyment of all its external
conditions and internal functions. Such an ideal is lost sight of when a
man cultivates his garden-plot of private pleasures, leaving it to
chance and barbarian fury to govern the state and quicken the world’s
passions.

Even Aristippus, the first and most delightful of hedonists, who really
enjoyed the pleasures he advocated and was not afraid of the incidental
pains—even Aristippus betrayed the post-rational character of his
philosophy by abandoning politics, mocking science, making his peace
with all abuses that fostered his comfort, and venting his wit on all
ambitions that exceeded his hopes. A great temperament can carry off a
rough philosophy. Rebellion and license may distinguish honourable souls
in an age of polite corruption, and a grain of sincerity is better, in
moral philosophy, than a whole harvest of conventionalities. The
violence and shamelessness of Aristippus were corrected by Epicurus; and
a balance was found between utter despair and utter irresponsibility.
Epicureanism retrenched much: it cut off politics, religion, enterprise,
and passion. These things it convicted of vanity, without stopping to
distinguish in them what might be inordinate from what might be
rational. At the same time it retained friendship, freedom of soul, and
intellectual light. It cultivated unworldliness without superstition
and happiness without illusion. It was tender toward simple and honest
things, scornful and bitter only against pretence and usurpation. It
thus marked a first halting-place in the retreat of reason, a stage
where the soul had thrown off only the higher and more entangling part
of her burden and was willing to live, in somewhat reduced
circumstances, on the remainder. Such a philosophy expresses well the
genuine sentiment of persons, at once mild and emancipated, who find
themselves floating on the ebb-tide of some civilisation, and enjoying
its fruits, without any longer representing the forces that brought that
civilisation about.

[Sidenote: Stoic recourse to conformity.]

The same emancipation, without its mildness, appeared in the Cynics,
whose secret it was to throw off all allegiance and all dependence on
circumstance, and to live entirely on inner strength of mind, on pride
and inflexible humour. The renunciation was far more sweeping than that
of Epicurus, and indeed wellnigh complete; yet the Stoics, in
underpinning the Cynical self-sufficiency with a system of physics,
introduced into the life of the sect a contemplative element which very
much enlarged and ennobled its sympathies. Nature became a sacred
system, the laws of nature being eulogistically called rational laws,
and the necessity of things, because it might be foretold in auguries,
being called providence. There was some intellectual confusion in all
this; but contemplation, even if somewhat idolatrous, has a purifying
effect, and the sad and solemn review of the cosmos to which the Stoic
daily invited his soul, to make it ready to face its destiny, doubtless
liberated it from many an unworthy passion. The impressive spectacle of
things was used to remind the soul of her special and appropriate
function, which was to be rational. This rationality consisted partly in
insight, to perceive the necessary order of things, and partly in
conformity, to perceive that this order, whatever it might be, could
serve the soul to exercise itself upon, and to face with equanimity.

Despair, in this system, flooded a much larger area of human life;
everything, in fact, was surrendered except the will to endure whatever
might come. The concentration was much more marked, since only a formal
power of perception and defiance was retained and made the sphere of
moral life; this rational power, at least in theory, was the one peak
that remained visible above the deluge. But in practice much more was
retained. Some distinction was drawn, however unwarrantably, between
external calamities and human turpitude, so that absolute conformity and
acceptance might not be demanded by the latter; although the chief
occasion which a Stoic could find to practise fortitude and recognise
the omnipresence of law was in noting the universal corruption of the
state and divining its ruin. The obligation to conform to nature
(which, strictly speaking, could not be disregarded in any case) was
interpreted to signify that every one should perform the offices
conventionally attached to his station. In this way a perfunctory
citizenship and humanity were restored to the philosopher. But the
restored life was merely histrionic: the Stoic was a recluse parading
the market-place and a monk disguised in armour. His interest and faith
were centred altogether on his private spiritual condition. He
cultivated the society of those persons who, he thought, might teach him
some virtue. He attended to the affairs of state so as to exercise his
patience. He might even lead an army to battle, if he wished to test his
endurance and make sure that philosophy had rendered him indifferent to
the issue.

[Sidenote: Conformity the core of Islam.]

The strain and artifice of such a discipline, with merely formal goals
and no hope on earth or in heaven, could not long maintain itself; and
doubtless it existed, at a particular juncture, only in a few souls.
Resignation to the will of God, says Bishop Butler, is _the whole of
piety_; yet mere resignation would make a sorry religion and the
negation of all morality, unless the will of God was understood to be
quite different from his operation in nature. To turn Stoicism into a
workable religion we need to qualify it with some pre-rational maxims.
Islam, for instance, which boasts that in its essence it is nothing but
the primitive and natural religion of mankind, consists in abandoning
oneself to the will of God or, in other words, in accepting the
inevitable. This will of God is learned for the most part by observing
the course of nature and history, and remembering the fate meted out
habitually to various sorts of men. Were this all, Islam would be a pure
Stoicism, and Hebraic religion, in its ultimate phase, would be simply
the eloquence of physics. It would not, in that case, be a moral
inspiration at all, except as contemplation and the sense of one’s
nothingness might occasionally silence the passions and for a moment
bewilder the mind. On recovering from this impression, however, men
would find themselves enriched with no self-knowledge, armed with no
precepts, and stimulated by no ideal. They would be reduced to enacting
their incidental impulses, as the animals are, quite as if they had
never perceived that in doing so they were fulfilling a divine decree.
Enlightened Moslems, accordingly, have often been more Epicurean than
Stoical; and if they have felt themselves (not without some reason)
superior to Christians in delicacy, in _savoir vivre_, in kinship with
all natural powers, this sense of superiority has been quite
rationalistic and purely human. Their religion contributed to it only
because it was simpler, freer from superstition, nearer to a clean and
pleasant regimen in life. Resignation to the will of God being granted,
expression of the will of man might more freely begin.

[Sidenote: enveloped in arbitrary doctrines.]

What made Islam, however, a positive and contagious novelty was the
assumption that God’s will might be incidentally revealed to prophets
before the event, so that past experience was not the only source from
which its total operation might be gathered. In its opposition to
grosser idolatries Islam might appeal to experience and challenge those
who trusted in special deities to justify their worship in face of the
facts. The most decisive facts against idolaters, however, were not yet
patent, but were destined to burst upon mankind at the last day—and
most unpleasantly for the majority. Where Mohammed speaks in the name of
the universal natural power he is abundantly scornful toward that fond
paganism which consists in imagining distinct patrons for various
regions of nature or for sundry human activities. In turning to such
patrons the pagan regards something purely ideal or, as the Koran
shrewdly observes, worships his own passions. Allah, on the contrary, is
overwhelmingly external and as far as possible from being ideal. He is
indeed the giver of all good things, as of all evil, and while his
mercies are celebrated on every page of the Koran, these mercies consist
in the indulgence he is expected to show to his favourites, and the
exceeding reward reserved for them after their earthly trials. Allah’s
mercy does not exclude all those senseless and unredeemed cruelties of
which nature is daily guilty; nay, it shines all the more conspicuously
by contrast with his essential irresponsibility and wanton wrath, a part
of his express purpose being to keep hell full of men and demons.

The tendency toward enlightenment which Islam represents, and the limits
of that enlightenment, may be illustrated by the precept about unclean
animals. Allah, we are told, being merciful and gracious, made the world
for man’s use, with all the animals in it. We may therefore justly
slaughter and devour them, in so far as comports with health; but, of
course, we may not eat animals that have died a natural death, nor those
offered in sacrifice to false gods, nor swine; for to do so would be an
abomination.

[Sidenote: The latter alone lend it practical force.]

Unfortunately religious reformers triumph not so much by their rational
insight as by their halting, traditional maxims. Mohammed felt the unity
of God like a philosopher; but people listened to him because he
preached it like a sectary. God, as he often reminds us, did not make
the world for a plaything; he made it in order to establish distinctions
and separate by an immense interval the fate of those who conform to the
truth from the fate of those who ignore it. Human life is indeed beset
with enough imminent evils to justify this urgent tone in the Semitic
moralist and to lend his precepts a stern practical ring, absent from
merely Platonic idealisms. But this stringency, which is called
positivism when the conditions of welfare are understood, becomes
fanaticism when they are misrepresented. Had Mohammed spoken only of the
dynamic unity in things, the omnipresence of destiny, and the actual
conditions of success and failure in the world, he would not have been
called a prophet or have had more than a dozen intelligent followers,
scattered over as many centuries; but the weakness of his intellect, and
his ignorance of nature, made the success of his mission. It is easier
to kindle righteous indignation against abuses when, by abating them, we
further our personal interests; and Mohammed might have been less
zealous in denouncing false gods had his own God been altogether the
true one. But, in the heat of his militancy, he descends so far as to
speak of _God’s interests_ which the faithful embrace, and of fighting
in _God’s cause_. By these notions, so crudely pre-rational, we are
allowed to interpret and discount the pantheistic sublimities with which
in most places we are regaled; and in order that a morality, too weak to
be human, may not wither altogether in the fierce light of the Absolute,
we are led to humanise the Absolute into a finite force, needing our
support against independent enemies. So complete is the bankruptcy of
that Stoic morality which thinks to live on the worship of That which
Is.

[Sidenote: Moral ambiguity in pantheism.]

As extremes are said to meet, so we may say that a radical position is
often the point of departure for opposite systems. Pantheism, or
religion and morality abdicating in favour of physics, may, in practice,
be interpreted in contrary ways. To be in sympathy with the Whole may
seem to require us to outgrow and discard every part; yet, on the other
hand, there is no obvious reason why Being should love its essence in a
fashion that involves hating every possible form of Being. The
worshipper of Being accordingly assumes now one, now the other, of two
opposite attitudes, according as the society in which he lives is in a
prerational or a post-rational state of culture. Pantheism is
interpreted pre-rationally, as by the early Mohammedans, or by the
Hegelians, when people are not yet acquainted, or not yet disgusted,
with worldliness; the Absolute then seems to lend a mystical sanction to
whatever existences or tendencies happen to be afoot. Morality is
reduced to sanctioning reigning conventions, or reigning passions, on
the authority of the universe. Thus the Moslems, by way of serving
Allah, could extend their conquests and cultivate the arts and pleasures
congenial to a self-sufficing soul, at once indolent and fierce; while
the transcendentalists of our times, by way of accepting their part in
the divine business, have merely added a certain speculative loftiness
to the maxims of some sect or the chauvinism of some nation.

[Sidenote: Under stress, it becomes ascetic and requires a mythology.]

To accept everything, however, is not an easy nor a tolerable thing,
unless you are naturally well pleased with what falls to your share.
However the Absolute may feel, a moral creature has to hate some forms
of being; and if the age has thrust these forms before a man’s eyes, and
imposed them upon him, not being suffered by his pantheism to blame the
Absolute he will (by an inconsistency) take to blaming himself. It will
be his finitude, his inordinate claims, his enormous effrontery in
having any will or any preference in particular, that will seem to him
the source of all evil and the single blot on the infinite lucidity of
things. Pantheism, under these circumstances, will issue in a
post-rational morality. It will practise asceticism and look for a
mystical deliverance from finite existence.

Under these circumstances myth is inevitably reintroduced. Without it,
no consolation could be found except in the prospect of death and,
awaiting that, in incidental natural satisfactions; whereby absorption
in the Absolute might come to look not only impossible but distinctly
undesirable. To make retreat out of human nature seem a possible
vocation, this nature itself must, in some myth, be represented as
unnatural; the soul that this life stifles must be said to come from
elsewhere and to be fitted to breathe some element far rarer and finer
than this sublunary fog.

[Sidenote: A supernatural world made by the Platonist out of dialectic.]

A curious foothold for such a myth was furnished by the Socratic
philosophy. Plato, wafted by his poetic vision too far, perhaps, from
the utilitarianism of his master, had eulogised concretions in discourse
at the expense of existences and had even played with cosmological
myths, meant to express the values of things, by speaking as if these
values had brought things into being. The dialectical terms thus
contrasted with natural objects, and pictured as natural powers,
furnished the dogmas needed at this juncture by a post-rational
religion. The spell which dialectic can exercise over an abstracted mind
is itself great; and it may grow into a sacred influence and a positive
revelation when it offers a sanctuary from a weary life in the world.
Out of the play of notions carried on in a prayerful dream wonderful
mysteries can be constructed, to be presently announced to the people
and made the core of sacramental injunctions. When the tide of vulgar
superstition is at the flood and every form of quackery is welcome, we
need not wonder that a theosophy having so respectable a
core—something, indeed, like a true logic misunderstood—should gain
many adherents. Out of the names of things and of virtues a mystic
ladder could be constructed by which to leave the things and the virtues
themselves behind; but the sagacity and exigencies of the school would
not fail to arrange the steps in this progress—the end of which was
unattainable except, perhaps, in a momentary ecstasy—so that the
obvious duties of men would continue, for the nonce, to be imposed upon
them. The chief difference made in morals would be only this: that the
positive occasions and sanctions of good conduct would no longer be
mentioned with respect, but the imagination would be invited to dwell
instead on mystical issues.

[Sidenote: The Herbraic cry for redemption.]

Neo-Platonic morality, through a thousand learned and vulgar channels,
permeated Christianity and entirely transformed it. Original
Christianity was, though in another sense, a religion of redemption. The
Jews, without dreaming of original sin or of any inherent curse in being
finite, had found themselves often in the sorest material straits. They
hoped, like all primitive peoples, that relief might come by
propitiating the deity. They knew that the sins of the fathers were
visited upon the children even to the third and fourth generation. They
had accepted this idea of joint responsibility and vicarious atonement,
turning in their unphilosophical way this law of nature into a principle
of justice. Meantime the failure of all their cherished ambitions had
plunged them into a penitential mood. Though in fact pious and virtuous
to a fault, they still looked for repentance—their own or the
world’s—to save them. This redemption was to be accomplished in the
Hebrew spirit, through long-suffering and devotion to the Law, with the
Hebrew solidarity, by vicarious attribution of merits and demerits
within the household of the faith.

Such a way of conceiving redemption was far more dramatic, poignant, and
individual than the Neo-Platonic; hence it was far more popular and
better fitted to be a nucleus for religious devotion. However much,
therefore, Christianity may have insisted on renouncing the world, the
flesh, and the devil, it always kept in the background this perfectly
Jewish and pre-rational craving for a delectable promised land. The
journey might be long and through a desert, but milk and honey were to
flow in the oasis beyond. Had renunciation been fundamental or revulsion
from nature complete, there would have been no much-trumpeted last
judgment and no material kingdom of heaven. The renunciation was only
temporary and partial; the revulsion was only against incidental evils.
Despair touched nothing but the present order of the world, though at
first it took the extreme form of calling for its immediate destruction.
This was the sort of despair and renunciation that lay at the bottom of
Christian repentance; while hope in a new order of this world, or of one
very like it, lay at the bottom of Christian joy. A temporary sacrifice,
it was thought, and a partial mutilation would bring the spirit
miraculously into a fresh paradise. The pleasures nature had grudged or
punished, grace was to offer as a reward for faith and patience. The
earthly life which was vain as an experience was to be profitable as a
trial. Normal experience, appropriate exercise for the spirit, would
thereafter begin.

[Sidenote: The two factors meet in Christianity.]

Christianity is thus a system of postponed rationalism, a rationalism
intercepted by a supernatural version of the conditions of happiness.
Its moral principle is reason—the only moral principle there is; its
motive power is the impulse and natural hope to be and to be happy.
Christianity merely renews and reinstates these universal principles
after a first disappointment and a first assault of despair, by opening
up new vistas of accomplishment, new qualities and measures of success.
The Christian field of action being a world of grace enveloping the
world of nature, many transitory reversals of acknowledged values may
take place in its code. Poverty, chastity, humility, obedience,
self-sacrifice, ignorance, sickness, and dirt may all acquire a
religious worth which reason, in its direct application, might scarcely
have found in them; yet these reversed appreciations are merely
incidental to a secret rationality, and are justified on the ground that
human nature, as now found, is corrupt and needs to be purged and
transformed before it can safely manifest its congenital instincts and
become again an authoritative criterion of values. In the kingdom of God
men would no longer need to do penance, for life there would be truly
natural and there the soul would be at last in her native sphere.

This submerged optimism exists in Christianity, being a heritage from
the Jews; and those Protestant communities that have rejected the pagan
and Platonic elements that overlaid it have little difficulty in
restoring it to prominence. Not, however, without abandoning the soul of
the gospel; for the soul of the gospel, though expressed in the language
of Messianic hopes, is really post-rational. It was not to marry and be
given in marriage, or to sit on thrones, or to unravel metaphysical
mysteries, or to enjoy any of the natural delights renounced in this
life, that Christ summoned his disciples to abandon all they had and to
follow him. There was surely a deeper peace in his self-surrender. It
was not a new thing even among the Jews to use the worldly promises of
their exoteric religion as symbols for inner spiritual revolutions; and
the change of heart involved in genuine Christianity was not a fresh
excitation of gaudy hopes, nor a new sort of utilitarian, temporary
austerity. It was an emptying of the will, in respect to all human
desires, so that a perfect charity and contemplative justice, falling
like the Father’s gifts ungrudgingly on the whole creation, might take
the place of ambition, petty morality, and earthly desires. It was a
renunciation which, at least in Christ himself and in his more spiritual
disciples, did not spring from disappointed illusion or lead to other
unregenerate illusions even more sure to be dispelled by events. It
sprang rather from a native speculative depth, a natural affinity to
the divine fecundity, serenity, and sadness of the world. It was the
spirit of prayer, the kindliness and insight which a pure soul can fetch
from contemplation.

[Sidenote: Consequent eclecticism.]

This mystical detachment, supervening on the dogged old Jewish optimism,
gave Christianity a double aspect, and had some curious consequence in
later times. Those who were inwardly convinced—as most religious minds
were under the Roman Empire—that all earthly things were vanity, and
that they plunged the soul into an abyss of nothingness if not of
torment, could, in view of brighter possibilities in another world,
carry their asceticism and their cult of suffering farther than a purely
negative system, like the Buddhistic, would have allowed. For a
discipline that is looked upon as merely temporary can contradict nature
more boldly than one intended to take nature’s place. The hope of
unimaginable benefits to ensue could drive religion to greater frenzies
than it could have fallen into if its object had been merely to silence
the will. Christianity persecuted, tortured, and burned. Like a hound it
tracked the very scent of heresy. It kindled wars, and nursed furious
hatreds and ambitions. It sanctified, quite like Mohammedanism,
extermination and tyranny. All this would have been impossible if, like
Buddhism, it had looked only to peace and the liberation of souls. It
looked beyond; it dreamt of infinite blisses and crowns it should be
crowned with before an electrified universe and an applauding God. These
were rival baits to those which the world fishes with, and were snapped
at, when seen, with no less avidity. Man, far from being freed from his
natural passions, was plunged into artificial ones quite as violent and
much more disappointing. Buddhism had tried to quiet a sick world with
anæsthetics; Christianity sought to purge it with fire.

Another consequence of combining, in the Christian life, post-rational
with pre-rational motives, a sense of exile and renunciation with hopes
of a promised land, was that esoteric piety could choose between the two
factors, even while it gave a verbal assent to the dogmas that included
both. Mystics honoured the post-rational motive and despised the
pre-rational; positivists clung to the second and hated the first. To
the spiritually minded, whose religion was founded on actual insight and
disillusion, the joys of heaven could never be more than a symbol for
the intrinsic worth of sanctity. To the worldling those heavenly joys
were nothing but a continuation of the pleasures and excitements of this
life, serving to choke any reflections which, in spite of himself, might
occasionally visit him about the vanity of human wishes. So that
Christianity, even in its orthodox forms, covers various kinds of
morality, and its philosophical incoherence betrays itself in disruptive
movements, profound schisms, and total alienation on the part of one
Christian from the inward faith of another. Trappist or Calvinist may be
practising a heroic and metaphysical self-surrender while the
busy-bodies of their respective creeds are fostering, in God’s name, all
their hot and miscellaneous passions.

[Sidenote: The negation of naturalism never complete.]

This contradiction, present in the overt morality of Christendom, cannot
be avoided, however, by taking refuge again in pure asceticism. Every
post-rational system is necessarily self-contradictory. Its despair
cannot be universal nor its nihilism complete so long as it remains a
coherent method of action, with particular goals and a steady faith that
their attainment is possible. The renunciation of the will must stop at
the point where the will to be saved makes its appearance: and as this
desire may be no less troublesome and insistent than any other, as it
may even become a tormenting obsession, the mystic is far from the end
of his illusions when he sets about to dispel them. There is one
rational method to which, in post-rational systems, the world is still
thought to be docile, one rational endeavour which nature is sure to
crown with success. This is the method of deliverance from existence,
the effort after salvation. There is, let us say, a law of Karma, by
which merit and demerit accruing in one incarnation pass on to the next
and enable the soul to rise continuously through a series of stages.
Thus the world, though called illusory, is not wholly intractable. It
provides systematically for an exit out of its illusions. On this
rational ordinance of phenomena, which is left standing by an imperfect
nihilism, Buddhist morality is built. Rational endeavour remains
possible because experience is calculable and fruitful in this one
respect, that it dissolves in the presence of goodness and knowledge.

Similarly in Christian ethics, the way of the cross has definite
stations and a definite end. However negative this end may be thought to
be, the assurance that it may be attained is a remnant of natural hope
in the bosom of pessimism. A complete disillusion would have involved
the neglect of such an assurance, the denial that it was possible or at
least that it was to be realised under specific conditions. That
conversion and good works lead to something worth attaining is a new
sort of positivistic hope. A complete scepticism would involve a doubt,
not only concerning the existence of such a method of salvation, but
also (what is more significant) concerning the importance of applying it
if it were found. For to assert that salvation is not only possible but
urgently necessary, that every soul is now in an intolerable condition
and should search for an ultimate solution to all its troubles, a
restoration to a normal and somehow blessed state—what is this but to
assert that the nature of things has a permanent constitution, by
conformity with which man may secure his happiness? Moreover, we assert
in such a faith that this natural constitution of things is discoverable
in a sufficient measure to guide our action to a successful issue.
Belief in Karma, in prayer, in sacraments, in salvation is a remnant of
a natural belief in the possibility of living successfully. The remnant
may be small and “expressed in fancy.” Transmigration or an atonement
may be chimerical ideas. Yet the mere fact of reliance upon something,
the assumption that the world is steady and capable of rational
exploitation, even if in a supernatural interest and by semi-magical
means, amounts to an essential loyalty to postulates of practical
reason, an essential adherence to natural morality.

The pretension to have reached a point of view from which _all_ impulse
may be criticised is accordingly an untenable pretension. It is
abandoned in the very systems in which it was to be most thoroughly
applied. The instrument of criticism must itself be one impulse
surviving the wreck of all the others; the vision of salvation and of
the way thither must be one dream among the rest. A single suggestion of
experience is thus accepted while all others are denied; and although a
certain purification and revision of morality may hence ensue, there is
no real penetration to a deeper principle than spontaneous reason, no
revelation of a higher end than the best possible happiness. One
sporadic growth of human nature may be substituted for its whole
luxuriant vegetation; one negative or formal element of happiness may
be preferred to the full entelechy of life. We may see the Life of
Reason reduced to straits, made to express itself in a niggardly and
fantastic environment; but we have, in principle and essence, the Life
of Reason still, empirical in its basis and rational in its method, its
substance impulse and its end happiness.

[Sidenote: Spontaneous values rehabilitated.]

So much for the umbilical cord that unites every living post-rational
system to the matrix of human hopes. There remains a second point of
contact between these systems and rational morality: the reinstated
natural duties which all religions and philosophies, in order to subsist
among civilised peoples, are at once obliged to sanction and somehow to
deduce from their peculiar principles. The most plausible evidence which
a supernatural doctrine can give of its truth is the beauty and
rationality of its moral corollaries. It is instructive to observe that
a gospel’s congruity with natural reason and common humanity is regarded
as the decisive mark of its supernatural origin. Indeed, were
inspiration not the faithful echo of plain conscience and vulgar
experience there would be no means of distinguishing it from madness.
Whatever poetic idea a prophet starts with, in whatever intuition or
analogy he finds a hint of salvation, it is altogether necessary that he
should hasten to interpret his oracle in such a manner that it may
sanction without disturbing the system of indispensable natural duties,
although these natural duties, by being attached artificially to
supernatural dogmas, may take on a different tone, justify themselves by
a different rhetoric, and possibly suffer real transformation in some
minor particulars. Systems of post-rational morality are not original
works: they are versions of natural morality translated into different
metaphysical languages, each of which adds its peculiar flavour, its own
genius and poetry, to the plain sense of the common original.

[Sidenote: A witness out of India.]

In the doctrine of Karma, for instance, experience of retribution is
ideally extended and made precise. Acts, daily experience teaches us,
form habits; habits constitute character, and each man’s character, as
Heraclitus said, is his guardian deity, the artisan of his fate. We need
but raise this particular observation to a solitary eminence, after the
manner of post-rational thinking; we need but imagine it to underlie and
explain all other empirical observations, so that character may come to
figure as an absolute cause, of which experience itself is an attendant
result. Such arbitrary emphasis laid on some term of experience is the
source of each metaphysical system in turn. In this case the surviving
dogma will have yielded an explanation of our environment no less than
of our state of heart by instituting a deeper spiritual law, a certain
balance of merit and demerit in the soul, accruing to it through a
series of previous incarnations. This fabulous starting-point was
gained by an imaginary extension of the law of moral continuity and
natural retribution; but when, accepting this starting-point, the
believer went on to inquire what he should do to be saved and to cancel
the heavy debts he inherited from his mythical past, he would merely
enumerate the natural duties of man, giving them, however, a new
sanction and conceiving them as if they emanated from his new-born
metaphysical theory. This theory, apart from a natural conscience and
traditional code, would have been perfectly barren. The notion that
every sin must be expiated does not carry with it any information about
what acts are sins.

This indispensable information must still be furnished by common
opinion. Those acts which bring suffering after them, those acts which
arouse the enmity of our fellows and, by a premonition of that enmity,
arouse our own shame—those are assumed and deputed to be sinful; and
the current code of morality being thus borrowed without begging leave,
the law of absolute retribution can be brought in to paint the picture
of moral responsibility in more glaring colours and to extend the vista
of rewards and punishments into a rhetorical infinite. Buddhistic
morality was natural morality intensified by this forced sense of minute
and boundless responsibility. It was coloured also by the negative,
pessimistic justification which this dogma gives to moral endeavour.
Every virtue was to be viewed as merely removing guilt and alleviating
suffering, knowledge itself being precious only as a means to that end.
The ultimate inspiration of right living was to be hope of perfect
peace—a hope generously bestowed by nature on every spirit which, being
linked to the flux of things, is conscious of change and susceptible of
weariness, but a hope which the irresponsible Oriental imagination had
disturbed with bad dreams. A pathetic feminine quality was thereby
imparted to moral feeling; we were to be good for pity’s sake, for the
sake of a great distant deliverance from profound sorrows.

[Sidenote: Dignity of post-rational morality.]

The pathetic idiosyncrasy of this religion has probably enabled it to
touch many a heart and to lift into speculation many a life otherwise
doomed to be quite instinctive animal. It has kept morality pure—free
from that admixture of worldly and partisan precepts with which less
pessimistic systems are encumbered. Restraint can be rationally imposed
on a given will only by virtue of evils which would be involved in its
satisfaction, by virtue, in other words, of some actual demand whose
disappointment would ensue upon inconsiderate action. To save, to cure,
to nourish are duties far less conditional than would be a supposed duty
to acquire or to create. There is no harm in merely not being, and
privation is an evil only when, after we exist, it deprives us of
something naturally requisite, the absence of which would defeat
interests already launched into the world. If there is something in a
purely remedial system of morality which seems one-sided and extreme, we
must call to mind the far less excusable one-sidedness of those
moralities of prejudice to which we are accustomed in the Occident—the
ethics of irrational acquisitiveness, irrational faith, and irrational
honour. Buddhistic morality, so reasonable and beautifully persuasive,
rising so willingly to the ideal of sanctity, merits in comparison the
profoundest respect. It is lifted as far above the crudities of
intuitionism as the whisperings of an angel are above a schoolboy’s
code.

A certain bias and deviation from strict reason seems, indeed,
inseparable from any moral reform, from any doctrine that is to be
practically and immediately influential. Socratic ethics was too perfect
an expression to be much of a force. Philosophers whose hearts are set
on justice and pure truth often hear reproaches addressed to them by the
fanatic, who contrasts the conspicuous change in this or that direction
accomplished by his preaching with the apparent impotence of reason and
thought. Reason’s resources are in fact so limited that it is usually
reduced to guerilla warfare: a general plan of campaign is useless when
only insignificant forces obey our commands. Moral progress is for that
reason often greatest when some nobler passion or more fortunate
prejudice takes the lead and subdues its meaner companions without
needing to rely on the consciousness of ultimate benefits hence accruing
to the whole life. So a pessimistic and merely remedial morality may
accomplish reforms which reason, with its broader and milder suasion,
might have failed in. If certain rare and precious virtues can thus be
inaugurated, under the influence of a zeal exaggerating its own
justification, there will be time later to insist on the complementary
truths and to tack in the other direction after having been carried
forward a certain distance by this oblique advance.

[Sidenote: Absurdities nevertheless involved.]

At the same time neglect of reason is never without its dangers and its
waste. The Buddhistic system itself suffers from a fundamental
contradiction, because its framers did not acknowledge the actual limits
of retribution nor the empirical machinery by which benefits and
injuries are really propagated. It is an onerous condition which
religions must fulfil, if they would prevail in the world, that they
must have their roots in the past. Buddhism had its mission of
salvation; but to express this mission to its proselytes it was obliged
to borrow the language of the fantastic metaphysics which had preceded
it in India. The machinery of transmigration had to serve as a
scaffolding to raise the monument of mercy, purity, and spirituality.
But this fabulous background given to life was really inconsistent with
what was best in the new morality; just as in Christianity the
post-rational evangelical ideals of redemption and regeneration, of the
human will mystically reversed, were radically incompatible with the
pre-rational myths about a creation and a political providence. The
doctrine of Karma was a hypostasis of moral responsibility; but in
making responsibility dynamic and all-explaining, the theory
discountenanced in advance the charitable efforts of Buddhism—the
desire to instruct and save every fellow-creature. For if all my
fortunes depend upon my former conduct, I am the sole artificer of my
destiny. The love, the pity, the science, or the prayers of others can
have no real influence over my salvation. They cannot diminish by one
tittle my necessary sufferings, nor accelerate by one instant the period
which my own action appoints for my deliverance. Perhaps another’s
influence might, in the false world of time and space, change the order
or accidental vesture of my moral experiences; but their quantity and
value, being the exact counterpart of my free merits and demerits, could
not be affected at all by those extraneous doings.

Therefore the empirical fact that we can help one another remains in
Buddhism (as in any retributive scheme) only by a serious inconsistency;
and since this fact is the sanction of whatever moral efficacy can be
attributed to Buddhism, in sobering, teaching, and saving mankind,
anything inconsistent with it is fundamentally repugnant to the whole
system. Yet on that repugnant and destructive dogma of Karma Buddhism
was condemned to base its instruction. This is the heavy price paid for
mythical consolations, that they invalidate the moral values they are
intended to emphasise. Nature has allowed the innocent to suffer for the
guilty, and the guilty, perhaps, to die in some measure unpunished. To
correct this imperfection we feign a closed circle of personal
retributions, exactly proportionate to personal deserts. But thereby,
without perceiving it, we have invalidated all political and social
responsibility, and denied that any man can be benefited or injured by
any other. Our moral ambition has overleaped itself and carried us into
a non-natural world where morality is impotent and unmeaning.

[Sidenote: The soul of positivism in all ideals.]

Post-rational systems accordingly mark no real advance and offer no
genuine solution to spiritual enigmas. The saving force each of them
invokes is merely some remnant of that natural energy which animates the
human animal. Faith in the supernatural is a desperate wager made by man
at the lowest ebb of his fortunes; it is as far as possible from being
the source of that normal vitality which subsequently, if his fortunes
mend, he may gradually recover. Under the same religion, with the same
posthumous alternatives and mystic harmonies hanging about them,
different races, or the same race at different periods, will manifest
the most opposite moral characteristics. Belief in a thousand hells and
heavens will not lift the apathetic out of apathy or hold back the
passionate from passion; while a newly planted and ungalled community,
in blessed forgetfulness of rewards or punishments, of cosmic needs or
celestial sanctions, will know how to live cheerily and virtuously for
life’s own sake, putting to shame those thin vaticinations. To hope for
a second life, to be had gratis, merely because this life has lost its
savour, or to dream of a different world, because nature seems too
intricate and unfriendly, is in the end merely to play with words; since
the supernatural has no permanent aspect or charm except in so far as it
expresses man’s natural situation and points to the satisfaction of his
earthly interests. What keeps supernatural morality, in its better
forms, within the limits of sanity is the fact that it reinstates in
practice, under novel associations and for motives ostensibly different,
the very natural virtues and hopes which, when seen to be merely
natural, it had thrown over with contempt. The new dispensation itself,
if treated in the same spirit, would be no less contemptible; and what
makes it genuinely esteemed is the restored authority of those human
ideals which it expresses in a fable.

The extent of this moral restoration, the measure in which nature is
suffered to bloom in the sanctuary, determines the value of
post-rational moralities. They may preside over a good life, personal
or communal, when their symbolism, though cumbrous, is not deceptive;
when the supernatural machinery brings man back to nature through
mystical circumlocutions, and becomes itself a poetic echo of experience
and a dramatic impersonation of reason. The peculiar accent and emphasis
which it will not cease to impose on the obvious lessons of life need
not then repel the wisest intelligence. True sages and true
civilisations can accordingly flourish under a dispensation nominally
supernatural; for that supernaturalism may have become a mere form in
which imagination clothes a rational and humane wisdom.

[Sidenote: Moribund dreams and perennial realities.]

People who speak only one language have some difficulty in conceiving
that things should be expressed just as well in some other; a prejudice
which does not necessarily involve their mistaking words for things or
being practically misled by their inflexible vocabulary. So it
constantly happens that supernatural systems, when they have long
prevailed, are defended by persons who have only natural interests at
heart; because these persons lack that speculative freedom and dramatic
imagination which would allow them to conceive other moulds for morality
and happiness than those to which a respectable tradition has accustomed
them. Sceptical statesmen and academic scholars sometimes suffer from
this kind of numbness; it is intelligible that they should mistake the
forms of culture for its principle, especially when their genius is not
original and their chosen function is to defend and propagate the local
traditions in which their whole training has immersed them. Indeed, in
the political field, such concern for decaying myths may have a pathetic
justification; for however little the life of or dignity of man may he
jeopardised by changes in language, languages themselves are not
indifferent things. They may be closely bound up with the peculiar
history and spirit of nations, and their disappearance, however
necessary and on the whole propitious, may mark the end of some stirring
chapter in the world’s history. Those whose vocation is not philosophy
and whose country is not the world may be pardoned for wishing to retard
the migrations of spirit, and for looking forward with apprehension to a
future in which their private enthusiasms will not be understood.

The value of post-rational morality, then, depends on a double
conformity on its part with the Life of Reason. In the first place some
natural impulse must be retained, some partial ideal must still be
trusted and pursued by the prophet of redemption. In the second place
the intuition thus gained and exclusively put forward must be made the
starting-point for a restored natural morality. Otherwise the faith
appealed to would be worthless in its operation, as well as fanciful in
its basis, and it could never become a mould for thought or action in a
civilised society.




