CHAPTER VIII

PRERATIONAL MORALITY


[Sidenote: Empirical alloy in dialectic.]

When a polyglot person is speaking, foreign words sometimes occur to
him, which he at once translates into the language he happens to be
using. Somewhat in the same way, when dialectic develops an idea,
suggestions for this development may come from the empirical field; yet
these suggestions soon shed their externality and their place is taken
by some genuine development of the original notion. In constructing, for
instance, the essence of a circle, I may have started from a hoop. I may
have observed that as the hoop meanders down the path the roundness of
it disappears to the eye, being gradually flattened into a straight
line, such as the hoop presents when it is rolling directly away from
me. I may now frame the idea of a mathematical circle, in which all
diameters are precisely equal, in express contrast to the series of
ellipses, with very unequal diameters, which the floundering hoop has
illustrated in its career. When once, however, the definition of the
circle is attained, no watching of hoops is any longer requisite. The
ellipse can be generated ideally out of the definition, and would have
been generated, like asymptotes and hyperbolas, even if never
illustrated in nature at all. Lemmas from a foreign tongue have only
served to disclose a great fecundity in the native one, and the
legitimate word that the context required has supplanted the casual
stranger that may first have ushered it into the mind.

When the idea which dialectic is to elaborate is a moral idea, a purpose
touching something in the concrete world, lemmas from experience often
play a very large part in the process. Their multitude, with the small
shifts in aspiration and esteem which they may suggest to the mind,
often obscures the dialectical process altogether. In this case the
foreign term is never translated into the native medium; we never make
out what ideal connection our conclusion has with our premises, nor in
what way the conduct we finally decide upon is to fulfil the purpose
with which we began. Reflection merely beats about the bush, and when a
sufficient number of prejudices and impulses have been driven from
cover, we go home satisfied with our day’s ranging, and feeling that we
have left no duty unconsidered; and our last bird is our final
resolution.

[Sidenote: Arrested rationality in morals.]

When morality is in this way non-dialectical, casual, impulsive,
polyglot, it is what we may call prerational morality. There is indeed
reason in it, since every deliberate precept expresses some reflection
by which impulses have been compared and modified. But such chance
reflection amounts to moral perception, not to moral science. Reason has
not begun to educate her children. This morality is like knowing chairs
from tables and things near from distant things, which is hardly what we
mean by natural science. On this stage, in the moral world, are the
judgments of Mrs. Grundy, the aims of political parties and their
maxims, the principles of war, the appreciation of art, the commandments
of religious authorities, special revelations of duty to individuals,
and all systems of intuitive ethics.

[Sidenote: Its emotional and practical power.]

Prerational morality is vigorous because it is sincere. Actual
interests, rooted habits, appreciations the opposite of which is
inconceivable and contrary to the current use of language, are embodied
in special precepts; or they flare up of themselves in impassioned
judgments. It is hardly too much to say, indeed, that prerational
morality is morality proper. Rational ethics, in comparison, seems a
kind of politics or wisdom, while post-rational systems are essentially
religions. If we thus identify morality with prerational standards, we
may agree also that morality is no science in itself, though it may
become, with other matters, a subject for the science of anthropology;
and Hume, who had never come to close quarters with any rational or
post-rational ideal, could say with perfect truth that morality was not
founded on reason. Instinct is of course not founded on reason, but
_vice versa_; and the maxims enforced by tradition or conscience are
unmistakably founded on instinct. They might, it is true, become
materials for reason, if they were intelligently accepted, compared, and
controlled; but such a possibility reverses the partisan and spasmodic
methods which Hume and most other professed moralists associate with
ethics. Hume’s own treatises on morals, it need hardly be said, are pure
psychology. It would have seemed to him conceited, perhaps, to inquire
what ought really to be done. He limited himself to asking what men
tended to think about their doings.

The chief expression of rational ethics which a man in Hume’s world
would have come upon lay in the Platonic and Aristotelian writings; but
these were not then particularly studied nor vitally understood. The
chief illustration of post-rational morality that could have fallen
under his eyes, the Catholic religion, he would never have thought of as
a philosophy of life, but merely as a combination of superstition and
policy, well adapted to the lying and lascivious habits of Mediterranean
peoples. Under such circumstances ethics could not be thought of as a
science; and whatever gradual definition of the ideal, whatever
prescription of what ought to be and to be done, found a place in the
thoughts of such philosophers formed a part of their politics or
religion and not of their reasoned knowledge.

[Sidenote: Moral science is an application of dialectic, not a part of
anthropology.]

There is, however, a dialectic of the will; and that is the science
which, for want of a better name, we must call ethics or moral
philosophy. The interweaving of this logic of practice with various
natural sciences that have man or society for their theme, leads to much
confusion in terminology and in point of view. Is the good, we may ask,
what anybody calls good at any moment, or what anybody calls good on
reflection, or what all men agree to call good, or what God calls good,
no matter what all mankind may think about it? Or is true good something
that perhaps nobody calls good nor knows of, something with no other
characteristic or relation except that it is simply good?

Various questions are involved in such perplexing alternatives; some are
physical questions and others dialectical. Why any one values anything
at all, or anything in particular, is a question of physics; it asks for
the causes of interest, judgment, and desire. To esteem a thing good is
to express certain affinities between that thing and the speaker; and if
this is done with self-knowledge and with knowledge of the thing, so
that the felt affinity is a real one, the judgment is invulnerable and
cannot be asked to rescind itself. Thus if a man said hemlock was good
to drink, we might say he was mistaken; but if he explained that he
meant good to drink in committing suicide, there would be nothing
pertinent left to say: for to adduce that to commit suicide is not good
would be impertinent. To establish that, we should have to go back and
ask him if he valued anything—life, parents, country, knowledge,
reputation; and if he said no, and was sincere, our mouths would be
effectually stopped—that is, unless we took to declamation. But we
might very well turn to the bystanders and explain what sort of blood
and training this man possessed, and what had happened among the cells
and fibres of his brain to make him reason after that fashion. The
causes of morality, good or bad, are physical, seeing that they are
causes.

The science of ethics, however, has nothing to do with causes, not in
that it need deny or ignore them but in that it is their fruit and
begins where they end. Incense rises from burning coals, but it is
itself no conflagration, and will produce none. What ethics asks is not
why a thing is called good, but whether it is good or not, whether it is
right or not so to esteem it. Goodness, in this ideal sense, is not a
matter of opinion, but of nature. For intent is at work, life is in
active operation, and the question is whether the thing or the situation
responds to that intent. So if I ask, Is four really twice two? the
answer is not that most people say so, but that, in saying so, I am not
misunderstanding myself. To judge whether things are _really_ good,
intent must be made to speak; and if this intent may itself be judged
later, that happens by virtue of other intents comparing the first with
their own direction.

Hence good, when once the moral or dialectical attitude has been
assumed, means not what is called good but what is so; that is, what
_ought_ to be called good. For intent, beneath which there is no moral
judgment, sets up its own standard, and ideal science begins on that
basis, and cannot go back of it to ask why the obvious good is good at
all. Naturally, there is a reason, but not a moral one; for it lies in
the physical habit and necessity of things. The reason is simply the
propulsive essence of animals and of the universal flux, which renders
forms possible but unstable, and either helpful or hurtful to one
another. That nature should have this constitution, or intent this
direction, is not a good in itself. It is esteemed good or bad as the
intent that speaks finds in that situation a support or an obstacle to
its ideal. As a matter of fact, nature and the very existence of life
cannot be thought wholly evil, since no intent is wholly at war with
these its conditions; nor can nature and life be sincerely regarded as
wholly good, since no moral intent stops at the facts; nor does the
universal flux, which infinitely overflows any actual synthesis,
altogether support any intent it may generate.

[Sidenote: Estimation the soul of philosophy.]

Philosophers would do a great discourtesy to estimation if they sought
to justify it. It is all other acts that need justification by this one.
The good greets us initially in every experience and in every object.
Remove from anything its share of excellence and you have made it
utterly insignificant, irrelevant to human discourse, and unworthy of
even theoretic consideration. Value is the principle of perspective in
science, no less than of rightness in life. The hierarchy of goods, the
architecture of values, is the subject that concerns man most. Wisdom is
the first philosophy, both in time and in authority; and to collect
facts or to chop logic would be idle and would add no dignity to the
mind, unless that mind possessed a clear humanity and could discern what
facts and logic are good for and what not. The facts would remain facts
and the truths truths; for of course values, accruing on account of
animal souls and their affections, cannot possibly create the universe
those animals inhabit. But both facts and truths would remain trivial,
fit to awaken no pang, no interest, and no rapture. The first
philosophers were accordingly sages. They were statesmen and poets who
knew the world and cast a speculative glance at the heavens, the better
to understand the conditions and limits of human happiness. Before their
day, too, wisdom had spoken in proverbs. _It is better_ every adage
began: _Better this than that_. Images or symbols, mythical or homely
events, of course furnished subjects and provocations for these
judgments; but the residuum of all observation was a settled estimation
of things, a direction chosen in thought and life because it was better.
Such was philosophy in the beginning and such is philosophy still.

[Sidenote: Moral discriminations are natural and inevitable.]

To one brought up in a sophisticated society, or in particular under an
ethical religion morality seems at first an external command, a chilling
and arbitrary set of requirements and prohibitions which the young
heart, if it trusted itself, would not reckon at a penny’s worth. Yet
while this rebellion is brewing in the secret conclave of the passions,
the passions themselves are prescribing a code. They are inventing
gallantry and kindness and honour; they are discovering friendship and
paternity. With maturity comes the recognition that the authorised
precepts of morality were essentially not arbitrary; that they expressed
the genuine aims and interests of a practised will; that their alleged
alien and supernatural basis (which if real would have deprived them of
all moral authority) was but a mythical cover for their forgotten
natural springs. Virtue is then seen to be admirable essentially, and
not merely by conventional imputation. If traditional morality has much
in it that is out of proportion, much that is unintelligent and inert,
nevertheless it represents on the whole the verdict of reason. It speaks
for a typical human will chastened by a typical human experience.

[Sidenote: A choice of proverbs.]

Gnomic wisdom, however, is notoriously polychrome, and proverbs depend
for their truth entirely on the occasion they are applied to. Almost
every wise saying has an opposite one, no less wise, to balance it; so
that a man rich in such lore, like Sancho Panza, can always find a
venerable maxim to fortify the view he happens to be taking. In respect
to foresight, for instance, we are told, Make hay while the sun shines,
A stitch in time saves nine, Honesty is the best policy, Murder will
out, Woe unto you, ye hypocrites, Watch and pray, Seek salvation with
fear and trembling, and _Respice finem_. But on the same authorities
exactly we have opposite maxims, inspired by a feeling that mortal
prudence is fallible, that life is shorter than policy, and that only
the present is real; for we hear, A bird in the hand is worth two in the
bush, _Carpe diem, Ars longa, vita brevis_. Be not righteous overmuch,
Enough for the day is the evil thereof, Behold the lilies of the field,
Judge not, that ye be not judged, Mind your own business, and It takes
all sorts of men to make a world. So when some particularly shocking
thing happens one man says, _Cherchez la femme_, and another says, Great
is Allah.

That these maxims should be so various and partial is quite intelligible
when we consider how they spring up. Every man, in moral reflection, is
animated by his own intent; he has something in view which he prizes, he
knows not why, and which wears to him the essential and unquestionable
character of a good. With this standard before his eyes, he observes
easily—for love and hope are extraordinarily keen-sighted—what in
action or in circumstances forwards his purpose and what thwarts it;
and at once the maxim comes, very likely in the language of the
particular instance before him. Now the interests that speak in a man
are different at different times; and the outer facts or measures which
in one case promote that interest may, where other less obvious
conditions have changed, altogether defeat it. Hence all sorts of
precepts looking to all sorts of results.

[Sidenote: Their various representative value.]

Prescriptions of this nature differ enormously in value; for they differ
enormously in scope. By chance, or through the insensible operation of
experience leading up to some outburst of genius, intuitive maxims may
be so central, so expressive of ultimate aims, so representative, I
mean, of all aims in fusion, that they merely anticipate what moral
science would have come to if it had existed. This happens much as in
physics ultimate truths may be divined by poets long before they are
discovered by investigators; the _vivida vis animi_ taking the place of
much recorded experience, because much unrecorded experience has
secretly fed it. Such, for instance, is the central maxim of
Christianity, Love thy neighbour as thyself. On the other hand, what is
usual in intuitive codes is a mixture of some elementary precepts,
necessary to any society, with others representing local traditions or
ancient rites: so Thou shalt not kill, and Thou shalt keep holy the
Sabbath day, figure side by side in the Decalogue. When Antigone, in
her sublimest exaltation, defies human enactments and appeals to
laws which are not of to-day nor yesterday, no man knowing whence
they have arisen, she mixes various types of obligation in a most
instructive fashion; for a superstitious horror at leaving a body
unburied—something decidedly of yesterday—gives poignancy in her mind
to natural affection for a brother—something indeed universal, yet
having a well-known origin. The passionate assertion of right is here,
in consequence, more dramatic than spiritual; and even its dramatic
force has suffered somewhat by the change in ruling ideals.

[Sidenote: Conflict of partial moralities.]

The disarray of intuitive ethics is made painfully clear in the
conflicts which it involves when it has fostered two incompatible
growths in two centres which lie near enough to each other to come into
physical collision. Such ethics has nothing to offer in the presence of
discord except an appeal to force and to ultimate physical sanctions. It
can instigate, but cannot resolve, the battle of nations and the battle
of religions. Precisely the same zeal, the same patriotism, the same
readiness for martyrdom fires adherents to rival societies, and fires
them especially in view of the fact that the adversary is no less
uncompromising and fierce. It might seem idle, if not cruel and
malicious, to wish to substitute one historical allegiance for another,
when both are equally arbitrary, and the existing one is the more
congenial to those born under it; but to feel this aggression to be
criminal demands some degree of imagination and justice, and sectaries
would not be sectaries if they possessed it.

Truly religious minds, while eager perhaps to extirpate every religion
but their own, often rise above national jealousies; for spirituality is
universal, whatever churches may be. Similarly politicians often
understand very well the religious situation; and of late it has become
again the general practice among prudent governments to do as the Romans
did in their conquests, and to leave people free to exercise what
religion they have, without pestering them with a foreign one. On the
other hand the same politicians are the avowed agents of a quite patent
iniquity; for what is their ideal? To substitute their own language,
commerce, soldiers, and tax-gatherers for the tax-gatherers, soldiers,
commerce, and language of their neighbours; and no means is thought
illegitimate, be it fraud in policy or bloodshed in war, to secure this
absolutely nugatory end. Is not one country as much a country as
another? Is it not as dear to its inhabitants? What then is gained by
oppressing its genius or by seeking to destroy it altogether?

Here are two flagrant instances where prerational morality defeats the
ends of morality. Viewed from within, each religious or national
fanaticism stands for a good; but in its outward operation it produces
and becomes an evil. It is possible, no doubt, that its agents are
really so far apart in nature and ideals that, like men and mosquitoes,
they can stand in physical relations only, and if they meet can meet
only to poison or to crush one another. More probably, however, humanity
in them is no merely nominal essence; it is definable ideally, as
essences are defined, by a partially identical function and intent. In
that case, by studying their own nature, they could rise above their
mutual opposition, and feel that in their fanaticism they were taking
too contracted a view of their own souls and were hardly doing justice
to themselves when they did such great injustice to others.

[Sidenote: The Greek ideal.]

How prerational morality may approach the goal, and miss it, is well
illustrated in the history of Hellenism. Greek morals may be said to
have been inspired by two prerational sentiments, a naturalistic
religion and a local patriotism. Could Plato have succeeded in making
that religion moral, or Alexander in universalising that patriotism,
perhaps Greece might have been saved and we might all be now at a very
different level of civilisation. Both Plato and Alexander failed, in
spite of the immense and lasting influence of their work; for in both
cases the after-effects were spurious, and the new spirit was smothered
in the dull substances it strove to vivify.

Greek myth was an exuberant assertion of the rights of life in the
universe. Existence could not but be joyful and immortal, if it had
once found, in land, sea, or air, a form congruous with that element.
Such congruity would render a being stable, efficient, beautiful. He
would achieve a perfection grounded in skilful practice and in a
thorough rejection of whatever was irrelevant. These things the Greeks
called virtue. The gods were perfect models of this kind of excellence;
for of course the amours of Zeus and Hermes’ trickery were, in their
hearty fashion, splendid manifestations of energy. This natural divine
virtue carried no sense of responsibility with it, but it could not fail
to diffuse benefit because it radiated happiness and beauty. The
worshipper, by invoking those braver inhabitants of the cosmos, felt he
might more easily attain a corresponding beauty and happiness in his
paternal city.

[Sidenote: Imaginative exuberance and political discipline.]

The source of myth had been a genial sympathy with nature. The observer,
at ease himself, multiplied ideally the potentialities of his being; but
he went farther in imagining what life might yield abroad, freed from
every trammel and necessity, than in deepening his sense of what life
was in himself, and of what it ought to be. This moral reflection,
absent from mythology, was supplied by politics. The family and the
state had a soberer antique religion of their own; this hereditary
piety, together with the laws, prescribed education, customs, and
duties. The city drew its walls close about the heart, and while it
fostered friendship and reason within, without it looked to little but
war. A splendid physical and moral discipline was established to serve a
suicidal egoism. The city committed its crimes, and the individual
indulged his vices of conduct and estimation, hardly rebuked by
philosophy and quite unrebuked by religion. Nevertheless, religion and
philosophy existed, together with an incomparable literature and art,
and an unrivalled measure and simplicity in living. A liberal fancy and
a strict civic regimen, starting with different partial motives and
blind purposes, combined by good fortune into an almost rational life.

It was inevitable, however, when only an irrational tradition supported
the state, and kept it so weak amid a world of enemies, that this state
should succumb; not to speak of the mean animosities, the license in
life, and the spirit of mockery that inwardly infested it. The myths,
too, faded; they had expressed a fleeting moment of poetic insight, as
patriotism had expressed a fleeting moment of unanimous effort; but what
force could sustain such accidental harmonies? The patriotism soon lost
its power to inspire sacrifice, and the myth its power to inspire
wonder; so that the relics of that singular civilisation were scattered
almost at once in the general flood of the world.

[Sidenote: Sterility of Greek example.]

The Greek ideal has fascinated many men in all ages, who have sometimes
been in a position to set a fashion, so that the world in general has
pretended also to admire. But the truth is Hellas, in leaving so many
heirlooms to mankind, has left no constitutional benefit; it has taught
the conscience no lesson. We possess a great heritage from Greece, but
it is no natural endowment. An artistic renaissance in the fifteenth
century and a historical one in the nineteenth have only affected the
trappings of society. The movement has come from above. It has not found
any response in the people. While Greek morality, in its contents or in
the type of life it prescribes, comes nearer than any other prerational
experiment to what reason might propose, yet it has been less useful
than many other influences in bringing the Life of Reason about. The
Christian and the Moslem, in refining their more violent inspiration,
have brought us nearer to genuine goodness than the Greek could by his
idle example. Classic perfection is a seedless flower, imitable only by
artifice, not reproducible by generation. It is capable of influencing
character only through the intellect, the means by which character can
be influenced least. It is a detached ideal, responding to no crying and
actual demand in the world at large. It never passed, to win the right
of addressing mankind, through a sufficient novitiate of sorrow.

[Sidenote: Prerational morality among the Jews.]

The Hebrews, on the contrary, who in comparison with the Greeks had a
barbarous idea of happiness, showed far greater moral cohesion under
the pressure of adversity. They integrated their purposes into a
fanaticism, but they integrated them; and the integrity that resulted
became a mighty example. It constituted an ideal of character not the
less awe-inspiring for being merely formal. We need not marvel that
abstract commandments should have impressed the world more than concrete
ideals. To appreciate an ideal, to love and serve it in the full light
of science and reason, would require a high intelligence, and, what is
rarer still, noble affinities and renunciations which are not to be
looked for in an undisciplined people. But to feel the truth and
authority of an abstract maxim (as, for instance, Do right and shame the
devil), a maxim applicable to experience on any plane, nothing is needed
but a sound wit and common honesty. Men know better what is right and
wrong than what is ultimately good or evil; their conscience is more
vividly present to them than the fruits which obedience to conscience
might bear; so that the logical relation of means to ends, of methods to
activities, eludes them altogether. What is a necessary connection
between the given end, happiness, and the normal life naturally
possessing it, appears to them as a miraculous connection between
obedience to God’s commands and enjoyment of his favour. The evidence of
this miracle astonishes them and fills them with zeal. They are
strengthened to persevere in righteousness under any stress of
misfortune, in the assurance that they are being put to a temporary test
and that the reward promised to virtue will eventually be theirs.

[Sidenote: The development of conscience.]

Thus a habit of faithfulness, a trust in general principles, is fostered
and ingrained in generation after generation—a rare and precious
heritage for a race so imperfectly rational as the human. Reason would
of course justify the same constancy in well-doing, since a course of
conduct would not be right, but wrong, if its ultimate issue were human
misery. But as the happiness secured by virtue may be remote and may
demand more virtue to make it appreciable, the mere rationality of a
habit gives it no currency in the world and but little moral glow in the
conscience. We should not, therefore, be too much offended at the
illusions which play a part in moral integration. Imagination is often
more efficacious in reaching the gist and meaning of experience than
intelligence can be, just because imagination is less scrupulous and
more instinctive. Even physical discoveries, when they come, are the
fruit of divination, and Columbus had to believe he might sail westward
to India before he could actually hit upon America. Reason cannot create
itself, and nature, in producing reason, has to feel her way
experimentally. Habits and chance systems of education have to arise
first and exercise upon individuals an irrational suasion favourable to
rational ends. Men long live in substantial harmony with reality before
they recognise its nature. Organs long exist before they reach their
perfect function. The fortunate instincts of a race destined to long
life and rationality express themselves in significant poetry before
they express themselves in science.

The service which Hebraism has rendered to mankind has been
instrumental, as that rendered by Hellenism has been imaginative.
Hebraism has put earnestness and urgency into morality, making it a
matter of duty, at once private and universal, rather than what paganism
had left it, a mass of local allegiances and legal practices. The Jewish
system has, in consequence, a tendency to propaganda and intolerance; a
tendency which would not have proved nefarious had this religion always
remained true to its moral principle; for morality is coercive and no
man, being autonomous, has a right to do wrong. Conscience, thus
reinforced by religious passion, has been able to focus a general
abhorrence on certain great scandals—slavery and sodomy could be
practically suppressed among Christians, and drunkenness among Moslems.
The Christian principle of charity also owed a part of its force to
Hebraic tradition. For the law and the prophets were full of mercy and
loving kindness toward the faithful. What Moses had taught his people
Christ and his Hellenising disciples had the beautiful courage to preach
to all mankind. Yet this virtue of charity, on its subtler and more
metaphysical side, belongs to the spirit of redemption, to that ascetic
and quasi-Buddhistic element in Christianity to which we shall presently
revert. The pure Jews can have no part in such insight, because it
contradicts the positivism of their religion and character and their
ideal of worldly happiness.

[Sidenote: Need of Hebraic devotion to Greek aims.]

As the human body is said to change all its substance every seven years,
and yet is the same body, so the Hebraic conscience might change all its
tenets in seven generations and be the same conscience still. Could this
abstract moral habit, this transferable earnestness, be enlisted in
rational causes, the Life of Reason would have gained a valuable
instrument. Men would possess the “single eye,” and the art, so
difficult to an ape-like creature with loose moral feelings, of acting
on principle. Could the vision of an adequate natural ideal fall into
the Hebraising mind, already aching for action and nerved to practical
enthusiasm, that ideal vision might become efficacious and be largely
realised in practice. The abstract power of self-direction, if
enlightened by a larger experience and a more fertile genius, might give
the Life of Reason a public embodiment such as it has not had since the
best days of classic antiquity. Thus the two prerational moralities out
of which European civilisation has grown, could they be happily
superposed, would make a rational polity.

[Sidenote: Prerational morality marks an acquisition but offers no
programme.]

The objects of human desire, then, until reason has compared and
experience has tested them, are a miscellaneous assortment of goods,
unstable in themselves and incompatible with one another. It is a happy
chance if a tolerable mixture of them recommends itself to a prophet or
finds an adventitious acceptance among a group of men. Intuitive morality
is adequate while it simply enforces those obvious and universal laws
which are indispensable to any society, and which impose themselves
everywhere on men under pain of quick extinction—a penalty which many
an individual and many a nation continually prefers to pay. But when
intuitive morality ventures upon speculative ground and tries to guide
progress, its magic fails. Ideals are tentative and have to be
critically viewed. A moralist who rests in his intuitions may be a good
preacher, but hardly deserves the name of philosopher. He cannot find
any authority for his maxims which opposite maxims may not equally
invoke. To settle the relative merits of rival authorities and of
hostile consciences it is necessary to appeal to the only real
authority, to experience, reason, and human nature in the living man. No
other test is conceivable and no other would be valid; for no good man
would ever consent to regard an authority as divine or binding which
essentially contradicted his own conscience. Yet a conscience which is
irreflective and incorrigible is too hastily satisfied with itself, and
not conscientious enough: it needs cultivation by dialectic. It neglects
to extend to all human interests that principle of synthesis and justice
by which conscience itself has arisen. And so soon as the conscience
summons its own dicta for revision in the light of experience and of
universal sympathy, it is no longer called conscience, but reason. So,
too, when the spirit summons its traditional faiths, to subject them to
a similar examination, that exercise is not called religion, but
philosophy. It is true, in a sense, that philosophy is the purest
religion and reason the ultimate conscience; but so to name them would
be misleading. The things commonly called by those names have seldom
consented to live at peace with sincere reflection. It has been felt
vaguely that reason could not have produced them, and that they might
suffer sad changes by submitting to it; as if reason could be the
_ground_ of anything, or as if everything might not find its
consummation in becoming rational.




