CHAPTER XI

ART AND HAPPINESS


[Sidenote: Æsthetic harmonies are parodies of real ones.]

The greatest enemy harmony can have is a premature settlement in which
some essential force is wholly disregarded. This excluded element will
rankle in the flesh; it will bring about no end of disorders until it is
finally recognised and admitted into a truly comprehensive regimen. The
more numerous the interests which a premature settlement combines the
greater inertia will it oppose to reform, and the more self-righteously
will it condemn the innocent pariah that it leaves outside.

Art has had to suffer much Pharisaical opposition of this sort.
Sometimes political systems, sometimes religious zeal, have excluded it
from their programme, thereby making their programme unjust and
inadequate. Yet of all premature settlements the most premature is that
which the fine arts are wont to establish. A harmony in appearance only,
one that touches the springs of nothing and has no power to propagate
itself, is so partial and momentary a good that we may justly call it an
illusion. To gloat on rhythms and declamations, to live lost in
imaginary passions and histrionic woes, is an unmanly life, cut off from
practical dominion and from rational happiness. A lovely dream is an
excellent thing in itself, but it leaves the world no less a chaos and
makes it by contrast seem even darker than it did. By dwelling in its
mock heaven art may inflict on men the same kind of injury that any
irresponsible passion or luxurious vice might inflict. For this reason
it sometimes passes for a misfortune in a family if a son insists on
being a poet or an actor. Such gifts suggest too much incompetence and
such honours too much disrepute. A man does not avoid real evils by
having visionary pleasures, but besides exposing himself to the real
evils quite unprotected, he probably adds fancied evils to them in
generous measure. He becomes supersensitive, envious, hysterical; the
world, which was perhaps carried away at first by his ecstasies, at the
next moment merely applauds his performance, then criticises it
superciliously, and very likely ends by forgetting it altogether.

Thus the fine arts are seldom an original factor in human progress. If
they express moral and political greatness, and serve to enhance it,
they acquire a certain dignity; but so soon as this expressive function
is abandoned they grow meretricious. The artist becomes an abstracted
trifler, and the public is divided into two camps: the dilettanti, who
dote on the artist’s affectations, and the rabble, who pay him to grow
coarse. Both influences degrade him and he helps to foster both. An
atmosphere of dependence and charlatanry gathers about the artistic
attitude and spreads with its influence. Religion, philosophy, and
manners may in turn be infected with this spirit, being reduced to a
voluntary hallucination or petty flattery. Romanticism, ritualism,
æstheticism, symbolism are names this disease has borne at different
times as it appeared in different circles or touched a different object.
Needless to say that the arts themselves are the first to suffer. That
beauty which should have been an inevitable smile on the face of
society, an overflow of genuine happiness and power, has to be imported,
stimulated artificially, and applied from without; so that art becomes a
sickly ornament for an ugly existence.

[Sidenote: yet prototypes of true perfections.]

Nevertheless, æsthetic harmony, so incomplete in its basis as to be
fleeting and deceptive, is most complete in its form. This so partial
synthesis is a synthesis indeed, and just because settlements made in
fancy are altogether premature, and ignore almost everything in the
world, in type they can be the most perfect settlements. The artist,
being a born lover of the good, a natural breeder of perfections, clings
to his insight. If the world calls his accomplishments vain, he can,
with better reason, call vain the world’s cumbrous instrumentalities, by
which nothing clearly good is attained. Appearances, he may justly urge,
are alone actual. All forces, substances, realities, and principles are
inferred and potential only and in the moral scale mere instruments to
bring perfect appearances about. To have grasped such an appearance, to
have embodied a form in matter, is to have justified for the first time
whatever may underlie appearance and to have put reality to some use. It
is to have begun to live. As the standard of perfection is internal and
is measured by the satisfaction felt in realising it, every artist has
tasted, in his activity, what activity essentially is. He has moulded
existence into the likeness of thought and lost himself in that ideal
achievement which, so to speak, beckons all things into being. Even if a
thousand misfortunes await him and a final disappointment, he has been
happy once. He may be inclined to rest his case there and challenge
practical people to justify in the same way the faith that is in them.

[Sidenote: Pros and cons of detached indulgences.]

That a moment of the most perfect happiness should prove a source of
unhappiness is no paradox to any one who has observed the world. A hope,
a passion, a crime, is a flash of vitality. It is inwardly congruous
with the will that breeds it, yet the happiness it pictures is so
partial that even while it is felt it may be overshadowed by sinister
forebodings. A certain unrest and insecurity may consciously harass it.
With time, or by a slight widening in the field of interest, this
submerged unhappiness may rise to the surface. If, as is probable, it is
caused or increased by the indulgence which preceded, then the only
moment in which a good was tasted, the only vista that had opened
congenially before the mind, will prove a new and permanent curse. In
this way love often misleads individuals, ambition cities, and religion
whole races of men. That art, also, should often be an indulgence, a
blind that hides reality from ill-balanced minds and ultimately
increases their confusion, is by no means incompatible with art’s ideal
essence. On the contrary, such a result is inevitable when ideality is
carried at all far upon a narrow basis. The more genuine and excellent
the vision the greater havoc it makes if, being inadequate, it
establishes itself authoritatively in the soul. Art, in the better
sense, is a condition of happiness for a practical and labouring
creature, since without art he remains a slave; but it is one more
source of unhappiness for him so long as it is not squared with his
necessary labours and merely interrupts them. It then alienates him from
his world without being able to carry him effectually into a better one.

[Sidenote: The happy imagination is one initially in line with things.]

The artist is in many ways like a child. He seems happy, because his
life is spontaneous, yet he is not competent to secure his own good. To
be truly happy he must be well bred, reared from the cradle, as it were,
under propitious influences, so that he may have learned to love what
conduces to his development. In that rare case his art will expand as
his understanding ripens; he will not need to repent and begin again on
a lower key. The ideal artist, like the ideal philosopher, has all time
and all existence for his virtual theme. Fed by the world he can help to
mould it, and his insight is a kind of wisdom, preparing him as science
might for using the world well and making it more fruitful. He can then
be happy, not merely in the sense of having now and then an ecstatic
moment, but happy in having light and resource enough within him to cope
steadily with real things and to leave upon them the vestige of his
mind.

[Sidenote: and brought always closer to them by experience.]

One effect of growing experience is to render what is unreal
uninteresting. Momentous alternatives in life are so numerous and the
possibilities they open up so varied that imagination finds enough
employment of a historic and practical sort in trying to seize them. A
child plans Towers of Babel; a mature architect, in planning, would lose
all interest if he were bidden to disregard gravity and economy. The
conditions of existence, after they are known and accepted, become
conditions for the only pertinent beauty. In each place, for each
situation, the plastic mind finds an appropriate ideal. It need not go
afield to import something exotic. It need make no sacrifices to whim
and to personal memories. It rather breeds out of the given problem a
new and singular solution, thereby exercising greater invention than
would be requisite for framing an arbitrary ideal and imposing it at all
costs on every occasion.

[Sidenote: Reason is the principle of both art and happiness.]

In other words, a happy result can be secured in art, as in life, only
by intelligence. Intelligence consists in having read the heart and
deciphered the promptings latent there, and then in reading the world
and deciphering its law and constitution, to see how and where the
heart’s ideal may be embodied. Our troubles come from the colossal
blunders made by our ancestors (who had worse ancestors of their own) in
both these interpretations, blunders which have come down to us in our
blood and in our institutions. The vices thus transmitted cloud our
intelligence. We fail in practical affairs when we ignore the conditions
of action and we fail in works of imagination when we concoct what is
fantastic and without roots in the world.

The value of art lies in making people happy, first in practising the
art and then in possessing its product. This observation might seem
needless, and ought to be so; but if we compare it with what is commonly
said on these subjects, we must confess that it may often be denied and
more often, perhaps, may not be understood. Happiness is something men
ought to pursue, although they seldom do so; they are drawn away from it
at first by foolish impulses and afterwards by perverse laws. To secure
happiness conduct would have to remain spontaneous while it learned not
to be criminal; but the fanatical attachment of men, now to a fierce
liberty, now to a false regimen, keeps them barbarous and wretched. A
rational pursuit of happiness—which is one thing with progress or with
the Life of Reason—would embody that natural piety which leaves to the
episodes of life their inherent values, mourning death, celebrating
love, sanctifying civic traditions, enjoying and correcting nature’s
ways. To discriminate happiness is therefore the very soul of art, which
expresses experience without distorting it, as those political or
metaphysical tyrannies distort it which sanctify unhappiness. A free
mind, like a creative imagination, rejoices at the harmonies it can find
or make between man and nature; and, where it finds none, it solves the
conflict so far as it may and then notes and endures it with a shudder.

A morality organised about the human heart in an ingenuous and sincere
fashion would involve every fine art and would render the world
pervasively beautiful—beautiful in its artificial products and
beautiful in its underlying natural terrors. The closer we keep to
elementary human needs and to the natural agencies that may satisfy
them, the closer we are to beauty. Industry, sport, and science, with
the perennial intercourse and passions of men, swarm with incentives to
expression, because they are everywhere creating new moulds of being and
compelling the eye to observe those forms and to recast them ideally.
Art is simply an adequate industry; it arises when industry is carried
out to the satisfaction of all human demands, even of those incidental
sensuous demands which we call æsthetic and which a brutal industry, in
its haste, may despise or ignore.

Arts responsive in this way to all human nature would be beautiful
according to reason and might remain beautiful long. Poetic beauty
touches the world whenever it attains some unfeigned harmony either with
sense or with reason; and the more unfeignedly human happiness was made
the test of all institutions and pursuits, the more beautiful they would
be, having more numerous points of fusion with the mind, and fusing with
it more profoundly. To distinguish and to create beauty would then be no
art relegated to a few abstracted spirits, playing with casual fancies;
it would be a habit inseparable from practical efficiency. All
operations, all affairs, would then be viewed in the light of ultimate
interests, and in their deep relation to human good. The arts would thus
recover their Homeric glory; touching human fate as they clearly would,
they would borrow something of its grandeur and pathos, and yet the
interest that worked in them would be warm, because it would remain
unmistakably animal and sincere.

[Sidenote: Only a rational society can have sure and perfect arts.]

The principle that all institutions should subserve happiness runs
deeper than any cult for art and lays the foundation on which the latter
might rest safely. If social structure were rational its free expression
would be so too. Many observers, with no particular philosophy to
adduce, feel that the arts among us are somehow impotent, and they look
for a better inspiration, now to ancient models, now to the raw
phenomena of life. A dilettante may, indeed, summon inspiration whence
he will; and a virtuoso will never lack some material to keep him busy;
but if what is hoped for is a genuine, native, inevitable art, a great
revolution would first have to be worked in society. We should have to
abandon our vested illusions, our irrational religions and patriotisms
and schools of art, and to discover instead our genuine needs, the forms
of our possible happiness. To call for such self-examination seems
revolutionary only because we start from a sophisticated system, a
system resting on traditional fashions and superstitions, by which the
will of the living generation is misinterpreted and betrayed. To shake
off that system would not subvert order but rather institute order for
the first time; it would be an _Instauratio Magna_, a setting things
again on their feet.

We in Christendom are so accustomed to artificial ideals and to
artificial institutions, kept up to express them, that we hardly
conceive how anomalous our situation is, sorely as we may suffer from
it. We found academies and museums, as we found missions, to fan a flame
that constantly threatens to die out for lack of natural fuel. Our overt
ideals are parasites in the body politic, while the ideals native to the
body politic, those involved in our natural structure and situation,
are either stifled by that alien incubus, leaving civic life barbarous,
or else force their way up, unremarked or not justly honoured as ideals.
Industry and science and social amenities, with all the congruous
comforts and appurtenances of contemporary life, march on their way, as
if they had nothing to say to the spirit, which remains entangled in a
cobweb of dead traditions. An idle pottering of the fancy over obsolete
forms—theological, dramatic, or plastic—makes that by-play to the
sober business of life which men call their art or their religion; and
the more functionless and gratuitous this by-play is the more those who
indulge in it think they are idealists. They feel they are champions of
what is most precious in the world, as a sentimental lady might fancy
herself a lover of flowers when she pressed them in a book instead of
planting their seeds in the garden.

[Sidenote: Why art is now empty and unstable.]

It is clear that gratuitous and functionless habits cannot bring
happiness; they do not constitute an activity at once spontaneous and
beneficent, such as noble art is an instance of. Those habits may indeed
give pleasure; they may bring extreme excitement, as madness notably
does, though it is in the highest degree functionless and gratuitous.
Nor is such by-play without consequences, some of which might
conceivably be fortunate. What is functionless is so called for being
worthless from some ideal point of view, and not conducing to the
particular life considered. But nothing real is dissociated from the
universal flux; everything—madness and all unmeaning cross-currents in
being—count in the general process and discharge somewhere, not without
effect, the substance they have drawn for a moment into their little
vortex. So our vain arts and unnecessary religions are not without real
effects and not without a certain internal vitality. When life is
profoundly disorganised it may well happen that only in detached
episodes, only in moments snatched for dreaming in, can men see the blue
or catch a glimpse of something like the ideal. In that case their
esteem for their irrelevant visions may be well grounded, and their thin
art and far-fetched religion may really constitute what is best in their
experience. In a pathetic way these poor enthusiasms may be justified,
but only because the very conception of a rational life lies entirely
beyond the horizon.

[Sidenote: Anomalous character of the irrational artist.]

It is no marvel, when art is a brief truancy from rational practice,
that the artist himself should be a vagrant, and at best, as it were, an
infant prodigy. The wings of genius serve him only for an escapade,
enabling him to skirt the perilous edge of madness and of mystical
abysses. But such an erratic workman does not deserve the name of artist
or master; he has burst convention only to break it, not to create a new
convention more in harmony with nature. His originality, though it may
astonish for a moment, will in the end be despised and will find no
thoroughfare. He will meantime be wretched himself, torn from the roots
of his being by that cruel, unmeaning inspiration; or, if too rapt to
see his own plight, he will be all the more pitied by practical men, who
cannot think it a real blessing to be lost in joys that do not
strengthen the character and yield nothing for posterity.

Art, in its nobler acceptation, is an achievement, not an indulgence. It
prepares the world in some sense to receive the soul, and the soul to
master the world; it disentangles those threads in each that can be
woven into the other. That the artist should be eccentric, homeless,
dreamful may almost seem a natural law, but it is none the less a
scandal. An artist’s business is not really to cut fantastical capers or
be licensed to play the fool. His business is simply that of every keen
soul to build well when it builds, and to speak well when it speaks,
giving practice everywhere the greatest possible affinity to the
situation, the most delicate adjustment to every faculty it affects. The
wonder of an artist’s performance grows with the range of his
penetration, with the instinctive sympathy that makes him, in his mortal
isolation, considerate of other men’s fate and a great diviner of their
secret, so that his work speaks to them kindly, with a deeper assurance
than they could have spoken with to themselves. And the joy of his great
sanity, the power of his adequate vision, is not the less intense
because he can lend it to others and has borrowed it from a faithful
study of the world.

[Sidenote: True art measures and completes happiness.]

If happiness is the ultimate sanction of art, art in turn is the best
instrument of happiness. In art more directly than in other activities
man’s self-expression is cumulative and finds an immediate reward; for
it alters the material conditions of sentience so that sentience becomes
at once more delightful and more significant. In industry man is still
servile, preparing the materials he is to use in action. In action
itself, though he is free, he exerts his influence on a living and
treacherous medium and sees the issue at each moment drift farther and
farther from his intent. In science he is an observer, preparing himself
for action in another way, by studying its results and conditions. But
in art he is at once competent and free; he is creative. He is not
troubled by his materials, because he has assimilated them and may take
them for granted; nor is he concerned with the chance complexion of
affairs in the actual world, because he is making the world over, not
merely considering how it grew or how it will consent to grow in future.
Nothing, accordingly, could be more delightful than genuine art, nor
more free from remorse and the sting of vanity. Art springs so
completely from the heart of man that it makes everything speak to him
in his own language; it reaches, nevertheless, so truly to the heart of
nature that it co-operates with her, becomes a parcel of her creative
material energy, and builds by her instinctive hand. If the various
formative impulses afoot in the world never opposed stress to stress and
made no havoc with one another, nature might be called an unconscious
artist. In fact, just where such a formative impulse finds support from
the environment, a consciousness supervenes. If that consciousness is
adequate enough to be prophetic, an art arises. Thus the emergence of
arts out of instincts is the token and exact measure of nature’s success
and of mortal happiness.


*** End of Volume Four ***




REASON IN SCIENCE

Volume Five of “The Life of Reason”


GEORGE SANTAYANA


hê gar noy enhergeia zôhê




CONTENTS

REASON IN SCIENCE


