CHAPTER VIII

PLASTIC REPRESENTATION

Psychology of imitation.—Sustained sensation involves
reproduction.—Imitative art repeats with intent to repeat, and in a new
material.—Imitation leads to adaptation and to knowledge.—How the
artist is inspired and irresponsible.—Need of knowing and loving the
subject rendered.—Public interests determine the subject of art, and
the subject the medium.—Reproduction by acting ephemeral.—demands of
sculpture.—It is essentially obsolete.—When men see groups and
backgrounds they are natural painters.—Evolution of painting.—Sensuous
and dramatic adequacy approached.—Essence of landscape-painting.—Its
threatened dissolution.—Reversion to pure decorative design.—Sensuous
values are primordial and so indispensable Pages 144-165


CHAPTER IX

JUSTIFICATION OF ART

Art is subject to moral censorship.—Its initial or specific excellence
is not enough.—All satisfactions, however hurtful, have an initial
worth.—But, on the whole, artistic activity is innocent.—It is
liberal, and typical of perfect activity.—The ideal, when incarnate,
becomes subject to civil society.—Plato’s strictures: he exaggerates
the effect of myths.—His deeper moral objections.—Their
lightness.—Importance of æsthetic alternatives.—The importance of
æsthetic goods varies with temperaments.—The æsthetic temperament
requires tutelage.—Aesthetic values everywhere interfused.—They are
primordial.—To superpose them adventitiously is to destroy them.—They
flow naturally from perfect function.—Even inhibited functions, when
they fall into a new rhythm, yield new beauties.—He who loves beauty
must chasten it Pages 166-190


CHAPTER X

THE CRITERION OF TASTE

Dogmatism is inevitable but may be enlightened.—Taste gains in
authority as it is more and more widely based.—Different æsthetic
endowments may be compared in quantity or force.—Authority of vital
over verbal judgments.—Tastes differ also in purity or
consistency.—They differ, finally, in pertinence, and in width of
appeal.—Art may grow classic by idealising the familiar, or by
reporting the ultimate.—Good taste demands that art should be rational,
_i.e._, harmonious with all other interests.—A mere “work of art” a
baseless artifice.—Human uses give to works of art their highest
expression and charm.—The sad values of appearance.—They need to be
made prophetic of practical goods, which in turn would be suffused with
beauty Pages 191-215


CHAPTER XI

ART AND HAPPINESS

Aesthetic harmonies are parodies of real ones, which in turn would be
suffused with beauty, yet prototypes of true perfections.—Pros and cons
of detached indulgences.—The happy imagination is one initially in line
with things, and brought always closer to them by experience.—Reason is
the principle of both art and happiness.—Only a rational society can
have sure and perfect arts.—Why art is now empty and
unstable.—Anomalous character of the irrational artist.—True art
measures and completes happiness. Pages 216-230




REASON IN ART




CHAPTER I

THE BASIS OF ART IN INSTINCT AND EXPERIENCE


[Sidenote: Man affects his environment, sometimes to good purpose.]

Man exists amid a universal ferment of being, and not only needs
plasticity in his habits and pursuits but finds plasticity also in the
surrounding world. Life is an equilibrium which is maintained now by
accepting modification and now by imposing it. Since the organ for all
activity is a body in mechanical relation to other material objects,
objects which the creature’s instincts often compel him to appropriate
or transform, changes in his habits and pursuits leave their mark on
whatever he touches. His habitat must needs bear many a trace of his
presence, from which intelligent observers might infer something about
his life and action. These vestiges of action are for the most part
imprinted unconsciously and aimlessly on the world. They are in
themselves generally useless, like footprints; and yet almost any sign
of man’s passage might, under certain conditions, interest a man. A
footprint could fill Robinson Crusoe with emotion, the devastation
wrought by an army’s march might prove many things to a historian, and
even the disorder in which a room is casually left may express very
vividly the owner’s ways and character.

Sometimes, however, man’s traces are traces of useful action which has
so changed natural objects as to make them congenial to his mind.
Instead of a footprint we might find an arrow; instead of a disordered
room, a well-planted orchard—things which would not only have betrayed
the agent’s habits, but would have served and expressed his intent. Such
propitious forms given by man to matter are no less instrumental in the
Life of Reason than are propitious forms assumed by man’s own habit or
fancy. Any operation which thus humanises and rationalises objects is
called art.

[Sidenote: Art is plastic instinct conscious of its aim.]

All art has an instinctive source and a material embodiment. If the
birds in building nests felt the utility of what they do, they would be
practising an art; and for the instinct to be called rational it would
even suffice that their traditional purpose and method should become
conscious occasionally. Thus weaving is an art, although the weaver may
not be at every moment conscious of its purpose, but may be carried
along, like any other workman, by the routine of his art; and language
is a rational product, not because it always has a use or meaning, but
because it is sometimes felt to have one. Arts are no less automatic
than instincts, and usually, as Aristotle observed, less thoroughly
purposive; for instincts, being transmitted by inheritance and imbedded
in congenital structure, have to be economically and deeply organised.
If they go far wrong they constitute a burden impossible to throw off
and impossible to bear. The man harassed by inordinate instincts
perishes through want, vice, disease, or madness. Arts, on the contrary,
being transmitted only by imitation and teaching, hover more lightly
over life. If ill-adjusted they make less havoc and cause less drain.
The more superficial they are and the more detached from practical
habits, the more extravagant and meaningless they can dare to become; so
that the higher products of life are the most often gratuitous. No
instinct or institution was ever so absurd as is a large part of human
poetry and philosophy, while the margin of ineptitude is much broader in
religious myth than in religious ethics.

[Sidenote: It is automatic.]

Arts are instincts bred and reared in the open, creative habits acquired
in the light of reason. Consciousness accompanies their formation; a
certain uneasiness or desire and a more or less definite conception of
what is wanted often precedes their full organisation. That the need
should be felt before the means for satisfying it have been found has
led the unreflecting to imagine that in art the need produces the
discovery and the idea the work. Causes at best are lightly assigned by
mortals, and this particular superstition is no worse than any other.
The data—the plan and its execution—as conjoined empirically in the
few interesting cases which show successful achievement, are made into a
law, in oblivion of the fact that in more numerous cases such
conjunction fails wholly or in part, and that even in the successful
cases other natural conditions are present, and must be present, to
secure the result. In a matter where custom is so ingrained and
supported by a constant apperceptive illusion, there is little hope of
making thought suddenly exact, or exact language not paradoxical. We
must observe, however, that only by virtue of a false perspective do
ideas seems to govern action, or is a felt necessity the mother of
invention. In truth invention is the child of abundance, and the genius
or vital premonition and groping which achieve art, simultaneously
achieve the ideas which that art embodies; or, rather, ideas are
themselves products of an inner movement which has an automatic
extension outwards; and this extension manifests the ideas. Mere craving
has no lights of its own to prophesy by, no prescience of what the world
may contain that would satisfy, no power of imagining what would allay
its unrest. Images and satisfactions have to come of themselves; then
the blind craving, as it turns into an incipient pleasure, first
recognises its object. The pure will’s impotence is absolute, and it
would writhe for ever and consume itself in darkness if perception gave
it no light and experience no premonition.

[Sidenote: So are the ideas it expresses.]

Now, a man cannot draw bodily from external perception the ideas he is
supposed to create or invent; and as his will or uneasiness, before he
creates the satisfying ideas, is by hypothesis without them, it follows
that creation or invention is automatic. The ideas come of themselves,
being new and unthought-of figments, similar, no doubt, to old
perceptions and compacted of familiar materials, but reproduced in a
novel fashion and dropping in their sudden form from the blue. However
instantly they may be welcomed, they were not already known and never
could have been summoned. In the stock example, for instance, of groping
for a forgotten name, we know the context in which that name should lie;
we feel the environment of our local void; but what finally pops into
that place, reinstated there by the surrounding tensions, is itself
unforeseen, for it was just this that was forgotten. Could we have
invoked the name we should not have needed to do so, having it already
at our disposal. It is in fact a palpable impossibility that any idea
should call itself into being, or that any act or any preference should
be its own ground. The responsibility assumed for these things is not a
determination to conceive them before they are conceived (which is a
contradiction in terms) but an embrace and appropriation of them once
they have appeared. It is thus that ebullitions in parts of our nature
become touchstones for the whole; and the incidents within us seem
hardly our own work till they are accepted and incorporated into the
main current of our being. All invention is tentative, all art
experimental, and to be sought, like salvation, with fear and trembling.
There is a painful pregnancy in genius, a long incubation and waiting
for the spirit, a thousand rejections and futile birth-pangs, before the
wonderful child appears, a gift of the gods, utterly undeserved and
inexplicably perfect. Even this unaccountable success comes only in rare
and fortunate instances. What is ordinarily produced is so base a
hybrid, so lame and ridiculous a changeling, that we reconcile ourselves
with difficulty to our offspring and blush to be represented by our
fated works.

[Sidenote: We are said to control whatever obeys us.]

The propensity to attribute happy events to our own agency, little as we
understand what we mean by it, and to attribute only untoward results to
external forces, has its ground in the primitive nexus of experience.
What we call ourselves is a certain cycle of vegetative processes,
bringing a round of familiar impulses and ideas; this stream has a
general direction, a conscious vital inertia, in harmony with which it
moves. Many of the developments within it are dialectical; that is, they
go forward by inner necessity, like an egg hatching within its shell,
warmed but undisturbed by an environment of which they are wholly
oblivious; and this sort of growth, when there is adequate consciousness
of it, is felt to be both absolutely obvious and absolutely free. The
emotion that accompanies it is pleasurable, but is too active and proud
to call itself a pleasure; it has rather the quality of assurance and
right. This part of life, however, is only its courageous core; about it
play all sorts of incidental processes, allying themselves to it in more
or less congruous movement. Whatever peripheral events fall in with the
central impulse are accordingly lost in its energy and felt to be not so
much peripheral and accidental as inwardly grounded, being, like the
stages of a prosperous dialectic, spontaneously demanded and instantly
justified when they come.

The sphere of the self’s power is accordingly, for primitive
consciousness, simply the sphere of what happens well; it is the entire
unoffending and obedient part of the world. A man who has good luck at
dice prides himself upon it, and believes that to have it is his destiny
and desert. If his luck were absolutely constant, he would say he had
the _power_ to throw high; and as the event would, by hypothesis,
sustain his boast, there would be no practical error in that assumption.
A will that never found anything to thwart it would think itself
omnipotent; and as the psychological essence of omniscience is not to
suspect there is anything which you do not know, so the psychological
essence of omnipotence is not to suspect that anything can happen which
you do not desire. Such claims would undoubtedly be made if experience
lent them the least colour; but would even the most comfortable and
innocent assurances of this sort cease to be precarious? Might not any
moment of eternity bring the unimagined contradiction, and shake the
dreaming god?

[Sidenote: Utility is a result.]

Utility, like significance, is an eventual harmony in the arts and by no
means their ground. All useful things have been discovered as the
Lilliputians discovered roast pig; and the casual feat has furthermore
to be supported by a situation favourable to maintaining the art. The
most useful act will never be repeated unless its secret remains
embodied in structure. Practice and endeavour will not help an artist to
remain long at his best; and many a performance is applauded which
cannot be imitated. To create the requisite structure two preformed
structures are needed: one in the agent, to give him skill and
perseverance, and another in the material, to give it the right
plasticity. Human progress would long ago have reached its goal if every
man who recognised a good could at once appropriate it, and possess
wisdom for ever by virtue of one moment’s insight. Insight,
unfortunately, is in itself perfectly useless and inconsequential; it
can neither have produced its own occasion nor now insure its own
recurrence. Nevertheless, being proof positive that whatever basis it
needs is actual, insight is also an indication that the extant
structure, if circumstances maintain it, may continue to operate with
the same moral results, maintaining the vision which it has once
supported.

[Sidenote: The useful naturally stable.]

When men find that by chance they have started a useful change in the
world, they congratulate themselves upon it and call their persistence
in that practice a free activity. And the activity is indeed rational,
since it subserves an end. The happy organisation which enables us to
continue in that rational course is the very organisation which enabled
us to initiate it. If this new process was formed under external
influences, the same influences, when they operate again, will
reconstitute the process each time more easily; while if it was formed
quite spontaneously, its own inertia will maintain it quietly in the
brain and bring it to the surface whenever circumstances permit. This is
what is called learning by experience. Such lessons are far from
indelible and are not always at command. Yet what has once been done may
be repeated; repetition reinforces itself and becomes habit; and a clear
memory of the benefit once attained by fortunate action, representing as
it does the trace left by that action in the system, and its harmony
with the man’s usual impulses (for the action is felt to be
_beneficial_), constitutes a strong presumption that the act will be
repeated automatically on occasion; _i.e._, that it has really been
learned. Consciousness, which willingly attends to results only, will
judge either the memory or the benefit, or both confusedly, to be the
ground of this readiness to act; and only if some hitch occurs in the
machinery, so that rational behaviour fails to takes place, will a
surprised appeal be made to material accidents, or to a guilty
forgetfulness or indocility in the soul.

[Sidenote: Intelligence is docility.]

The idiot cannot learn from experience at all, because a new process, in
his liquid brain, does not modify structure; while the fool uses what he
has learned only inaptly and in frivolous fragments, because his
stretches of linked experience are short and their connections insecure.
But when the cerebral plasm is fresh and well disposed and when the
paths are clear, attention is consecutive and learning easy; a multitude
of details can be gathered into a single cycle of memory or of potential
regard. Under such circumstances action is the unimpeded expression of
healthy instinct in an environment squarely faced. Conduct from the
first then issues in progress, and, by reinforcing its own organisation
at each rehearsal, makes progress continual. For there will subsist not
only a readiness to act and a great precision in action, but if any
significant circumstance has varied in the conditions or in the
interests at stake, this change will make itself felt; it will check the
process and prevent precipitate action. Deliberation or well-founded
scruple has the same source as facility—a plastic and quick
organisation. To be sensitive to difficulties and dangers goes with
being sensitive to opportunities.

[Sidenote: Art is reason propagating itself.]

Of all reason’s embodiments art is therefore the most splendid and
complete. Merely to attain categories by which inner experience may be
articulated, or to feign analogies by which a universe may be conceived,
would be but a visionary triumph if it remained ineffectual and went
with no actual remodelling of the outer world, to render man’s dwelling
more appropriate and his mind better fed and more largely transmissible.
Mind grows self-perpetuating only by its expression in matter. What
makes progress possible is that rational action may leave traces in
nature, such that nature in consequence furnishes a better basis for the
Life of Reason; in other words progress is art bettering the conditions
of existence. Until art arises, all achievement is internal to the
brain, dies with the individual, and even in him spends itself without
recovery, like music heard in a dream. Art, in establishing instruments
for human life beyond the human body, and moulding outer things into
sympathy with inner values, establishes a ground whence values may
continually spring up; the thatch that protects from to-day’s rain will
last and keep out to-morrow’s rain also; the sign that once expresses an
idea will serve to recall it in future.

Not only does the work of art thus perpetuate its own function and
produce a better experience, but the process of art also perpetuates
itself, because it is teachable. Every animal learns something by
living; but if his offspring inherit only what he possessed at birth,
they have to learn life’s lessons over again from the beginning, with at
best some vague help given by their parents’ example. But when the
fruits of experience exist in the common environment, when new
instruments, unknown to nature, are offered to each individual for his
better equipment, although he must still learn for himself how to live,
he may learn in a humaner school, where artificial occasions are
constantly open to him for expanding his powers. It is no longer merely
hidden inner processes that he must reproduce to attain his
predecessors’ wisdom; he may acquire much of it more expeditiously by
imitating their outward habit—an imitation which, furthermore, they
have some means of exacting from him. Wherever there is art there is a
possibility of training. A father who calls his idle sons from the
jungle to help him hold the plough, not only inures them to labour but
compels them to observe the earth upturned and refreshed, and to watch
the germination there; their wandering thought, their incipient
rebellions, will be met by the hope of harvest; and it will not be
impossible for them, when their father is dead, to follow the plough of
their own initiative and for their own children’s sake. So great is the
sustained advance in rationality made possible by art which, being
embodied in matter, is teachable and transmissible by training; for in
art the values secured are recognised the more easily for having been
first enjoyed when other people furnished the means to them; while the
maintenance of these values is facilitated by an external tradition
imposing itself contagiously or by force on each new generation.

[Sidenote: Beauty an incident in rational art.]

Art is action which transcending the body makes the world a more
congenial stimulus to the soul. All art is therefore useful and
practical, and the notable æsthetic value which some works of art
possess, for reasons flowing for the most part out of their moral
significance, is itself one of the satisfactions which art offers to
human nature as a whole. Between sensation and abstract discourse lies a
region of deployed sensibility or synthetic representation, a region
where more is seen at arm’s length than in any one moment could be felt
at close quarters, and yet where the remote parts of experience, which
discourse reaches only through symbols, are recovered and recomposed in
something like their native colours and experienced relations. This
region, called imagination, has pleasures more airy and luminous than
those of sense, more massive and rapturous than those of intelligence.
The values inherent in imagination, in instant intuition, in sense
endowed with form, are called æsthetic values; they are found mainly in
nature and living beings, but often also in man’s artificial works, in
images evoked by language, and in the realm of sound.

[Sidenote: Inseparable from the others.]

Productions in which an æsthetic value is or is supposed to be
prominent take the name of fine art; but the work of fine art so defined
is almost always an abstraction from the actual object, which has many
non-æsthetic functions and values. To separate the æsthetic element,
abstract and dependent as it often is, is an artifice which is more
misleading than helpful; for neither in the history of art nor in a
rational estimate of its value can the æsthetic function of things be
divorced from the practical and moral. What had to be done was, by
imaginative races, done imaginatively; what had to be spoken or made,
was spoken or made fitly, lovingly, beautifully. Or, to take the matter
up on its psychological side, the ceaseless experimentation and ferment
of ideas, in breeding what it had a propensity to breed, came sometimes
on figments that gave it delightful pause; these beauties were the first
knowledges and these arrests the first hints of real and useful things.
The rose’s grace could more easily be plucked from its petals than the
beauty of art from its subject, occasion, and use. An æsthetic
fragrance, indeed, all things may have, if in soliciting man’s senses or
reason they can awaken his imagination as well; but this middle zone is
so mixed and nebulous, and its limits are so vague, that it cannot well
be treated in theory otherwise than as it exists in fact—as a phase of
man’s sympathy with the world he moves in. If art is that element in the
Life of Reason which consists in modifying its environment the better
to attain its end, art may be expected to subserve all parts of the
human ideal, to increase man’s comfort, knowledge, and delight. And as
nature, in her measure, is wont to satisfy these interests together, so
art, in seeking to increase that satisfaction, will work simultaneously
in every ideal direction. Nor will any of these directions be on the
whole good, or tempt a well-trained will, if it leads to estrangement
from all other interests. The æsthetic good will be accordingly hatched
in the same nest with the others, and incapable of flying far in a
different air.




