CHAPTER VIII

PRERATIONAL MORALITY

Empirical alloy in dialectic.—Arrested rationality in morals.—Its
emotional and practical power.—Moral science is an application of
dialectic, not a part of anthropology.—Estimation the soul of
philosophy.—Moral discriminations are natural and inevitable.—A choice
of proverbs.—Their various representative value.—Conflict of partial
moralities.—The Greek ideal.—Imaginative exuberance and political
discipline.—Sterility of Greek example.—Prerational morality among the
Jews.—The development of conscience.—Need of Hebraic devotion to Greek
aims.—Prerational morality marks an acquisition but offers no programme.
Pages 210-232


CHAPTER IX

RATIONAL ETHICS

Moral passions represent private interests.—Common ideal interests may
supervene.—To this extent there is rational society.—A rational
morality not attainable, but its principle clear.—It is the logic of an
autonomous will.—Socrates’ science.—Its opposition to sophistry and
moral anarchy.—Its vitality.—Genuine altruism is natural
self-expression.—Reason expresses impulses, but impulses reduced to
harmony.—Self-love artificial.—The sanction of reason is
happiness.—Moral science impeded by its chaotic data, and its
unrecognised scope.—Fallacy in democratic hedonism.—Sympathy a
conditional duty.—All life, and hence right life, finite and
particular. Pages 233-261


CHAPTER X

POST-RATIONAL MORALITY

Socratic ethics retrospective.—Rise of disillusioned moralities.—The
illusion subsisting in them.—Epicurean refuge in pleasure.—Stoic
recourse to conformity.—Conformity the core of Islam, enveloped in
arbitrary doctrines.—The latter alone lend it practical force.—Moral
ambiguity in pantheism.—Under stress, it becomes ascetic and requires a
mythology.—A supernatural world made by the Platonist out of
dialectic.—The Hebraic cry for redemption.—The two factors meet in
Christianity.—Consequent eclecticism.—The negation of naturalism never
complete.—Spontaneous values rehabilitated.—A witness out of
India.—Dignity of post-rational morality.—Absurdities nevertheless
involved.—The soul of positivism in all ideals.—Moribund dreams and
perennial realities. Pages 262-300


CHAPTER XI

THE VALIDITY OF SCIENCE

Various modes of revising science.—Science its own best
critic.—Obstruction by alien traditions.—Needless anxiety for moral
interests.—Science an imaginative and practical art.—Arrière-pensée in
transcendentalism.—Its romantic sincerity.—Its constructive
impotence.—Its dependence on common-sense.—Its futility.—Ideal
science is self-justified.—Physical science is presupposed in
scepticism.—It recurs in all understanding of perception.—Science
contains all trustworthy knowledge.—It suffices for the Life of Reason.
Pages 301-320




REASON IN SCIENCE




CHAPTER I

TYPES AND AIMS OF SCIENCE


[Sidenote: Science still young.]

Science is so new a thing and so far from final, it seems to the layman
so hopelessly accurate and extensive, that a moralist may well feel some
diffidence in trying to estimate its achievements and promises at their
human worth. The morrow may bring some great revolution in science, and
is sure to bring many a correction and many a surprise. Religion and art
have had their day; indeed a part of the faith they usually inspire is
to believe that they have long ago revealed their secret. A critic may
safely form a judgment concerning them; for even if he dissents from the
orthodox opinion and ventures to hope that religion and art may assume
in the future forms far nobler and more rational than any they have
hitherto worn, still he must confess that art and religion have had
several turns at the wheel; they have run their course through in
various ages and climes with results which anybody is free to estimate
if he has an open mind and sufficient interest in the subject. Science,
on the contrary, which apparently cannot exist where intellectual
freedom is denied, has flourished only twice in recorded times: once
for some three hundred years in ancient Greece, and again for about the
same period in modern Christendom. Its fruits have scarcely begun to
appear; the lands it is discovering have not yet been circumnavigated,
and there is no telling what its ultimate influence will be on human
practice and feeling.

[Sidenote: Its miscarriage in Greece.]

The first period in the life of science was brilliant but ineffectual.
The Greeks’ energy and liberty were too soon spent, and the very
exuberance of their genius made its expression chaotic. Where every mind
was so fresh and every tongue so clever no scientific tradition could
arise, and no laborious applications could be made to test the value of
rival notions and decide between them. Men of science were mere
philosophers. Each began, not where his predecessor had ended, but at
the very beginning. Another circumstance that impeded the growth of
science was the forensic and rhetorical turn proper to Greek
intelligence. This mental habit gave a tremendous advantage in
philosophy to the moralist and poet over the naturalist or
mathematician. Hence what survived in Greece after the heyday of
theoretic achievement was chiefly philosophies of life, and these—at
the death of liberty—grew daily more personal and ascetic. Authority in
scientific matters clung chiefly to Plato and Aristotle, and this not
for the sake of their incomparable moral philosophy—for in ethics that
decadent age preferred the Stoics and Epicureans—but just for those
rhetorical expedients which in the Socratic school took the place of
natural science. Worse influences in this field could hardly be
imagined, since Plato’s physics ends in myth and apologue, while
Aristotle’s ends in nomenclature and teleology.

All that remained of Greek physics, therefore, was the conception of
what physics should be—a great achievement due to the earlier
thinkers—and certain hints and guesses in that field. The elements of
geometry had also been formulated, while the Socratic school bequeathed
to posterity a well-developed group of moral sciences, rational in
principle, but destined to be soon overlaid with metaphysical and
religious accretions, so that the dialectical nerve and reasonableness
of them were obliterated, and there survived only miscellaneous
conclusions, fragments of wisdom built topsy-turvy into the new mythical
edifice. It is the sad task reserved for historical criticism to detach
those sculptured stones from the rough mass in which they have been
embedded and to rearrange them in their pristine order, thus
rediscovering the inner Socratic principle of moral philosophy, which is
nothing but self-knowledge—a circumspect, systematic utterance of the
speaker’s mind, disclosing his implicit meaning and his ultimate
preferences.

[Sidenote: Its timid reappearance in modern times.]

At its second birth science took a very different form. It left cosmic
theories to pantheistic enthusiasts like Giordano Bruno, while in sober
laborious circles it confined itself to specific discoveries—the
earth’s roundness and motion about the sun, the laws of mechanics, the
development and application of algebra, the invention of the calculus,
and a hundred other steps forward in various disciplines. It was a
patient siege laid to the truth, which was approached blindly and
without a general, as by an army of ants; it was not stormed
imaginatively as by the ancient Ionians, who had reached at once the
notion of nature’s dynamic unity, but had neglected to take possession
in detail of the intervening tracts, whence resources might be drawn in
order to maintain the main position.

Nevertheless, as discoveries accumulated, they fell insensibly into a
system, and philosophers like Descartes and Newton arrived at a general
physics. This physics, however, was not yet meant to cover the whole
existent world, or to be the genetic account of all things in their
system. Descartes excluded from his physics the whole mental and moral
world, which became, so far as his science went, an inexplicable
addendum. Similarly Newton’s mechanical principles, broad as they were,
were conceived by him merely as a parenthesis in theology. Not until the
nineteenth century were the observations that had been accumulated given
their full value or in fact understood; for Spinoza’s system, though
naturalistic in spirit, was still dialectical in form, and had no
influence on science and for a long time little even on speculation.

Indeed the conception of a natural order, like the Greek cosmos, which
shall include all existences—gods no less than men, if gods actually
exist—is one not yet current, although it is implied in every
scientific explanation and is favoured by two powerful contemporary
movements which, coming from different quarters, are leading men’s minds
back to the same ancient and obvious naturalism. One of these movements
is the philosophy of evolution, to which Darwin gave such an
irresistible impetus. The other is theology itself, where it has been
emancipated from authority and has set to work to square men’s
conscience with history and experience. This theology has generally
passed into speculative idealism, which under another name recognises
the universal empire of law and conceives man’s life as an incident in a
prodigious natural process, by which his mind and his interests are
produced and devoured. This “idealism” is in truth a system of
immaterial physics, like that of Pythagoras or Heraclitus. While it
works with fantastic and shifting categories, which no plain naturalist
would care to use, it has nothing to apply those categories to except
what the naturalist or historian may already have discovered and
expressed in the categories of common prose. German idealism is a
translation of physical evolution into mythical language, which
presents the facts now in the guise of a dialectical progression, now in
that of a romantic drama. In either case the facts are the same, and
just those which positive knowledge has come upon. Thus many who are not
brought to naturalism by science are brought to it, quite unwillingly
and unawares, by their religious speculations.

[Sidenote: Distinction between science and myth.]

The gulf that yawns between such idealistic cosmogonies and a true
physics may serve to make clear the divergence in principle which
everywhere divides natural science from arbitrary conceptions of things.
This divergence is as far as possible from lying in the merit of the two
sorts of theory. Their merit, and the genius and observation required to
frame them, may well be equal, or an imaginative system may have the
advantage in these respects. It may even be more serviceable for a while
and have greater pragmatic value, so long as knowledge is at best
fragmentary, and no consecutive or total view of things is attempted by
either party. Thus in social life a psychology expressed in terms of
abstract faculties and personified passions may well carry a man farther
than a physiological psychology would. Or, again, we may say that there
was more experience and love of nature enshrined in ancient mythology
than in ancient physics; the observant poet might then have fared better
in the world than the pert and ignorant materialist. Nor does the
difference between science and myth lie in the fact that the one is
essentially less speculative than the other. They are differently
speculative, it is true, since myth terminates in unverifiable notions
that might by chance represent actual existences; while science
terminates in concepts or laws, themselves not possibly existent, but
verified by recurring particular facts, belonging to the same experience
as those from which the theory started.

[Sidenote: Platonic status of hypothesis.]

The laws formulated by science—the transitive figments describing the
relation between fact and fact—possess only a Platonic sort of reality.
They are more real, if you will, than the facts themselves, because they
are more permanent, trustworthy, and pervasive; but at the same time
they are, if you will, not real at all, because they are incompatible
with immediacy and alien to brute existence. In declaring what is true
of existences they altogether renounce existence on their own behalf.
This situation has made no end of trouble in ill-balanced minds, not
docile to the diversities and free complexity of things, but bent on
treating everything by a single method. They have asked themselves
persistently the confusing question whether the matter or the form of
things is the reality; whereas, of course, both elements are needed,
each with its incommensurable kind of being. The material element alone
is existent, while the ideal element is the sum of all those
propositions which are true of what exists materially. Anybody’s
_knowledge_ of the truth, being a complex and fleeting feeling, is of
course but a moment of existence or material being, which whether found
in God or man is as far as possible from being that truth itself which
it may succeed in knowing.

[Sidenote: Meaning of verification.]

The true contrast between science and myth is more nearly touched when
we say that science alone is capable of verification. Some ambiguity,
however, lurks in this phrase, since verification comes to a method only
vicariously, when the particulars it prophesies are realised in sense.
To verify a theory as if it were not a method but a divination of occult
existences would be to turn the theory into a myth and then to discover
that what the myth pictured had, by a miracle, an actual existence also.
There is accordingly a sense in which myth admits substantiation of a
kind that science excludes. The Olympic hierarchy might conceivably
exist bodily; but gravitation and natural selection, being schemes of
relation, can never exist substantially and on their own behoof.
Nevertheless, the Olympic hierarchy, even if it happened to exist, could
not be proved to do so unless it were a part of the natural world open
to sense; while gravitation and natural selection, without being
existences, can be verified at every moment by concrete events occurring
as those principles require. A hypothesis, being a discursive device,
gains its utmost possible validity when its discursive value is
established. It _is_ not, it merely _applies_; and every situation in
which it is found to apply is a proof of its truth.

The case would not be different with fables, were their basis and
meaning remembered. But fables, when hypostatised, forget that they,
too, were transitive symbols and boast to reveal an undiscoverable
reality. A dogmatic myth is in this sorry plight: that the more evidence
it can find to support it the more it abrogates its metaphysical
pretensions, while the more it insists on its absolute truth the less
relevance it has to experience and the less meaning. To try to support
fabulous dogmas by evidence is tantamount to acknowledging that they are
merely scientific hypotheses, instruments of discourse, and methods of
expression. But in that case their truth would no longer be supposed to
lie in the fact that somewhere beyond the range of human observation
they descended bodily to the plane of flying existence, and were
actually enacted there. They would have ceased to resemble the society
of Olympus, which to prove itself real would need to verify itself,
since only the gods and those mortals admitted to their conclave could
know for a fact that that celestial gathering existed. On the contrary,
a speculation that could be supported by evidence would be one that
might be made good without itself descending to the plane of immediacy,
but would be sufficiently verified when diffuse facts fall out as it had
led us to expect. The myth in such a case would have become transparent
again and relevant to experience, which could continually serve to
support or to correct it. Even if somewhat overloaded and poetical, it
would be in essence a scientific theory. It would no longer terminate in
itself; it would point forward, leading the thinker that used it to
eventual facts of experience, facts which his poetic wisdom would have
prepared him to meet and to use.

[Sidenote: Possible validity of myths.]

If I say, for instance, that Punishment, limping in one leg, patiently
follows every criminal, the myth is obvious and innocent enough. It
reveals nothing, but, what is far better, it means something. I have
expressed a truth of experience and pointed vaguely to the course which
events may be expected to take under given circumstances. The
expression, though mythical in form, is scientific in effect, because it
tends to surround a given phenomenon (the crime) with objects on its own
plane—other passions and sensations to follow upon it. What would be
truly mythical would be to stop at the figure of speech and maintain, by
way of revealed dogma, that a lame goddess of vindictive mind actually
follows every wicked man, her sword poised in mid-air. Sinking into that
reverie, and trembling at its painted truth, I should be passing to the
undiscoverable and forgetting the hard blows actually awaiting me in the
world. Fable, detaining the mind too long in the mesh of expression,
would have become metaphysical dogma. I should have connected the given
fact with imagined facts, which even if by chance real—for such a
goddess may, for all we know, actually float in the fourth
dimension—are quite supernumerary in my world, and never, by any
possibility, can become parts or extensions of the experience they are
thought to explain. The gods are demonstrable only as hypotheses, but as
hypotheses they are not gods.

[Sidenote: Any dreamed-of thing might be experienced.]

The same distinction is sometimes expressed by saying that science deals
only with objects of possible experience. But this expression is
unfortunate, because everything thinkable, no matter how mythical and
supernatural or how far beyond the range of mortal senses, is an object
of _possible_ experience. Tritons and sea-horses might observe one
another and might feel themselves live. The thoughts and decrees said to
occupy the divine mind from all eternity would certainly be phenomena
there; they would be experienced things. Were fables really as
metaphysical and visionary as they pretend to be, were they not all the
while and in essence mere symbols for natural situations, they would be
nothing but reports about other alleged parts of experience. A real
Triton, a real Creator, a real heaven would obviously be objects open to
properly equipped senses and seats of much vivid experience. But a
Triton after all has something to do with the Ægean and other earthly
waters; a Creator has something to do with the origin of man and of his
habitat; heaven has something to do with the motives and rewards of
moral action. This relevance to given experience and its objects is what
cuts those myths off from their blameless and gratuitous rôle of
reporting experiences that might be going on merrily enough somewhere
else in the universe. In calling them myths and denying that what they
describe falls within the purview of science, we do not assert that,
absolutely taken, they could not be objects of a possible experience.
What we mean is rather that no matter how long we searched the sea
waves, in which it is the essence of our Tritons to disport themselves,
we should never find Tritons there; and that if we traced back the
history of man and nature we should find them always passing by natural
generation out of slightly different earlier forms and never appearing
suddenly, at the fiat of a vehement Jehovah swimming about in a chaos;
and finally that if we considered critically our motives and our ideals,
we should find them springing from and directed upon a natural life and
its functions, and not at all on a disembodied and timeless ecstasy.
Those myths, then, while they intrinsically refer to facts in the given
world, describe those facts in incongruous terms. They are symbols, not
extensions, for the experience we know.

[Sidenote: But science follows the movement of its subject-matter.]

A chief characteristic of science, then, is that in supplementing given
facts it supplements them by adding other facts belonging to the same
sphere, and eventually discoverable by tracing the given object in its
own plane through its continuous transformations. Science expands
speculatively, by the aid of merely instrumental hypotheses, objects
given in perception until they compose a congruous, self-supporting
world, all parts of which might be observed consecutively. What a
scientific hypothesis interpolates among the given facts—the atomic
structure of things, for instance—might come in time under the direct
fire of attention, fixed more scrupulously, longer, or with better
instruments upon those facts themselves. Otherwise the hypothesis that
assumed that structure would be simply false, just as a hypothesis that
the interior of the earth is full of molten fire would be false if on
inspection nothing were found there but solid rock. Science does not
merely prolong a habit of inference; it verifies and solves the
inference by reaching the fact inferred.

The contrast with myth at this point is very interesting; for in myth
the facts are themselves made vehicles, and knowledge is felt to
terminate in an independent existence on a higher or deeper level than
any immediate fact; and this circumstance is what makes myth impossible
to verify and, except by laughter, to disprove. If I attributed the
stars’ shining to the diligence of angels who lighted their lamps at
sunset, lest the upper reaches of the world should grow dangerous for
travellers, and if I made my romance elaborate and ingenious enough, I
might possibly find that the stars’ appearance and disappearance could
continue to be interpreted in that way. My myth might always suggest
itself afresh and might be perennially appropriate. But it would never
descend, with its charming figures, into the company of its evidences.
It would never prove that what it terminated in was a fact, as in my
metaphysical faith I had deputed and asserted it to be. The angels would
remain notional, while my intent was to have them exist; so that the
more earnestly I held to my fable the more grievously should I be
deceived. For even if seraphic choirs existed in plenty on their own
emotional or musical plane of being, it would not have been their
hands—if they had hands—that would have lighted the stars I saw; and
this, after all, was the gist and starting-point of my whole fable and
its sole witness in my world. A myth might by chance be a revelation,
did what it talks of have an actual existence somewhere else in the
universe; but it would need to be a revelation in order to be true at
all, and would then be true only in an undeserved and spurious fashion.
Any representative and provable validity which it might possess would
assimulate it to science and reduce it to a mere vehicle and instrument
for human discourse. It would evaporate as soon as the prophecies it
made were fulfilled, and it would claim no being and no worship on its
own account. Science might accordingly be called a myth conscious of its
essential ideality, reduced to its fighting weight and valued only for
its significance.

[Sidenote: Moral value of science.]

A symptom of the divergence between myth and science may be found in the
contrary emotions which they involve. Since in myth we interpret
experience in order to interpret it, in order to delight ourselves by
turning it poetically into the language and prosody of our own life, the
emotion we feel when we succeed is artistic; myth has a dramatic charm.
Since in science, on the contrary, we employ notional machinery, in
itself perhaps indifferent enough, in order to arrive at eventual facts
and to conceive the aspect which given things would actually wear from a
different point of view in space or time, the emotion we feel when we
succeed is that of security and intellectual dominion; science has a
rational value. To see better what we now see, to see by anticipation
what we should see actually under other conditions, is wonderfully to
satisfy curiosity and to enlighten conduct. At the same time, scientific
thinking involves no less inward excitement than dramatic fiction does.
It summons before us an even larger number of objects in their fatal
direction upon our interests. Were science adequate it would indeed
absorb those passions which now, since they must be satisfied somehow,
have to be satisfied by dramatic myths. To imagine how things might have
been would be neither interesting nor possible if we knew fully how
things are. All pertinent dramatic emotion, joyous or tragic, would then
inhere in practical knowledge. As it is, however, science abstracts from
the more musical overtones of things in order to trace the gross and
basal processes within them; so that the pursuit of science seems
comparatively dry and laborious, except where at moments the vista opens
through to the ultimate or leads back to the immediate. Then, perhaps,
we recognise that in science we are surveying all it concerns us to
know, and in so doing are becoming all that it profits us to be. Mere
amusement in thought as in sportive action is tedious and illiberal: it
marks a temperament so imperfectly educated that it prefers idle to
significant play and a flimsy to a solid idea.

[Sidenote: Its continuity with common knowledge.]

The fact that science follows the subject-matter in its own movement
involves a further consequence: science differs from common knowledge in
scope only, not in nature. When intelligence arises, when the flux of
things begins to be mitigated by representation of it and objects are at
last fixed and recognisable, there is science. For even here, in the
presence of a datum something virtual and potential is called up,
namely, what the given thing was a moment ago, what it is growing into,
or what it is contrasted with in character. As I walk round a tree, I
learn that the parts still visible, those that have just disappeared
and those now coming into view, are continuous and belong to the same
tree.

This declaration, though dialectic might find many a mare’s nest in its
language, is a safe and obvious enough expression of knowledge. It
involves terms, however, which are in the act of becoming potential.
What is just past, what is just coming, though sensibly continuous with
what is present, are partially infected with nonentity. After a while
human apprehension can reach them only by inference, and to count upon
them is frankly to rely on theory. The other side of the tree, which
common sense affirms to exist unconditionally, will have to be
represented in memory or fancy; and it may never actually be observed by
any mortal. Yet, if I continued my round, I should actually observe it
and know it by experience; and I should find that it had the same status
as the parts now seen, and was continuous with them. My assertion that
it exists, while certainly theoretical and perhaps false, is accordingly
scientific in type. Science, when it has no more scope than this, is
indistinguishable from common sense. The two become distinct only when
the facts inferred cannot be easily verified or have not yet been merged
with the notion representing the given object in most men’s minds.

Where science remains consciously theoretical (being as yet contrasted
with ordinary apperception and current thought), it is, ideally
considered, a _pis aller_, an expedient to which a mind must have
recourse when it lacks power and scope to hold all experience in hand
and to view the wide world in its genuine immediacy. As oblivescence is
a gradual death, proper to a being not ideally master of the universal
flux, but swamped within it, so science is an artificial life, in which
what cannot be perceived directly (because personal limitations forbid)
may be regarded abstractly, yet efficaciously, in what we think and do.
With better faculties the field of possible experience could be better
dominated, and fewer of its parts, being hidden from sight, would need
to be mapped out symbolically on that sort of projection which we call
scientific inference. The real relations between the parts of nature
would then be given in intuition, from which hypothesis, after all, has
borrowed its schemata.

[Sidenote: Its intellectual essence.]

Science is a half-way house between private sensation and universal
vision. We should not forget to add, however, that the universal vision
in question, if it were to be something better than private sensation or
passive feeling in greater bulk, would have to be intellectual, just as
science is; that is, it would have to be practical and to survey the
flux from a given standpoint, in a perspective determined by special and
local interests. Otherwise the whole world, when known, would merely be
re-enacted in its blind immediacy without being understood or subjected
to any purpose. The critics of science, when endowed with any
speculative power, have always seen that what is hypothetical and
abstract in scientific method is somehow servile and provisional;
science being a sort of telegraphic wire through which a meagre report
reaches us of things we would fain observe and live through in their
full reality. This report may suffice for approximately fit action; it
does not suffice for ideal knowledge of the truth nor for adequate
sympathy with the reality. What commonly escapes speculative critics of
science, however, is that in transcending hypothesis and reaching
immediacy again we should run a great risk of abandoning knowledge and
sympathy altogether; for if we _became_ what we now represent so
imperfectly, we should evidently no longer represent it at all. We
should not, at the end of our labours, have at all enriched our own
minds by adequate knowledge of what surrounds us, nor made our wills
just in view of alien but well-considered interests. We should have lost
our own essence and substituted for it, not something higher than
indiscriminate being, but only indiscriminate being in its flat, blind,
and selfish infinity. The ideality, the representative faculty, would
have gone out in our souls, and our perfected humanity would have
brought us back to protoplasm.

In transcending science, therefore, we must not hope to transcend
knowledge, nor in transcending selfishness to abolish finitude. Finitude
is the indispensable condition of unselfishness as well as of
selfishness, and of speculative vision no less than of hypothetical
knowledge. The defect of science is that it is inadequate or abstract,
that the account it gives of things is not full and sensuous enough; but
its merit is that, like sense, it makes external being present to a
creature that is concerned in adjusting itself to its environment, and
informs that creature about things other than itself. Science, if
brought to perfection, would not lose its representative or ideal
essence. It would still survey and inform, but it would survey
everything at once and inform the being it enlightened about all that
could affect its interests. It would thus remain practical in effect and
speculative in character. In losing its accidental limitations it would
not lose its initial bias, its vital function. It would continue to be a
rational activity, guiding and perfecting a natural being.

Perfect knowledge of things would be as far as possible from identifying
the knower with them, seeing that for the most part—even when we call
them human—they have no knowledge of themselves. Science, accordingly,
even when imperfect, is a tremendous advance on absorption in sense and
a dull immediacy. It begins to enrich the mind and gives it some
inkling, at least, of that ideal dominion which each centre of
experience might have if it had learned to regard all others, and the
relation connecting it with them, both in thought and in action. Ideal
knowledge would be an inward state corresponding to a perfect
adjustment of the body to all forces affecting it. If the adjustment was
perfect the inward state would regard every detail in the objects
envisaged, but it would see those details in a perspective of its own,
adding to sympathetic reproduction of them a consciousness of their
relation to its own existence and perfection.

[Sidenote: Unity of science.]

The fact that science expresses the character and relation of objects in
their own terms has a further important consequence, which serves again
to distinguish science from metaphorical thinking. If a man tries to
illustrate the nature of a thing by assimilating it to something else
which he happens to have in mind at the same time, it is obvious that a
second man, whose mind is differently furnished, may assimilate the same
object to a quite different idea: so myths are centrifugal, and the more
elaborate and delicate they are the more they diverge, like
well-developed languages. The rude beginnings of myth in every age and
country bear a certain resemblance, because the facts interpreted are
similar and the minds reading them have not yet developed their special
grammar of representation. But two highly developed mythical
systems—two theologies, for instance, like the Greek and the
Indian—will grow every day farther and farther apart. Science, on the
contrary, whatever it may start with, runs back into the same circle of
facts, because it follows the lead of the subject-matter, and is
attentive to its inherent transformations.

If men’s fund of initial perceptions, then, is alike, their science is
sure to be so; while the embroideries they make upon perception out of
their own resources will differ as much as do the men themselves. Men
asleep, said Heraclitus, live each in his own world, but awake they live
in the same world together. To be awake is nothing but to be dreaming
under control of the object; it is to be pursuing science to the
comparative exclusion of mere mental vegetation and spontaneous myth.
Thus if our objects are the same, our science and our waking lives will
coincide; or if there is a natural diversity in our discoveries, because
we occupy different points in space and time and have a varying range of
experience, these diversities will nevertheless supplement one another;
the discovery that each has made will be a possible discovery for the
others also. So a geographer in China and one in Babylonia may at first
make wholly unlike maps; but in time both will take note of the
Himalayas, and the side each approaches will slope up to the very crest
approached by the other. So science is self-confirming, and its most
disparate branches are mutually illuminating; while in the realm of
myth, until it is surveyed scientifically, there can be nothing but
mutual repulsion and incapacity to understand. Languages and religions
are necessarily rivals, but sciences are necessarily allies.

[Sidenote: In existence, judged by reflection, there is a margin of
waste.]

The unity of science can reach no farther than does coherent experience;
and though coherence be a condition of experience in the more pregnant
sense of the word—in the sense in which the child or the fool has no
experience—existence is absolutely free to bloom as it likes, and no
logic can set limits or prescribe times for its irresponsible presence.
A great deal may accordingly exist which cannot be known by science, or
be reached from the outside at all. This fact perhaps explains why
science has as yet taken so little root in human life: for even within
the limits of human existence, which are tolerably narrow, there is
probably no little incoherence, no little lapsing into what, from any
other point of view, is inconceivable and undiscoverable. Science, for
instance, can hardly reach the catastrophes and delights, often so
vivid, which occur in dreams; for even if a physiological psychology
should some day be able to find the causes of these phenomena, and so to
predict them, it would never enter the dream-world persuasively, in a
way that the dreamer could appreciate and understand, while he continued
to dream. This is because that dream-world and the waking world present
two disjointed landscapes, and the figures they contain belong to quite
different genealogies—like the families of Zeus and of Abraham. Science
is a great disciplinarian, and misses much of the sport which the
absolute is free to indulge in. If there is no inner congruity and
communion between two fields, science cannot survey them both; at best
in tracing the structure of things presented in one of them, it may come
upon some detail which may offer a basis or lodgment for the entire
fabric of the other, which will thus be explained _ab extra_; as the
children of Abraham might give an explanation for Zeus and his progeny,
treating them as a phenomenon in the benighted minds of some of Japhet’s
children.

This brings the Olympian world within the purview of science, but does
so with a very bad grace. For suppose the Olympian gods really
existed—and there is nothing impossible in that supposition—they would
not be allowed to have any science of their own; or if they did, it
would threaten the children of Abraham with the same imputed unreality
with which the latter boast to have extinguished Olympus. In order,
then, that two regions of existence should be amenable to a science
common to both and establishing a mutual rational representation between
them, it is requisite that the two regions should be congruous in
texture and continuous inwardly: the objects present in each must be
transformations of the objects present in the other. As this condition
is not always fulfilled, even within a man’s personal fortunes, it is
impossible that all he goes through should be mastered by science or
should accrue to him ideally and become part of his funded experience.
Much must be lost, left to itself, and resigned to the unprofitable
flux that produced it.

[Sidenote: Sciences converge from different points of origin.]

A consequence of this incoherence in experience is that science is not
absolutely single but springs up in various places at once, as a certain
consistency or method becomes visible in this or that direction. These
independent sciences might, conceivably, never meet at all; each might
work out an entirely different aspect of things and cross the other, as
it were, at a different level. This actually happens, for instance, in
mathematics as compared with history or psychology, and in morals as
compared with physics. Nevertheless, the fact that these various
sciences are all human, and that here, for instance, we are able to
mention them in one breath and to compare their natures, is proof that
their spheres touch somehow, even if only peripherally. Since common
knowledge, which knows of them all, is itself an incipient science, we
may be sure that some continuity and some congruity obtains between
their provinces. Some aspect of each must coincide with some aspect of
some other, else nobody who pursued any one science would so much as
suspect the existence of the rest. Great as may be the aversion of
learned men to one another, and comprehensive as may be their ignorance,
they are not positively compelled to live in solitary confinement, and
the key of their prison cells is at least in their own pocket.

[Sidenote: Two chief kinds of science, physics and dialectic.]

Some sciences, like chemistry and biology, or biology and anthropology,
are parted only, we presume, by accidental gaps in human knowledge; a
more minute and better directed study of these fields would doubtless
disclose their continuity with the fields adjoining. But there is one
general division in science which cuts almost to the roots of human
experience. Human understanding has used from the beginning a double
method of surveying and arresting ideally the irreparable flux of being.
One expedient has been to notice and identify similarities of character,
recurrent types, in the phenomena that pass before it or in its own
operations; the other expedient has been to note and combine in one
complex object characters which occur and reappear together. The latter
feat which is made easy by the fact that when various senses are
stimulated at once the inward instinctive reaction—which is felt by a
primitive mind more powerfully than any external image—is one and not
consciously divisible.

The first expedient imposes on the flux what we call ideas, which are
concretions in discourse, terms employed in thought and language. The
second expedient separates the same flux into what we call things, which
are concretions in existence, complexes of qualities subsisting in space
and time, having definable dynamic relations there and a traceable
history. Carrying out this primitive diversity in reflection science
has moved in two different directions. By refining concretions in
discourse it has attained to mathematics, logic, and the dialectical
developments of ethics; by tracing concretions in existence it has
reached the various natural and historical sciences. Following ancient
usage, I shall take the liberty of calling the whole group of sciences
which elaborates ideas _dialectic_, and the whole group that describes
existences _physics_.

The contrast between ideal science or dialectic and natural science or
physics is as great as the understanding of a single experience could
well afford; yet the two kinds of science are far from independent. They
touch at their basis and they co-operate in their results. Were
dialectic made clearer or physics deeper than it commonly is, these
points of contact would doubtless be multiplied; but even as they stand
they furnish a sufficient illustration of the principle that all science
develops objects in their own category and gives the mind dominion over
the flux of matter by discovering its form.

[Sidenote: Their mutual implication.]

That physics and dialectic touch at their basis may be shown by a double
analysis. In the first place, it is clear that the science of existence,
like all science, is itself discourse, and that before concretions in
existence can be discovered, and groups of coexistent qualities can be
recognised, these qualities themselves must be arrested by the mind,
noted, and identified in their recurrences. But these terms, bandied
about in scientific discourse, are so many essences and pure ideas: so
that the inmost texture of natural science is logical, and the whole
force of any observation made upon the outer world lies in the constancy
and mutual relations of the terms it is made in. If down did not mean
down and motion motion, Newton could never have taken note of the fall
of his apple. Now the constancy and relation of meanings is something
_meant_, it is something created by insight and intent and is altogether
dialectical; so that the science of existence is a portion of the art of
discourse.

On the other hand discourse, in its operation, is a part of existence.
That truth or logical cogency is not itself an existence can be proved
dialectically,[A] and is obvious to any one who sees for a moment what
truth means, especially if he remembers at the same time that all
existence is mutable, which it is the essence of truth not to be. But
the knowledge or discovery of truth is an event in time, an incident in
the flux of existence, and therefore a matter for natural science to
study.

Furthermore, every term which dialectic uses is originally given
embodied; in other words, it is given as an element in the actual flux,
it conies by illustration. Though meaning is the object of an ideal
function, and signification is inwardly appreciable only in terms of
signification, yet the ideal leap is made from a material datum: that in
which signification is seen is a fact. Or to state the matter somewhat
differently, truth is not self-generating; if it were it would be a
falsehood.

Its eternity, and the infinitude of propositions it contains, remain
potential and unapproachable until their incidence is found in
existence. Form cannot of itself decide which of all possible forms
shall be real; in their ideality, and without reference to their
illustration in things, all consistent propositions would be equally
valid and equally trivial. Important truth is truth about something, not
truth about truth; and although a single datum might suffice to give
foothold and pertinence to an infinity of truths, as one atom would
posit all geometry, geometry, if there were no space, would be, if I may
say so, all of the fourth dimension, and arithmetic, if there were no
pulses or chasms in being, would be all algebra. Truth depends upon
facts for its perspective, since facts select truths and decide which
truths shall be mere possibilities and which shall be the eternal forms
of actual things. The dialectical world would be a trackless desert if
the existent world had no arbitrary constitution. Living dialectic comes
to clarify existence; it turns into meanings the actual forms of things
by reflecting upon them, and by making them intended subjects of
discourse.

[Sidenote: Their co-operation.]

Dialectic and physics, thus united at their basis, meet again in their
results. In mechanical science, which is the best part of physics,
mathematics, which is the best part of dialectic, plays a predominant
rôle; it furnishes the whole method of understanding wherever there is
any real understanding at all. In psychology and history, too, although
dialectic is soon choked by the cross-currents of nature, it furnishes
the little perspicuousness which there is. We understand actions and
mental developments when the purposes or ideas contained in any stage
are carried out logically in the sequel; it is when conduct and growth
are rational, that is, when they are dialectical, that we think we have
found the true secret and significance of them. It is the evident ideal
of physics, in every department, to attain such an insight into causes
that the effects actually given may be thence _deduced_; and deduction
is another name for dialectic. To be sure, the dialectic applicable to
material processes and to human life is one in which the terms and the
categories needed are still exceedingly numerous and vague: a little
logic is all that can be read into the cataract of events. But the hope
of science, a hope which is supported by every success it scores, is
that a simpler law than has yet been discovered will be found to connect
units subtler than those yet known; and that in these finer terms the
universal mechanism may be exhaustively rendered. Mechanism is the ideal
of physics, because it is the infusion of a maximum of mathematical
necessity into the flux of real things. It is the aspiration of natural
science to be as dialectical as possible, and thus, in their ideal, both
branches of science are brought together.

That the ideal of dialectic is to apply to existence and thereby to
coincide with physics is in a sense no less true, although dialecticians
may be little inclined to confess it. The direct purpose of deduction is
to elucidate an idea, to develop an import, and nothing can be more
irrelevant in this science than whether the conclusion is verified in
nature or not. But the direct purpose of dialectic is not its ultimate
justification. Dialectic is a human pursuit and has, at bottom, a moral
function; otherwise, at bottom, it would have no value. And the moral
function and ultimate justification of dialectic is to further the Life
of Reason, in which human thought has the maximum practical validity,
and may enjoy in consequence the richest ideal development. If dialectic
takes a turn which makes it inapplicable in physics, which makes it
worthless for mastering experience, it loses all its dignity: for
abstract cogency has no dignity if the subject-matter into which it is
introduced is trivial. In fact, were dialectic a game in which the
counters were not actual data and the conclusions were not possible
principles for understanding existence, it would not be a science at
all. It would resemble a counterfeit paper currency, without intrinsic
value and without commercial convenience. Just as a fact without
implications is not a part of science, so a method without application
would not be.

The free excursions of dialectic into non-natural regions may be wisely
encouraged when they satisfy an interest which is at bottom healthy and
may, at least indirectly, bring with it excellent fruits. As musicians
are an honour to society, so are dialecticians that have a single heart
and an exquisite patience. But somehow the benefit must redound to
society and to practical knowledge, or these abstracted hermits will
seem at first useless and at last mad. The logic of nonsense has a
subtle charm only because it can so easily be turned into the logic of
common sense. Empty dialectic is, as it were, the ballet of science: it
runs most neatly after nothing at all.

[Sidenote: No science _a priori_.]

Both physics and dialectic are contained in common knowledge, and when
carried further than men carry them daily life these sciences remain
essentially inevitable and essentially fallible. If science deserves
respect, it is not for being oracular but for being useful and
delightful, as seeing is. Understanding is nothing but seeing under and
seeing far. There is indeed a great mystery in knowledge, but this
mystery is present in the simplest memory or presumption. The sciences
have nothing to supply more fundamental than vulgar thinking or, as it
were, preliminary to it. They are simply elaborations of it; they accept
its pre-suppositions and carry on its ordinary processes. A pretence on
the philosopher’s part that he could get behind or below human thinking,
that he could underpin, so to speak, his own childhood and the inherent
conventions of daily thought, would be pure imposture. A philosopher
can of course investigate the history of knowledge, he can analyse its
method and point out its assumptions; but he cannot know by other
authority than that which the vulgar know by, nor can his knowledge
begin with other unheard-of objects or deploy itself in advance over an
esoteric field. Every deeper investigation presupposes ordinary
perception and uses some at least of its data. Every possible discovery
_extends_ human knowledge. None can base human knowledge anew on a
deeper foundation or prefix an ante-experimental episode to experience.
We may construct a theory as disintegrating as we please about the
dialectical or empirical conditions of the experience given; we may
disclose its logical stratification or physical antecedents; but every
idea and principle used in such a theory must be borrowed from current
knowledge as it happens to lie in the philosopher’s mind.

[Sidenote: Role of criticism.]

If these speculative adventures do not turn out well, the scientific man
is free to turn about and become the critic and satirist of his foiled
ambitions. He may exhaust scepticism and withdraw into the citadel of
immediate feeling, yielding bastion after bastion to the assaults of
doubt. When he is at last perfectly safe from error and reduced to
speechless sensibility, he will perceive, however, that he is also
washed clean of every practical belief: he would declare himself
universally ignorant but for a doubt whether there be really anything to
know. This metaphysical exercise is simply one of those “fallings from
us, vanishings, blank misgivings of a creature moving about in worlds
not realised” which may visit any child. So long as the suspension of
judgment lasts, knowledge is surely not increased; but when we remember
that the enemy to whom we have surrendered is but a ghost of our own
evoking, we easily reoccupy the lost ground and fall back into an
ordinary posture of belief and expectation. This recovered faith has no
new evidences to rest on. We simply stand where we stood before we began
to philosophise, only with a better knowledge of the lines we are
holding and perhaps with less inclination to give them up again for no
better reason than the undoubted fact that, in a speculative sense, it
is always possible to renounce them.

Science, then, is the attentive consideration of common experience; it
is common knowledge extended and refined. Its validity is of the same
order as that of ordinary perception, memory, and understanding. Its
test is found, like theirs, in actual intuition, which sometimes
consists in perception and sometimes in intent. The flight of science is
merely longer from perception to perception, and its deduction more
accurate of meaning from meaning and purpose from purpose. It generates
in the mind, for each vulgar observation, a whole brood of suggestions,
hypotheses, and inferences. The sciences bestow, as is right and
fitting, infinite pains upon that experience which in their absence
would drift by unchallenged or misunderstood. They take note, infer, and
prophesy. They compare prophecy with event; and altogether they
supply—so intent are they on reality—every imaginable background and
extension for the present dream.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote A: For instance, in Plato’s “Parmenides,” where it is shown
that the ideas are not in the mind. We may gather from what is there
said that the ideas cannot be identified with any embodiment of them,
however perfect, since an idea means a nature common to all its possible
embodiments and remains always outside of them. This is what Plato meant
by saying that the ideas lay apart from phenomena and were what they
were in and for themselves. They were mere forms and not, as a
materialised Platonism afterward fancied, images in the mind of some
psychological deity. The gods doubtless know the ideas, as Plato tells
us in the same place: these are the common object of their thought and
of ours; hence they are not anybody’s thinking process, which of course
would be in flux and phenomenal. Only by being ideal (_i.e._, by being a
goal of intellectual energy and no part of sensuous existence) can a
term be common to various minds and serve to make their deliverances
pertinent to one another.

That truth is no existence might also be proved as follows: Suppose that
nothing existed or (if critics carp at that phrase), that a universe did
not exist. It would then be true that all existences were wanting, yet
this truth itself would endure; therefore truth is not an existence. An
attempt might be made to reverse this argument by saying that since it
would still “be” true that nothing existed, the supposition is
self-contradictory, for the truth would “be” or exist in any case. Truth
would thus be turned into an opinion, supposed to subsist eternally in
the ether. The argument, however, is a bad sophism, because it falsifies
the intent of the terms used. Somebody’s opinion is not what is meant by
the truth, since every opinion, however long-lived, may be false.
Furthermore, the notion that it might have been true that nothing
existed is a perfectly clear notion. The nature of dialectic is entirely
corrupted when sincerity is lost. No intent can be self-contradictory,
since it fixes its own object, but a man may easily contradict himself
by wavering between one intent and another.]




