CHAPTER XV

CONCLUSION


[Sidenote: The failure of magic.]

The preceding analysis of religion, although it is illustrated mainly by
Christianity, may enable us in a general way to distinguish the rational
goal of all religious life. In no sphere is the contrast clearer between
wisdom and folly; in none, perhaps, has there been so much of both. It
was a prodigious delusion to imagine that work could be done by magic;
and the desperate appeal which human weakness has made to prayer, to
castigations, to miscellaneous fantastic acts, in the hope of thereby
bending nature to greater sympathy with human necessities, is a pathetic
spectacle; all the more pathetic in that here the very importunity of
evil, which distracted the mind and allowed it no choice or
deliberation, prevented very often those practical measures which, if
lighted upon, would have instantly relieved the situation. Religion when
it has tried to do man’s work for him has not only cheated hope, but
consumed energy and drawn away attention from the true means of success.

[Sidenote: and of mythology.]

[Sidenote: Their imaginative value.]

No less useless and retarding has been the effort to give religion the
function of science. Mythology, in excogitating hidden dramatic causes
for natural phenomena, or in attributing events to the human values
which they might prevent or secure, has profoundly perverted and
confused the intellect; it has delayed and embarrassed the discovery of
natural forces, at the same time fostering presumptions which, on being
exploded, tended to plunge men, by revulsion, into an artificial
despair. At the same time this experiment in mythology involved
wonderful creations which have a poetic value of their own, to offset
their uselessness in some measure and the obstruction they have
occasioned. In imagining human agents behind every appearance fancy has
given appearances some kinship to human life; it has made nature a mass
of hieroglyphics and enlarged to that extent the means of human
expression. While objects and events were capriciously moralised, the
mind’s own plasticity has been developed by its great exercise in
self-projection. To imagine himself a thunder-cloud or a river, the
dispenser of silent benefits and the contriver of deep-seated universal
harmonies, has actually stimulated man’s moral nature: he has grown
larger by thinking himself so large.

Through the dense cloud of false thought and bad habit in which religion
thus wrapped the world, some rays broke through from the beginning; for
mythology and magic expressed life and sought to express its conditions.
Human needs and human ideals went forth in these forms to solicit and to
conquer the world; and since these imaginative methods, for their very
ineptitude, rode somewhat lightly over particular issues and envisaged
rather distant goods, it was possible through them to give aspiration
and reflection greater scope than the meaner exigencies of life would
have permitted. Where custom ruled morals and a narrow empiricism
bounded the field of knowledge, it was partly a blessing that
imagination should be given an illegitimate sway. Without
misunderstanding, there might have been no understanding at all; without
confidence in supernatural support, the heart might never have uttered
its own oracles. So that in close association with superstition and
fable we find piety and spirituality entering the world.

[Sidenote: Piety and spirituality justified.]

Rational religion has these two phases: piety, or loyalty to necessary
conditions, and spirituality, or devotion to ideal ends. These simple
sanctities make the core of all the others. Piety drinks at the deep,
elemental sources of power and order: it studies nature, honours the
past, appropriates and continues its mission. Spirituality uses the
strength thus acquired, remodelling all it receives, and looking to the
future and the ideal. True religion is entirely human and political, as
was that of the ancient Hebrews, Romans, and Greeks. Supernatural
machinery is either symbolic of natural conditions and moral aims or
else is worthless.

[Sidenote: Mysticism a primordial state of feeling.]

There is one other phase or possible overtone of religion about which a
word might be added in conclusion. What is called mysticism is a certain
genial loosening of convention, whether rational or mythical; the mystic
smiles at science and plays with theology, undermining both by force of
his insight and inward assurance. He is all faith, all love, all vision,
but he is each of these things _in vacuo_, and in the absence of any
object.

Mysticism can exist, in varied degrees, at any stage of rational
development. Its presence is therefore no indication of the worth or
worthlessness of its possessor. This circumstance tends to obscure its
nature, which would otherwise be obvious enough. Seeing the greatest
saints and philosophers grow mystical in their highest flights, an
innocent observer might imagine that mysticism was an ultimate attitude,
which only his own incapacity kept him from understanding. But exactly
the opposite is the case. Mysticism is the most primitive of feelings
and only visits formed minds in moments of intellectual arrest and
dissolution. It can exist in a child, very likely in an animal; indeed,
to parody a phrase of Hegel’s, the only pure mystics are the brutes.
When articulation fails in the face of experience; when instinct guides
without kindling any prophetic idea to which action may be inwardly
referred; when life and hope and joy flow through the soul from an
unknown region to an unknown end, then consciousness is mystical. Such
an experience may suffuse the best equipped mind, if its primordial
energies, its will and emotions, much outrun its intelligence. Just as
at the beginning pure inexperience may flounder intellectually and yet
may have a sense of not going astray, a sense of being carried by earth
and sky, by contagion and pleasure, into its animal paradise; so at the
end, if the vegetative forces still predominate, all articulate
experience may be lifted up and carried down-stream bodily by the
elementary flood rising from beneath.

[Sidenote: It may recur at any stage of culture.]

Every religion, all science, all art, is accordingly subject to
incidental mysticism; but in no case can mysticism stand alone and be
the body or basis of anything. In the Life of Reason it is, if I may say
so, a normal disease, a recurrent manifestation of lost equilibrium and
interrupted growth; but in these pauses, when the depths rise to the
surface and obliterate what scratches culture may have made there, the
rhythm of life may be more powerfully felt, and the very disappearance
of intellect may be taken for a revelation. Both in a social and a
psychological sense revelations come from beneath, like earthquakes and
volcanic eruptions; and while they fill the spirit with contempt for
those fragile structures which they so easily overwhelm, they are
utterly incapable of raising anything on the ruins. If they leave
something standing it is only by involuntary accident, and if they
prepare the soil for anything, it is commonly only for wild-flowers and
weeds. Revelations are seldom beneficent, therefore, unless there is
more evil in the world to destroy than good to preserve; and mysticism,
under the same circumstances, may also liberate and relieve the spirit.

[Sidenote: Form gives substance its life and value.]

The feelings which in mysticism rise to the surface and speak in their
own name are simply the ancient, overgrown feelings of vitality,
dependence, inclusion; they are the background of consciousness coming
forward and blotting out the scene. What mysticism destroys is, in a
sense, its only legitimate expression. The Life of Reason, in so far as
it is life, contains the mystic’s primordial assurances, and his
rudimentary joys; but in so far as it is rational it has discovered what
those assurances rest on, in what direction they may be trusted to
support action and thought; and it has given those joys distinction and
connexion, turning a dumb momentary ecstasy into a many-coloured and
natural happiness.


*** End of Volume Three ***




REASON IN ART

Volume Four of “The Life of Reason”


GEORGE SANTAYANA


hê gar noy enhergeia zôhê




CONTENTS

REASON IN ART


