CHAPTER IX

THE CHRISTIAN COMPROMISE

Suspense between hope and disillusion.—Superficial solution.—But from
what shall we be redeemed?—Typical attitude of St. Augustine.—He
achieves Platonism.—He identifies it with Christianity.—God the
good.—Primary and secondary religion.—Ambiguous efficacy of the good
in Plato.—Ambiguous goodness of the creator in Job.—The
Manicheans.—All things good by nature.—The doctrine of creation
demands that of the fall.—Original sin.—Forced abandonment of the
ideal.—The problem among the Protestants.—Pantheism accepted.—Plainer
scorn for the ideal.—The price of mythology is superstition. Pages
148-177


CHAPTER X

PIETY

The core of religion not theoretical.—Loyalty to the sources of our
being.—The pious Æneas.—An ideal background required.—Piety accepts
natural conditions and present tasks.—The leadership of instinct is
normal.—Embodiment essential to spirit.—Piety to the gods takes form
from current ideals.—The religion of humanity.—Cosmic piety. Pages
178-192


CHAPTER XI

SPIRITUALITY AND ITS CORRUPTIONS

To be spiritual is to live in view of the ideal.—Spirituality
natural.—Primitive consciousness may be spiritual.—Spirit crossed by
instrumentalities.—One foe of the spirit is worldliness.—The case for
and against pleasure.—Upshot of worldly wisdom.—Two supposed escapes
from vanity: fanaticism and mysticism.—Both are irrational.—Is there a
third course?—Yes, for experience has intrinsic, inalienable
values.—For these the religious imagination must supply an ideal
standard. Pages 193-213


CHAPTER XII

CHARITY

Possible tyranny of reason.—Everything has its rights.—Primary and
secondary morality.—Uncharitable pagan justice is not just.—The doom
of ancient republics.—Rational charity.—Its limits.—Its mythical
supports.—There is intelligence in charity.—Buddhist and Christian
forms of it.—Apparent division of the spiritual and the natural. Pages
214-228


CHAPTER XIII

THE BELIEF IN A FUTURE LIFE

The length of life a subject for natural science.—“Psychical”
phenomena.—Hypertrophies of sense.—These possibilities affect physical
existence only.—Moral grounds for the doctrine.—The necessary
assumption of a future.—An assumption no evidence.—A solipsistic
argument.—Absoluteness and immortality transferred to the gods.—Or to
a divine principle in all beings.—In neither case is the individual
immortal.—Possible forms of survival.—Arguments from retribution and
need of opportunity.—Ignoble temper of both.—False optimistic
postulate involved.—Transition to ideality. Pages 229-250


CHAPTER XIV

IDEAL IMMORTALITY

Olympian immortality the first ideal.—Its indirect attainment by
reproduction.—Moral acceptance of this compromise.—Even vicarious
immortality intrinsically impossible.—Intellectual victory over
change.—The glory of it.—Reason makes man’s divinity and his
immortality.—It is the locus of all truths.—Epicurean immortality,
through the truth of existence.—Logical immortality, through objects of
thought.—Ethical immortality, through types of excellence. Pages 251-273


CHAPTER XV

CONCLUSION

The failure of magic and of mythology.—Their imaginative value.—Piety
and spirituality justified.—Mysticism a primordial state of
feeling.—It may recur at any stage of culture.—Form gives substance
its life and value. Pages 274-279




REASON IN RELIGION




CHAPTER I

HOW RELIGION MAY BE AN EMBODIMENT OF REASON


[Sidenote: Religion certainly significant.]

Experience has repeatedly confirmed that well-known maxim of Bacon’s,
that “a little philosophy inclineth man’s mind to atheism, but depth in
philosophy bringeth men’s minds about to religion.” In every age the
most comprehensive thinkers have found in the religion of their time and
country something they could accept, interpreting and illustrating that
religion so as to give it depth and universal application. Even the
heretics and atheists, if they have had profundity, turn out after a
while to be forerunners of some new orthodoxy. What they rebel against
is a religion alien to their nature; they are atheists only by accident,
and relatively to a convention which inwardly offends them, but they
yearn mightily in their own souls after the religious acceptance of a
world interpreted in their own fashion. So it appears in the end that
their atheism and loud protestation were in fact the hastier part of
their thought, since what emboldened them to deny the poor world’s faith
was that they were too impatient to understand it. Indeed, the
enlightenment common to young wits and worm-eaten old satirists, who
plume themselves on detecting the scientific ineptitude of
religion—something which the blindest half see—is not nearly
enlightened enough: it points to notorious facts incompatible with
religious tenets literally taken, but it leaves unexplored the habits of
thought from which those tenets sprang, their original meaning, and
their true function. Such studies would bring the sceptic face to face
with the mystery and pathos of mortal existence. They would make him
understand why religion is so profoundly moving and in a sense so
profoundly just. There must needs be something humane and necessary in
an influence that has become the most general sanction of virtue, the
chief occasion for; art and philosophy, and the source, perhaps, of the
best human happiness. If nothing, as Hooker said, is “so malapert as a
splenetic religion,” a sour irreligion is almost as perverse.

[Sidenote: But not literally true.]

At the same time, when Bacon penned the sage epigram we have quoted he
forgot to add that the God to whom depth in philosophy brings back men’s
minds is far from being the same from whom a little philosophy estranges
them. It would be pitiful indeed if mature reflection bred no better
conceptions than those which have drifted down the muddy stream of time,
where tradition and passion have jumbled everything together.
Traditional conceptions, when they are felicitous, may be adopted by the
poet, but they must be purified by the moralist and disintegrated by
the philosopher. Each religion, so dear to those whose life it
sanctifies, and fulfilling so necessary a function in the society that
has adopted it, necessarily contradicts every other religion, and
probably contradicts itself. What religion a man shall have is a
historical accident, quite as much as what language he shall speak. In
the rare circumstances where a choice is possible, he may, with some
difficulty, make an exchange; but even then he is only adopting a new
convention which may be more agreeable to his personal temper but which
is essentially as arbitrary as the old.

[Sidenote: All religion is positive and particular.]

The attempt to speak without speaking any particular language is not
more hopeless than the attempt to have a religion that shall be no
religion in particular. A courier’s or a dragoman’s speech may indeed be
often unusual and drawn from disparate sources, not without some mixture
of personal originality; but that private jargon will have a meaning
only because of its analogy to one or more conventional languages and
its obvious derivation from them. So travellers from one religion to
another, people who have lost their spiritual nationality, may often
retain a neutral and confused residuum of belief, which they may
egregiously regard as the essence of all religion, so little may they
remember the graciousness and naturalness of that ancestral accent which
a perfect religion should have. Yet a moment’s probing of the
conceptions surviving in such minds will show them to be nothing but
vestiges of old beliefs, creases which thought, even if emptied of all
dogmatic tenets, has not been able to smooth away at its first
unfolding. Later generations, if they have any religion at all, will be
found either to revert to ancient authority, or to attach themselves
spontaneously to something wholly novel and immensely positive, to some
faith promulgated by a fresh genius and passionately embraced by a
converted people. Thus every living and healthy religion has a marked
idiosyncrasy. Its power consists in its special and surprising message
and in the bias which that revelation gives to life. The vistas it opens
and the mysteries propounds are another world to live in; and another
world to live in—whether we expect ever to pass wholly into it or
no—is what we mean by having a religion.

[Sidenote: It aims at the Life of Reason.]

What relation, then, does this great business of the soul, which we call
religion, bear to the Life of Reason? That the relation between the two
is close seems clear from several circumstances. The Life of Reason is
the seat of all ultimate values. Now the history of mankind will show us
that whenever spirits at once lofty and intense have seemed to attain
the highest joys, they have envisaged and attained them in religion.
Religion would therefore seem to be a vehicle or a factor in rational
life, since the ends of rational life are attained by it. Moreover, the
Life of Reason is an ideal to which everything in the world should be
subordinated; it establishes lines of moral cleavage everywhere and
makes right eternally different from wrong. Religion does the same
thing. It makes absolute moral decisions. It sanctions, unifies, and
transforms ethics. Religion thus exercises a function of the Life of
Reason. And a further function which is common to both is that of
emancipating man from his personal limitations. In different ways
religions promise to transfer the soul to better conditions. A
supernaturally favoured kingdom is to be established for posterity upon
earth, or for all the faithful in heaven, or the soul is to be freed by
repeated purgations from all taint and sorrow, or it is to be lost in
the absolute, or it is to become an influence and an object of adoration
in the places it once haunted or wherever the activities it once loved
may be carried on by future generations of its kindred. Now reason in
its way lays before us all these possibilities: it points to common
objects, political and intellectual, in which an individual may lose
what is mortal and accidental in himself and immortalise what is
rational and human; it teaches us how sweet and fortunate death may be
to those whose spirit can still live in their country and in their
ideas; it reveals the radiating effects of action and the eternal
objects of thought.

Yet the difference in tone and language must strike us, so soon as it is
philosophy that speaks. That change should remind us that even if the
function of religion and that of reason coincide, this function is
performed in the two cases by very different organs. Religions are many,
reason one. Religion consists of conscious ideas, hopes, enthusiasms,
and objects of worship; it operates by grace and flourished by prayer.
Reason, on the other hand, is a mere principle or potential order, on
which, indeed, we may come to reflect, but which exists in us ideally
only, without variation or stress of any kind. We conform or do not
conform to it; it does not urge or chide us, nor call for any emotions
on our part other than those naturally aroused by the various objects
which it unfolds in their true nature and proportion. Religion brings
some order into life by weighting it with new materials. Reason adds to
the natural materials only the perfect order which it introduces into
them. Rationality is nothing but a form, an ideal constitution which
experience may more or less embody. Religion is a part of experience
itself, a mass of sentiments and ideas. The one is an inviolate
principle, the other a changing and struggling force. And yet this
struggling and changing force of religion, seems to direct man toward
something eternal. It seems to make for an ultimate harmony within the
soul and for an ultimate harmony between the soul and all the soul
depends upon. So that religion, in its intent, is a more conscious and
direct pursuit of the Life of Reason than is society, science, or art.
For these approach and fill out the ideal life tentatively and
piecemeal, hardly regarding the goal or caring for the ultimate
justification of their instinctive aims. Religion also has an
instinctive and blind side, and bubbles up in all manner of chance
practices and intuitions; soon, however, it feels its way toward the
heart of things, and, from whatever quarter it may come, veers in the
direction of the ultimate.

[Sidenote: But largely fails to attain it.]

Nevertheless, we must confess that this religious pursuit of the Life of
Reason has been singularly abortive. Those within the pale of each
religion may prevail upon themselves to express satisfaction with its
results, thanks to a fond partiality in reading the past and generous
draughts of hope for the future; but any one regarding the various
religions at once and comparing their achievements with what reason
requires, must feel how terrible is the disappointment which they have
one and all prepared for mankind. Their chief anxiety has been to offer
imaginary remedies for mortal ills, some of which are incurable
essentially, while others might have been really cured by well-directed
effort. The Greek oracles, for instance, pretended to heal our natural
ignorance, which has its appropriate though difficult cure, while the
Christian vision of heaven pretended to be an antidote to our natural
death, the inevitable correlate of birth and of a changing and
conditioned existence. By methods of this sort little can be done for
the real betterment of life. To confuse intelligence and dislocate
sentiment by gratuitous fictions is a short-sighted way of pursuing
happiness. Nature is soon avenged. An unhealthy exaltation and a
one-sided morality have to be followed by regrettable reactions. When
these come, the real rewards of life may seem vain to a relaxed
vitality, and the very name of virtue may irritate young spirits
untrained in any natural excellence. Thus religion too often debauches
the morality it comes to sanction, and impedes the science it ought to
fulfil.

[Sidenote: Its approach imaginative.]

What is the secret of this ineptitude? Why does religion, so near to
rationality in its purpose, fall so far short of it in its texture and
in its results? The answer is easy: Religion pursues, rationality
through the imagination. When it explains events or assigns causes, it
gives imaginative substitute for science. When it gives; precepts,
insinuates ideals, or remoulds aspiration, it is an imaginative
substitute for wisdom—I mean for the deliberate and impartial pursuit
of all good. The conditions and the aims of life are both represented in
religion poetically, but this poetry tends to arrogate to itself literal
truth and moral authority, neither of which it possesses. Hence the
depth and importance of religion become intelligible no less than its
contradictions and practical disasters. Its object is the same as that
of reason, but its method is to proceed by intuition and by unchecked
poetical conceits. These are repeated and vulgarised in proportion to
their original fineness and significance, till they pass for reports of
objective truth and come to constitute a world of faith, superposed upon
the world of experience and regarded as materially enveloping it, if not
in space at least in time and in existence. The only truth of religion
comes from its interpretation of life, from its symbolic rendering of
that moral, experience which it springs out of and which it seeks to
elucidate. Its falsehood comes from the insidious misunderstanding which
clings to it, to the effect that these poetic conceptions are not merely
representations of experience as it is or should be, but are rather
information about experience or reality elsewhere—an experience and
reality which, strangely enough, supply just the defects betrayed by
reality and experience here.

[Sidenote: When its poetic method is denied its value is jeopardised.]

Thus religion has the same original relation to life that poetry has;
only poetry, which never pretends to literal validity, adds a pure value
to existence, the value of a liberal imaginative exercise. The poetic
value of religion would initially be greater than that of poetry itself,
because religion deals with higher and more practical themes, with sides
of life which are in greater need of some imaginative touch and ideal
interpretation than are those pleasant or pompous things which ordinary
poetry dwells upon. But this initial advantage is neutralised in part by
the abuse to which religion is subject, whenever its symbolic rightness
is taken for scientific truth. Like poetry, it improves the world only
by imagining it improved, but not content with making this addition to
the mind’s furniture—an addition which might be useful and
ennobling—it thinks to confer a more radical benefit by persuading
mankind that, in spite of appearances, the world is really such as that
rather arbitrary idealisation has painted it. This spurious satisfaction
is naturally the prelude to many a disappointment, and the soul has
infinite trouble to emerge again from the artificial problems and
sentiments into which it is thus plunged. The value of religion becomes
equivocal. Religion remains an imaginative achievement, a symbolic
representation of moral reality which may have a most important function
in vitalising the mind and in transmitting, by way of parables, the
lessons of experience. But it becomes at the same time a continuous
incidental deception; and this deception, in proportion as it is
strenuously denied to be such, can work indefinite harm in the world and
in the conscience.

[Sidenote: It precedes science rather than hinders it.]

On the whole, however, religion should not be conceived as having taken
the place of anything better, but rather as having come to relieve
situations which, but for its presence, would have been infinitely
worse. In the thick of active life, or in the monotony of practical
slavery, there is more need to stimulate fancy than to control it.
Natural instinct is not much disturbed in the human brain by what may
happen in that thin superstratum of ideas which commonly overlays it.
We must not blame religion for preventing the development of a moral and
natural science which at any rate would seldom have appeared; we must
rather thank it for the sensibility, the reverence, the speculative
insight which it has introduced into the world.

[Sidenote: It is merely symbolic and thoroughly human.]

We may therefore proceed to analyse the significance and the function
which religion has had at its different stages, and, without disguising
or in the least condoning its confusion with literal truth, we may allow
ourselves to enter as sympathetically as possible into its various
conceptions and emotions. They have made up the inner life of many
sages, and of all those who without great genius or learning have lived
steadfastly in the spirit. The feeling of reverence should itself be
treated with reverence, although not at a sacrifice of truth, with which
alone, in the end, reverence is compatible. Nor have we any reason to be
intolerant of the partialities and contradictions which religions
display. Were we dealing with a science, such contradictions would have
to be instantly solved and removed; but when we are concerned with the
poetic interpretation of experience, contradiction means only variety,
and variety means spontaneity, wealth of resource, and a nearer approach
to total adequacy.

If we hope to gain any understanding of these matters we must begin by
taking them out of that heated and fanatical atmosphere in which the
Hebrew tradition has enveloped them. The Jews had no philosophy, and
when their national traditions came to be theoretically explicated and
justified, they were made to issue in a puerile scholasticism and a
rabid intolerance. The question of monotheism, for instance, was a
terrible question to the Jews. Idolatry did not consist in worshipping a
god who, not being ideal, might be unworthy of worship, but rather in
recognising other gods than the one worshipped in Jerusalem. To the
Greeks, on the contrary, whose philosophy was enlightened and ingenuous,
monotheism and polytheism seemed perfectly innocent and compatible. To
say God or the gods was only to use different expressions for the same
influence, now viewed in its abstract unity and correlation with all
existence, now viewed in its various manifestations in moral life, in
nature, or in history. So that what in Plato, Aristotle, and the Stoics
meets us at every step—the combination of monotheism with
polytheism—is no contradiction, but merely an intelligent variation of
phrase to indicate various aspects or functions in physical and moral
things. When religion appears to us in this light its contradictions and
controversies lose all their bitterness. Each doctrine will simply
represent the moral plane on which they live who have devised or adopted
it. Religions will thus be better or worse, never true or false. We
shall be able to lend ourselves to each in turn, and seek to draw from
it the secret of its inspiration.




