CHAPTER VIII

PLASTIC REPRESENTATION


[Sidenote: Psychology of imitation.]

Imitation is a fertile principle in the Life of Reason. We have seen
that it furnishes the only rational sanction for belief in any fellow
mind; now we shall see how it creates the most glorious and interesting
of plastic arts. The machinery of imitation is obscure but its
prevalence is obvious, and even in the present rudimentary state of
human biology we may perhaps divine some of its general features. In a
motor image the mind represents prophetically what the body is about to
execute: but all images are more or less motor, so that no idea,
apparently, can occupy the mind unless the body has received some
impulse to enact the same. The plastic instinct to reproduce what is
seen is therefore simply an uninterrupted and adequate seeing; these two
phenomena, separable logically and divided in Cartesian psychology by an
artificial chasm, are inseparable in existence and are, for natural
history, two parts of the same event. That an image should exist for
consciousness is, abstractly regarded, a fact which neither involves
motion nor constitutes knowledge; but that natural relation to ulterior
events which endows that image with a cognitive function identifies it
at the same time with the motor impulse which accompanies the idea. If
the image involved no bodily attitude and prophesied no action it would
refer to no eventual existence and would have no practical meaning. Even
if it _meant_ to refer to something ulterior it would, under those
circumstances, miss its aim, seeing that no natural relation connected
it with any object which could support or verify its asseverations. It
might _feel_ significant, like a dream, but its significance would be
vain and not really self-transcendent; for it is in the world of events
that logic must find application, if it cares for applicability at all.
This needful bond between ideas and the further existences they forebode
is not merely a logical postulate, taken on trust because the ideas in
themselves assert it; it is a previous and genetic bond, proper to the
soil in which the idea flourishes and a condition of its existence. For
the idea expresses unawares a present cerebral event of which the
ulterior event consciously looked to is a descendant or an ancestor; so
that the ripening of that idea, or its prior history, leads materially
to the fact which the idea seeks to represent ideally.

[Sidenote: Sustained sensation involves reproduction.]

In some such fashion we may come to conceive how imitative art is simply
the perfection and fulfilment of sensation. The act of apperception in
which a sensation is reflected upon and understood is already an
internal reproduction. The object is retraced and gone over in the
mind, not without quite perceptible movements in the limbs, which sway,
as it were, in sympathy with the object’s habit. Presumably this
incipient imitation of the object is the physical basis for apperception
itself; the stimulus, whatever devious courses it may pursue,
reconstitutes itself into an impulse to render the object again, as we
acquire the accent which we often hear. This imitation sometimes has the
happiest results, in that the animal fights with one that fights, and
runs after one that runs away from him. All this happens initially, as
we may still observe in ourselves, quite without thought of eventual
profit; although if chase leads to contact, and contact stimulates
hunger or lust, movements important for preservation will quickly
follow. Such eventual utilities, however, like all utilities, are
supported by a prodigious gratuitous vitality, and long before a
practical or scientific use of sensation is attained its artistic force
is in full operation. If art be play, it is only because all life is
play in the beginning. Rational adjustments to truth and to benefit
supervene only occasionally and at a higher level.

[Sidenote: Imitative art repeats with intent to repeat, and in a new
material.]

Imitation cannot, of course, result in a literal repetition of the
object that suggests it. The copy is secondary; it does not iterate the
model by creating a second object on the same plane of reality, but
reproduces the form in a new medium and gives it a different function.
In these latter circumstances lies the imitative essence of the second
image: for one leaf does not imitate another nor is each twin the
other’s copy. Like sensibility, imitation remodels a given being so that
it becomes, in certain formal respects, like another being in its
environment. It is a response and an index, by which note is taken of a
situation or of its possible developments. When a man involuntarily
imitates other men, he does not become those other persons; he is simply
modified by their presence in a manner that allows him to conceive their
will and their independent existence, not without growing similar to
them in some measure and framing a genuine representation of them in his
soul. He enacts what he understands, and his understanding consists
precisely in knowing that he is re-enacting something which has its
collateral existence elsewhere in nature. An element in the percipient
repeats the total movement and tendency of the person perceived. The
imitation, though akin to what it imitates, and reproducing it, lies in
a different medium, and accordingly has a specific individuality and
specific effects. Imitation is far more than similarity, nor does its
ideal function lie in bringing a flat and unmeaning similarity about. It
has a representative and intellectual value because in reproducing the
forms of things it reproduces them in a fresh substance to a new
purpose.

If I imitate mankind by following their fashions, I add one to the
million and improve nothing: but if I imitate them under proper
inhibitions and in the service of my own ends, I really understand them,
and, by representing what I do not bodily become, I preserve and enlarge
my own being and make it relevant ideally to what it physically depends
upon. Assimilation is a way of drifting through the flux or of letting
it drift through oneself; representation, on the contrary, is a
principle of progress. To grow by accumulating passions and fancies is
at best to grow in bulk: it is to become what a colony or a hydra might
be. But to make the accretions which time brings to your being
representative of what you are not, and do not wish to be, is to grow in
dignity. It is to be wise and prepared. It is to survey a universe
without ceasing to be a mind.

[Sidenote: Imitation leads to adaptation and to knowledge.]

A product of imitative sensibility is accordingly on a higher plane than
the original existences it introduces to one another—the ignorant
individual and the unknown world. Imitation in softening the body into
physical adjustment stimulates the mind to ideal representation. This is
the case even when the stimulus is a contagious influence or habit,
though the response may then be slavish and the representation vague.
Sheep jumping a wall after their leader doubtless feel that they are not
alone; and though their action may have no purpose it probably has a
felt sanction and reward. Men also think they invoke an authority when
they appeal to the _quod semper et ubique et ab omnibus_, and a
conscious unanimity is a human if not a rational joy. When, however, the
stimulus to imitation is not so pervasive and touches chiefly a single
sense, when what it arouses is a movement of the hand or eye retracing
the object, then the response becomes very definitely cognitive. It
constitutes an observation of fact, an acquaintance with a thing’s
structure amounting to technical knowledge; for such a survey leaves
behind it a power to reconstitute the process it involved. It leaves an
efficacious idea. In an idle moment, when the information thus acquired
need not be put to instant use, the new-born faculty may work itself out
spontaneously. The sound heard is repeated, the thing observed is
sketched, the event conceived is acted out in pantomime. Then imitation
rounds itself out; an uninhibited sensation has become an instinct to
keep that sensation alive, and plastic representation has begun.

[Sidenote: How the artist is inspired and irresponsible.]

The secret of representative genius is simple enough. All hangs on
intense, exhaustive, rehearsed sensation. To paint is a way of letting
vision work; nor should the amateur imagine that while he lacks
technical knowledge he can have in his possession all the ideal burden
of an art. His reaction will be personal and adventitious, and he will
miss the artist’s real inspiration and ignore his genuine successes. You
may instruct a poet about literature, but his allegiance is to emotion.
You may offer the sculptor your comparative observations on style and
taste; he may or may not care to listen, but what he knows and loves is
the human body. Critics are in this way always one stage behind or
beyond the artist; their operation is reflective and his is direct. In
transferring to his special medium what he has before him his whole mind
is lost in the object; as the marksman, to shoot straight, looks at the
mark. How successful the result is, or how appealing to human nature, he
judges afterwards, as an outsider might, and usually judges ill; since
there is no life less apt to yield a broad understanding for human
affairs or even for the residue of art itself, than the life of a man
inspired, a man absorbed, as the genuine artist is, in his own travail.
But into this travail, into this digestion and reproduction of the thing
seen, a critic can hardly enter. Having himself the ulterior office of
judge, he must not hope to rival nature’s children in their sportiveness
and intuition.

In an age of moral confusion, these circumstances may lead to a strange
shifting of rôles. The critic, feeling that something in the artist has
escaped him, may labour to put himself in the artist’s place. If he
succeeded, the result would only be to make him a biographer; he would
be describing in words the very intuitions which the artist had rendered
in some other medium. To understand how the artist felt, however, is not
criticism; criticism is an investigation of what the work is good for.
Its function may be chiefly to awaken certain emotions in the beholder,
to deepen in him certain habits of apperception; but even this most
æsthetic element in a work’s operation does not borrow its value from
the possible fact that the artist also shared those habits and emotions.
If he did, and if they are desirable, so much the better for him; but
his work’s value would still consist entirely in its power to propagate
such good effects, whether they were already present in him or not. All
criticism is therefore moral, since it deals with benefits and their
relative weight. Psychological penetration and reconstructed biography
may be excellent sport; if they do not reach historic truth they may at
least exercise dramatic talent. Criticism, on the other hand, is a
serious and public function; it shows the race assimilating the
individual, dividing the immortal from the mortal part of a soul.

[Sidenote: Need of knowing and loving the subject rendered.]

Representation naturally repeats those objects which are most
interesting in themselves. Even the medium, when a choice is possible,
is usually determined by the sort of objects to be reproduced.
Instruments lose their virtue with their use and a medium of
representation, together with its manipulation, is nothing but a
vehicle. It is fit if it makes possible a good rendition. All
accordingly hangs on what life has made interesting to the senses, on
what presents itself persuasively to the artist for imitation; and
living arts exist only while well-known, much-loved things imperatively
demand to be copied, so that their reproduction has some honest
non-æsthetic interest for mankind. Although subject matter is often said
to be indifferent to art, and an artist, when his art is secondary, may
think of his technique only, nothing is really so poor and melancholy as
art that is interested in itself and not in its subject. If any remnant
of inspiration or value clings to such a performance, it comes from a
surviving taste for something in the real world. Thus the literature
that calls itself purely æsthetic is in truth prurient; without this
half-avowed weakness to play upon, the coloured images evoked would have
had nothing to marshall or to sustain them.

[Sidenote: Public interests determine the subject of art, and the
subject the medium.]

A good way to understand schools and styles and to appreciate their
respective functions and successes is to consider first what region of
nature preoccupied the age in which they arose. Perception can cut the
world up into many patterns, which it isolates and dignifies with the
name of things. It must distinguish before it can reproduce and the
objects which attention distinguishes are of many strange sorts. Thus
the single man, the hero, in his acts of prowess or in his readiness,
may be the unit and standard in discourse. It will then be his image
that will preoccupy the arts. For such a task the most adequate art is
evidently sculpture, for sculpture is the most complete of imitations.
In no other art can apprehension render itself so exhaustively and with
such recuperative force. Sculpture retains form and colour, with all
that both can suggest, and it retains them in their integrity, leaving
the observer free to resurvey them from any point of view and drink in
their quality exhaustively.

[Sidenote: Reproduction by acting ephemera.]

The movement and speech which are wanting, the stage may be called upon
to supply; but it cannot supply them without a terrible sacrifice, for
it cannot give permanence to it expression. Acting is for this reason an
inferior art, not perhaps in difficulty and certainly not in effect, but
inferior in dignity, since the effort of art is to keep what is
interesting in existence, to recreate it in the eternal, and this ideal
is half frustrated if the representation is itself fleeting and the
rendering has no firmer subsistence than the inspiration that gave it
birth. By making himself, almost in his entirety, the medium of his art,
the actor is morally diminished, and as little of him remains in his
work, when this is good, as of his work in history. He lends himself
without interest, and after being Brutus at one moment and Falstaff at
another, he is not more truly himself. He is abolished by his creations,
which nevertheless cannot survive him.

[Sidenote: High demands of sculpture.]

Being so adequate a rendering of its object, sculpture demands a perfect
mastery over it and is correspondingly difficult. It requires taste and
training above every other art; for not only must the material form be
reproduced, but its motor suggestions and moral expression must be
rendered; things which in the model itself are at best transitory, and
which may never be found there if a heroic or ideal theme is proposed.
The sculptor is obliged to have caught on the wing attitudes momentarily
achieved or vaguely imagined; yet these must grow firm and harmonious
under his hand. Nor is this enough; for sculpture is more dependent than
other arts on its model. If the statue is to be ideal, _i.e._, if it is
to express the possible motions and vital character of its subject, the
model must itself be refined. Training must have cut in the flesh those
lines which are to make the language and eloquence of the marble.
Trivial and vulgar forms, such as modern sculpture abounds in, reflect
an undisciplined race of men, one in which neither soul nor body has
done anything well, because the two have done nothing together. The
frame has remained gross or awkward, while the face has taken on a tense
expression, betraying loose and undignified habits of mind. To carve
such a creature is to perpetuate a caricature. The modern sculptor is
stopped short at the first conception of a figure; if he gives it its
costume, it is grotesque; if he strips it, it is unmeaning and pitiful.

[Sidenote: It is essentially obsolete.]

Greece was in all these respects a soil singularly favourable to
sculpture. The success there achieved was so conspicuous that two
thousand years of essential superfluity have not availed to extirpate
the art. Plastic impulse is indeed immortal, and many a hand, even
without classic example, would have fallen to modelling. In the middle
ages, while monumental sculpture was still rudely reminiscent,
ornamental carving arose spontaneously. Yet at every step the
experimental sculptor would run up against disaster. What could be seen
in the streets, while it offered plenty of subjects, offered none that
could stimulate his talent. His patrons asked only for illustration and
applied ornament; his models offered only the smirk and sad humour of a
stunted life. Here and there his statues might attain a certain
sweetness and grace, such as painting might perfectly well have
rendered; but on the whole sculpture remained decorative and infantile.

The Renaissance brought back technical freedom and a certain
inspiration, unhappily a retrospective and exotic one. The art cut
praiseworthy capers in the face of the public, but nobody could teach
the public itself to dance. If several great temperaments, under the
auspices of fashion, could then call up a magic world in which bodies
still spoke a heroic language, that was a passing dream. Society could
not feed such an artificial passion, nor the schools transmit an
arbitrary personal style that responded to nothing permanent in social
conditions. Academies continued to offer prizes for sculpture, the nude
continued to be seen in studios, and equestrian or other rhetorical
statues continued occasionally to be erected in public squares. Heroic
sculpture, however, in modern society, is really an anomaly and
confesses as much by being a failure. No personal talent avails to
rescue an art from laboured insignificance when it has no steadying
function in the moral world, and must waver between caprice and
convention. Where something modest and genuine peeped out was in
portraiture, and also at times in that devotional sculpture in wood
which still responded to a native interest and consequently kept its
sincerity and colour. Pious images may be feeble in the extreme, but
they have not the weakness of being merely æsthetic. The purveyor of
church wares has a stated theme; he is employed for a purpose; and if he
has enough technical resource his work may become truly beautiful: which
is not to say that he will succeed if his conceptions are without
dignity or his style without discretion. There are good _Mater
dolorosas_; there is no good _Sacred Heart_.

[Sidenote: When men see groups and backgrounds they are natural
painters.]

It may happen, however, that people are not interested in subjects that
demand or allow reproduction in bulk. The isolated figure or simple
group may seem cold apart from its natural setting. In rendering an
action you may need to render its scene, if it is the circumstance that
gives it value rather than the hero. You may also wish to trace out the
action through a series of episodes with many figures. In the latter
case you might have recourse to a bas-relief, which, although durable,
is usually a thankless work; there is little in it that might not be
conveyed in a drawing with distinctness. As some artists, like Michael
Angelo, have carried the sculptor’s spirit into painting, many more,
when painting is the prevalent and natural art, have produced carved
pictures. It may be said that any work is essentially a picture which is
conceived from a single quarter and meant to be looked at only in one
light. Objects in such a case need not be so truly apperceived and
appropriated as they would have to be in true sculpture. One aspect
suffices: the subject presented is not so much constructed as dreamt.

[Sidenote: Evolution of painting.]

The whole history of painting may be strung on this single thread—the
effort to reconstitute impressions, first the dramatic impression and
then the sensuous. A summary and symbolic representation of things is
all that at first is demanded; the point is to describe something
pictorially and recall people’s names and actions. It is characteristic
of archaic painting to be quite discursive and symbolic; each figure is
treated separately and stuck side by side with the others upon a golden
ground. The painter is here smothered in the recorder, in the annalist;
only those perceptions are allowed to stand which have individual names
or chronicle facts mentioned in the story. But vision is really more
sensuous and rich than report, if art is only able to hold vision in
suspense and make it explicit. When painting is still at this stage, and
is employed on hieroglyphics, it may reach the maximum of decorative
splendour. Whatever sensuous glow finer representations may later
acquire will be not sensuous merely, but poetical; Titians, Murillos,
or Turners are _colourists in representation_, and their canvases would
not be particularly warm or luminous if they represented nothing human
or mystical or atmospheric. A stained-glass window or a wall of tiles
can outdo them for pure colour and decorative magic. Leaving decoration,
accordingly, to take care of itself and be applied as sense may from
time to time require, painting goes on to elaborate the symbols with
which it begins, to make them symbolise more and more of what their
object contains. A catalogue of persons will fall into a group, a group
will be fused into a dramatic action. Conventional as the separate
figures may still be, their attitudes and relations will reconstitute
the dramatic impression. The event will be rendered in its own language;
it will not, to be recognised, have to appeal to words. Thus a symbolic
crucifixion is a crucifixion only because we know by report that it is;
a plastic crucifixion would first teach us, on the contrary, what a real
crucifixion might be. It only remains to supply the aerial medium and
make dramatic truth sensuous truth also.

[Sidenote: Sensuous and dramatic adequacy approached.]

To work up a sensation intellectually and reawaken all its passionate
associations is to reach a new and more exciting sensation which we call
emotion or thought. As in poetry there are two stages, one pregnant and
prior to prose and another posterior and synthetic, so in painting we
have not only a reversion to sense but an ulterior synthesis of the
sensuous, its interpretation in a dramatic or poetic vision. Archaic
painting, with its abstract rendering of separate things, is the prose
of design. It would not be beautiful at all but for its colour and
technical feeling—that expression of candour and satisfaction which may
pervade it, as it might a Latin rhyme. To correct this thinness and
dislocation, to restore life without losing significance, painting must
proceed to accumulate symbol upon symbol, till the original impression
is almost restored, but so restored that it contains all the
articulation which a thorough analysis had given it. Such painting as
Tintoretto’s or Paolo Veronese’s records impressions as a cultivated
sense might receive them. It glows with visible light and studies the
sensuous appearance, but it contains at the same time an intelligent
expression of all those mechanisms, those situations and passions, with
which the living world is diversified. It is not a design in spots,
meant merely to outdo a sunset; it is a richer dream of experience,
meant to outshine the reality.

In order to reconstitute the image we may take an abstract
representation or hieroglyphic and gradually increase its depth and its
scope. As the painter becomes aware of what at first he had ignored, he
adds colour to outline, modelling to colour, and finally an observant
rendering of tints and values. This process gives back to objects their
texture and atmosphere, and the space in which they lie. From a
representation which is statuesque in feeling and which renders figures
by furnishing a visible inventory of their parts and attributes, the
artist passes to considering his figures more and more as parts of a
whole and as moving in an ambient ether. They tend accordingly to lose
their separate emphasis, in order to be like flowers in a field or trees
in a forest. They become elements, interesting chiefly by their
interplay, and shining by a light which is mutually reflected.

[Sidenote: Essence of landscape-painting.]

When this transformation is complete the painting is essentially a
landscape. It may not represent precisely the open country; it may even
depict an interior, like Velasquez’s Meninas. But the observer, even in
the presence of men and artificial objects, has been overcome by the
medium in which they swim. He is seeing the air and what it happens to
hold. He is impartially recreating from within all that nature puts
before him, quite as if his imagination had become their diffused
material substance. Whatever individuality and moral value these bits of
substance may have they acquire for him, as for nature, incidentally and
by virtue of ulterior relations consequent on their physical being. If
this physical being is wholly expressed, the humanity and morality
involved will be expressed likewise, even if expressed unawares. Thus a
profound and omnivorous reverie overflows the mind; it devours its
objects or is absorbed into them, and the mood which this active
self-alienation brings with it is called the spirit of the scene, the
sentiment of the landscape.

Perception and art, in this phase, easily grow mystical; they are
readily lost in primordial physical sympathies. Although at first a
certain articulation and discursiveness may be retained in the picture,
so that the things seen in their atmosphere and relations may still be
distinguished clearly, the farther the impartial absorption in them
goes, the more what is inter-individual rises and floods the individual
over. All becomes light and depth and air, and those particular objects
threaten to vanish which we had hoped to make luminous, breathing, and
profound. The initiated eye sees so many nameless tints and surfaces,
that it can no longer select any creative limits for things. There cease
to be fixed outlines, continuous colours, or discrete existences in
nature.

[Sidenote: Its threatened dissolution.]

An artist, however, cannot afford to forget that even in such a case
units and divisions would have to be introduced by him into his work. A
man, in falling back on immediate reality, or immediate appearance, may
well feel his mind’s articulate grammar losing its authority, but that
grammar must evidently be reasserted if from the immediate he ever
wishes to rise again to articulate mind; and art, after all, exists for
the mind and must speak humanly. If we crave something else, we have not
so far to go: there is always the infinite about us and the animal
within us to absolve us from human distinctions.

Moreover, it is not quite true that the immediate has no real diversity.
It evidently suggests the ideal terms into which we divide it, and it
sustains our apprehension itself, with all the diversities this may
create. To what I call right and left, light and darkness, a real
opposition must correspond in any reality which is at all relevant to my
experience; so that I should fail to integrate my impression, and to
absorb the only reality that concerns me, if I obliterated those points
of reference which originally made the world figured and visible. Space
remains absolutely dark, for all the infinite light which we may declare
to be radiating through it, until this light is concentrated in one body
or reflected from another; and a landscape cannot be so much as vaporous
unless mists are distinguishable in it, and through them some known
object which they obscure. In a word, landscape is always, in spite of
itself, a collection of particular representations. It is a mass of
hieroglyphics, each the graphic symbol for some definite human sensation
or reaction; only these symbols have been extraordinarily enriched and
are fused in representation, so that, like instruments in an orchestra,
they are merged in the voluminous sensation they constitute together, a
sensation in which, for attentive perception, they never cease to exist.

[Sidenote: Reversion to pure decorative design.]

Impatience of such control as reality must always exercise over
representation may drive painting back to a simpler function. When a
designer, following his own automatic impulse, conventionalises a form,
he makes a legitimate exchange, substituting fidelity to his
apperceptive instincts for fidelity to his external impressions. When a
landscape-painter, revolting against a tedious discursive style, studies
only masses of colour and abstract systems of lines, he retains
something in itself beautiful, although no longer representative,
perhaps, of anything in nature. A pure impression cannot be
illegitimate; it cannot be false until it pretends to represent
something, and then it will have ceased to be a simple feeling, since
something in it will refer to an ulterior existence, to which it ought
to conform. This ulterior existence (since intelligence is life
understanding its own conditions) can be nothing in the end but what
produced that impression. Sensuous life, however, has its value within
itself; its pleasures are not significant. Representative art is
accordingly in a sense secondary; beauty and expression begin farther
back. They are present whenever the outer stimulus agreeably strikes an
organ and thereby arouses a sustained image, in which the consciousness
of both stimulation and reaction is embodied. An abstract design in
outline and colour will amply fulfil these conditions, if sensuous and
motor harmonies are preserved in it, and if a sufficient sweep and depth
of reaction is secured. Stained-glass, tapestry, panelling, and in a
measure all objects, by their mere presence and distribution, have a
decorative function. When sculpture and painting cease to be
representative they pass into the same category. Decoration in turn
merges in construction; and so all art, like the whole Life of Reason,
is joined together at its roots, and branches out from the vital
processes of sensation and reaction. Diversity arises centrifugally,
according to the provinces explored and the degree of mutual checking
and control to which the various extensions are subjected.

[Sidenote: Sensuous values are primordial and so indispensable.]

Organisation, both internal and adaptive, marks the dignity and
authority which each art may have attained; but this advantage,
important as is must seem to a philosopher or a legislator, is not what
the artist chiefly considers. His privilege is to remain capricious in
his response to the full-blown universe of science and passion, and to
be still sensuous in his highest imaginings. He cares for structure only
when it is naturally decorative. He thinks gates were invented for the
sake of triumphal arches, and forests for the sake of poets and deer.
Representation, with all it may represent, means to him simply what it
says to his emotions. In all this the artist, though in one sense
foolish, in another way is singularly sane; for, after all, everything
must pass through the senses, and life, whatever its complexity, remains
always primarily a feeling.

To render this feeling delightful, to train the senses to their highest
potency and harmony in operation, is to begin life well. Were the
foundations defective and subject to internal strain there could be
little soundness in the superstructure. Æsthetic activity is far from
being a late or adventitious ornament in human economy; it is an
elementary factor, the perfection of an indispensable vehicle. Whenever
science or morals have done violence to sense they have decreed their
own dissolution. To sense a rebellious appeal will presently be
addressed, and the appeal will go against rash and empty dogmas. A keen
æsthetic sensibility and a flourishing art mark the puberty of reason.
Fertility comes later, after a marriage with the practical world. But a
sensuous ripening is needed first, such as myth and ornament betray in
their exuberance. A man who has no feeling for feeling and no felicity
in expression will hardly know what he is about in his further
undertakings. He will have missed his first lesson in living
spontaneously and well. Not knowing himself, he will be all hearsay and
pedantry. He may fall into the superstition of supposing that what gives
life value can be something external to life. Science and morals are
themselves arts that express natural impulses and find experimental
rewards. This fact, in betraying their analogy to æsthetic activity,
enables them also to vindicate their excellence.




