CHAPTER VI

THE NATURE OF INTENT


[Sidenote: Dialectic better than physics.]

Common knowledge passes from memory to history and from history to
mechanism; and having reached that point it may stop to look back, not
without misgivings, over the course it has traversed, and thus become
psychology. These investigations, taken together, constitute physics, or
the science of existence. But this is only half of science and on the
whole the less interesting and less fundamental half. No existence is of
moment to a man, not even his own, unless it touches his will and
fulfils or thwarts his intent. Unless he is concerned that existences
should be of specific kinds, unless he is interested in form, he can
hardly be interested in being. At the very least in terms of pleasure
versus pain, light versus darkness, comfort versus terror, the flying
moment must be loaded with obloquy or excellence if its passage is not
to remain a dead fact, and to sink from the sphere of actuality
altogether into that droning limbo of potentialities which we call
matter. Being which is indifferent to form is only the material of
being. To exist is nothing if you have nothing to do, if there is
nothing to choose or to distinguish, or if those things which belong to
a chosen form are not gathered into it before your eyes, to express what
we call a truth or an excellence.

Existence naturally precedes any idealisation of it which men can
contrive (since they, at least, must exist first), yet in the order of
values knowledge of existence is subsidiary to knowledge of ideals. If
it be true that a good physics is as yet the predominant need in
science, and that man is still most troubled by his ignorance of matters
of fact, this circumstance marks his illiberal condition. Without
knowledge of existence nothing can be done; but nothing is really done
until something else is known also, the use or excellence that existence
may have. It is a great pity that those finer temperaments that are
naturally addressed to the ideal should have turned their energies to
producing bad physics, or to preventing others from establishing natural
truths; for if physics were established on a firm basis the idealists
would for the first time have a free field. They might then recover
their proper function of expressing the mind honestly, and disdain the
sorry attempt to prolong confusion and to fish in troubled waters.

[Sidenote: Maladjustments to nature render physics conspicuous and
unpleasant.]

Perhaps if physical truth had not been so hugely misrepresented in men’s
faith and conduct, it would not need to be minutely revealed or
particularly emphasised. When the conditions surrounding life are not
rightly faced by instinct they are inevitably forced upon reflection
through painful shocks; and for a long time the new habit thus forced
upon men brings to consciousness not so much the movement of
consciousness itself as the points at which its movement impinges on the
external world and feels checks and frictions. Physics thus becomes
inordinately conspicuous (as when philology submerges the love of
letters) for lack of a good disposition that should allow us to take
physics for granted. Much in nature is delightful to know and to keep in
mind, but much also (the whole infinite remainder) is obscure and
uninteresting; and were we practically well adjusted to its issue we
might gladly absolve ourselves from studying its processes. In a world
that in extent and complexity so far outruns human energies, physical
knowledge ought to be largely virtual; that is, nature ought to be
represented by a suitable attitude toward it, by the attitude which
reason would dictate were knowledge complete, and not by explicit ideas.

[Sidenote: Physics should be largely virtual.]

The ancients were happily inspired when they imagined that beyond the
gods and the fixed stars the cosmos came to an end, for the empyrean
beyond was nothing in particular, nothing to trouble one’s self about.
Many existences are either out of relation to man altogether or have so
infinitesimal an influence on his experience that they may be
sufficiently represented there by an atom of star-dust; and it is
probable that if, out of pure curiosity, we wished to consider very
remote beings and had the means of doing so, we should find the detail
of existence in them wholly incommensurable with anything we can
conceive. Such beings could be known virtually only, in that we might
speak of them in the right key, representing them in appropriate
symbols, and might move in their company with the right degree of
respectful indifference.

[Sidenote: and dialectic explicit.]

The present situation of science, however, reverses the ideal one.
Physics, in so far as it exists, is explicit, and at variance with our
acquired attitude toward things; so that we may justly infer, by the
shock our little knowledge gives us, that our presumptions and
assumptions have been so egregious that more knowledge would give us
still greater shocks. Meantime dialectic, or knowledge of ideal things,
remains merely virtual. The ideal usually comes before us only in
revulsions which we cannot help feeling against some scandalous
situation or some intolerable muddle. We have no time or genius left,
after our agitated soundings and balings, to think of navigation as a
fine art, or to consider freely the sea and sky or the land we are
seeking. The proper occupation of the mind is gone, or rather not
initiated.

A further bad consequence of this illiberal state is that, among many
who have, in spite of the times, adoration in their souls, to adore
physics, to worship Being, seems a philosophical religion, whereas, of
course, it is the essence of idolatry. The true God is an object of
intent, an ideal of excellence and knowledge, not a term belonging to
sense or to probable hypothesis or to the prudent management of affairs.
After we have squared our accounts with nature and taken sufficient
thought for our bodily necessities, the eyes can be lifted for the first
time to the eternal. The rest was superstition and the quaking use of a
false physics. That appeal to the supernatural which while the danger
threatens is but forlorn medicine, after the blow has fallen may turn to
sublime wisdom. This wisdom has cast out the fear of material evils, and
dreads only that the divine should not come down and be worthily
entertained among us. In art, in politics, in that form of religion
which is superior, and not inferior, to politics and art, we define and
embody intent; and the intent embodied dignifies the work and lends
interest to its conditions. So, in science, it is dialectic that makes
physics speculative and worthy of a free mind. The baser utilities of
material knowledge would leave life itself perfectly vain, if they did
not help it to take on an ideal shape. Ideal life, in so far as it
constitutes science, is dialectical. It consists in seeing how things
hang together perspicuously and how the later phases of any process fill
out—as in good music—the tendency and promise of what went before.
This derivation may be mathematical or it may be moral; but in either
case the data and problem define the result, dialectic being insight
into their inherent correspondence.

[Sidenote: Intent is vital and indescribable.]

Intent is one of many evidences that the intellect’s essence is
practical. Intent is action in the sphere of thought; it corresponds to
transition and derivation in the natural world. Analytic psychology is
obliged to ignore intent, for it is obliged to regard it merely as a
feeling; but while the feeling of intent is a fact like any other,
intent itself is an aspiration, a passage, the recognition of an object
which not only is not a part of the feeling given but is often incapable
of being a feeling or a fact at all. What happened to motion under the
Eleatic analysis happens to intent under an anatomising reflection. The
parts do not contain the movement of transition which makes them a
whole. Moral experience is not expressible in physical categories,
because while you may give place and date for every feeling that
something is important or is absurd, you cannot so express what these
feelings have discovered and have wished to confide to you. The
importance and the absurdity have disappeared. Yet it is this
pronouncement concerning what things are absurd or important that makes
the intent of those judgments. To touch it you have to enter the moral
world; that is, you have to bring some sympathetic or hostile judgment
to bear on those you are considering and to meet intent, not by noting
its existence, but by estimating its value, by collating it with your
own intent. If some one says two and two are five, you are no
counter-mathematician when you conscientiously put it down that he said
so. Your science is not relevant to his intent until you run some risk
yourself in that arena and say, No: two and two are four.

[Sidenote: It is analogous to flux in existence]

Feelings and ideas, when plucked and separately considered, do not
retain the intent that made them cognitive or living; yet in their
native medium they certainly lived and knew. If this ideality or
transcendence seems a mystery, it is such only in the sense in which
every initial or typical fact is mysterious. Every category would be
unthinkable if it were not actually used. The mystery in this instance
has, however, all that can best serve to make a mystery homely and
amiable. It is supported by a strong analogy to other familiar
mysteries. The fact that intellect has intent, and does not constitute
or contain what it envisages, is like the fact that time flows, that
bodies gravitate, that experience is gathered, or that existence is
suspended between being and not being. Propagation in animals is
mysterious and familiar in the same fashion. Cognition, too, is an
expedient for vanquishing instability. As reproduction circumvents
mortality and preserves a semblance of permanence in the midst of
change, so intent regards what is not yet, or not here, or what exists
no longer. Thus the pulverisation proper to existence is vanquished by
thought, which in a moment announces or commemorates other moments,
together with the manner of their approach or recession. The mere image
of what is absent constitutes no knowledge of it; a dream is not
knowledge of a world like it existing elsewhere; it is simply another
more fragile world. What renders the image cognitive is the intent that
projects it and deputes it to be representative. It is cognitive only in
use, when it is the vehicle of an assurance which may be right or wrong,
because it takes something ulterior for its standard.

[Sidenote: It expresses natural life.]

We may give intent a somewhat more congenial aspect if we remember that
thought comes to animals in proportion to their docility in the world
and to their practical competence. The more plastic a being is to
experience, so long as he retains vital continuity and a cumulative
structure, the more intelligent he becomes. Intelligence is an
expression of adaptation, of impressionable and prophetic structure.
What wonder, then, that intelligence should speak of the things that
inspire it and that lend it its oracular and practical character,
namely, of things at that moment absent and merely potential, in other
words, of the surrounding world? Mere feeling might suffice to translate
into consciousness each particle of protoplasm in its isolation; but to
translate the relations of that particle to what is not itself and to
express its response to those environing presences, intent and conscious
signification are required. Intellect transcends the given and means
the absent because life, of which intellect is the fulfilment or
entelechy, is itself absorbed from without and radiated outward. As life
depends on an equilibrium of material processes which reach far beyond
the individual they sustain in being, so intent is a recognition of
outlying existences which sustain in being that very sympathy by which
they are recognised. Intent and life are more than analogous. If we use
the word life in an ideal sense, the two are coincident, for, as
Aristotle says, the act proper to intellect is life.[F] The flux is so
pervasive, so subtle in its persistency, that even those miracles which
suspend it must somehow share its destiny. Intent bridges many a chasm,
but only by leaping across. The life that is sustained for years, the
political or moral purpose that may bind whole races together, is
condemned to be partly a memory and partly a plan and wholly an ideal.
Its scope is nothing but the range to which it can continually extend
its sympathies and its power of representation. Its moments have nothing
in common except their loyalties and a conspiring interest in what is
not themselves.

[Sidenote: It has a material basis.]

This moral energy, so closely analogous to physical interplay, is of
course not without a material basis. Spiritual sublimation does not
consist in not using matter but in using it up, in making it all useful.
When life becomes rational it continues to be mechanical and to take up
room and energy in the natural world. That new direction of attention
upon form which finds in facts instances of ideas, does not occur
without a certain heat and labour in the brain. In its most intimate and
supernatural functions intellect has natural conditions. In dreams and
madness intent is confused and wayward, in idiocy it is suspended
altogether; nor has discourse any other pledge that it is addressing
kindred interlocutors except that which it receives from the disposition
and habit of bodies. People who have not yet been born into the world
have not yet begun to think about it.

There is, of course, an inner dialectical relevance among all
propositions that have the same ideal theme, no matter how remote or
unknown to one another those who utter the propositions may be; but the
medium in which this infinite dialectical network is woven is
motionless, and indifferent to the direction in which thought might
traverse it; in other words, it is not discourse or intelligence but
eternal truth. From the point of view of experience this prior
dialectical relation of form to form is merely potential; for the
thoughts between which it would obtain need never exist or be enacted.
There is society only among incarnate ideas; and it is only by
expressing some material situation that an idea is selected out of the
infinity of not impossible ideas and promoted to the temporal dignity of
actual thought.

[Sidenote: It is necessarily relevant to earth.]

Moreover, even if the faculty of intelligence were disembodied and could
exist in a vacuum, it would still be a vain possession if no data were
given for it to operate upon and if no particular natural structure,
animal, social, or artistic, were at hand for intelligence to ally
itself to and defend. Reason would in that case die of inanition; it
would have no subject-matter and no sanction, as well as no seat.
Intelligence is not a substance; it is a principle of order and of art;
it requires a given situation and some particular natural interest to
bring it into play. In fact, it is nothing but a name for the empire
which conscious, but at bottom irrational, interests attain over the
field in which they operate; it is the fruition of life, the token of
successful operation.

Every theme or motive in the Life of Reason expresses some instinct
rooted in the body and incidental to natural organisation. The intent by
which memory refers to past or absent experience, or the intent by which
perception becomes recognition, is a transcript of relations in which
events actually stand to one another. Such intent represents
modifications of structure and action important to life, modifications
that have responded to forces on which life is dependent. Both desire
and meaning translate into cognitive or ideal energy, into intent,
mechanical relations subsisting in nature. These mechanical relations
give practical force to the thought that expresses them, and the
thought in turn gives significance and value to the forces that subserve
it. Fulfilment is mutual, in one direction bringing material
potentialities to the light and making them actual and conscious, and in
the other direction embodying intent in the actual forms of things and
manifesting reason. Nothing could be more ill-considered than the desire
to disembody reason. Reason cries aloud for reunion with the material
world which she needs not only for a basis but, what concerns her even
more, for a theme.

In private and silent discourse, when words and grammar are swathed in
reverie, the material basis and reference of thought may be forgotten.
Desire and intent may then seem to disport themselves in a purely ideal
realm; moral or logical tensions alone may seem to determine the whole
process. Meditative persons are even inclined to regard the disembodied
life which they think they enjoy at such times as the true and native
form of experience; all organs, applications, and expressions of thought
they deprecate and call accidental. As some pious souls reject dogma to
reach pure faith and suspend prayer to enjoy union, so some mystical
logicians drop the world in order to grasp reality. It is an exquisite
suicide; but the energy and ideal that sustain such a flight are
annihilated by its issue, and the soul drops like a paper balloon
consumed by the very flame that wafted it. No thought is found without
an organ; none is conceivable without an expression which is that
organ’s visible emanation; and none would be significant without a
subject-matter lying in the world of which that organ is a part.

[Sidenote: The basis of intent becomes appreciable in language.]

The natural structure underlying intent is latent in silent thought, and
its existence might be denied by a sceptical thinker over whose mind the
analogies and spirit of physics exercised little influence. This
hypothetical structure is not, however, without obvious extensions which
imply its existence even where we do not perceive it directly. A smile
or a blush makes visible to the observer movements which must have been
at work in the body while thought occupied the mind—even if, as more
often happens, the blush or smile did not precede and introduce the
feeling they suggest, the feeling which in our verbal mythology is said
to cause them. No one would be so simple as to suppose that such
involuntary signs of feeling spring directly and by miracle out of
feeling. They surely continue some previous bodily commotion which
determines their material character, so that laughter, for instance,
becomes a sign of amusement rather than of rage, which it might just as
well have represented, so far as the abstract feeling itself is
concerned.

In the same way a sigh, a breath, a word are but the last stage and
superficial explosion of nervous tensions, tensions which from the point
of view of their other eventual expressions we might call interplaying
impulses or potential memories. As these material seethings underlay the
budding thought, so the uttered word, when it comes, underlies the
perfect conception. The word, in so far as it is material, undeniably
continues an internal material process, for aphasia and garrulity have
known physical causes. In the vibrations which we call words the hidden
complexities of cerebral action fly out, so to speak, into the air; they
become recognisable sounds emitted by lips and tongue and received by
the ear. The uttered word produces an obvious commotion in nature;
through it thought, being expressed in that its material basis is
extended outward, becomes at the same moment rational and practical; for
its expression enters into the chain of its future conditions and
becomes an omen of that thought’s continuance, repetition, and
improvement. Thought’s rational function consists, as we then perceive,
in expressing a natural situation and improving that situation by
expressing it, until such expression becomes a perfect and adequate
state of knowledge, which justifies both itself and its conditions.
Expression makes thought a power in the very world from which thought
drew its being, and renders it in some measure self-sustaining and
self-assured.

A thirsty man, let us say, begs for drink. Had his petition been a
wordless desire it might have been supposed, though falsely, to be a
disembodied and quite immaterial event, a transcendental attitude of
will, without conditions or consequences, but somehow with an absolute
moral dignity. But when the petition became articulate and audible to a
fellow-mortal, who thereupon proceeded to fetch a cup of water, the
desire, through the cry that expressed it, obviously asserted itself in
the mechanical world, to which it already secretly belonged by virtue of
its cause, a parched body. This material background for moral energy,
which even an inarticulate yearning would not have lacked, becomes in
language an overt phenomenon, linked observably with all other objects
and processes.

Language is accordingly an overflow of the physical basis of thought. It
is an audible gesture, more refined than the visible, but in the same
sense an automatic extension of nervous and muscular processes. Words
underlie the thought they are said to express—in truth it is the
thought that is the flower and expression of the language—much as the
body underlies the mind.

[Sidenote: Intent starts from a datum.]

Language contains, side by side two distinct elements. One is the
meaning or sense of the words—a logical projection given to sensuous
terms. The other is the sensuous vehicle of that meaning—the sound,
sign, or gesture. This sensuous term is a fulcrum for the lever of
signification, a _point d’appui_ which may be indefinitely attenuated in
rapid discourse, but not altogether discarded. Intent though it vaults
high must have something to spring from, or it would lend meaning to
nothing. The minimal sensuous term that subsists serves as a clue to a
whole system of possible assertions radiating from it. It becomes the
sign for an essence or idea, a logical hypostasis corresponding in
discourse to that material hypostasis of perceptions which is called an
external thing.

The hypostasised total of rational and just discourse is the truth. Like
the physical world, the truth is external and in the main potential. Its
ideal consistency and permanence serve to make it a standard and
background for fleeting assertions, just as the material hypostasis
called nature is the standard and background for all momentary
perceptions. What exists of truth in direct experience is at any moment
infinitesimal, as what exists of nature is, but all that either contains
might be represented in experience at one time or another.[G]

[Sidenote: and is carried by a feeling.]

The tensions and relations of words which make grammar or make poetry
are immediate in essence, the force of language being just as empirical
as the reality of things. To ask a thinker what he means by meaning is
as futile as to ask a carpenter what he means by wood; to discover it
you must emulate them and repeat their experience—which indeed you will
hardly be able to do if some sophist has so entangled your reason that
you can neither understand what you see nor assert what you mean. But as
the carpenter’s acquaintance with wood might be considerably refined if
he became a naturalist or liberalised if he became a carver, so a casual
speaker’s sense of what he means might be better focussed by dialectic
and more delicately shaded by literary training. Meantime the vital act
called intent, by which consciousness becomes cognitive and practical,
would remain at heart an indescribable experience, a sense of spiritual
life as radical and specific as the sense of heat.

[Sidenote: It demands conventional expression.]

Significant language forms a great system of ideal tensions, contained
in the mutual relations of parts of speech, and of clauses in
propositions. Of these tensions the intent in a man’s mind at any moment
is a living specimen. Experience at that moment may have a significance,
a transitive force, that asks to be enshrined in some permanent
expression; the more acute and irrevocable the crisis is, the more
urgent the need of transmitting to other moments some cognisance of what
was once so great. But were this experience to exhale its spirit in a
vacuum, using no conventional and transmissible medium of expression, it
would be foiled in its intent. It would leave no monument and achieve no
immortality in the world of representation; for the experience and its
expression would remain identical and perish together, just as a
perception and its object would remain identical and perish together if
there were no intelligence to discover the material world, to which the
perplexing shifts of sensation may be habitually referred. Spontaneous
expression, if it is to be recognisable and therefore in effect
expressive, labours under the necessity of subordinating itself to an
ideal system of expressions, a permanent language in which its
spontaneous utterances may be embedded. By virtue of such adoption into
a common medium expression becomes interpretable; a later moment may
then reconstruct the past out of its surviving memorial.

Intent, beside the form it has in language, where it makes the soul of
grammar, has many other modes of expression, in mathematical and logical
reasoning, in action, and in those contemplated and suspended acts which
we call estimation, policy, or morals. Moral philosophy, the wisdom of
Socrates, is merely a consideration of intent. In intent we pass over
from existence to ideality, the nexus lying in the propulsive nature of
life which could not have been capped by any form of knowledge which was
not itself in some way transitive and ambitious. Intent, though it looks
away from existence and the actual, is the most natural and pervasive of
things. Physics and dialectic meet in this: that the second brings to
fruition what the first describes, namely, existence, and that both have
their transcendental root in the flux of being. Matter cannot exist
without some form, much as by shedding every form in succession it may
proclaim its aversion to fixity and its radical formlessness or
infinitude. Nor can form, without the treacherous aid of matter, pass
from its ideal potentiality into selected and instant being.

[Sidenote: A fable about matter and form.]

In order to live—if such a myth may be allowed—the Titan Matter was
eager to disguise his incorrigible vagueness and pretend to be
something. He accordingly addressed himself to the beautiful company of
Forms, sisters whom he thought all equally beautiful, though their
number was endless, and equally fit to satisfy his heart. He wooed them
hypocritically, with no intention of wedding them; yet he uttered their
names in such seductive accents (called by mortals intelligence and
toil) that the virgin goddesses offered no resistance—at least such of
them as happened to be near or of a facile disposition. They were
presently deserted by their unworthy lover; yet they, too, in that
moment’s union, had tasted the sweetness of life. The heaven to which
they returned was no longer an infinite mathematical paradise. It was
crossed by memories of earth, and a warmer breath lingered in some of
its lanes and grottoes. Henceforth its nymphs could not forget that they
had awakened a passion, and that, unmoved themselves, they had moved a
strange indomitable giant to art and love.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote F: Cf. the motto on the title-page.]

[Footnote G: Not, of course, in human experience, which is incapable of
containing the heart of a flea, much less what may be endured in remoter
spheres. But if an intelligence were constructed _ad hoc_ there is
nothing real that might not fall within the scope of experience. The
difference between existence and truth on the one side and knowledge or
representation on the other may be reduced to this: that knowledge
brings what exists or what is true under apperception, while being
diffuses what is understood into an impartial subsistence. As truth is
indistinguishable from an absolute motionless intellect, which should no
longer be a function of life but merely a static order, so existence is
indistinguishable from an absolute motionless experience, which should
no longer be a foreshortening or representation of anything. This
existence would be motionless in the sense that it would “mark time,”
for of course every fact in it might be a fact of transition. The whole
system, however, would have a static ideal constitution, since the fact
that things change in a certain way or stand in a certain order is as
much a fact as any other; and it is not a logical necessity, either, but
a brute matter of fact that might well have been otherwise.]




