CHAPTER II

RATIONALITY OF INDUSTRIAL ART


[Sidenote: Utility is ultimately ideal.]

If there were anything wholly instrumental or merely useful its
rationality, such as it was, would be perfectly obvious. Such a thing
would be exhaustively defined by its result and conditioned exclusively
by its expediency. Yet the value of most human arts, mechanical as they
may appear, has a somewhat doubtful and mixed character. Naval
architecture, for instance, serves a clear immediate purpose. Yet to
cross the sea is not an ultimate good, and the ambition or curiosity
that first led man, being a land-animal, to that now vulgar adventure,
has sometimes found moralists to condemn it. A vessel’s true excellence
is more deeply conditioned than the ship-wright may imagine when he
prides himself on having made something that will float and go. The best
battle-ship, or racing yacht, or freight steamer, might turn out to be a
worse thing for its specific excellence, if the action it facilitated
proved on the whole maleficent, and if war or racing or trade could be
rightly condemned by a philosopher. The rationality of ship-building has
several sets of conditions: the patron’s demands must be first
fulfilled; then the patron’s specifications have to be judged by the
purpose he in turn has in mind; this purpose itself has to be justified
by his ideal in life, and finally his ideal by its adequacy to his total
or ultimate nature. Error on any of these planes makes the ultimate
product irrational; and if a finer instinct, even in the midst of
absorbing subsidiary action, warns a man that he is working against his
highest good, his art will lose its savour and its most skilful products
will grow hateful, even to his immediate apprehension, infected as they
will be by the canker of folly.

[Sidenote: Work wasted and chances missed.]

Art thus has its casuistry no less than morals, and philosophers in the
future, if man should at last have ceased to battle with ghosts, might
be called upon to review material civilisation from its beginnings,
testing each complication by its known ultimate fruits and reaching in
this way a purified and organic ideal of human industry, an ideal which
education and political action might help to embody. If nakedness or a
single garment were shown to be wholesomer and more agreeable than
complicated clothes, weavers and tailors might be notably diminished in
number. If, in another quarter, popular fancy should sicken at last of
its traditional round of games and fictions, it might discover infinite
entertainment in the play of reality and truth, and infinite novelties
to be created by fruitful labour; so that many a pleasure might be found
which is now clogged by mere apathy and unintelligence. Human genius,
like a foolish Endymion, lies fast asleep amid its opportunities,
wasting itself in dreams and disinheriting itself by negligence.

[Sidenote: Ideals must be interpreted, not prescribed.]

Descriptive economy, however, will have to make great progress before
the concrete ethics of art can be properly composed. History, conceived
hitherto as a barbarous romance, does not furnish sufficient data by
which the happiness of life under various conditions may be soberly
estimated. Politics has receded into the region of blind impulse and
factional interests, and would need to be reconstituted before it could
approach again that scientific problem which Socrates and his great
disciples would have wished it to solve. Meantime it may not be
premature to say something about another factor in practical philosophy,
namely, the ultimate interests by which industrial arts and their
products have to be estimated. Even before we know the exact effects of
an institution we can fix to some extent the purposes which, in order to
be beneficent, it will have to subserve, although in truth such
antecedent fixing of aims cannot go far, seeing that every operation
reacts on the organ that executes it, thereby modifying the ideal
involved. Doubtless the most industrial people would still wish to be
happy and might accordingly lay down certain principles which its
industry should never transgress, as for instance that production should
at any price leave room for liberty, leisure, beauty, and a spirit of
general co-operation and goodwill. But a people once having become
industrial will hardly be happy if sent back to Arcadia; it will have
formed busy habits which it cannot relax without tedium; it will have
developed a restlessness and avidity which will crave matter, like any
other kind of hunger. Every experiment in living qualifies the initial
possibilities of life, and the moralist would reckon without his host if
he did not allow for the change which forced exercise makes in instinct,
adjusting it more or less to extant conditions originally, perhaps,
unwelcome. It is too late for the highest good to prescribe flying for
quadrupeds or peace for the sea waves.

What antecedent interest does mechanical art subserve? What is the
initial and commanding ideal of life by which all industrial
developments are to be proved rational or condemned as vain? If we look
to the most sordid and instrumental of industries we see that their
purpose is to produce a foreordained result with the minimum of effort.
They serve, in a word, to cheapen commodities. But the value of such an
achievement is clearly not final; it hangs on two underlying ideals, one
demanding abundance in the things produced and the other diminution in
the toil required to produce them. At least the latter interest may in
turn be analysed further, for to diminish toil is itself no absolute
good; it is a good only when such diminution in one sphere liberates
energies which may be employed in other fields, so that the total human
accomplishment may be greater. Doubtless useful labour has its natural
limits, for if overdone any activity may impair the power of enjoying
both its fruits and its operation. Yet in so far as labour can become
spontaneous and in itself delightful it is a positive benefit; and to
its intrinsic value must be added all those possessions or useful
dispositions which it may secure. Thus one ideal—to diminish
labour—falls back into the other—to diffuse occasions for enjoyment.
The aim is not to curtail occupation but rather to render occupation
liberal by supplying it with more appropriate objects.

[Sidenote: The aim of industry is to live well.]

It is then liberal life, fostered by industry and commerce or involved
in them, that alone can justify these instrumental pursuits. Those
philosophers whose ethics is nothing but sentimental physics like to
point out that happiness arises out of work and that compulsory
activities, dutifully performed, underlie freedom. Of course matter or
force underlies everything; but rationality does not accrue to spirit
because mechanism supports it; it accrues to mechanism in so far as
spirit is thereby called into existence; so that while values derive
existence only from their causes, causes derive value only from their
results. Functions cannot be exercised until their organs exist and are
in operation, so that what is primary in the order of genesis is always
last and most dependent in the order of worth. The primary substance of
things is their mere material; their first cause is their lowest
instrument. Matter has only the values of the forms which it assumes,
and while each stratification may create some intrinsic ideal and
achieve some good, these goods are dull and fleeting in proportion to
their rudimentary character and their nearness to protoplasmic thrills.
Where reason exists life cannot, indeed, be altogether slavish; for any
operation, however menial and fragmentary, when it is accompanied by
ideal representation of the ends pursued and by felt success in
attaining them, becomes a sample and anagram of all freedom.
Nevertheless to arrest attention on a means is really illiberal, though
not so much by what such an interest contains as by what it ignores.
Happiness in a treadmill is far from inconceivable; but for that
happiness to be rational the wheel should be nothing less than the whole
sky from which influences can descend upon us. There would be meanness
of soul in being content with a smaller sphere, so that not everything
that was relevant to our welfare should be envisaged in our thoughts and
purposes. To be absorbed by the incidental is the animal’s portion; to
be confined to the instrumental is the slave’s. For though within such
activity there may be a rational movement, the activity ends in a fog
and in mere physical drifting. Happiness has to be begged of fortune or
found in mystical indifference: it is not yet subtended by rational art.

[Sidenote: Some arts, but no men, are slaves by nature.]

The Aristotelian theory of slavery, in making servile action wholly
subservient, sins indeed against persons, but not against arts. It sins
against persons because there is inconsiderate haste in asserting that
whole classes of men are capable of no activities, except the physical,
which justify themselves inherently. The lower animals also have
physical interests and natural emotions. A man, if he deserves the name,
must be credited with some rational capacity: prospect and retrospect,
hope and the ideal portraiture of things, must to some extent employ
him. Freedom to cultivate these interests is then his inherent right. As
the lion vindicates his prerogative to ferocity and dignity, so every
rational creature vindicates his prerogative to spiritual freedom. But a
too summary classification of individuals covers, in Aristotle, a just
discrimination among the arts. In so far as a man’s occupation is merely
instrumental and justified only externally, he is obviously a slave and
his art at best an evil necessity. For the operation is by hypothesis
not its own end; and if the product, needful for some ulterior purpose,
had been found ready made in nature, the other and self-justifying
activities could have gone on unimpeded, without the arrest or
dislocation which is involved in first establishing the needful
conditions for right action. If air had to be manufactured, as dwellings
must be, or breathing to be learned like speech, mankind would start
with an even greater handicap and would never have come within sight of
such goals as it can now pursue. Thus all instrumental and remedial
arts, however indispensable, are pure burdens; and progress consists in
abridging them as much as is possible without contracting the basis for
moral life.

[Sidenote: Servile arts may grow spontaneous or their products may be
renounced.]

This needful abridgment can take place in two directions. The art may
become instinctive, unconscious of the utility that backs it and
conscious only of the solicitation that leads it on. In that measure
human nature is adapted to its conditions; lessons long dictated by
experience are actually learned and become hereditary habits. So
inclination to hunt and fondness for nursing children have passed into
instincts in the human race; and what if it were a forced art would be
servile, by becoming spontaneous has risen to be an ingredient in ideal
life; for sport and maternity are human ideals. In an opposite direction
servile arts may be abridged by a lapse of the demand which required
them. The servile art of vine-dressers, for instance, would meet such a
fate if the course of history, instead of tending to make the vintage an
ideal episode and to create worshippers of Bacchus and Priapus, tended
rather to bring about a distaste for wine and made the whole industry
superfluous. This solution is certainly less happy than the other,
insomuch as it suppresses a function instead of taking it up into
organic life; yet life to be organic has to be exclusive and finite; it
has to work out specific tendencies in a specific environment; and
therefore to surrender a particular impeded impulse may involve a clear
gain, if only a compensating unimpeded good thereby comes to light
elsewhere. If wine disappeared, with all its humane and symbolic
consecrations, that loss might bring an ultimate gain, could some less
treacherous friend of frankness and merriment be thereby brought into
the world.

In practice servile art is usually mitigated by combining these two
methods; the demand subserved, being but ill supported, learns to
restrain itself and be less importunate; while at the same time habit
renders the labour which was once unwilling largely automatic, and even
overlays it with ideal associations. Human nature is happily elastic;
there is hardly a need that may not be muffled or suspended, and hardly
an employment that may not be relieved by the automatic interest with
which it comes to be pursued. To this automatic interest other
palliatives are often added, sometimes religion, sometimes mere dulness
and resignation; but in these cases the evil imposed is merely
counterbalanced or forgotten, it is not remedied. Reflective and
spiritual races minimise labour by renunciation, for they find it easier
to give up its fruits than to justify its exactions. Among energetic and
self-willed men, on the contrary, the demand for material progress
remains predominant, and philosophy dwells by preference on the
possibility that a violent and continual subjection in the present might
issue in a glorious future dominion. This possible result was hardly
realised by the Jews, nor long maintained by the Greeks and Romans, and
it remains to be seen whether modern industrialism can achieve it. In
fact, we may suspect that success only comes when a nation’s external
task happens to coincide with its natural genius, so that a minimum of
its labour is servile and a maximum of its play is beneficial. It is in
such cases that we find colossal achievements and apparently
inexhaustible energies. Prosperity is indeed the basis of every ideal
attainment, so that prematurely to recoil from hardship, or to be
habitually conscious of hardship at all, amounts to renouncing
beforehand all earthly goods and all chance of spiritual greatness. Yet
a chance is no certainty. When glory requires Titanic labours it often
finds itself in the end buried under a pyramid rather than raised upon a
pedestal. Energies which are not from the beginning self-justifying and
flooded with light seldom lead to ideal greatness.

[Sidenote: Art starts from two potentialities: its material and its
problem.]

The action to which industry should minister is accordingly liberal or
spontaneous action; and this one condition of rationality in from two
the arts. But a second condition is implicit in the first: freedom means
freedom in some operation, ideality means the ideality of something
embodied and material. Activity, achievement, a passage from prospect
to realisation, is evidently essential to life. If all ends were already
reached, and no art were requisite, life could not exist at all, much
less a Life of Reason. No politics, no morals, no thought would be
possible, for all these move towards some ideal and envisage a goal to
which they presently pass. The transition is the activity, without which
achievement would lose its zest and indeed its meaning; for a situation
could never be achieved which had been given from all eternity. The
ideal is a concomitant emanation from the natural and has no other
possible status. Those human possessions which are perennial and of
inalienable value are in a manner potential possessions only. Knowledge,
art, love are always largely in abeyance, while power is absolutely
synonymous with potentiality. Fruition requires a continual recovery, a
repeated re-establishment of the state we enjoy. So breath and
nutrition, feeling and thought, come in pulsations; they have only a
periodic and rhythmic sort of actuality. The operation may be sustained
indefinitely, but only if it admits a certain internal oscillation.

A creature like man, whose mode of being is a life or experience and not
a congealed ideality, such as eternal truth might show, must accordingly
find something to do; he must operate in an environment in which
everything is not already what he is presently to make it. In the actual
world this first condition of life is only too amply fulfilled; the real
difficulty in man’s estate, the true danger to his vitality, lies not
in want of work but in so colossal a disproportion between demand and
opportunity that the ideal is stunned out of existence and perishes for
want of hope. The Life of Reason is continually beaten back upon its
animal sources, and nations are submerged in deluge after deluge of
barbarism. Impressed as we may well be by this ancient experience, we
should not overlook the complementary truth which under more favourable
circumstances would be as plain as the other: namely, that our deepest
interest is after all to live, and we could not live if all acquisition,
assimilation, government, and creation had been made impossible for us
by their foregone realisation, so that every operation was forestalled
by the given fact. The distinction between the ideal and the real is one
which the human ideal itself insists should be preserved. It is an
essential expression of life, and its disappearance would be tantamount
to death, making an end to voluntary transition and ideal
representation. All objects envisaged either in vulgar action or in the
airiest cognition must be at first ideal and distinct from the given
facts, otherwise action would have lost its function at the same moment
that thought lost its significance. All life would have collapsed into a
purposeless datum.

The ideal requires, then, that opportunities should be offered for
realising it through action, and that transition should be possible to
it from a given state of things. One form of such transition is art,
where the ideal is a possible and more excellent form to be given to
some external substance or medium. Art needs to find a material
relatively formless which its business is to shape; and this initial
formlessness in matter is essential to art’s existence. Were there no
stone not yet sculptured and built into walls, no sentiment not yet
perfectly uttered in poetry, no distance or oblivion yet to be abolished
by motion or inferential thought, activity of all sorts would have lost
its occasion. Matter, or actuality in what is only potentially ideal, is
therefore a necessary condition for realising an ideal at all.

[Sidenote: Each must be definite and congruous with the other.]

This potentiality, however, in so far as the ideal requires it, is a
quite definite disposition. Absolute chaos would defeat life as surely
as would absolute ideality. Activity, in presupposing material
conditions, presupposes them to be favourable, so that a movement
towards the ideal may actually take place. Matter, which from the point
of view of a given ideal is merely its potentiality, is in itself the
potentiality of every other ideal as well; it is accordingly responsible
to no ideal in particular and proves in some measure refractory to all.
It makes itself felt, either as an opportune material or as an
accidental hindrance, only when it already possesses definite form and
affinities; given in a certain quantity, quality, and order, matter
feeds the specific life which, if given otherwise, it would impede or
smother altogether.

[Sidenote: A sophism exposed]

Art, in calling for materials, calls for materials plastic to its
influence and definitely predisposed to its ends. Unsuitableness in the
data far from grounding action renders it abortive, and no expedient
could be more sophistical than that into which theodicy, in its
desperate straits, has sometimes been driven, of trying to justify as
conditions for ideal achievement the very conditions which make ideal
achievement impossible. The given state from which transition is to take
place to the ideal must support that transition; so that the desirable
want of ideality which plastic matter should possess is merely relative
and strictly determined. Art and reason find in nature the background
they require; but nature, to be wholly justified by its ideal functions,
would have to subserve them perfectly. It would have to offer to reason
and art a sufficient and favourable basis; it would have to feed sense
with the right stimuli at the right intervals, so that art and reason
might continually flourish and be always moving to some new success. A
poet needs emotions and perceptions to translate into language, since
these are his subject-matter and his inspiration; but starvation,
physical or moral, will not help him to sing. One thing is to meet with
the conditions inherently necessary for a given action; another thing is
to meet with obstacles fatal to the same. A propitious formlessness in
matter is no sort of evil; and evil is so far from being a propitious
formlessness in matter that it is rather an impeding form which matter
has already assumed.

[Sidenote: Industry prepares matter for the liberal arts.]

Out of this appears, with sufficient clearness, the rational function
which the arts possess. They give, as nature does, a form to matter, but
they give it a more propitious form. Such success in art is possible
only when the materials and organs at hand are in a large measure
already well disposed; for it can as little exist with a dull organ as
with no organ at all, while there are winds in which every sail must be
furled. Art depends upon profiting by a bonanza and learning to sail in
a good breeze, strong enough for speed and conscious power but placable
enough for dominion and liberty of soul. Then perfection in action can
be attained and a self-justifying energy can emerge out of apathy on the
one hand and out of servile and wasteful work on the other. Art has
accordingly two stages: one mechanical or industrial, in which untoward
matter is better prepared, or impeding media are overcome; the other
liberal, in which perfectly fit matter is appropriated to ideal uses and
endowed with a direct spiritual function. A premonition or rehearsal of
these two stages may be seen in nature, where nutrition and reproduction
fit the body for its ideal functions, whereupon sensation and
cerebration make it a direct organ of mind. Industry merely gives nature
that form which, if more thoroughly humane, she might have originally
possessed for our benefit; liberal arts bring to spiritual fruition the
matter which either nature or industry has prepared and rendered
propitious. This spiritual fruition consists in the activity of turning
an apt material into an expressive and delightful form, thus filling the
world with objects which by symbolising ideal energies tend to revive
them under a favouring influence and therefore to strengthen and refine
them.

[Sidenote: Each partakes of the other]

It remains merely to note that all industry contains an element of fine
art and all fine art an element of industry; since every proximate end,
in being attained, satisfies the mind and manifests the intent that
pursued it; while every operation upon a material, even one so volatile
as sound, finds that material somewhat refractory. Before the product
can attain its ideal function many obstacles to its transparency and
fitness have to be removed. A certain amount of technical and
instrumental labour is thus involved in every work of genius, and a
certain genius in every technical success.




