CHAPTER IV

MUSIC


[Sidenote: Music is a world apart.]

Sound readily acquires ideal values. It has power in itself to engross
attention and at the same time may be easily diversified, so as to
become a symbol for other things. Its direct empire is to be compared
with that of stimulants and opiates, yet it presents to the mind, as
these do not, a perception that corresponds, part by part, with the
external stimulus. To hear is almost to understand. The process we
undergo in mathematical or dialectical thinking is called understanding,
because a natural sequence is there adequately translated into ideal
terms. Logical connections seem to be internally justified, while only
the fact that we perceive them here and now, with more or less facility,
is attributed to brute causes. Sound approaches this sort of ideality;
it presents to sense something like the efficacious structure of the
object. It is almost mathematical; but like mathematics it is adequate
only by being abstract; and while it discloses point by point one strain
in existence, it leaves many other strains, which in fact are interwoven
with it, wholly out of account. Music is accordingly, like mathematics,
very nearly a world by itself; it contains a whole gamut of experience,
from sensuous elements to ultimate intellectual harmonies. Yet this
second existence, this life in music, is no mere ghost of the other; it
has its own excitements, its quivering alternatives, its surprising
turns; the abstract energy of it takes on so much body, that in
progression or declension it seems quite as impassioned as any animal
triumph or any moral drama.

[Sidenote: It justifies itself.]

That a pattering of sounds on the ear should have such moment is a fact
calculated to give pause to those philosophers who attempt to explain
consciousness by its utility, or who wish to make physical and moral
processes march side by side from all eternity. Music is essentially
useless, as life is: but both have an ideal extension which lends
utility to its conditions. That the way in which idle sounds run
together should matter so much is a mystery of the same order as the
spirit’s concern to keep a particular body alive, or to propagate its
life. Such an interest is, from an absolute point of view, wholly
gratuitous; and so long as the natural basis and expressive function of
spirit are not perceived, this mystery is baffling. In truth the order
of values inverts that of causes; and experience, in which all values
lie, is an ideal resultant, itself ineffectual, of the potencies it can
conceive. Delight in music is liberal; it makes useful the organs and
processes that subserve it. These agencies, when they support a
conscious interest in their operation, give that operation its first
glimmering justification, and admit it to the rational sphere. Just so
when organic bodies generate a will bent on their preservation, they add
a value and a moral function to their equilibrium. In vain should we ask
for what purpose existences arise, or become important; that purpose, to
be such, must already have been important to some existence; and the
only question that can be asked or answered is what recognised
importance, what ideal values, actual existences involve.

[Sidenote: It is vital and transient.]

We happen to breathe, and on that account are interested in breathing;
and it is no greater marvel that, happening to be subject to intricate
musical sensations, we should be in earnest about these too. The human
ear discriminates sounds with ease; what it hears is so diversified that
its elements can be massed without being confused, or can form a
sequence having a character of its own, to be appreciated and
remembered. The eye too has a field in which clear distinctions and
relations appear, and for that reason is an organ favourable to
intelligence; but what gives music its superior emotional power is its
rhythmic advance. Time is a medium which appeals more than space to
emotion. Since life is itself a flux, and thought an operation, there is
naturally something immediate and breathless about whatever flows and
expands. The visible world offers itself to our regard with a certain
lazy indifference. “Peruse me,” it seems to say, “if you will. I am
here; and even if you pass me by now and later find it to your advantage
to resurvey me, I may still be here.” The world of sound speaks a more
urgent language. It insinuates itself into our very substance, and it is
not so much the music that moves us as we that move with it. Its rhythms
seize upon our bodily life, to accelerate or to deepen it; and we must
either become inattentive altogether or remain enslaved.

[Sidenote: Its physical affinities.]

This imperious function in music has lent it functions which are far
from æsthetic. Song can be used to keep in unison many men’s efforts, as
when sailors sing as they heave; it can make persuasive and obvious
sentiments which, if not set to music, might seem absurd, as often in
love songs and in psalmody. It may indeed serve to prepare the mind for
any impression whatever, and render the same more intense when it comes.
Music was long used before it was loved or people took pains to refine
it. It would have seemed as strange in primitive times to turn utterance
into a fine art as now to make æsthetic paces out of mourning or
child-birth. Primitive music is indeed a wail and a parturition; magical
and suggestive as it may be, for long ages it never bethinks itself to
be beautiful. It is content to furnish a contagious melancholy
employment to souls without a language and with little interest in the
real world. Barbaric musicians, singing and playing together more or
less at random, are too much carried away by their performance to
conceive its effect; they cry far too loud and too unceasingly to
listen. A contagious tradition carries them along and controls them, in
a way, as they improvise; the assembly is hardly an audience; all are
performers, and the crowd is only a stimulus that keeps every one
dancing and howling in emulation. This unconsidered flow of early art
remains present, more or less, to the end. Instead of vague custom we
have schools, and instead of swaying multitudes academic example; but
many a discord and mannerism survive simply because the musician is so
suggestible, or so lost in the tumult of production, as never to
reconsider what he does, or to perceive its wastefulness.

Nevertheless an inherent value exists in all emitted sounds, although
barbaric practice and theory are slow to recognise it. Each tone has its
quality, like jewels of different water; every cadence has its vital
expression, no less inherent in it than that which comes in a posture or
in a thought. Everything audible thrills merely by sounding, and though
this perceptual thrill be at first overpowered by the effort and
excitement of action, yet it eventually fights its way to the top.
Participation in music may become perfunctory or dull for the great
majority, as when hymns are sung in church; a mere suggestion of action
will doubtless continue to colour the impression received, for a
tendency to act is involved in perception; but this suggestion will be
only an over-tone or echo behind an auditory feeling. Some performers
will be singled out from the crowd; those whom the public likes to hear
will be asked to continue alone; and soon a certain suasion will be
exerted over them by the approval or censure of others, so that
consciously or unconsciously they will train themselves to please.

[Sidenote: Physiology of music.]

The musical quality of sounds has a simple physical measure for its
basis; and the rate of vibration is complicated by its sweep or
loudness, and by concomitant sounds. What a rich note is to a pure and
thin one, that a chord is to a note; nor is melody wholly different in
principle, for it is a chord rendered piece-meal. Time intervenes, and
the harmony is deployed; so that in melody rhythm is added, with its
immense appeal, to the cumulative effect already secured by rendering
many notes together. The heightened effect which a note gets by figuring
in a phrase, or a phrase in a longer passage, comes of course from the
tensions established and surviving in the sensorium—a case, differently
shaded, of chords and overtones. The difference is only that the more
emphatic parts of the melody survive clearly to the end, while the
detail, which if perceived might now clash, is largely lost, and out of
the preceding parts perhaps nothing but a certain swing and potency is
present at the close. The mind has been raked and set vibrating in an
unusual fashion, so that the _finale_ comes like a fulfilment after much
premonition and desire, whereas the same event, unprepared for, might
hardly have been observed. The whole technique of music is but an
immense elaboration of this principle. It deploys a sensuous harmony by
a sort of dialectic, suspending and resolving it, so that the parts
become distinct and their relation vital.

[Sidenote: Limits of musical sensibility.]

Such elaboration often exceeds the synthetic power of all but the best
trained minds. Both in scope and in articulation musical faculty varies
prodigiously. There is no fixed limit to the power of sustaining a given
conscious process while new features appear in the same field; nor is
there any fixed limit to the power of recovering, under changed
circumstances, a process that was formerly suspended. A whole symphony
might be felt at once, if the musician’s power of sustained or
cumulative hearing could stretch so far. As we all survey two notes and
their interval in one sensation (actual experience being always
transitive and pregnant, and its terms ideal), so a trained mind might
survey a whole composition. This is not to say that time would be
transcended in such an experience; the apperception would still have
duration and the object would still have successive features, for
evidently music not arranged in time would not be music, while all
sensations with a recognisable character occupy more than an instant in
passing. But the passing sensation, throughout its lapse, presents some
experience; and this experience, taken at any point, may present a
temporal sequence with any number of members, according to the synthetic
and analytic power exerted by the given mind. What is tedious and
formless to the inattentive may seem a perfect whole to one who, as they
say, takes it all in; and similarly what is a frightful deafening
discord to a sense incapable of discrimination, for one who can hear the
parts may break into a celestial chorus. A musical education is
necessary for musical judgment. What most people relish is hardly music;
it is rather a drowsy revery relieved by nervous thrills.

[Sidenote: The value of music is relative to them.]

The degree to which music should be elaborated depends on the capacity
possessed by those it addresses. There are limits to every man’s
synthetic powers, and to stretch those powers to their limit is
exhausting. Excitement then becomes a debauch; it leaves the soul less
capable of habitual harmony. Especially is such extreme tension
disastrous when, as in music, nothing remains to be the fruit of that
mighty victory; the most pregnant revelation sinks to an illusion and is
discredited when it cannot maintain its inspiration in the world’s
presence. Everything has its own value and sets up its price; but others
must judge if that price is fair, and sociability is the condition of
all rational excellence. There is therefore a limit to right complexity
in music, a limit set not by the nature of music itself, but by its
place in human economy. This limit, though clear in principle, is
altogether variable in practice; duly cultivated people will naturally
place it higher than the unmusical would. In other words, popular music
needs to be simple, although elaborate music may be beautiful to the
few. When elaborate music is the fashion among people to whom all music
is a voluptuous mystery, we may be sure that what they love is
voluptuousness or fashion, and not music itself.

[Sidenote: Wonders of musical structure.]

Beneath its hypnotic power music, for the musician, has an intellectual
essence. Out of simple chords and melodies, which at first catch only
the ear, he weaves elaborate compositions that by their form appeal also
to the mind. This side of music resembles a richer versification; it may
be compared also to mathematics or to arabesques. A moving arabesque
that has a vital dimension, an audible mathematics, adding sense to
form, and a versification that, since it has no subject-matter, cannot
do violence to it by its complex artifices—these are types of pure
living, altogether joyful and delightful things. They combine life with
order, precision with spontaneity; the flux in them has become
rhythmical and its freedom has passed into a rational choice, since it
has come in sight of the eternal form it would embody. The musician,
like an architect or goldsmith working in sound, but freer than they
from material trammels, can expand for ever his yielding labyrinth;
every step opens up new vistas, every decision—how unlike those made in
real life!—multiplies opportunities, and widens the horizon before him,
without preventing him from going back at will to begin afresh at any
point, to trace the other possible paths leading thence through various
magic landscapes. Pure music is pure art. Its extreme abstraction is
balanced by its entire spontaneity, and, while it has no external
significance, it bears no internal curse. It is something to which a few
spirits may well surrender themselves, sure that in a liberal
commonwealth they will be thanked for their ideal labour, the fruits of
which many may enjoy. Such excursions into ultra-mundane regions, where
order is free, refine the mind and make it familiar with perfection. By
analogy an ideal form comes to be conceived and desiderated in other
regions, where it is not produced so readily, and the music heard, as
the Pythagoreans hoped, makes the soul also musical.

[Sidenote: Its inherent emotions.]

It must be confessed, however, that a world of sounds and rhythms, all
about nothing, is a by-world and a mere distraction for a political
animal. Its substance is air, though the spell of it may have moral
affinities. Nevertheless this ethereal art may be enticed to earth and
married with what is mortal. Music interests humanity most when it is
wedded to human events. The alliance comes about through the emotions
which music and life arouse in common. For sound, in sweeping through
the body and making felt there its kinetic and potential stress,
provokes no less interest than does any other physical event or
premonition. Music can produce emotion as directly as can fighting or
love. If in the latter instances the body’s whole life may be in
jeopardy, this fact is no explanation of our concern; for many a danger
is not felt and there is no magic in the body’s future condition, that
it should now affect the soul. What touches the soul is the body’s
condition at the moment; and this is altered no less truly by a musical
impression than by some protective or reproductive act. If emotions
accompany the latter, they might as well accompany the former; and in
fact they do. Nor is music the only idle cerebral commotion that enlists
attention and presents issues no less momentous for being quite
imaginary; dreams do the same, and seldom can the real crises of life so
absorb the soul, or prompt it to such extreme efforts, as can delirium
in sickness, or delusion in what passes for health.

[Sidenote: In growing specific they remain unearthly.]

There is perhaps no emotion incident to human life that music cannot
render in its abstract medium by suggesting the pang of it; though of
course music cannot describe the complex situation which lends earthly
passions their specific colour. It is by fusion with many suggested
emotions that sentiment grows definite; this fusion can hardly come
about without ideas intervening, and certainly it could never be
sustained or expressed without them. Occasions define feelings; we can
convey a delicate emotion only by delicately describing the situation
which brings it on. Music, with its irrelevant medium, can never do this
for common life, and the passions, as music renders them, are always
general. But music has its own substitute for conceptual distinctness.
It makes feeling specific, nay, more delicate and precise than
association with things could make it, by uniting it with musical form.
We may say that besides suggesting abstractly all ordinary passions,
music creates a new realm of form far more subtly impassioned than is
vulgar experience. Human life is confined to a dramatic repertory which
has already become somewhat classical and worn, but music has no end of
new situations, shaded in infinite ways; it moves in all sorts of bodies
to all sorts of adventures. In life the ordinary routine of destiny
beats so emphatic a measure that it does not allow free play to feeling;
we cannot linger on anything long enough to exhaust its meaning, nor can
we wander far from the beaten path to catch new impressions. But in
music there are no mortal obligations, no imperious needs calling us
back to reality. Here nothing beautiful is extravagant, nothing
delightful unworthy. Musical refinement finds no limit but its own
instinct, so that a thousand shades of what, in our blundering words, we
must call sadness or mirth, find in music their distinct expression.
Each phrase, each composition, articulates perfectly what no human
situation could embody. These fine emotions are really new; they are
altogether musical and unexampled in practical life; they are native to
the passing cadence, absolute postures into which it throws the soul.

[Sidenote: They merge with common emotions, and express such as find no
object in nature.]

There is enough likeness, however, between musical and mundane feeling
for the first to be used in entertaining the second. Hence the singular
privilege of this art: to give form to what is naturally inarticulate
and express those depths of human nature which can speak no language
current in the world. Emotion is primarily about nothing, and much of it
remains about nothing to the end. What rescues a part of our passions
from this pathological plight, and gives them some other function than
merely to be, is the ideal relevance, the practical and mutually
representative character, which they sometimes acquire. All experience
is pathological if we consider its ground; but a part of it is also
rational if we consider its import. The words I am now writing have a
meaning not because at this moment they are fused together in my animal
soul as a dream might fuse them, however incongruous the situation they
depict might be in waking life; they are significant only if this
moment’s product can meet and conspire with some other thought speaking
of what elsewhere exists, and uttering an intuition that from time to
time may be actually recovered. The art of distributing interest among
the occasions and vistas of life so as to lend them a constant worth,
and at the same time to give feeling an ideal object, is at bottom the
sole business of education; but the undertaking is long, and much
feeling remains unemployed and unaccounted for. This objectless emotion
chokes the heart with its dull importunity; now it impedes right action,
now it feeds and fattens illusion. Much of it radiates from primary
functions which, though their operation is half known, have only base or
pitiful associations in human life; so that they trouble us with deep
and subtle cravings, the unclaimed _Hinterland_ of life. When music,
either by verbal indications or by sensuous affinities, or by both at
once, succeeds in tapping this fund of suppressed feeling, it
accordingly supplies a great need. It makes the dumb speak, and plucks
from the animal heart potentialities of expression which might render
it, perhaps, even more than human.

[Sidenote: Music lends elementary feelings an intellectual communicable
form.]

By its emotional range music is appropriate to all intense occasions: we
dance, pray, and mourn to music, and the more inadequate words or
external acts are to the situation, the more grateful music is. As the
only bond between music and life is emotion, music is out of place only
where emotion itself is absent. If it breaks in upon us in the midst of
study or business it becomes an interruption or alternative to our
activity, rather than an expression of it; we must either remain
inattentive or pass altogether into the realm of sound (which may be
unemotional enough) and become musicians for the nonce. Music brings its
sympathetic ministry only to emotional moments; there it merges with
common existence, and is a welcome substitute for descriptive ideas,
since it co-operates with us and helps to deliver us from dumb
subjection to influences which we should not know how to meet otherwise.
There is often in what moves us a certain ruthless persistence, together
with a certain poverty of form; the power felt is out of proportion to
the interest awakened, and attention is kept, as in pain, at once
strained and idle. At such a moment music is a blessed resource. Without
attempting to remove a mood that is perhaps inevitable, it gives it a
congruous filling. Thus the mood is justified by an illustration or
expression which seems to offer some objective and ideal ground for its
existence; and the mood is at the same time relieved by absorption in
that impersonal object. So entertained, the feeling settles. The passion
to which at first we succumbed is now tamed and appropriated. We have
digested the foreign substance in giving it a rational form: its
energies are merged in that strength by which we freely operate.

In this way the most abstract of arts serves the dumbest emotions.
Matter which cannot enter the moulds of ordinary perception, capacities
which a ruling instinct usually keeps under, flow suddenly into this
new channel. Music is like those branches which some trees put forth
close to the ground, far below the point where the other boughs
separate; almost a tree by itself, it has nothing but the root in common
with its parent. Somewhat in this fashion music diverts into an abstract
sphere a part of those forces which abound beneath the point at which
human understanding grows articulate. It nourishes on saps which other
branches of ideation are too narrow or rigid to take up. Those
elementary substances the musician can spiritualise by his special
methods, taking away their reproach and redeeming them from blind
intensity.

[Sidenote: All essences are in themselves good, even the passions.]

There is consequently in music a sort of Christian piety, in that it
comes not to call the just but sinners to repentance, and understands
the spiritual possibilities in outcasts from the respectable world. If
we look at things absolutely enough, and from their own point of view,
there can be no doubt that each has its own ideal and does not question
its own justification. Lust and frenzy, revery or despair, fatal as they
may be to a creature that has general ulterior interests, are not
perverse in themselves: each searches for its own affinities, and has a
kind of inertia which tends to maintain it in being, and to attach or
draw in whatever is propitious to it. Feelings are as blameless as so
many forms of vegetation; they can be poisonous only to a different
life. They are all primordial motions, eddies which the universal flux
makes for no reason, since its habit of falling into such attitudes is
the ground-work and exemplar for nature and logic alike. That such
strains should exist is an ultimate datum; justification cannot be
required of them, but must be offered to each of them in turn by all
that enters its particular orbit. There is no will but might find a
world to disport itself in and to call good, and thereupon boast to have
created that in which it found itself expressed. But such satisfaction
has been denied to the majority; the equilibrium of things has at least
postponed their day. Yet they are not altogether extinguished, since the
equilibrium of things is mechanical and results from no preconcerted
harmony such as would have abolished everything contrary to its own
perfection. Many ill-suppressed possibilities endure in matter, and peep
into being through the crevices, as it were, of the dominant world.
Weeds they are called by the tyrant, but in themselves they are aware of
being potential gods. Why should not every impulse expand in a congenial
paradise? Why should each, made evil now only by an adventitious
appellation or a contrary fate, not vindicate its own ideal? If there is
a piety towards things deformed, because it is not they that are
perverse, but the world that by its laws and arbitrary standards decides
to treat them as if they were, how much more should there be a piety
towards things altogether lovely, when it is only space and matter that
are wanting for their perfect realisation?

[Sidenote: Each impulse calls for a possible congenial world.]

Philosophers talk of self-contradiction, but there is evidently no such
thing, if we take for the self what is really vital, each propulsive,
definite strain of being, each nucleus for estimation and for pleasure
and pain. Bach impulse may be contradicted, but not by itself; it may
find itself opposed, in a theatre which it has entered it knows not how,
by violent personages that it has never wished to encounter. The
environment it calls for is congenial with it: and by that environment
it could never be thwarted or condemned. The lumbering course of events
may indeed involve it in rum, and a mind with permanent interests to
defend may at once rule out everything inconsistent with possible
harmonies; but such rational judgments come from outside and represent a
compromise struck with material forces. Moral judgments and conflicts
are possible only in the mind that represents many interests
synthetically: in nature, where primary impulses collide, all conflict
is physical and all will innocent. Imagine some ingredient of humanity
loosed from its oppressive environment in human economy: it would at
once vegetate and flower into some ideal form, such as we see
exuberantly displayed in nature. If we can only suspend for a moment the
congested traffic in the brain, these initial movements will begin to
traverse it playfully and show their paces, and we shall live in one of
those plausible worlds which the actual world has made impossible.

[Sidenote: Literature incapable of expressing pure feelings.]

Man possesses, for example, a native capacity for joy. There are
moments, in friendship or in solitude, when joy is realised; but the
occasions are often trivial and could never justify in reflection the
feelings that then happen to bubble up. Nor can pure joy be long
sustained: cross-currents of lassitude or anxiety, distracting
incidents, irrelevant associations, trouble its course and make it
languish, turning it before long into dulness or melancholy. Language
cannot express a joy that shall be full and pure; for to keep the purity
nothing would have to be named which carried the least suggestion of
sadness with it, and, in the world that human language refers to, such a
condition would exclude every situation possible. “O joy, O joy,” would
be the whole ditty: hence some dialecticians, whose experience is
largely verbal, think whatever is pure necessarily thin.

[Sidenote: Music may do so.]

That feeling should be so quickly polluted is, however, a superficial
and earthly accident. Spirit is clogged by what it flows through, but at
its springs it is both limpid and abundant. There is matter enough in
joy for many a universe, though the actual world has not a single form
quite fit to embody it, and its too rapid syllables are excluded from
the current hexameter. Music, on the contrary, has a more flexible
measure; its prosody admits every word. Its rhythms can explicate every
emotion, through all degrees of complexity and volume, without once
disavowing it. Thus unused matter, which is not less fertile than that
which nature has absorbed, comes to fill out an infinity of ideal forms.
The joy condemned by practical exigencies to scintillate for a moment
uncommunicated, and then, as it were, to be buried alive, may now find
an abstract art to embody it and bring it before the public, formed into
a rich and constant object called a musical composition. So art succeeds
in vindicating the forgotten regions of spirit: a new spontaneous
creation shows how little authority or finality the given creation has.

[Sidenote: Instability the soul of matter.]

What is true of joy is no less true of sorrow, which, though it arises
from failure in some natural ideal, carries with it a sentimental ideal
of its own. Even confusion can find in music an expression and a
catharsis. That death or change should grieve does not follow from the
material nature of these phenomena. To change or to disappear might be
as normal a tendency as to move; and it actually happens, when nothing
ideal has been attained, that _not to be thus_ is the whole law of
being. There is then a nameless satisfaction in passing on; which is the
virtual ideal of pain and mere willing. Death and change acquire a
tragic character when they invade a mind which is not ready for them in
all its parts, so that those elements in it which are still vigorous,
and would maintain somewhat longer their ideal identity, suffer violence
at the hands of the others, already mastered by decay and willing to be
self-destructive. Thus a man whose physiological complexion involves
more poignant emotion than his ideas can absorb—one who is
sentimental—will yearn for new objects that may explain, embody, and
focus his dumb feelings; and these objects, if art can produce them,
will relieve and glorify those feelings in the act of expressing them.
Catharsis is nothing more.

[Sidenote: Peace the triumph of spirit.]

There would be no pleasure in expressing pain, if pain were not
dominated through its expression. To know how just a cause we have for
grieving is already a consolation, for it is already a shift from
feeling to understanding. By such consideration of a passion, the
intellectual powers turn it into subject-matter to operate upon. All
utterance is a feat, all apprehension a discovery; and this intellectual
victory, sounding in the midst of emotional struggles, hushes some part
of their brute importunity. It is at once sublime and beneficent, like a
god stilling a tempest. Melancholy can in this way be the food of art;
and it is no paradox that such a material may be beautiful when a fit
form is imposed upon it, since a fit form turns anything into an
agreeable object; its beauty runs as deep as its fitness, and stops
where its adaptation to human nature begins to fail. Whatever can
interest may prompt to expression, as it may have satisfied curiosity;
and the mind celebrates a little triumph whenever it can formulate a
truth, however unwelcome to the flesh, or discover an actual force,
however unfavourable to given interests. As meditation on death and on
life make equally for wisdom, so the expression of sorrow and joy make
equally for beauty. Meditation and expression are themselves congenial
activities with an intrinsic value which is not lessened if what they
deal with could have been abolished to advantage. If once it exists, we
may understand and interpret it; and this reaction will serve a double
purpose. At first, in its very act, it will suffuse and mollify the
unwelcome experience by another, digesting it, which is welcome; and
later, by the broader adjustment which it will bring into the mind, it
will help us to elude or confront the evils thus laid clearly before us.

Catharsis has no such effect as a sophistical optimism wishes to
attribute to it; it does not show us that evil is good, or that calamity
and crime are things to be grateful for: so forced an apology for evil
has nothing to do with tragedy or wisdom; it belongs to apologetics and
an artificial theodicy. Catharsis is rather the consciousness of how
evil evils are, and how besetting; and how possible goods lie between
and involve serious renunciations. To understand, to accept, and to use
the situation in which a mortal may find himself is the function of art
and reason. Such mastery is desirable in itself and for its fruits; it
does not make itself responsible for the chaos of goods and evils that
it supervenes upon. Whatever writhes in matter, art strives to give form
to; and however unfavourable the field may be for its activity, it does
what it can there, since no other field exists in which it may labour.

[Sidenote: Refinement is true strength.]

Sad music pleases the melancholy because it is sad and other men because
it is music. When a composer attempts to reproduce complex conflicts in
his score he will please complex or disordered spirits for expressing
their troubles, but other men only for the order and harmony he may have
brought out of that chaos. The chaos in itself will offend, and it is no
part of rational art to produce it. As well might a physician poison in
order to give an antidote, or maim in order to amputate. The subject
matter of art is life, life as it actually is; but the function of art
is to make life better. The depth to which an artist may find current
experience to be sunk in discord and confusion is not his special
concern; his concern is, in some measure, to lift experience out. The
more barbarous his age, the more drastic and violent must be his
operation. He will have to shout in a storm. His strength must needs, in
such a case, be very largely physical and his methods sensational. In a
gentler age he may grow nobler, and blood and thunder will no longer
seem impressive. Only the weak are obliged to be violent; the strong,
having all means at command, need not resort to the worst. Refined art
is not wanting in power if the public is refined also. And as
refinement comes only by experience, by comparison, by subordinating
means to ends and rejecting what hinders, it follows that a refined mind
will really possess the greater volume, as well as the subtler
discrimination. Its ecstasy without grimace, and its submission without
tears, will hold heaven and earth better together—and hold them better
apart—than could a mad imagination.




