CHAPTER III

MECHANISM


[Sidenote: Recurrent forms in nature.]

A retrospect over human experience, if a little extended, can hardly
fail to come upon many interesting recurrences. The seasons make their
round and the generations of men, like the forest leaves, repeat their
career. In this its finer texture history undoubtedly repeats itself. A
study of it, in registering so many recurrences, leads to a description
of habit, or to natural history. To observe a recurrence is to divine a
mechanism. It is to analyse a phenomenon, distinguishing its form, which
alone recurs, from its existence, which is irrevocable; and that the
flux of phenomena should turn out, on closer inspection, to be composed
of a multitude of recurring forms, regularly interwoven, is the ideal of
mechanism. The forms, taken ideally and in themselves, are what
reflection first rescues from the flux and makes a science of; they
constitute that world of eternal relations with which dialectic is
conversant. To note here and there some passing illustration of these
forms is one way of studying experience. The observer, the poet, the
historian merely _define_ what they see. But these incidental
illustrations of form (called by Plato phenomena) may have a method in
their comings and goings, and this method may in turn be definable. It
will be a new sort of constant illustrated in the flux; and this we call
a law. If events could be reduced to a number of constant forms moving
in a constant medium according to a constant law, a maximum of constancy
would be introduced into the flux, which would thereby be proved to be
mechanical.

The form of events, abstracted from their material presence, becomes a
general mould to which we tend to assimilate new observations. Whatever
in particular instances may contravene the accredited rule, we attribute
without a qualm to unknown variations in the circumstances, thus saving
our faith in order at all hazards and appealing to investigation to
justify the same. Only when another rule suggests itself which leaves a
smaller margin unaccounted for in the phenomena do we give up our first
generalisation. Not even the rudest superstition can be criticised or
dislodged scientifically save by another general rule, more exact and
trustworthy than the superstition. The scepticism which comes from
distrust of abstraction and disgust with reckoning of any sort is not a
scientific force; it is an intellectual weakness.

Generalities are indeed essential to understanding, which is apt to
impose them hastily upon particulars. Confirmation is not needed to
create prejudice. It suffices that a vivid impression should once have
cut its way into the mind and settled there in a fertile soil; it will
entwine itself at once with its chance neighbours and these adventitious
relations will pass henceforth for a part of the fact. Repetition,
however, is a good means of making or keeping impressions vivid and
almost the only means of keeping them unchanged. Prejudices, however
refractory to new evidence, evolve inwardly of themselves. The mental
soil in which they lie is in a continual ferment and their very vitality
will extend their scope and change their application. Generalisations,
therefore, when based on a single instance, will soon forget it and
shift their ground, as unchecked words shift their meaning. But when a
phenomenon actually recurs the generalisations founded on it are
reinforced and kept identical, and prejudices so sustained by events
make man’s knowledge of nature.

[Sidenote: Their discovery makes the flux calculable.]

Natural science consists of general ideas which look for verification in
events, and which find it. The particular instance, once noted, is
thrown aside like a squeezed orange, its significance in establishing
some law having once been extracted. Science, by this flight into the
general, lends immediate experience an interest and scope which its
parts, taken blindly, could never possess; since if we remained sunk in
the moments of existence and never abstracted their character from their
presence, we should never know that they had any relation to one
another. We should feel their incubus without being able to distinguish
their dignities or to give them names. By analysing what we find and
abstracting what recurs from its many vain incidents we can discover a
sustained structure within, which enables us to foretell what we may
find in future. Science thus articulates experience and reveals its
skeleton.

Skeletons are not things particularly congenial to poets, unless it be
for the sake of having something truly horrible to shudder at and to
frighten children with: and so a certain school of philosophers exhaust
their rhetoric in convincing us that the objects known to science are
artificial and dead, while the living reality is infinitely rich and
absolutely unutterable. This is merely an ungracious way of describing
the office of thought and bearing witness to its necessity. A body is
none the worse for having some bones in it, even if they are not all
visible on the surface. They are certainly not the whole man, who
nevertheless runs and leaps by their leverage and smooth turning in
their sockets; and a surgeon’s studies in dead anatomy help him
excellently to set a living joint. The abstractions of science are
extractions of truths. Truths cannot of themselves constitute existence
with its irrational concentration in time, place, and person, its
hopeless flux, and its vital exuberance; but they can be true of
existence; they can disclose that structure by which its parts cohere
materially and become ideally inferable from one another.

[Sidenote: Looser principles tried first.]

Science becomes demonstrable in proportion as it becomes abstract. It
becomes in the same measure applicable and useful, as mathematics
witnesses, whenever the abstraction is judiciously made and has seized
the profounder structural features in the phenomenon. These features are
often hard for human eyes to discern, buried as they may be in the
internal infinitesimal texture of things. Things accordingly seem to
move on the world’s stage in an unaccountable fashion, and to betray
magic affinities to what is separated from them by apparent chasms. The
types of relation which the mind may observe are multifarious. Any
chance conjunction, any incidental harmony, will start a hypothesis
about the nature of the universe and be the parent image of a whole
system of philosophy. In self-indulgent minds most of these standard
images are dramatic, and the cue men follow in unravelling experience is
that offered by some success or failure of their own. The sanguine,
having once found a pearl in a dunghill, feel a glorious assurance that
the world’s true secret is that everything in the end is ordered for
everybody’s benefit—and that is optimism. The atrabilious, being ill at
ease with themselves, see the workings everywhere of insidious sin, and
conceive that the world is a dangerous place of trial. A somewhat more
observant intellect may decide that what exists is a certain number of
definite natures, each striving to preserve and express itself; and in
such language we still commonly read political events and our friend’s
actions. At the dawn of science a Thales, observing the ways and the
conditions of things somewhat more subtly, will notice that rain,
something quite adventitious to the fields, is what covers them with
verdure, that the slime breeds life, that a liquid will freeze to stone
and melt to air; and his shrewd conclusion will be that everything is
water in one disguise or another. It is only after long accumulated
observation that we can reach any exact law of nature; and this law we
hardly think of applying to living things. These have not yet revealed
the secret of their structure, and clear insight is vouchsafed us only
in such regions as that of mathematical physics, where cogency in the
ideal system is combined with adequacy to explain the phenomena.

[Sidenote: Mechanism for the most part hidden.]

These exact sciences cover in the gross the field in which human life
appears, the antecedents of this life, and its instruments. To a
speculative mind, that had retained an ingenuous sense of nature’s
inexhaustible resources and of man’s essential continuity with other
natural things, there could be no ground for doubting that similar
principles (could they be traced in detail) would be seen to preside
over all man’s action and passion. A thousand indications, drawn from
introspection and from history, would be found to confirm this
speculative presumption. It is not only earthquakes and floods, summer
and winter, that bring human musings sharply to book. Love and ambition
are unmistakable blossomings of material forces, and the more intense
and poetical a man’s sense is of his spiritual condition the more loudly
will he proclaim his utter dependence on nature and the identity of the
moving principle in him and in her.

Mankind and all its works are undeniably subject to gravity and to the
law of projectiles; yet what is true of these phenomena in bulk seems to
a superficial observation not to be true of them in detail, and a person
may imagine that he subverts all the laws of physics whenever he wags
his tongue. Only in inorganic matter is the ruling mechanism open to
human inspection: here changes may be seen to be proportionate to the
elements and situation in which they occur. Habit here seems perfectly
steady and is called necessity, since the observer is able to deduce it
unequivocally from given properties in the body and in the external
bodies acting upon it. In the parts of nature which we call living and
to which we impute consciousness, habit, though it be fatal enough, is
not so exactly measurable and perspicuous. Physics cannot account for
that minute motion and pullulation in the earth’s crust of which human
affairs are a portion. Human affairs have to be surveyed under
categories lying closer to those employed in memory and legend. These
looser categories are of every sort—grammatical, moral, magical—and
there is no knowing when any of them will apply or in what measure.
Between the matters covered by the exact sciences and vulgar experience
there remains, accordingly, a wide and nebulous gulf. Where we cannot
see the mechanism involved in what happens we have to be satisfied with
an empirical description of appearances as they first fall together in
our apprehension; and this want of understanding in the observer is what
popular philosophy calls intelligence in the world.

[Sidenote: Yet presumably pervasive.]

That this gulf is apparent only, being due to inadequacy and confusion
in human perception rather than to incoherence in things, is a
speculative conviction altogether trustworthy. Any one who can at all
catch the drift of experience—moral no less than physical—must feel
that mechanism rules the whole world. There are doubleness and diversity
enough in things to satiate the greatest lover of chaos; but that a
cosmos nevertheless underlies the superficial play of sense and opinion
is what all practical reason must assume and what all comprehended
experience bears witness to. A cosmos does not mean a disorder with
which somebody happens to be well pleased; it means a necessity from
which every one must draw his happiness. If a principle is efficacious
it is to that extent mechanical. For to be efficacious a principle must
apply necessarily and proportionately; it must assure us that where the
factors are the same as on a previous occasion the quotient will be the
same also.

Now, in order that the flux of things should contain a repetition,
elements must be identified within it; these identical elements may then
find themselves in an identical situation, on which the same result may
ensue which ensued before. If the elements were not constant and
recognisable, or if their relations did not suffice to determine the
succeeding event, no observation could be transferred with safety from
the past to the future. Thus art and comprehension would be defeated
together. Novelties in the world are not lacking, because the elements
entering at any moment into a given combination have never before
entered into a combination exactly similar. Mechanism applies to the
matter and minute texture of things; but its applying there will create,
at each moment, fresh ideal wholes, formal unities which mind emanates
from and represents. The result will accordingly always be unprecedented
in the total impression it produces, in exact proportion to the
singularity of the situation in hand. Mechanical processes are not like
mathematical relations, because they _happen_. What they express the
form of is a flux, not a truth or an ideal necessity. The situation may
therefore always be new, though produced from the preceding situation by
rules which are invariable, since the preceding situation was itself
novel.

Mechanism might be called the dialectic of the irrational. It is such a
measure of intelligibility as is compatible with flux and with
existence. Existence itself being irrational and change unintelligible,
the only necessity they are susceptible of is a natural or empirical
necessity, impinging at both ends upon brute matters of fact. The
existential elements, their situation, number, affinities, and mutual
influence all have to be begged before calculation can begin. When these
surds have been accepted at their face value, inference may set to work
among them; yet the inference that mechanism will continue to reign will
not amount to certain knowledge until the event inferred has come to
give it proof. Calculation in physics differs from pure dialectic in
that the ultimate object it looks to is not ideal. Theory here must
revert to the immediate flux for its sanction, whereas dialectic is a
centrifugal emanation from existence and never returns to its point of
origin. It remains suspended in the ether of those eternal relations
which forms have, even when found embedded in matter.

[Sidenote: Inadequacy of consciousness.]

If the total flux is continuous and naturally intelligible, why is the
part felt by man so disjointed and opaque? An answer to this question
may perhaps be drawn from the fact that consciousness apparently arises
to express the functions only of extremely complicated organisms. The
basis of thought is vastly more elaborate than its deliverance. It takes
a wonderful brain and exquisite senses to produce a few stupid ideas.
The mind starts, therefore, with a tremendous handicap. In order to
attain adequate practical knowledge it would have to represent clearly
its own conditions; for the purpose of mind is its own furtherance and
perfection, and before that purpose could be fulfilled the mind’s
interests would have to become parallel to the body’s fortunes. This
means that the body’s actual relations in nature would have to become
the mind’s favourite themes in discourse. Had this harmony been
attained, the more accurately and intensely thought was exercised the
more stable its status would become and the more prosperous its
undertakings, since lively thought would then be a symptom of health in
the body and of mechanical equilibrium with the environment.

The body’s actual relations, however, on which health depends, are
infinitely complex and immensely extended. They sweep the whole material
universe and are intertwined most closely with all social and passionate
forces, with their incalculable mechanical springs. Meantime the mind
begins by being a feeble and inconsequent ghost. Its existence is
intermittent and its visions unmeaning. It fails to conceive its own
interests or the situations that might support or defeat those
interests. If it pictures anything clearly, it is only some phantastic
image which in no way represents its own complex basis. Thus the
parasitical human mind, finding what clear knowledge it has laughably
insufficient to interpret its destiny, takes to neglecting knowledge
altogether and to hugging instead various irrational ideas. On the one
hand it lapses into dreams which, while obviously irrelevant to
practice, express the mind’s vegetative instincts; hence art and
mythology, which substitute play-worlds for the real one on correlation
with which human prosperity and dignity depend. On the other hand, the
mind becomes wedded to conventional objects which mark, perhaps, the
turning-points of practical life and plot the curve of it in a schematic
and disjointed fashion, but which are themselves entirely opaque and, as
we say, material. Now as matter is commonly a name for things not
understood, men materially minded are those whose ideas, while
practical, are meagre and blind, so that their knowledge of nature, if
not invalid, is exceedingly fragmentary. This grossness in common sense,
like irrelevance in imagination, springs from the fact that the mind’s
representative powers are out of focus with its controlling conditions.

[Sidenote: Its articulation inferior to that of its objects.]

In other words, sense ought to correspond in articulation with the
object to be represented—otherwise the object’s structure, with the
fate it imports; cannot be transferred into analogous ideas. Now the
human senses are not at all fitted to represent an organism on the scale
of the human body. They catch its idle gestures but not the inner
processes which control its action. The senses are immeasurably too
gross. What to them is a _minimum visibile_, a just perceptible atom, is
in the body’s structure, very likely, a system of worlds, the inner
cataclysms of which count in producing that so-called atom’s behaviour
and endowing it with affinities apparently miraculous. What must the
seed of animals contain, for instance, to be the ground, as it
notoriously is, for every physical and moral property of the offspring?
Or what must the system of signals and the reproductive habit in a brain
be, for it to co-ordinate instinctive movements, learn tricks, and
remember? Our senses can represent at all adequately only such objects
as the solar system or a work of human architecture, where the unit’s
inner structure and fermentation may be provisionally neglected in
mastering the total. The architect may reckon in bricks and the
astronomer in planets and yet foresee accurately enough the practical
result. In a word, only what is extraordinarily simple is intelligible
to man, while only what is extraordinarily complex can support
intelligence. Consciousness is essentially incompetent to understand
what most concerns it, its own vicissitudes, and sense is altogether out
of scale with the objects of practical interest in life.

[Sidenote: Science consequently retarded.]

One consequence of this profound maladjustment is that science is hard
to attain and is at first paradoxical. The change of scale required is
violent and frustrates all the mind’s rhetorical habits. There is a
constant feeling of strain and much flying back to the mother-tongue of
myth and social symbol. Every wrong hypothesis is seized upon and is
tried before any one will entertain the right one. Enthusiasm for
knowledge is chilled by repeated failures and a great confusion cannot
but reign in philosophy. A man with an eye for characteristic features
in various provinces of experience is encouraged to deal with each upon
a different principle; and where these provinces touch or actually fuse,
he is at a loss what method of comprehension to apply. There sets in,
accordingly, a tendency to use various methods at once or a different
one on each occasion, as language, custom, or presumption seems to
demand. Science is reduced by philosophers to plausible discourse, and
the more plausible the discourse is, by leaning on all the heterogeneous
prejudices of the hour, the more does it foster the same and discourage
radical investigation.

Thus even Aristotle felt that good judgment and the dramatic habit of
things altogether excluded the simple physics of Democritus. Indeed, as
things then stood, Democritus had no right to his simplicity, except
that divine right which comes of inspiration. His was an indefensible
faith in a single radical insight, which happened nevertheless to be
true. To justify that insight forensically it would have been necessary
to change the range of human vision, making it telescopic in one region
and microscopic in another; whereby the objects so transfigured would
have lost their familiar aspect and their habitual context in discourse.
Without such a startling change of focus nature can never seem
everywhere mechanical. Hence, even to this day, people with broad human
interests are apt to discredit a mechanical philosophy. Seldom can
penetration and courage in thinking hold their own against the
miscellaneous habits of discourse; and nobody remembers that moral
values must remain captious, and imaginative life ignoble and dark, so
long as the whole basis and application of them is falsely conceived.
Discoveries in science are made only by near-sighted specialists, while
the influence of public sentiment and policy still works systematically
against enlightenment.

[Sidenote: and speculation rendered necessary.]

The maladaptation of sense to its objects has a second consequence: that
speculation is in a way nobler for man than direct perception. For
direct perception is wholly inadequate to render the force, the reality,
the subtle relations of the object perceived, unless this object be a
shell only, like a work of fine art, where nothing counts but the
surface. Since the function of perception is properly to give
understanding and dominion, direct perception is a defeat and, as it
were, an insult to the mind, thus forced to busy itself about so
unintelligible and dense an apparition. Æsthetic enthusiasm cares
nothing about what the object inwardly is, what is its efficacious
movement and real life. It revels selfishly in the harmonies of
perception itself, harmonies which perhaps it attributes to the object
through want of consideration. These æsthetic objects, which have no
intrinsic unity or cohesion, lapse in the most melancholy and
inexplicable fashion before our eyes. Then we cry that beauty wanes,
that life is brief, and that its prizes are deceptive. Our minds have
fed on casual aspects of nature, like tints in sunset clouds.
Imaginative fervour has poured itself out exclusively on these
apparitions, which are without relevant backing in the world; and long,
perhaps, before this life is over, which we called too brief, we begin
to pine for another, where just those images which here played so
deceptively on the surface of the flux may be turned into fixed and
efficacious realities. Meantime speculation amuses us with prophecies
about what such realities might be. We look for them, very likely, in
the wrong place, namely, in human poetry and eloquence, or at best in
dialectic; yet even when stated in these mythical terms the hidden world
divined in meditation seems nobler and, as we say, more real than the
objects of sense. For we hope, in those speculative visions, to reach
the permanent, the efficacious, the stanch principles of experience,
something to rely on in prospect and appeal to in perplexity.

Science, in its prosaic but trustworthy fashion, passes likewise beyond
the dreamlike unities and cadences which sense discloses; only, as
science aims at controlling its speculation by experiment, the hidden
reality it discloses is exactly like what sense perceives, though on a
different scale, and not observable, perhaps, without a magic carpet of
hypothesis, to carry the observer to the ends of the universe or,
changing his dimensions, to introduce him into those infinitesimal
abysses where nature has her workshop. In this region, were it
sufficiently explored, we might find just those solid supports and
faithful warnings which we were looking for with such ill success in our
rhetorical speculations. The machinery disclosed would not be human; it
would be machinery. But it would for that very reason serve the purpose
which made us look for it instead of remaining, like the lower animals,
placidly gazing on the pageants of sense, till some unaccountable pang
forced us to spasmodic movement. It is doubtless better to find material
engines—not necessarily inanimate, either—which may really serve to
bring order, security, and progress into our lives, than to find
impassioned or ideal spirits, that can do nothing for us except, at
best, assure us that they are perfectly happy.

[Sidenote: Dissatisfaction with mechanism partly natural.]

The reigning aversion to mechanism is partly natural and partly
artificial. The natural aversion cannot be wholly overcome. Like the
aversion to death, to old age, to labour, it is called forth by man’s
natural situation in a world which was not made for him, but in which he
grew. That the efficacious structure of things should not be
intentionally spectacular nor poetical, that its units should not be
terms in common discourse, nor its laws quite like the logic of passion,
is of course a hard lesson to learn. The learning, however—not to speak
of its incidental delights—is so extraordinarily good for people that
only with that instruction and the blessed renunciations it brings can
clearness, dignity, or virility enter their minds. And of course, if the
material basis of human strength could be discovered and better
exploited, the free activity of the mind would be not arrested but
enlarged. Geology adds something to the interest of landscape, and
botany much to the charm of flowers; natural history increases the
pleasure with which we view society and the justice with which we judge
it. An instinctive sympathy, a solicitude for the perfect working of any
delicate thing, as it makes the ruffian tender to a young child, is a
sentiment inevitable even toward artificial organisms. Could we better
perceive the fine fruits of order, the dire consequences of every
specific cruelty or jar, we should grow doubly considerate toward all
forms; for we exist through form, and the love of form is our whole real
inspiration.

[Sidenote: and partly artificial.]

The artificial prejudice against mechanism is a fruit of party spirit.
When a myth has become the centre or sanction for habits and
institutions, these habits and institutions stand against any conception
incompatible with that myth. It matters nothing that the values the
myth was designed to express may remain standing without it, or may be
transferred to its successor. Social and intellectual inertia is too
great to tolerate so simple an evolution. It divides opinions not into
false and true but into high and low, or even more frankly into those
which are acceptable and comforting to its ruffled faith and those which
are dangerous, alarming, and unfortunate. Imagine Socrates “viewing with
alarm” the implications of an argument! This artificial prejudice is
indeed modern and will not be eternal. Ancient sages, when they wished
to rebuke the atheist, pointed to the very heavens which a sentimental
religion would nowadays gladly prove to be unreal, lest the soul should
learn something of their method. Yet the Ptolemaic spheres were no more
manlike and far less rich in possibilities of life than the Copernican
star-dust. The ancients thought that what was intelligible was divine.
Order was what they meant by intelligence, and order productive of
excellence was what they meant by reason. When they noticed that the
stars moved perpetually and according to law, they seriously thought
they were beholding the gods. The stars as we conceive them are not in
that sense perfect. But the order which nature does not cease to
manifest is still typical of all order, and is sublime. It is from these
regions of embodied law that intelligibility and power combined come to
make their covenant with us, as with all generations.

[Sidenote: Biassed judgments inspired by moral inertia.]

The emotions and the moral principles that are naturally allied to
materialism suffer an eclipse when materialism, which is properly a
primary or dogmatic philosophy, breathing courage and victory, appears
as a destructive force and in the incongruous rôle of a critic. One
dogmatism is not fit to criticise another; their conflict can end only
in insults, sullenness, and an appeal to that physical drift and
irrational selection which may ultimately consign one party to oblivion.
But a philosophy does ill to boast of such borrowed triumphs. The next
turn of the wheel may crush the victor, and the opinions hastily buried
may rise again to pose as the fashionable and superior insights of a
later day. To criticise dogmatism it is necessary to be a genuine
sceptic, an honest transcendentalist, that falls back on the immediate
and observes by what principles of logical architecture the ultimate,
the reality discovered, has been inferred from it. Such criticism is not
necessarily destructive; some construction and some belief being
absolutely inevitable, if reason and life are to operate at all,
criticism merely offers us the opportunity of revising and purifying our
dogmas, so as to make them reasonable and congruous with practice.
Materialism may thus be reinstated on transcendental grounds, and the
dogma at first uttered in the flush of intelligent perception, with no
scruple or self-consciousness, may be repeated after a thorough
examination of heart, on the ground that it is the best possible
expression of experience, the inevitable deliverance of thought. So
approached, a dogmatic system will carry its critical justification with
it, and the values it enshrines and secures will not be doubtful. The
emotions it arouses will be those aroused by the experience it explains.
Causes having been found for what is given, these causes will be proved
to have just that beneficent potency and just that distressing
inadequacy which the joys and failures of life show that the reality
has, whatever this reality may otherwise be. The theory will add nothing
except the success involved in framing it. Life being once for all what
it is, no physics can render it worse or better, save as the knowledge
of physics, with insight into the causes of our varied fortunes, is
itself an achievement and a new resource.

[Sidenote: Positive emotions proper to materialism.]

A theory is not an unemotional thing. If music can be full of passion,
merely by giving form to a single sense, how much more beauty or terror
may not a vision be pregnant with which brings order and method into
everything that we know. Materialism has its distinct æsthetic and
emotional colour, though this may be strangely affected and even
reversed by contrast with systems of an incongruous hue, jostling it
accidentally in a confused and amphibious mind. If you are in the habit
of believing in special providences, or of expecting to continue your
romantic adventures in a second life, materialism will dash your hopes
most unpleasantly, and you may think for a year or two that you have
nothing left to live for. But a thorough materialist, one born to the
faith and not half plunged into it by an unexpected christening in cold
water, will be like the superb Democritus, a laughing philosopher. His
delight in a mechanism that can fall into so many marvellous and
beautiful shapes, and can generate so many exciting passions, should be
of the same intellectual quality as that which the visitor feels in a
museum of natural history, where he views the myriad butterflies in
their cases, the flamingoes and shell-fish, the mammoths and gorillas.
Doubtless there were pangs in that incalculable life, but they were soon
over; and how splendid meantime was the pageant, how infinitely
interesting the universal interplay, and how foolish and inevitable
those absolute little passions. Somewhat of that sort might be the
sentiment that materialism would arouse in a vigorous mind, active,
joyful, impersonal, and in respect to private illusions not without a
touch of scorn.

To the genuine sufferings of living creatures the ethics that
accompanies materialism has never been insensible; on the contrary, like
other merciful systems, it has trembled too much at pain and tended to
withdraw the will ascetically, lest the will should be defeated.
Contempt for mortal sorrows is reserved for those who drive with
hosannas the Juggernaut car of absolute optimism. But against evils
born of pure vanity and self-deception, against the verbiage by which
man persuades himself that he is the goal and acme of the universe,
laughter is the proper defence. Laughter also has this subtle advantage,
that it need not remain without an overtone of sympathy and brotherly
understanding; as the laughter that greets Don Quixote’s absurdities and
misadventures does not mock the hero’s intent. His ardour was admirable,
but the world must be known before it can be reformed pertinently, and
happiness, to be attained, must be placed in reason.

[Sidenote: The material world not dead nor ugly,]

Oblivious of Democritus, the unwilling materialists of our day have
generally been awkwardly intellectual and quite incapable of laughter.
If they have felt anything, they have felt melancholy. Their allegiance
and affection were still fixed on those mythical sentimental worlds
which they saw to be illusory. The mechanical world they believed in
could not please them, in spite of its extent and fertility. Giving
rhetorical vent to their spleen and prejudice, they exaggerated nature’s
meagreness and mathematical dryness. When their imagination was chilled
they spoke of nature, most unwarrantably, as dead, and when their
judgment was heated they took the next step and called it unreal. A man
is not blind, however, because every part of his body is not an eye, nor
every muscle in his eye a nerve sensitive to light. Why, then, is nature
dead, although it swarms with living organisms, if every part is not
obviously animate? And why is the sun dark and cold, if it is bright and
hot only to animal sensibility? This senseless lamentation is like the
sophism of those Indian preachers who, to make men abandon the illusions
of self-love, dilated on the shocking contents of the human body. Take
off the skin, they cried, and you will discover nothing but loathsome
bleeding and quivering substances. Yet the inner organs are well enough
in their place and doubtless pleasing to the microbes that inhabit them;
and a man is not hideous because his cross-section would not offer the
features of a beautiful countenance. So the structure of the world is
not therefore barren or odious because, if you removed its natural outer
aspect and effects, it would not make an interesting landscape. Beauty
being an appearance and life an operation, that is surely beautiful and
living which so operates and so appears as to manifest those qualities.

[Sidenote: nor especially cruel.]

It is true that materialism prophesies an ultimate extinction for man
and all his works. The horror which this prospect inspires in the
natural man might be mitigated by reflection; but, granting the horror,
is it something introduced by mechanical theories and not present in
experience itself? Are human things inwardly stable? Do they belong to
the eternal in any sense in which the operation of material forces can
touch their immortality? The panic which seems to seize some minds at
the thought of a merely natural existence is something truly
hysterical; and yet one wonders why ultimate peace should seem so
intolerable to people who not so many years ago found a stern religious
satisfaction in consigning almost the whole human race to perpetual
torture, the Creator, as Saint Augustine tells us, having in his
infinite wisdom and justice devised a special kind of material fire that
might avail to burn resurrected bodies for ever without consuming them.
A very real truth might be read into this savage symbol, if we
understood it to express the ultimate defeats and fruitless agonies that
pursue human folly; and so we might find that it gave mythical
expression to just that conditioned fortune and inexorable flux which a
mechanical philosophy shows us the grounds of. Our own vices in another
man seem particularly hideous; and so those actual evils which we take
for granted when incorporated in the current system strike us afresh
when we see them in a new setting. But it is not mechanical science that
introduced mutability into things nor materialism that invented death.

[Sidenote: Mechanism to be judged by its fruits.]

The death of individuals, as we observe daily in nature, does not
prevent the reappearance of life; and if we choose to indulge in
arbitrary judgments on a subject where data fail us, we may as
reasonably wish that there might be less life as that there might be
more. The passion for a large and permanent population in the universe
is not obviously rational; at a great distance a man must view
everything, including himself, under the form of eternity, and when life
is so viewed its length or its diffusion becomes a point of little
importance. What matters then is quality. The reasonable and humane
demand to make of the world is that such creatures as exist should not
be unhappy and that life, whatever its quantity, should have a quality
that may justify it in its own eyes. This just demand, made by
conscience and not by an arbitrary fancy, the world described by
mechanism does not fulfil altogether, for adjustments in it are
tentative, and much friction must precede and follow upon any vital
equilibrium attained. This imperfection, however, is actual, and no
theory can overcome it except by verbal fallacies and scarcely deceptive
euphemisms. What mechanism involves in this respect is exactly what we
find: a tentative appearance of life in many quarters, its disappearance
in some, and its reinforcement and propagation in others, where the
physical equilibrium attained insures to it a natural stability and a
natural prosperity.




