CHAPTER VI

POETRY AND PROSE


[Sidenote: Force of primary expressions.]

There is both truth and illusion in the saying that primitive poets are
sublime. Genesis and the Iliad (works doubtless backed by a long
tradition) are indeed sublime. Primitive men, having perhaps developed
language before the other arts, used it with singular directness to
describe the chief episodes of life, which was all that life as yet
contained. They had frank passions and saw things from single points of
view. A breath from that early world seems to enlarge our natures, and
to restore to language, which we have sophisticated, all its
magnificence and truth. But there is more, for (as we have seen)
language is spontaneous; it constitutes an act before it registers an
observation. It gives vent to emotion before it is adjusted to things
external and reduced, as it were, to its own echo rebounding from a
refractory world. The lion’s roar, the bellowing of bulls, even the
sea’s cadence has a great sublimity. Though hardly in itself poetry, an
animal cry, when still audible in human language, renders it also the
unanswerable, the ultimate voice of nature. Nothing can so pierce the
soul as the uttermost sigh of the body. There is no utterance so
thrilling as that of absolute impulse, if absolute impulse has learned
to speak at all. An intense, inhospitable mind, filled with a single
idea, in which all animal, social, and moral interests are fused
together, speaks a language of incomparable force. Thus the Hebrew
prophets, in their savage concentration, poured into one torrent all
that their souls possessed or could dream of. What other men are wont to
pursue in politics, business, religion, or art, they looked for from one
wave of national repentance and consecration. Their age, swept by this
ideal passion, possessed at the same time a fresh and homely vocabulary;
and the result was an eloquence so elemental and combative, so
imaginative and so bitterly practical, that the world has never heard
its like. Such single-mindedness, with such heroic simplicity in words
and images, is hardly possible in a late civilisation. Cultivated poets
are not unconsciously sublime.

[Sidenote: Its exclusiveness and narrowness.]

The sublimity of early utterances should not be hailed, however, with
unmixed admiration. It is a sublimity born of defect or at least of
disproportion. The will asserts itself magnificently; images, like
thunder-clouds, seem to cover half the firmament at once. But such a
will is sadly inexperienced; it has hardly tasted or even conceived any
possible or high satisfactions. Its lurid firmament is poor in stars. To
throw the whole mind upon something is not so great a feat when the
mind has nothing else to throw itself upon. Every animal when goaded
becomes intense; and it is perhaps merely the apathy in which mortals
are wont to live that keeps them from being habitually sublime in their
sentiments. The sympathy that makes a sheep hasten after its fellows, in
vague alarm or in vague affection; the fierce premonitions that drive a
bull to the heifer; the patience with which a hen sits on her eggs; the
loyalty which a dog shows to his master—what thoughts may not all these
instincts involve, which it needs only a medium of communication to
translate into poetry?

Man, though with less wholeness of soul, enacts the same dramas. He
hears voices on all occasions; he incorporates what little he observes
of nature into his verbal dreams; and as each new impulse bubbles to the
surface he feels himself on the verge of some inexpressible heaven or
hell. He needs but to abandon himself to that seething chaos which
perpetually underlies conventional sanity—a chaos in which memory and
prophecy, vision and impersonation, sound and sense, are inextricably
jumbled together—to find himself at once in a magic world,
irrecoverable, largely unmeaning, terribly intricate, but, as he will
conceive, deep, inward, and absolutely real. He will have reverted, in
other words, to crude experience, to primordial illusion. The movement
of his animal or vegetative mind will be far from delightful; it will be
unintelligent and unintelligible; nothing in particular will be
represented therein; but it will be a movement in the soul and for the
soul, as exciting and compulsive as the soul’s volume can make it. In
this muddy torrent words also may be carried down; and if these words
are by chance strung together into a cadence, and are afterwards written
down, they may remain for a memento of that turbid moment. Such words we
may at first hesitate to call poetry, since very likely they are
nonsense; but this nonsense will have some quality—some rhyme or
rhythm—that makes it memorable (else it would not have survived); and
moreover the words will probably show, in their connotation and order,
some sympathy with the dream that cast them up. For the man himself, in
whom such a dream may be partly recurrent, they may consequently have a
considerable power of suggestion, and they may even have it for others,
whenever the rhythm and incantation avail to plunge them also into a
similar trance.

[Sidenote: Rudimentary poetry an incantation or charm.]

Memorable nonsense, or sound with a certain hypnotic power, is the
really primitive and radical form of poetry. Nor is such poetry yet
extinct: children still love and compose it and every genuine poet, on
one side of his genius, reverts to it from explicit speech. As all
language has acquired its meaning, and did not have it in the beginning,
so the man who launches a new locution, the poet who creates a symbol,
must do so without knowing what significance it may eventually acquire,
and conscious at best only of the emotional background from which it
emerged. Pure poetry is pure experiment; and it is not strange that
nine-tenths of it should be pure failure. For it matters little what
unutterable things may have originally gone together with a phrase in
the dreamer’s mind; if they were not uttered and the phrase cannot call
them back, this verbal relic is none the richer for the high company it
may once have kept. Expressiveness is a most accidental matter. What a
line suggests at one reading, it may never suggest again even to the
same person. For this reason, among others, poets are partial to their
own compositions; they truly discover there depths of meaning which
exist for nobody else. Those readers who appropriate a poet and make him
their own fall into a similar illusion; they attribute to him what they
themselves supply, and whatever he reels out, lost in his own personal
revery, seems to them, like _sortes biblicoe_, written to fit their own
case.

[Sidenote: Inspiration irresponsible.]

Justice has never been done to Plato’s remarkable consistency and
boldness in declaring that poets are inspired by a divine madness and
yet, when they transgress rational bounds, are to be banished from an
ideal republic, though not without some marks of Platonic regard.
Instead of fillets, a modern age might assign them a coterie of
flattering dames, and instead of banishment, starvation; but the result
would be the same in the end. A poet is inspired because what occurs in
his brain is a true experiment in creation. His apprehension plays with
words and their meanings as nature, in any spontaneous variation, plays
with her own structure. A mechanical force shifts the kaleidoscope; a
new direction is given to growth or a new gist to signification. This
inspiration, moreover, is mad, being wholly ignorant of its own issue;
and though it has a confused fund of experience and verbal habit on
which to draw, it draws on this fund blindly and quite at random,
consciously possessed by nothing but a certain stress and pregnancy and
the pains, as it were, of parturition. Finally the new birth has to be
inspected critically by the public censor before it is allowed to live;
most probably it is too feeble and defective to prosper in the common
air, or is a monster that violates some primary rule of civic existence,
tormenting itself to disturb others.

[Sidenote: Plato’s discriminating view.]

Plato seems to have exaggerated the havoc which these poetic dragons can
work in the world. They are in fact more often absurd than venomous, and
no special legislation is needed to abolish them. They soon die quietly
of universal neglect. The poetry that ordinarily circulates among a
people is poetry of a secondary and conventional sort that propagates
established ideas in trite metaphors. Popular poets are the parish
priests of the Muse, retailing her ancient divinations to a long since
converted public. Plato’s quarrel was not so much with poetic art as
with ancient myth and emotional laxity: he was preaching a crusade
against the established church. For naturalistic deities he wished to
substitute moral symbols; for the joys of sense, austerity and
abstraction. To proscribe Homer was a marked way of protesting against
the frivolous reigning ideals. The case is much as if we should now
proscribe the book of Genesis, on account of its mythical cosmogony, or
in order to proclaim the philosophic truth that the good, being an
adequate expression to be attained by creation, could not possibly have
preceded it or been its source. We might admit at the same time that
Genesis contains excellent images and that its poetic force is
remarkable; so that if serious misunderstanding could be avoided the
censor might be glad to leave it in everybody’s hands. Plato in some
such way recognised that Homer was poetical and referred his works,
mischievous as they might prove incidentally, to divine inspiration.
Poetic madness, like madness in prophecy or love, bursts the body of
things to escape from it into some ideal; and even the Homeric world,
though no model for a rational state, was a cheerful heroic vision,
congenial to many early impulses and dreams of the mind.

[Sidenote: Explosive and pregnant expression.]

Homer, indeed, was no primitive poet; he was a consummate master, the
heir to generations of discipline in both life and art. This appears in
his perfect prosody, in his limpid style, in his sense for proportion,
his abstentions, and the frank pathos of his portraits and principles,
in which there is nothing gross, subjective, or arbitrary. The
inspirations that came to him never carried him into crudeness or
absurdity. Every modern poet, though the world he describes may be more
refined in spots and more elaborate, is less advanced in his art; for
art is made rudimentary not by its date but by its irrationality. Yet
even if Homer had been primitive he might well have been inspired, in
the same way as a Bacchic frenzy or a mystic trance; the most blundering
explosions may be justified antecedently by the plastic force that is
vented in them. They may be expressive, in the physical sense of this
ambiguous word; for, far as they may be from conveying an idea, they may
betray a tendency and prove that something is stirring in the soul.
Expressiveness is often sterile; but it is sometimes fertile and capable
of reproducing in representation the experience from which it sprang. As
a tree in the autumn sheds leaves and seeds together, so a ripening
experience comes indifferently to various manifestations, some barren
and without further function, others fit to carry the parent experience
over into another mind, and give it a new embodiment there.
Expressiveness in the former case is dead, like that of a fossil; in the
latter it is living and efficacious, recreating its original. The first
is idle self-manifestation, the second rational art.

[Sidenote: Natural history of inspiration.]

Self-manifestation, so soon as it is noted and accepted as such, seems
to present the same marvel as any ideal success. Such self-manifestation
is incessant, many-sided, unavoidable; yet it seems a miracle when its
conditions are looked back upon from the vantage ground of their result.
By reading spirit out of a work we turn it into a feat of inspiration.
Thus even the crudest and least coherent utterances, when we suspect
some soul to be groping in them, and striving to address us, become
oracular; a divine afflatus breathes behind their gibberish and they
seem to manifest some deep intent. The miracle of creation or
inspiration consists in nothing but this, that an external effect should
embody an inner intention. The miracle, of course, is apparent only, and
due to an inverted and captious point of view. In truth the tendency
that executed the work was what first made its conception possible; but
this conception, finding the work responsive in some measure to its
inner demand, attributes that response to its own magic prerogative.
Hence the least stir and rumble of formative processes, when it
generates a soul, makes itself somehow that soul’s interpreter; and dim
as the spirit and its expression may both remain, they are none the less
in profound concord, a concord which wears a miraculous providential
character when it is appreciated without being understood.

[Sidenote: Expressions to be understood must be recreated, and so
changed.]

Primitive poetry is the basis of all discourse. If we open any ancient
book we come at once upon an elaborate language, and on divers
conventional concepts, of whose origin and history we hear nothing. We
must read on, until by dint of guessing and by confronting instances we
grow to understand those symbols. The writer was himself heir to a
linguistic tradition which he made his own by the same process of
adoption and tentative use by which we, in turn, interpret his phrases:
he understood what he heard in terms of his own experience, and
attributed to his predecessors (no matter what their incommunicable
feelings may have been) such ideas as their words generated in his own
thinking. In this way expressions continually change their sense; they
can communicate a thought only by diffusing a stimulus, and in passing
from mouth to mouth they will wholly reverse their connotation, unless
some external object or some recurring human situation gives them a
constant standard, by which private aberrations may be checked. Thus in
the first phrase of Genesis, “In the beginning God created the heavens
and the earth,” the words have a stable meaning only in so far as they
are indicative and bring us back to a stable object. What “heavens” and
“earth” stand for can be conveyed by gestures, by merely pointing up and
down; but beyond that sensuous connotation their meaning has entirely
changed since they were here written; and no two minds, even to-day,
will respond to these familiar words with exactly the same images.
“Beginning” and “created” have a superficial clearness, though their
implications cannot be defined without precipitating the most intricate
metaphysics, which would end in nothing but a proof that both terms were
ambiguous and unthinkable. As to the word “God,” all mutual
understanding is impossible. It is a floating literary symbol, with a
value which, if we define it scientifically, becomes quite algebraic. As
no experienced object corresponds to it, it is without fixed indicative
force, and admits any sense which its context in any mind may happen to
give it. In the first sentence of Genesis its meaning, we may safely
say, is “a masculine being by whom heaven and earth were created.” To
fill out this implication other instances of the word would have to be
gathered, in each of which, of course, the word would appear with a new
and perhaps incompatible meaning.

[Sidenote: Expressions may be recast perversely, humorously, or
sublimely.]

Whenever a word appears in a radically new context it has a radically
new sense: the expression in which it so figures is a poetic figment, a
fresh literary creation. Such invention is sometimes perverse, sometimes
humorous, sometimes sublime; that is, it may either buffet old
associations without enlarging them, or give them a plausible but
impossible twist, or enlarge them to cover, with unexpected propriety, a
much wider or more momentous experience. The force of experience in any
moment—if we abstract from represented values—is emotional; so that
for sublime poetry what is required is to tap some reservoir of feeling.
If a phrase opens the flood-gates of emotion, it has made itself most
deeply significant. Its discursive range and clearness may not be
remarkable; its emotional power will quite suffice. For this reason
again primitive poetry may be sublime: in its inchoate phrases there is
affinity to raw passion and their very blindness may serve to bring that
passion back. Poetry has body; it represents the volume of experience as
well as its form, and to express volume a primitive poet will rely
rather on rhythm, sound, and condensed suggestion than on discursive
fulness or scope.

[Sidenote: The nature of prose.]

The descent from poetry to prose is in one sense a progress. When use
has worn down a poetic phrase to its external import, and rendered it an
indifferent symbol for a particular thing, that phrase has become
prosaic; it has also become, by the same process, transparent and purely
instrumental. In poetry feeling is transferred by contagion; in prose it
is communicated by bending the attention upon determinate objects; the
one stimulates and the other informs. Under the influence of poetry
various minds radiate from a somewhat similar core of sensation, from
the same vital mood, into the most diverse and incommunicable images.
Interlocutors speaking prose, on the contrary, pelt and besiege one
another with a peripheral attack; they come into contact at sundry
superficial points and thence push their agreement inwards, until
perhaps a practical coincidence is arrived at in their thought.
Agreement is produced by controlling each mind externally, through a
series of checks and little appeals to possible sensation; whereas in
poetry the agreement, where it exists, is vague and massive; there is an
initial fusion of minds under hypnotic musical influences, from which
each listener, as he awakes, passes into his own thoughts and
interpretations. In prose the vehicle for communication is a
conventional sign, standing in the last analysis for some demonstrable
object or controllable feeling. By marshalling specific details a
certain indirect suasion is exercised on the mind, as nature herself, by
continual checks and denials, gradually tames the human will. The
elements of prose are always practical, if we run back and reconstruct
their primitive essence, for at bottom every experience is an original
and not a copy, a nucleus for ideation rather than an object to which
ideas may refer. It is when these stimulations are shaken together and
become a system of mutual checks that they begin to take on ideally a
rhythm borrowed from the order in which they actually recurred. Then a
prophetic or representative movement arises in thought. Before this
comes about, experience remains a constantly renovated dream, as poetry
to the end conspires to keep it. For poetry, while truly poetical, never
loses sight of initial feelings and underlying appeals; it is
incorrigibly transcendental, and takes every present passion and every
private dream in turn for the core of the universe. By creating new
signs, or by recasting and crossing those which have become
conventional, it keeps communication massive and instinctive, immersed
in music, and inexhaustible by clear thought.


[Sidenote: It is more advanced and responsible than poetry.]

Lying is a privilege of poets because they have not yet reached the
level on which truth and error are discernible. Veracity and
significance are not ideals for a primitive mind; we learn to value them
as we learn to live, when we discover that the spirit cannot be wholly
free and solipsistic. To have to distinguish fact from fancy is so great
a violence to the inner man that not only poets, but theologians and
philosophers, still protest against such a distinction. They urge (what
is perfectly true for a rudimentary creature) that facts are mere
conceptions and conceptions full-fledged facts; but this interesting
embryonic lore they apply, in their intellectual weakness, to retracting
or undermining those human categories which, though alone fruitful or
applicable in life, are not congenial to their half-formed imagination.
Retreating deeper into the inner chaos, they bring to bear the whole
momentum of an irresponsible dialectic to frustrate the growth of
representative ideas: In this they are genuine, if somewhat belated,
poets, experimenting anew with solved problems, and fancying how
creation might have moved upon other lines. The great merit that prose
shares with science is that it is responsible. Its conscience is a new
and wiser imagination, by which creative thought is rendered cumulative
and progressive; for a man does not build less boldly or solidly if he
takes the precaution of building in baked brick. Prose is in itself
meagre and bodiless, merely indicating the riches of the world. Its
transparency helps us to look through it to the issue, and the signals
it gives fill the mind with an honest assurance and a prophetic art far
nobler than any ecstasy.

[Sidenote: Maturity brings love of practical truth.]

As men of action have a better intelligence than poets, if only their
action is on a broad enough stage, so the prosaic rendering of
experience has the greater value, if only the experience rendered covers
enough human interests. Youth and aspiration indulge in poetry; a mature
and masterful mind will often despise it, and prefer to express itself
laconically in prose. It is clearly proper that prosaic habits should
supervene in this way on the poetical; for youth, being as yet little
fed by experience, can find volume and depth only in the soul; the
half-seen, the supra-mundane, the inexpressible, seem to it alone
beautiful and worthy of homage. Time modifies this sentiment in two
directions. It breeds lassitude and indifference towards impracticable
ideals, originally no less worthy than the practicable. Ideals which
cannot be realised, and are not fed at least by partial realisations,
soon grow dormant. Life-blood passes to other veins; the urgent and
palpitating interests of life appear in other quarters. While things
impossible thus lose their serious charm, things actual reveal their
natural order and variety; these not only can entertain the mind
abstractly, but they can offer a thousand material rewards in
observation and action. In their presence, a private dream begins to
look rather cheap and hysterical. Not that existence has any dignity or
prerogative in the presence of will, but that will itself, being
elastic, grows definite and firm when it is fed by success; and its
formed and expressible ideals then put to shame the others, which have
remained vague for want of practical expression. Mature interests centre
on soluble problems and tasks capable of execution; it is at such points
that the ideal can be really served. The individual’s dream straightens
and reassures itself by merging with the dream of humanity. To dwell, as
irrational poets do, on some private experience, on some emotion without
representative or ulterior value, then seems a waste of time. Fiction
becomes less interesting than affairs, and poetry turns into a sort of
incompetent whimper, a childish fore-shortening of the outspread world.

[Sidenote: Pure prose would tend to efface itself.]

On the other hand, prose has a great defect, which is abstractness. It
drops the volume of experience in finding bodiless algebraic symbols by
which to express it. The verbal form, instead of transmitting an image,
seems to constitute it, in so far as there is an image suggested at
all; and the ulterior situation is described only in the sense that a
change is induced in the hearer which prepares him to meet that
situation. Prose seems to be a use of language in the service of
material life. It would tend, in that case, to undermine its own basis;
for in proportion as signals for action are quick and efficacious they
diminish their sensuous stimulus and fade from consciousness. Were
language such a set of signals it would be something merely
instrumental, which if made perfect ought to be automatic and
unconscious. It would be a buzzing in the ears, not a music native to
the mind. Such a theory of language would treat it as a necessary evil
and would look forward hopefully to the extinction of literature, in
which it would recognise nothing ideal. There is of course no reason to
deprecate the use of vocables, or of any other material agency, to
expedite affairs; but an art of speech, if it is to add any ultimate
charm to life, has to supervene upon a mere code of signals. Prose,
could it be purely representative, would be ideally superfluous. A
literary prose accordingly owns a double allegiance, and its life is
amphibious. It must convey intelligence, but intelligence clothed in a
language that lends the message an intrinsic value, and makes it
delightful to apprehend apart from its importance in ultimate theory or
practice. Prose is in that measure a fine art. It might be called poetry
that had become pervasively representative, and was altogether faithful
to its rational function.

[Sidenote: Form alone, or substance alone, may be poetical.]

We may therefore with good reason distinguish prosaic form from prosaic
substance. A novel, a satire, a book of speculative philosophy, may have
a most prosaic exterior; every phrase may convey its idea economically;
but the substance may nevertheless be poetical, since these ideas may be
irrelevant to all ulterior events, and may express nothing but the
imaginative energy that called them forth. On the other hand, a poetic
vehicle in which there is much ornamental play of language and rhythm
may clothe a dry ideal skeleton. So those tremendous positivists, the
Hebrew prophets, had the most prosaic notions about the goods and evils
of life. So Lucretius praised, I will not say the atoms merely, but even
fecundity and wisdom. The motives, to take another example, which Racine
attributed to his personages, were prosaically conceived; a physiologist
could not be more exact in his calculations, for even love may be made
the mainspring in a clock-work of emotions. Yet that Racine was a born
poet appears in the music, nobility, and tenderness of his medium; he
clothed his intelligible characters in magical and tragic robes; the
aroma of sentiment rises like a sort of pungent incense between them and
us, and no dramatist has ever had so sure a mastery over transports and
tears.

[Sidenote: Poetry has its place in the medium.]

In the medium a poet is at home; in the world he tries to render, he is
a child and a stranger. Poetic notions are false notions; in so far as
their function is representative they are vitiated by containing
elements not present in things. Truth is a jewel which should not be
painted over; but it may be set to advantage and shown in a good light.
The poetic way of idealising reality is dull, bungling, and impure; a
better acquaintance with things renders such flatteries ridiculous. That
very effort of thought by which opaque masses of experience were first
detached from the flux and given a certain individuality, seeks to
continue to clarify them until they become as transparent as possible.
To resist this clarification, to love the chance incrustations that
encumber human ideas, is a piece of timid folly, and poetry in this
respect is nothing but childish confusion. Poetic apprehension is a
makeshift, in so far as its cognitive worth is concerned; it is exactly,
in this respect, what myth is to science. Approaching its subject-matter
from a distance, with incongruous categories, it translates it into some
vague and misleading symbol rich in emotions which the object as it is
could never arouse and is sure presently to contradict. What lends these
hybrid ideas their temporary eloquence and charm is their congruity with
the mind that breeds them and with its early habits. Falsification, or
rather clouded vision, gives to poetry a more human accent and a readier
welcome than to truth. In other words, it is the medium that asserts
itself; the apperceptive powers indulge their private humours, and
neglect the office to which they were assigned once for all by their
cognitive essence.

[Sidenote: It is the best medium possible.]

That the medium should so assert itself, however, is no anomaly, the
cognitive function being an ulterior one to which ideas are by no means
obliged to conform. Apperception is itself an activity or art, and like
all others terminates in a product which is a good in itself, apart from
its utilities. If we abstract, then, from the representative function
which may perhaps accrue to speech, and regard it merely as an operation
absorbing energy and occasioning delight, we see that poetic language is
language at its best. Its essential success consists in fusing ideas in
charming sounds or in metaphors that shine by their own brilliance.
Poetry is an eloquence justified by its spontaneity, as eloquence is a
poetry justified by its application. The first draws the whole soul into
the situation, and the second puts the whole situation before the soul.

[Sidenote: Might it not convey what it is best to know?]

Is there not, we may ask, some ideal form of discourse in which
apperceptive life could be engaged with all its volume and transmuting
power, and in which at the same time no misrepresentation should be
involved? Transmutation is not erroneous when it is intentional;
misrepresentation does not please for being false, but only because
truth would be more congenial if it resembled such a fiction. Why
should not discourse, then, have nothing but truth in its import and
nothing but beauty in its form? With regard to euphony and grammatical
structure there is evidently nothing impossible in such an ideal; for
these radical beauties of language are independent of the
subject-matter. They form the body of poetry; but the ideal and
emotional atmosphere which is its soul depends on things external to
language, which no perfection in the medium could modify. It might seem
as if the brilliant substitutions, the magic suggestions essential to
poetry, would necessarily vanish in the full light of day. The light of
day is itself beautiful; but would not the loss be terrible if no other
light were ever suffered to shine?

[Sidenote: A rational poetry would exclude much now thought poetical.]

The Life of Reason involves sacrifice. What forces yearn for the ideal,
being many and incompatible, have to yield and partly deny themselves in
order to attain any ideal at all. There is something sad in all possible
attainment so long as the rational virtue (which wills such attainment)
is not pervasive; and even then there is limitation to put up with, and
the memory of many a defeat. Rational poetry is possible and would be
infinitely more beautiful than the other; but the charm of unreason, if
unreason seem charming, it certainly could not preserve. In what human
fancy demands, as at present constituted, there are irrational
elements. The given world seems insufficient; impossible things have to
be imagined, both to extend its limits and to fill in and vivify its
texture. Homer has a mythology without which experience would have
seemed to him undecipherable; Dante has his allegories and his mock
science; Shakespeare has his romanticism; Goethe his symbolic characters
and artificial machinery. All this lumber seems to have been somehow
necessary to their genius; they could not reach expression in more
honest terms. If such indirect expression could be discarded, it would
not be missed; but while the mind, for want of a better vocabulary, is
reduced to using these symbols, it pours into them a part of its own
life and makes them beautiful. Their loss is a real blow, while the
incapacity that called for them endures; and the soul seems to be
crippled by losing its crutches.

[Sidenote: All apperception modifies its object.]

There are certain adaptations and abbreviations of reality which thought
can never outgrow. Thought is representative; it enriches each soul and
each moment with premonitions of surrounding existences. If discourse is
to be significant it must transfer to its territory and reduce to its
scale whatever objects it deals with: in other words, thought has a
point of view and cannot see the world except in perspective. This point
of view is not, for reason, locally or naturally determined; sense alone
is limited in that material fashion, being seated in the body and
looking thence centrifugally upon things in so far as they come into
dynamic relations with that body. Intelligence, on the contrary, sallies
from that physical stronghold and consists precisely in shifting and
universalising the point of view, neutralising all local, temporal, or
personal conditions. Yet intelligence, notwithstanding, has its own
centre and point of origin, not explicitly in space or in a natural
body, but in some specific interest or moral aim. It translates animal
life into moral endeavour, and what figured in the first as a local
existence figures in the second as a specific good. Reason accordingly
has its essential bias, and looks at things as they affect the
particular form of life which reason expresses; and though all reality
should be ultimately swept by the eye of reason, the whole would still
be surveyed by a particular method, from a particular starting-point,
for a particular end; nor would it take much shrewdness to perceive that
this nucleus for discourse and estimation, this ideal life, corresponds
in the moral world to that animal body which gave sensuous experience
its seat and centre; so that rationality is nothing but the ideal
function or aspect of natural life. Reason is universal in its outlook
and in its sympathies: it is the faculty of changing places ideally and
representing alien points of view; but this very self-transcendence
manifests a certain special method in life, an equilibrium which a
far-sighted being is able to establish between itself and its
comprehended conditions. Reason remains to the end essentially human
and, in its momentary actuality, necessarily personal.

[Sidenote: Reason has its own bias and method.]

We have here an essential condition of discourse which renders it at
bottom poetical. Selection and applicability govern all thinking, and
govern it in the interests of the soul. Reason is itself a specific
medium; so that prose can never attain that perfect transparency and
mere utility which we were attributing to it. We should not wish to know
“things in themselves,” even if we were able. What it concerns us to
know about them is merely the service or injury they are able to do us,
and in what fashion they can affect our lives. To know this would be, in
so far, truly to know them; but it would be to know them through our own
faculties and through their supposed effects; it would be to know them
by their appearance. A singular proof of the frivolous way in which
philosophers often proceed, when they think they are particularly
profound, is seen in this puzzle, on which they solemnly ask us to fix
our thoughts: How is it possible to know reality, if all we can attain
in experience is but appearance? The meaning of knowledge, which is an
intellectual and living thing, is here forgotten, and the notion of
sensation, or bodily possession, is substituted for it; so what we are
really asked to consider is how, had we no understanding, we should be
able to understand what we endure. It is by conceiving what we endure to
be the appearance of something beyond us, that we reach knowledge that
something exists beyond us, and that it plays in respect to us a
determinate rôle. There could be no knowledge of reality if what
conveyed that knowledge were not felt to be appearance; nor can a medium
of knowledge better than appearance be by any possibility conceived. To
have such appearances is what makes realities knowable. Knowledge
transcends sensation by relating it to other sensation, and thereby
rising to a supersensuous plane, the plane of principles and causes by
which sensibles are identified in character and distributed in
existence. These principles and causes are what we call the intelligible
or the real world; and the sensations, when they have been so
interpreted and underpinned, are what we call experience.

[Sidenote: Rational poetry would envelop exact knowledge in ultimate
emotions.]

If a poet could clarify the myths he begins with, so as to reach
ultimate scientific notions of nature and life, he would still be
dealing with vivid feeling and with its imaginative expression. The
prosaic landscape before him would still be a work of art, painted on
the human brain by human reason. If he found that landscape
uninteresting, it would be because he was not really interested in life;
if he found it dull and unpoetical, he would be manifesting his small
capacity and childish whims. Tragic, fatal, intractable, he might well
feel that the truth was; but these qualities have never been absent from
that half-mythical world through which poets, for want of a rational
education, have hitherto wandered. A rational poet’s vision would have
the same moral functions which myth was asked to fulfil, and fulfilled
so treacherously; it would employ the same ideal faculties which myth
expressed in a confused and hasty fashion. More detail would have been
added, and more variety in interpretation. To deal with so great an
object, and retain his mastery over it, a poet would doubtless need a
robust genius. If he possessed it, and in transmuting all existence
falsified nothing, giving that picture of everything which human
experience in the end would have drawn, he would achieve an ideal
result. In prompting mankind to imagine, he would be helping them to
live. His poetry, without ceasing to be a fiction in its method and
ideality, would be an ultimate truth in its practical scope. It would
present in graphic images the total efficacy of real things. Such a
poetry would be more deeply rooted in human experience than is any
casual fancy, and therefore more appealing to the heart. Such a poetry
would represent more thoroughly than any formula the concrete burden of
experience; it would become the most trustworthy of companions. The
images it had worked out would confront human passion more intelligibly
than does the world as at present conceived, with its mechanism half
ignored and its ideality half invented; they would represent vividly the
uses of nature, and thereby make all natural situations seem so many
incentives to art.

[Sidenote: An illustration.]

Rational poetry is not wholly unknown. When Homer mentions an object,
how does he render it poetical? First, doubtless, by the euphony of its
name or the sensuous glow of some epithet coupled with it. Sometimes,
however, even this ornamental epithet is not merely sensuous; it is very
likely a patronymic, the name of some region or some mythical ancestor.
In other words, it is a signal for widening our view and for conceiving
the object, not only vividly and with pause, but in an adequate historic
setting. Macbeth tells us that his dagger was “unmannerly breeched in
gore.” Achilles would not have amused himself with such a metaphor, even
if breeches had existed in his day, but would rather have told us whose
blood, on other occasions, had stained the same blade, and perhaps what
father or mother had grieved for the slaughtered hero, or what brave
children remained to continue his race. Shakespeare’s phrase is
ingenious and fanciful; it dazzles for a moment, but in the end it seems
violent and crude. What Homer would have said, on the contrary, being
simple and true, might have grown, as we dwelt upon it, always more
noble, pathetic, and poetical. Shakespeare, too, beneath his occasional
absurdities of plot and diction, ennobles his stage with actual history,
with life painted to the quick, with genuine human characters, politics,
and wisdom; and surely these are not the elements that do least credit
to his genius. In every poet, indeed, there is some fidelity to nature,
mixed with that irrelevant false fancy with which poetry is sometimes
identified; and the degree in which a poet’s imagination dominates
reality is, in the end, the exact measure of his importance and dignity.

[Sidenote: Volume can be found in scope better than in suggestion.]

Before prosaic objects are descried, the volume and richness needful for
poetry lie in a blurred and undigested chaos; but after the common world
has emerged and has called on prose to describe it, the same volume and
richness may be recovered; and a new and clarified poetry may arise
through synthesis. Scope is a better thing than suggestion, and more
truly poetical. It has expressed what suggestion pointed to and felt in
the bulk: it possesses what was yearned for. A real thing, when all its
pertinent natural associates are discerned, touches wonder, pathos, and
beauty on every side; the rational poet is one who, without feigning
anything unreal, perceives these momentous ties, and presents his
subject loaded with its whole fate, missing no source of worth which is
in it, no ideal influence which it may have. Homer remains, perhaps, the
greatest master in this art. The world he glorified by showing in how
many ways it could serve reason and beauty was but a simple world, and
an equal genius in these days might be distracted by the Babel about
him, and be driven, as poets now are, into incidental dreams. Yet the
ideal of mastery and idealisation remains the same, if any one could
only attain it: mastery, to see things as they are and dare to describe
them ingenuously; idealisation, to select from this reality what is
pertinent to ultimate interests and can speak eloquently to the soul.




