CHAPTER III

EMERGENCE OF FINE ART


[Sidenote: Art is spontaneous action made stable by success.]

Action which is purely spontaneous is merely tentative. Any experience
of success or utility which might have preceded, if it availed to make
action sure, would avail to make it also intentional and conscious of
its ulterior results. Now the actual issue which an action is destined
to have, since it is something future and problematical, can exert no
influence on its own antecedents; but if any picture of what the issue
is likely to be accompanies the heat and momentum of action, that
picture being, of all antecedents in the operation, the one most easily
remembered and described, may be picked out as essential, and dignified
with the name of motive or cause. This will not happen to every
prophetic idea; we may live in fear and trembling as easily as with an
arrogant consciousness of power. The difference flows from the greater
or lesser affinity that happens to exist between expectation and
instinct. Action remains always, in its initial phase, spontaneous and
automatic; it retains an inwardly grounded and perfectly blind tendency
of its own; but this tendency may agree or clash with the motor
impulses subtending whatever ideas may at the same time people the
fancy. If the blind and the ideal impulses agree, spontaneous action is
voluntary and its result intentional; if they clash, the ideas remain
speculative and idle, random, ineffectual wishes; while the result, not
being referable to any idea, is put down to fate. The sense of power,
accordingly, shows either that events have largely satisfied desire, so
that natural tendency goes hand in hand with the suggestions of
experience, or else that experience has not been allowed to count at all
and that the future is being painted _a priori_. In the latter case the
sense of power is illusory. Action will then never really issue in the
way intended, and even thought will only seem to make progress by
constantly forgetting its original direction.

Though life, however, is initially experimental and always remains
experimental at bottom, yet experiment fortifies certain tendencies and
cancels others, so that a gradual sediment of habit and wisdom is formed
in the stream of time. Action then ceases to be merely tentative and
spontaneous, and becomes art. Foresight begins to accompany practice
and, as we say, to guide it. Purpose thus supervenes on useful impulse,
and conscious expression on self-sustaining automatism. Art lies between
two extremes. On the one side is purely spontaneous fancy, which would
never foresee its own works and scarcely recognise or value them after
they had been created, since at the next moment the imaginative current
would as likely as not have faced about and might be making in the
opposite direction; and on the other side is pure utility, which would
deprive the work of all inherent ideality, and render it inexpressive of
anything in man save his necessities. War, for instance, is an art when,
having set itself an ideal end, it devises means of attaining it; but
this ideal end has for its chief basis some failure in politics and
morals. War marks a weakness and disease in human society, and its best
triumphs are glorious evils—cruel and treacherous remedies, big with
new germs of disease. War is accordingly a servile art and not
essentially liberal; whatever inherent values its exercise may have
would better be realised in another medium. Yet out of the pomp and
circumstance of war fine arts may arise—music, armoury, heraldry, and
eloquence. So utility leads to art when its vehicle acquires intrinsic
value and becomes expressive. On the other hand, spontaneous action
leads to art when it acquires a rational function. Thus utterance, which
is primarily automatic, becomes the art of speech when it serves to mark
crises in experience, making them more memorable and influential through
their artificial expression; but expression is never art while it
remains expressive to no purpose.

[Sidenote: It combines utility and automatism.]

A good way of understanding the fine arts would be to study how they
grow, now out of utility, now out of automatism. We should thus see
more clearly how they approach their goal, which can be nothing but the
complete superposition of these two characters. If all practice were art
and all art perfect, no action would remain compulsory and not justified
inherently, while no creative impulse would any longer be wasteful or,
like the impulse to thrum, symptomatic merely and irrelevant to
progress. It is by contributing to the Life of Reason and merging into
its substance that art, like religion or science, first becomes worthy
of praise. Each element comes from a different quarter, bringing its
specific excellence and needing its peculiar purification and
enlightenment, by co-ordination with all the others; and this process of
enlightenment and purification is what we call development in each
department. The meanest arts are those which lie near the limit either
of utility or of automatic self-expression. They become nobler and more
rational as their utility is rendered spontaneous or their spontaneity
beneficent.

[Sidenote: Automatism fundamental and irresponsible.]

The spontaneous arts are older than the useful, since man must live and
act before he can devise instruments for living and acting better. Both
the power to construct machines and the end which, to be useful, they
would have to serve, need to be given in initial impulse. There is
accordingly a vast amount of irresponsible play and loose experiment in
art, as in consciousness, before these gropings acquire a settled habit
and function, and rationality begins. The farther back we go into
barbarism the more we find life and mind busied with luxuries; and
though these indulgences may repel a cultivated taste and seem in the
end cruel and monotonous, their status is really nearer to that of
religion and spontaneous art than to that of useful art or of science.
Ceremony, for instance, is compulsory in society and sometimes truly
oppressive, yet its root lies in self-expression and in a certain
ascendency of play which drags all life along into conventional channels
originally dug out in irresponsible bursts of action. This occurs
inevitably and according to physical analogies. Bodily organs grow
automatically and become necessary moulds of life. We must either find a
use for them or bear as best we may the idle burden they impose. Of such
burdens the barbarian carries the greatest possible sum; and while he
paints the heavens with his grotesque mythologies, he encumbers earth
with inventions and prescriptions almost as gratuitous. The fiendish
dances and shouts, the cruel initiations, mutilations, and sacrifices in
which savages indulge, are not planned by them deliberately nor
justified in reflection. Men find themselves falling into these
practices, driven by a tradition hardly distinguishable from instinct.
In its periodic fury the spirit hurries them into wars and orgies, quite
as it kindles sudden flaming visions in their brains, habitually so
torpid. The spontaneous is the worst of tyrants, for it exercises a
needless and fruitless tyranny in the guise of duty and inspiration.
Without mitigating in the least the subjection to external forces under
which man necessarily labours, it adds a new artificial subjection to
his own false steps and childish errors.

[Sidenote: It is tamed by contact with the world.]

This mental vegetation, this fitful nervous groping, is nevertheless a
sign of life, out of which art emerges by discipline and by a gradual
application to real issues. An artist is a dreamer consenting to dream
of the actual world; he is a highly suggestible mind hypnotised by
reality. Even barbaric genius may find points of application in the
world. These points will be more numerous the more open the eyes have
been, the more docile and intelligent the mind is that gathers and
renders back its impressions in a synthetic and ideal form. Intuition
will then represent, at least symbolically, an actual situation. Grimace
and gesture and ceremony will be modified by a sense of their effect;
they will become artful and will transform their automatic
expressiveness into ideal expression. They will become significant of
what it is intended to communicate and important to know; they will have
ceased to be irresponsible exercises and vents for passing feeling, by
which feeling is dissipated, as in tears, without being embodied and
intellectualised, as in a work of art.

[Sidenote: The dance.]

[Sidenote: Functions of gesture.]

The dance is an early practice that passes after this fashion into an
art. A prancing stallion may transfigure his movements more beautifully
than man is capable of doing; for the springs and limits of effect are
throughout mechanical, and man, in more than one respect, would have to
become a centaur before he could rival the horse’s prowess. Human
instinct is very imperfect in this direction, and grows less happy the
more artificial society becomes; most dances, even the savage ones, are
somewhat ridiculous. A rudimentary instinct none the less remains, which
not only involves a faculty of heightened and rhythmic motion, but also
assures a direct appreciation of such motion when seen in others. The
conscious agility, _fougue_, and precision which fill the performer
become contagious and delight the spectator as well. There are indeed
dances so ugly that, like those of contemporary society, they cannot be
enjoyed unless they are shared; they yield pleasures of exercise only,
or at best of movement in unison. But when man was nearer to the animal
and his body and soul were in happier conjunction, when society, too,
was more compulsive over the individual, he could lend himself more
willingly and gracefully to being a figure in the general pageant of the
world. The dance could then detach itself from its early association
with war and courtship and ally itself rather to religion and art. From
being a spontaneous vent for excitement, or a blind means of producing
it, the dance became a form of discipline and conscious social
control—a cathartic for the soul; and this by a quite intelligible
transition. Gesture, of which the dance is merely a pervasive use, is an
incipient action. It is conduct in the groping stage, before it has lit
on its purpose, as can be seen unmistakably in all the gesticulation of
love and defiance. In this way the dance is attached to life initially
by its physiological origin. Being an incipient act, it naturally leads
to its own completion and may arouse in others the beginnings of an
appropriate response. Gesture is only less catching and less eloquent
than action itself. But gesture, while it has this power of suggesting
action and stimulating the response which would be appropriate if the
action took place, may be arrested in the process of execution, since it
is incipient only; it will then have revealed an intention and betrayed
a state of mind. Thus it will have found a function which action itself
can seldom fulfil. When an act is done, indications of what it was to be
are superfluous; but indications of possible acts are in the highest
degree useful and interesting. In this way gesture assumes the rôle of
language and becomes a means of rational expression. It remains
suggestive and imitable enough to convey an idea, but not enough to
precipitate a full reaction; it feeds that sphere of merely potential
action which we call thought; it becomes a vehicle for intuition.

Under these circumstances, to tread the measures of a sacred dance, to
march with an army, to bear one’s share in any universal act, fills the
heart with a voluminous silent emotion. The massive suggestion, the
pressure of the ambient will, is out of all proportion to the present
call for action. Infinite resources and definite premonitions are thus
stored up in the soul; and merely to have moved solemnly together is the
best possible preparation for living afterwards, even if apart, in the
consciousness of a general monition and authority.

[Sidenote: Automatic music.]

Parallel to this is the genesis and destiny of music, an art originally
closely intertwined with the dance. The same explosive forces that
agitate the limbs loosen the voice; hand, foot, and throat mark their
wild rhythm together. Birds probably enjoy the pulsation of their
singing rather than its sound. Even human music is performed long before
it is listened to, and is at first no more an art than sighing. The
original emotions connected with it are felt by participation in the
performance—a participation which can become ideal only because, at
bottom, it is always actual. The need of exercise and self-expression,
the force of contagion and unison, bears the soul along before an
artistic appreciation of music arises; and we may still observe among
civilised races how music asserts itself without any æsthetic intent, as
when the pious sing hymns in common, or the sentimental, at sea, cannot
refrain from whining their whole homely repertory in the moonlight. Here
as elsewhere, instinct and habit are phases of the same inner
disposition. What has once occurred automatically on a given occasion
will be repeated in much the same form when a similar occasion recurs.
Thus impulse, reinforced by its own remembered expression, passes into
convention. Savages have a music singularly monotonous, automatic, and
impersonal; they cannot resist the indulgence, though they probably have
little pleasure in it. The same thing happens with customary sounds as
with other prescribed ceremonies; to omit them would be shocking and
well-nigh impossible, yet to repeat them serves no end further than to
avoid a sense of strangeness or inhibition. These automatisms, however,
in working themselves out, are not without certain retroactive effects:
they leave the system exhausted or relieved, and they have meantime
played more or less agreeably on the senses. The music we make
automatically we cannot help hearing incidentally; the sensation may
even modify the expression, since sensation too has its physical side.
The expression is reined in and kept from becoming vagrant, in
proportion as its form and occasion are remembered. The automatic
performer, being henceforth controlled more or less by reflection and
criticism, becomes something of an artist: he trains himself to be
consecutive, impressive, agreeable; he begins to compare his
improvisation with its subject and function, and thus he develops what
is called style and taste.




