CHAPTER VII

DIALECTIC


[Sidenote: Dialectic elaborates given forms.]

The advantage which the mechanical sciences have over history is drawn
from their mathematical form. Mathematics has somewhat the same place in
physics that conscience has in action; it seems to be a directive
principle in natural operations where it is only a formal harmony. The
formalistic school, which treats grammar in all departments as if it
were the ground of import rather than a means of expressing it, takes
mathematics also for an oracular deliverance, springing full-armed out
of the brain, and setting up a canon which all concrete things must
conform to. Thus mathematical science has become a mystery which a myth
must be constructed to solve. For how can it happen, people ask, that
pure intuition, retreating into its cell, can evolve there a prodigious
system of relations which it carries like a measuring-rod into the world
and lo! everything in experience submits to be measured by it? What
pre-established harmony is this between the spinning cerebral silkworm
and nature’s satins and brocades?

If we but knew, so the myth runs, that experience can show no patterns
but those which the prolific Mind has woven, we should not wonder at
this necessary correspondence. The Mind having decreed of its own
motion, while it sat alone before the creation of the world, that it
would take to dreaming mathematically, it evoked out of nothing all
formal necessities; and later, when it felt some solicitation to play
with things, it imposed those forms upon all its toys, admitting none of
any other sort into the nursery. In other words, perception perfected
its grammar before perceiving any of its objects, and having imputed
that grammar to the materials of sense, it was able to perceive objects
for the first time and to legislate further about their relations.

The most obvious artifices of language are often the most deceptive and
bring on epidemic prejudices. What is this Mind, this machine existing
prior to existence? The mind that exists is only a particular department
or focus of existence; its principles cannot be its own source, much
less the source of anything in other beings. Mathematical principles in
particular are not imposed on existence or on nature _ab extra_, but are
found in and abstracted from the subject-matter and march of experience.
To exist things have to wear some form, and the form they happen to wear
is largely mathematical. This being the case, the mind in shaping its
barbarous prosody somewhat more closely to the nature of things, learns
to note and to abstract the form that so strikingly defines them. Once
abstracted and focussed in the mind, these forms, like all forms, reveal
their dialectic; but that things conform to that dialectic (when they
do) is not wonderful, seeing that it is the obvious form of things that
the mind has singled out, not without practical shrewdness, for more
intensive study.

[Sidenote: Forms are abstracted from existence by intent.]

The difference between ideal and material knowledge does not lie in the
ungenerated oracular character of one of them in opposition to the
other; in both the data are inexplicable and irrational, and in both
investigation is tentative, observant, and subject to control by the
subject-matter. The difference lies, rather, in the direction of
speculation. In physics, which is at bottom historical, we study what
happens; we make inventories and records of events, of phenomena, of
juxtapositions. In dialectic, which is wholly intensive, we study what
is; we strive to clarify and develop the essence of what we find,
bringing into focus the inner harmonies and implications of forms—forms
which our attention or purpose has defined initially. The intuitions
from which mathematical deduction starts are highly generic notions
drawn from observation. The lines and angles of geometers are ideals,
and their ideal context is entirely independent of what may be their
context in the world; but they are found in the world, and their ideals
are suggested by very common sensations. Had they been invented, by
some inexplicable parthenogenesis in thought, it would indeed have been
a marvel had they found application. Philosophy has enough notions of
this inapplicable sort—usually, however, not very recondite in their
origin—to show that dialectic, when it seems to control existence, must
have taken more than one hint from the subject world, and that in the
realm of logic, too, nothing submits to be governed without
representation.

[Sidenote: Confusion comes of imperfect abstraction, or ambiguous
intent.]

When dialectic is employed, as in ethics and metaphysics, upon highly
complex ideas—concretions in discourse which cover large blocks of
existence—the dialectician in defining and in deducing often reaches
notions which cease to apply in some important respect to the object
originally intended. Thus Socrates, taking “courage” for his theme,
treats it dialectically and expresses the intent of the word by saying
that courage must be good, and then develops the meaning of good,
showing that it means the choice 01 the greater benefit; and finally
turns about and ends by saying that courage is consequently the choice
of the greater benefit and identical with wisdom. Here we have a process
of thought ending in a paradox which, frankly, misrepresents the
original meaning. For “courage” meant not merely something desirable but
something having a certain animal and psychological aspect. The emotion
and gesture of it had not been excluded from the idea. So that while
the argument proves to perfection that unwise courage is a bad thing, it
does not end with an affirmation really true of the original concept.
The instinct which we call courage, with an eye to its psychic and
bodily quality, is not always virtuous or wise. Dialectic, when it
starts with confused and deep-dyed feelings, like those which ethical
and metaphysical terms generally stand for, is thus in great danger of
proving unsatisfactory and being or seeming sophistical.

The mathematical dialectician has no such serious dangers to face. When,
having observed the sun and sundry other objects, he frames the idea of
a circle and tracing out its intent shows that the circle meant cannot
be squared, there is no difficulty in reverting to nature and saying
that the sun’s circle cannot be squared. For there is no difference in
intent between the circularity noted in the sun and that which is the
subject of the demonstration. The geometer has made in his first
reflection so clear and violent an abstraction from the sun’s actual
bulk and qualities that he will never imagine himself to be speaking of
anything but a concretion in discourse. The concretion in nature is
never legislated about nor so much as thought of except possibly when,
under warrant of sense, it is chosen to illustrate the concept
investigated dialectically. It does not even occur to a man to ask if
the sun’s circle can be squared, for every one understands that the sun
is circular only in so far as it conforms to the circle’s ideal nature;
which is as if Socrates and his interlocutors had clearly understood
that the _virtue_ of courage in an intemperate villain meant only
whatever in his mood or action was rational and truly desirable, and had
then said that courage, so understood, was identical with wisdom or with
the truly rational and desirable rule of life.

[Sidenote: The fact that mathematics applies to existence is empirical.]

The applicability of mathematics is not vouched for by mathematics but
by sense, and its application in some distant part of nature is not
vouched for by mathematics but by inductive arguments about nature’s
uniformity, or by the character which the notion, “a distant part of
nature,” already possesses. Inapplicable mathematics, we are told, is
perfectly thinkable, and systematic deductions, in themselves valid, may
be made from concepts which contravene the facts of perception. We may
suspect, perhaps, that even these concepts are framed by analogy out of
suggestions found in sense, so that some symbolic relevance or
proportion is kept, even in these dislocated speculations, to the matter
of experience. It is like a new mythology; the purely fictitious idea
has a certain parallelism and affinity to nature and moves in a human
and familiar way. Both data and method are drawn from applicable
science, elements of which even myth, whether poetic or mathematical,
may illustrate by a sort of variant or fantastic reduplication.

The great glory of mathematics, like that of virtue, is to be useful
while remaining free. Number and measure furnish an inexhaustible
subject-matter which the mind can dominate and develop dialectically as
it is the mind’s inherent office to develop ideas. At the same time
number and measure are the grammar of sense; and the more this inner
logic is cultivated and refined the greater subtlety and sweep can be
given to human perception. Astronomy on the one hand and mechanical arts
on the other are fruits of mathematics by which its worth is made known
even to the layman, although the born mathematician would not need the
sanction of such an extraneous utility to attach him to a subject that
has an inherent cogency and charm. Ideas, like other things, have
pleasure in propagation, and even when allowance is made for birth-pangs
and an occasional miscarriage, their native fertility will always
continue to assert itself. The more ideal and frictionless the movement
of thought is, the more perfect must be the physiological engine that
sustains it. The momentum of that silent and secluded growth carries the
mind, with a sense of pure disembodied vision, through the logical
labyrinth; but the momentum is vital, for the truth itself does not
move.

[Sidenote: Its moral value is therefore contingent.]

Whether the airy phantoms thus brought into being are valued and
preserved by the world is an ulterior point of policy which the pregnant
mathematician does not need to consider in bringing to light the
legitimate burden of his thoughts. But were mathematics incapable of
application, did nature and experience, for instance, illustrate nothing
but Parmenides’ Being or Hegel’s Logic, the dialectical cogency which
mathematics would of course retain would not give this science a very
high place in the Life of Reason. Mathematics would be an amusement, and
though apparently innocent, like a game of patience, it might even turn
out to be a wasteful and foolish exercise for the mind; because to
deepen habits and cultivate pleasures irrelevant to other interests is a
way of alienating ourselves from our general happiness. Distinction and
a curious charm there may well be in such a pursuit, but this quality is
perhaps traceable to affinities and associations with other more
substantial interests, or is due to the ingenious temper it denotes,
which touches that of the wit or magician. Mathematics, if it were
nothing more than a pleasure, might conceivably become a vice. Those
addicted to it might be indulging an atavistic taste at the expense of
their humanity. It would then be in the position now occupied by
mythology and mysticism. Even as it is, mathematicians share with
musicians a certain partiality in their characters and mental
development. Masters in one abstract subject, they may remain children
in the world; exquisite manipulators of the ideal, they may be erratic
and clumsy in their earthly ways. Immense as are the uses and wide the
applications of mathematics, its texture is too thin and inhuman to
employ the whole mind or render it harmonious. It is a science which
Socrates rejected for its supposed want of utility; but perhaps he had
another ground in reserve to justify his humorous prejudice. He may have
felt that such a science, if admitted, would endanger his thesis about
the identity of virtue and knowledge.

[Sidenote: Quantity submits easily to dialectical treatment.]

Mathematical method has been the envy of philosophers, perplexed and
encumbered as they are with the whole mystery of existence, and they
have attempted at times to emulate mathematical cogency. Now the
lucidity and certainty found in mathematics are not inherent in its
specific character as the science of number or dimension; they belong to
dialectic as a whole which is essentially elucidation. The effort to
explain meanings is in most cases abortive because these meanings melt
in our hands—a defeat which Hegel would fain have consecrated, together
with all other evils, into necessity and law. But the merit of
mathematics is that it is so much less Hegelian than life; that it holds
its own while it advances, and never allows itself to misrepresent its
original intent. In all it finds to say about the triangle it never
comes to maintain that the triangle is really a square. The privilege of
mathematics is simply to have offered the mind, for dialectical
treatment, a material to which dialectical treatment could be honestly
applied. This material consists in certain general aspects of
sensation—its extensity, its pulsation, its distribution into related
parts. The wakefulness that originally makes these abstractions is able
to keep them clear, and to elaborate them infinitely without
contradicting their essence.

For this reason it is always a false step in mathematical science, a
step over its brink into the abyss beyond, when we try to reduce its
elements to anything not essentially sensible. Intuition must continue
to furnish the subject of discourse, the axioms, and the ultimate
criteria and sanctions. Calculation and transmutation can never make
their own counters or the medium in which they move. So that space,
number, continuity, and every other elementary intuition remains at
bottom opaque—opaque, that is, to mathematical science; for it is no
paradox, but an obvious necessity, that the data of a logical operation
should not be producible by its workings. Reason would have nothing to
do if it had no irrational materials. Saint Augustine’s rhetoric
accordingly covered—as so often with him—a profound truth when he said
of time that he knew what it was when no one asked him, but if any one
asked him he did not know; which may be restated by saying that time is
an intuition, an aspect of crude experience, which science may work with
but which it can never arrive at.

[Sidenote: Constancy and progress in intent.]

When a concretion is formed in discourse and an intent is attained in
consciousness, predicates accrue to the subject in a way which is
perfectly empirical. Dialectic is not retrospective; it does not consist
in recovering ground previously surveyed. The accretion of new
predicates comes in answer to chance questions, questions raised, to be
sure, about a given theme. The subject is fixed by the mind’s intent and
it suffices to compare any tentative assertion made about it with that
intent itself to see whether the expression suggested for it is truly
dialectical and thoroughly honest. Dialectic verifies by
reconsideration, by equation of tentative results with fixed intentions.
It does not verify, like the sciences of existence, by comparing a
hypothesis with a new perception. In dialectic no new _perception_ is
wanted; the goal is to understand the old fact, to give it an aureole
and not a progeny. It is a transubstantiation of matter, a passage from
existence to eternity. In this sense dialectic is “synthetic _a
priori_”; it analyses an intent which demanded further elucidation and
had fixed the direction and principle of its expansion. If this intent
is abandoned and a new subject is introduced surreptitiously, a fallacy
is committed; yet the correct elucidation of ideas is a true progress,
nor could there be any progress unless the original idea were better
expressed and elicited as we proceeded; so that constancy in intent and
advance in explication are the two requisites of a cogent deduction.

The question in dialectic is always what is true, what can be said,
about _this_; and the demonstrative pronoun, indicating an act of
selective attention, raises the object it selects to a concretion in
discourse, the relations of which in the universe of discourse it then
proceeds to formulate. At the same time this dialectical investigation
may be full of surprises. Knowledge may be so truly enriched by it that
_knowledge_, in an ideal sense, only begins when dialectic has given
some articulation to being. Without dialectic an animal might follow
instinct, he might have vivid emotions, expectations, and dreams, but he
could hardly be said to know anything or to guide his life with
conscious intent. The accretions that might come empirically into any
field of vision would not be new predicates to be added to a known
thing, unless the logical and functional mantle of that thing fell upon
them and covered them. While the right of particulars to existence is
their own, granted them by the free grace of heaven, their ability to
enlarge our knowledge on any particular subject—their relevance or
incidence in discourse—hangs on their fulfilling the requirements which
that subject’s dialectical nature imposes on all its expressions.

[Sidenote: Intent determines the functional essence of objects.]

It is on this ground, for instance, that the image of a loaf of bread is
so far from being the loaf of bread itself. External resemblance is
nothing; even psychological derivation or superposition is nothing; the
intent, rather, which picks out what that object’s function and meaning
shall be, alone defines its idea; and this function involves a locus and
a status which the image does not possess. Such admirable iridescence as
the image might occasionally put on—in the fine arts, for
instance—would not constitute any iridescence or transformation in the
thing; nor would identity of aspect preserve the thing if its soul, if
its utility, had disappeared. Herein lies the ground for the essential
or functional distinction between primary and secondary qualities in
things, a distinction which a psychological scepticism has so hastily
declared to be untenable. If it was discovered, said these logicians,
that space was perceived through reading muscular sensations, space, and
the muscles too, were thereby proved to be unreal. This remarkable
sophism passed muster in the philosophical world for want of attention
to dialectic, which might so easily have shown that what a thing _means_
is spatial distinction and mechanical efficacy, and that the origin of
our perceptions, which are all equally bodily and dependent on material
stimulation, has nothing to do with their respective claims to
hypostasis. It is intent that makes objects objects; and the same
intent, defining the function of things, defines the scope of those
qualities which are essential to them. In the flux substances and
shadows drift down together; it is reason that discerns the difference.

[Sidenote: Also the scope of ideals.]

Purposes need dialectical articulation as much as essences do, and
without an articulate and fixed purpose, without an ideal, action would
collapse into mere motion or conscious change. It is notably in this
region that elucidation constitutes progress; for to understand the
properties of number may be less important than empirically to count;
but to see and feel the values of things in all their distinction and
fulness is the ultimate fruit of efficiency; it is mastery in that art
of life for which all the rest is apprenticeship. Dialectic of this sort
is practised intuitively by spiritual minds; and even when it has to be
carried on argumentatively it may prove very enlightening. That the
excellence of courage is identical with that of wisdom still needs to be
driven home; and that the excellence of poetry is identical with that of
all other things probably sounds like a blind paradox. Yet did not all
excellences conspire to one end and meet in one Life of Reason, how
could their relative value be estimated, or any reflective sanction be
found for them at all? The miscellaneous, captious fancies of the will,
the menagerie of moral prejudices, still call for many a Socrates to
tame them. So long as courage means a grimace of mind or body, the love
of it is another grimace. But if it meant the value, recognisable by
reason and diffused through all life, which that casual attitude or
feeling might have, then we should be launched upon the quest for
wisdom.

The want of integration in moral views is like what want of integration
would be in arithmetic if we declared that it was the part of a man and
a Christian to maintain that _my_ two equals four or that a _green_
fifteen is a hundred. These propositions might have incidental lights
and shades in people’s lives to make them plausible and precious; but
they could not be maintained by one who had clarified his intent in
naming and adding. For then the arithmetical relations would be
abstracted, and their incidental associates would drop out of the
account. So a man who is in pursuit of things for the good that is in
them must recognise and (if reason avails) must pursue what is good in
them all. Strange customs and unheard-of thoughts may then find their
appropriate warrant; just as in higher mathematical calculations very
wonderful and unforeseen results may be arrived at, which a man will not
accept without careful reconsideration of the terms and problem before
him; but if he finds the unexpected conclusion flowing from those
premises, he will have enlarged his knowledge of his art and discovered
a congenial good. He will have made progress in the Socratic science of
knowing his own intent.

[Sidenote: Double status of mathematics.]

Mathematics, for all its applications in nature, is a part of ideal
philosophy. It is logic applied to certain simple intuitions. These
intuitions and many of their developments happen to appear in that
efficacious and self-sustaining moiety of being which we call material;
so that mathematics is _per accidens_ the dialectical study of nature’s
efficacious form. Its use and application in the world rather hide its
dialectical principle. Mathematics owes its public success to the happy
choice of a simple and widely diffused subject-matter; it owes its inner
cogency, however, to its ideality and the merely adventitious
application it has to existence. Mathematics has come to seem the type
of good logic because it is an illustration of logic in a sphere so
highly abstract in idea and so pervasive in sense as to be at once
manageable and useful.

The delights and triumphs of mathematics ought, therefore, to be a great
encouragement to ideal philosophy. If in a comparatively uninteresting
field attention can find so many treasures of harmony and order, what
beauties might it not discover in interpreting faithfully ideas nobler
than extension and number, concretions closer to man’s spiritual life?
But unfortunately the logic of values is subject to voluntary and
involuntary confusions of so discouraging a nature that the flight of
dialectic in that direction has never been long and, even when short,
often disastrous. What is needed, as the example of mathematics shows,
is a steadfast intent and an adventurous inquiry. It would not occur to
a geometer to ask with trepidation what difference it would make to the
Pythagorean proposition if the hypothenuse were said to be wise and
good. Yet metaphysicians, confounding dialectic with physics and
thereby corrupting both, will discuss for ever the difference it makes
to substance whether you call it matter or God. Nevertheless, no
decorative epithets can give substance any other attributes than those
which it has; that is, other than the actual appearances that substance
is needed to support. Similarly, neither mathematicians nor astronomers
are exercised by the question whether [Greek: pi] created the ring of
Saturn; yet naturalists and logicians have not rejected the analogous
problem whether the good did or did not create the animals.

[Sidenote: Practical rôle of dialectic.]

So long as in using terms there is no fixed intent, no concretion in
discourse with discernible predicates, controversy will rage as
conceptions waver and will reach no valid result. But when the force of
intellect, once having arrested an idea amid the flux of perceptions,
avails to hold and examine that idea with perseverance, not only does a
flash of light immediately cross the mind, but deeper and deeper vistas
are opened there into ideal truth. The principle of dialectic is
intelligence itself; and as no part of man’s economy is more vital than
intelligence (since intelligence is what makes life aware of its
destiny), so no part has a more delightful or exhilarating movement. To
understand is pre-eminently to live, moving not by stimulation and
external compulsion, but by inner direction and control. Dialectic is
related to observation as art is to industry; it uses what the other
furnishes; it is the fruition of experience. It is not an alternative to
empirical pursuits but their perfection; for dialectic, like art, has no
special or private subject-matter, nor any obligation to be useless. Its
subject-matter is all things, and its function is to compare them in
form and worth, giving the mind speculative dominion over them. It
profits by the flux to fix its signification. This is precisely what
mathematics does for the abstract form and multitude of sensible things;
it is what dialectic might do everywhere, with the same incidental
utility, if it could settle its own attitude and learn to make the
passions steadfast and calm in the consciousness of their ultimate
objects.

[Sidenote: Hegel’s satire on dialectic.]

The nature of dialectic might be curiously illustrated by reference to
Hegel’s Logic; and though to approach the subject from Hegel’s satirical
angle is not, perhaps, quite honest or fair, the method has a certain
spice. Hegel, who despised mathematics, saw that in other departments
the instability of men’s meanings defeated their desire to understand
themselves. This insecurity in intent he found to be closely connected
with change of situation, with the natural mutability of events and
opinions in the world. Instead of showing, however, what inroads
passion, oblivion, sophistry, and frivolity may make into dialectic, he
bethought himself to represent all these incoherences, which are indeed
significant of natural changes, as the march of dialectic itself, thus
identified with the process of evolution and with natural law. The
romance of an unstable and groping theology, full of warm intentions and
impossible ideas, he took to be typical of all experience and of all
science.

In that impressionable age any effect of _chiaro-oscuro_ caught in the
moonlight of history could find a philosopher to exalt it into the
darkly luminous secret of the world. Hegel accordingly decreed that
men’s habit of self-contradiction constituted their providential
function, both in thought and in morals; and he devoted his Logic to
showing how every idea they embraced (for he never treated an idea
otherwise than as a creed), when pressed a little, turned into its
opposite. This opposite after a while would fall back into something
like the original illusion; whereupon a new change of insight would
occur and a new thought would be accepted until, the landscape changing,
attention would be attracted to a fresh aspect of the matter and
conviction would wander into a new labyrinth of false steps and
half-meanings. The sum total of these wanderings, when viewed from
above, formed an interesting picture. A half-mystical, half-cynical
reflection might take a certain pleasure in contemplating it; especially
if, in memory of Calvin and the Stoics, this situation were called the
expression of Absolute Reason and Divine Will.

We may think for a moment that we have grasped the elusive secret of
this philosophy and that it is simply a Calvinism without Christianity,
in which God’s glory consists in the damnation of quite all his
creatures. Presently, however, the scene changes again, and we recognise
that Creator and creation, ideal and process, are identical, so that the
glory belongs to the very multitude that suffers. But finally, as we rub
our eyes, the whole revelation collapses into a platitude, and we
discover that this glory and this damnation were nothing but unctuous
phrases for the vulgar flux of existence.

That nothing is what we mean by it is perfectly true when we in no case
know what we mean. Thus a man who is a mystic by nature may very well
become one by reflection also. Not knowing what he wants nor what he is,
he may believe that every shift carries him nearer to perfection. A
temperamental and quasi-religious thirst for inconclusiveness and room
to move on lent a certain triumphant note to Hegel’s satire; he was sure
it all culminated in something, and was not sure it did not culminate in
himself. The system, however, as it might strike a less egotistical
reader, is a long demonstration of man’s ineptitude and of nature’s
contemptuous march over a path paved with good intentions. It is an
idealism without respect for ideals; a system of dialectic in which a
psychological flux (not, of course, psychological science, which would
involve terms dialectically fixed and determinate) is made
systematically to obliterate intended meanings.

[Sidenote: Dialectic expresses a given intent.]

This spirited travesty of logic has enough historical truth in it to
show that dialectic must always stand, so to speak, on its apex; for
life is changeful, and the vision and interest of one moment are not
understood in the next. Theological dialectic rings hollow when once
faith is dead; grammar looks artificial when a language is foreign;
mathematics itself seems shallow when, like Hegel, we have no love for
nature’s intelligible mechanism nor for the clear structure and
constancy of eternal things. Ideal philosophy is a flower of the spirit
and varies with the soil. If mathematics suffers so little
contradiction, it is only because the primary aspects of sensation which
it elaborates could not lapse from the world without an utter break in
its continuity. Otherwise though mathematics might not be refuted it
might well be despised, like an obsolete ontology. Its boasted necessity
and universality would not help it at all if experience should change so
much as to present no further mathematical aspect. Those who expect to
pass at death into a non-spatial and super-temporal world, where there
will be no detestable extended and unthinking substances, and nothing
that need be counted, will find their hard-learned mathematics sadly
superfluous there. The memory of earthly geometry and arithmetic will
grow pale amid that floating incense and music, where dialectic, if it
survives at all, will have to busy itself on new intuitions.

So, too, when the landscape changes in the moral world, when new
passions or arts make their appearance, moral philosophy must start
afresh on a new foundation and try to express the ideals involved in the
new pursuits. To this extent experience lends colour to Hegel’s
dialectical physics; but he betrayed, like the sincere pantheist he was,
the finite interests that give actual values to the world, and he wished
to bestow instead a groundless adoration on the law that connected and
defeated every ideal. Such a genius, in spite of incisive wit and a
certain histrionic sympathy with all experience, could not be truly
free; it could not throw off its professional priestcraft, its habit of
ceremonious fraud on the surface, nor, at heart, its inhuman religion.

[Sidenote: Its empire is ideal and autonomous.]

The sincere dialectician, the genuine moralist, must stand upon human,
Socratic ground. Though art be long, it must take a short life for its
basis and an actual interest for its guide. The liberal dialectician has
the gift of conversation; he does not pretend to legislate from the
throne of Jehovah about the course of affairs, but asks the ingenuous
heart to speak for itself, guiding and checking it only in its own
interest. The result is to express a given nature and to cultivate it;
so that whenever any one possessing such a nature is born into the world
he may use this calculation, and more easily understand and justify his
mind. Of course, if experience were no longer the same, and faculties
had entirely varied, the former interpretation could no longer serve.
Where nature shows a new principle of growth the mind must find a new
method of expression, and move toward other goals. Ideals are not forces
stealthily undermining the will; they are possible forms of being that
would frankly express it. These forms are invulnerable, eternal, and
free; and he who finds them divine and congenial and is able to embody
them at least in part and for a season, has to that extent transfigured
life, turning it from a fatal process into a liberal art.




