CHAPTER II

HISTORY


[Sidenote: History an artificial memory.]

The least artificial extension of common knowledge is history. Personal
recollection supplies many an anecdote, anecdotes collected and freely
commented upon make up memoirs, and memoirs happily combined make not
the least interesting sort of history. When a man recalls any episode in
his career, describes the men that flourished in his youth, or laments
the changes that have since taken place, he is an informal historian. He
would become one in a formal and technical sense if he supplemented and
controlled his memory by ransacking papers, and taking elaborate pains
to gather evidence on the events he wished to relate. This systematic
investigation, especially when it goes back to first sources, widens the
basis for imaginative reconstruction. It buttresses somewhat the frail
body of casual facts that in the first instance may have engaged an
individual’s attention.

History is nothing but assisted and recorded memory. It might almost be
said to be no science at all, if memory and faith in memory were not
what science necessarily rests on. In order to sift evidence we must
rely on some witness, and we must trust experience before we proceed to
expand it. The line between what is known scientifically and what has
to be assumed in order to support that knowledge is impossible to draw.
Memory itself is an internal rumour; and when to this hearsay within the
mind we add the falsified echoes that reach us from others, we have but
a shifting and unseizable basis to build upon. The picture we frame of
the past changes continually and grows every day less similar to the
original experience which it purports to describe.

[Sidenote: Second sight requires control.]

It is true that memory sometimes, as in a vision, seems to raise the
curtain upon the past and restore it to us in its pristine reality. We
may imagine at such moments experience can never really perish, but,
though hidden by chance from the roving eye, endures eternally in some
spiritual sphere. Such bodily recovery of the past, however, like other
telepathic visions, can never prove its own truth. A lapse into by-gone
perception, a sense of living the past over with all its vivid minutiæ
and trivial concomitants, might involve no true repetition of anything
that had previously existed. It might be a fresh experience altogether.
The sense of knowing constitutes only a working presumption for
experiment to start with; until corroboration comes that presumption can
claim no respect from the outsider.

[Sidenote: Nature the theme common to various memories.]

While memory remains a private presumption, therefore, it can be
compared with nothing else that might test its veracity. Only when
memory is expressed and, in the common field of expression, finds itself
corroborated by another memory, does it rise somewhat in dignity and
approach scientific knowledge. Two presumptions, when they coincide,
make a double assurance. While memory, then, is the basis of all
historical knowledge, it is not called history until it enters a field
where it can be supported or corrected by evidence. This field is that
natural world which all experiences, in so far as they are rational,
envisage together. Assertions relating to events in that world can
corroborate or contradict one another—something that would be
impossible if each memory, like the plot of a novel, moved in a sphere
of its own. For memory to meet memory, the two must present objects
which are similar or continuous: then they can corroborate or correct
each other and help to fix the order of events as they really
happened—that is, as they happened independently of what either memory
may chance to represent. Thus even the most miraculous and direct
recovery of the past needs corroboration if it is to be systematically
credited; but to receive corroboration it must refer to some event in
nature, in that common world in space and time to which other memories
and perceptions may refer also. In becoming history, therefore, memory
becomes a portion of natural science. Its assertions are such that any
natural science may conceivably support or contradict them.

[Sidenote: Growth of legend.]

Nature and its transformations, however, form too serried and
complicated a system for our wayward minds to dominate if left to their
spontaneous workings. Whatever is remembered or conceived is at first
vaguely believed to have its place in the natural order, all myth and
fable being originally localised within the confines of the material
world and made to pass for a part of early history. The method by which
knowledge of the past is preserved is so subject to imaginative
influence that it cannot avail to exclude from history anything that the
imagination may supply. In the growth of legend a dramatic rhythm
becomes more and more marked. What falls in with this rhythm is
reproduced and accentuated whenever the train of memory is started anew.
The absence of such cadences would leave a sensible gap—a gap which the
momentum of ideation is quick to fill up with some appropriate image.
Whatever, on the other hand, cannot be incorporated into the dominant
round of fancies is consigned more and more to oblivion.

This consolidation of legend is not intentional. It is ingenuous and for
the most part inevitable. When we muse about our own past we are
conscious of no effort to give it dramatic unity; on the contrary, the
excitement and interest of the process consist in seeming to discover
the hidden eloquence and meaning of the events themselves. When a man of
experience narrates the wonders he has seen, we listen with a certain
awe, and believe in him for his miracles as we believe in our own memory
for its arts. A bard’s mechanical and ritualistic habits usually put all
judgment on his own part to sleep; while the sanctity attributed to the
tale, as it becomes automatically more impressive, precludes tinkering
with it intentionally. Especially the allegories and marvels with which
early history is adorned are not ordinarily invented with malice
prepense. They are rather discovered in the mind, like a foundling,
between night and morning. They are divinely vouchsafed. Each time the
tale is retold it suffers a variation which is not challenged, since it
is memory itself that has varied. The change is discoverable only if
some record of the narrative in its former guise, or some physical
memorial of the event related, survives to be confronted with the
modified version. The modified version itself can make no comparisons.
It merely inherits the name and authority of its ancestor. The innocent
poet believes his own lies.

Legends consequently acquire a considerable eloquence and dramatic
force. These beauties accrue spontaneously, because rhythm and ideal
pertinence, in which poetic merit largely lies, are natural formative
principles for speech and memory. As symmetry in material structures is
a ground for strength, and hills by erosion are worn to pyramids, so it
is in thoughts. Yet the stability attained is not absolute, but only
such stability as the circumstances require. Dramatic effect is not
everywhere achieved, nor is it missed by the narrator where it is
wanting, so that even the oldest and best-pruned legends are full of
irrelevant survivals, contradictions, and scraps of nonsense. These
literary blemishes are like embedded fossils and tell of facts which the
mechanism of reproduction, for some casual reason, has not obliterated.
The recorder of verbal tradition religiously sets down its
inconsistencies and leaves in the transfigured chronicle many tell-tale
incidents and remarks which, like atrophied organs in an animal body,
reveal its gradual formation. Art and a deliberate pursuit of unction or
beauty would have thrown over this baggage. The automatic and pious
minstrel carries it with him to the end.

[Sidenote: No history without documents.]

For these reasons there can be no serious history until there are
archives and preserved records, although sometimes a man in a privileged
position may compose interesting essays on the events and persons of his
own time, as his personal experience has presented them to him. Archives
and records, moreover, do not absolve a speculative historian from
paying the same toll to the dramatic unities and making the same
concessions to the laws of perspective which, in the absence of
documents, turn tradition so soon into epic poetry. The principle that
elicits histories out of records is the same that breeds legends out of
remembered events. In both cases the facts are automatically
foreshortened and made to cluster, as it were providentially, about a
chosen interest. The historian’s politics, philosophy, or romantic
imagination furnishes a vital nucleus for reflection. All that falls
within that particular vortex is included in the mental picture, the
rest is passed over and tends to drop out of sight. It is not possible
to say, nor to think, everything at once; and the private interest which
guides a man in selecting his materials imposes itself inevitably on the
events he relates and especially on their grouping and significance.

History is always written wrong, and so always needs to be rewritten.
The conditions of expression and even of memory dragoon the facts and
put a false front on diffuse experience. What is interesting is brought
forward as if it had been central and efficacious in the march of
events, and harmonies are turned into causes. Kings and generals are
endowed with motives appropriate to what the historian values in their
actions; plans are imputed to them prophetic of their actual
achievements, while the thoughts that really preoccupied them remain
buried in absolute oblivion. Such falsification is inevitable, and an
honest historian is guilty of it only against his will. He would wish,
as he loves the truth, to see and to render it entire. But the limits of
his book and of his knowledge force him to be partial. It is only a very
great mind, seasoned by large wisdom, that can lend such an accent and
such a carrying-power to a few facts as to make them representative of
all reality.

[Sidenote: The aim is truth.]

Some historians, indeed, are so frankly partisan or cynical that they
avowedly write history with a view to effect, either political or
literary. Moralising historians belong to this school, as well as those
philosophers who worship evolution. They sketch every situation with
malice and twist it, as if it were an argument, to bring out a point,
much as fashionable portrait-painters sometimes surcharge the
characteristic, in order to make a bold effect at a minimum expense of
time and devotion. And yet the truly memorable aspect of a man is that
which he wears in the sunlight of common day, with all his generic
humanity upon him. His most interesting phase is not that which he might
assume under the lime-light of satirical or literary comparisons. The
characteristic is after all the inessential. It marks a peripheral
variation in the honest and sturdy lump. To catch only the heartless
shimmer of individuality is to paint a costume without the body that
supports it. Therefore a broad and noble historian sets down all within
his apperception. His literary interests are forgotten; he is wholly
devoted to expressing the passions of the dead. His ideal, emanating
from his function and chosen for no extraneous reason, is to make his
heroes think and act as they really thought and acted in the world.

Nevertheless the opposite happens, sometimes to a marked and even
scandalous degree. As legend becomes in a few generations preposterous
myth, so history, after a few rehandlings and condensations, becomes
unblushing theory. Now theory—when we use the word for a schema of
things’ relations and not for contemplation of them in their detail and
fulness—is an expedient to cover ignorance and remedy confusion. The
function of history, if it could be thoroughly fulfilled, would be to
render theory unnecessary. Did we possess a record of all geological
changes since the creation we should need no geological theory to
suggest to us what those changes must have been. Hypothesis is like the
rule of three: it comes into play only when one of the terms is unknown
and needs to be inferred from those which are given. The ideal
historian, since he would know all the facts, would need no hypotheses,
and since he would imagine and hold all events together in their actual
juxtapositions he would need no classifications. The intentions, acts,
and antecedents of every mortal would be seen in their precise places,
with no imputed qualities or scope; and when those intentions had been
in fact fulfilled, the fulfilments too would occupy their modest
position in the rank and file of marching existence. To omniscience the
idea of cause and effect would be unthinkable. If all things were
perceived together and co-existed for thought, as they actually flow
through being, on one flat phenomenal level, what sense would there be
in saying that one element had compelled another to appear? The relation
of cause is an instrument necessary to thought only when thought is
guided by presumption. We say, “If this thing had happened, that other
thing would have followed”—a hypothesis which would lapse and become
unmeaning had we always known all the facts. For no supposition contrary
to fact would then have entered discourse.

[Sidenote: Indirect methods of attaining it.]

This ideal of direct omniscience is, however, impossible to attain; not
merely accidental frailties, but the very nature of things stands in the
way. Experience cannot be suspended or sustained in being, because its
very nucleus is mobile and in shifting cannot retain its past phases
bodily, but only at best some trace or representation of them. Memory
itself is an expedient by which what is hopelessly lost in its totality
may at least be partly kept in its beauty or significance; and
experience can be enlarged in no other way than by carrying into the
moving present the lesson and transmitted habit of much that is past.
History is naturally reduced to similar indirect methods of recovering
what has lapsed. The historian’s object may be to bring the past again
before the mind in all its living reality, but in pursuing that object
he is obliged to appeal to inference, to generalisation, and to dramatic
fancy. We may conveniently distinguish in history, as it is perforce
written by men, three distinct elements, which we may call historical
investigation, historical theory, and historical romance.

[Sidenote: Historical research a part of physics.]

Historical investigation is the natural science of the past. The
circumstance that its documents are usually literary may somewhat
disguise the physical character and the physical principles of this
science; but when a man wishes to discover what really happened at a
given moment, even if the event were somebody’s thought; he has to read
his sources, not for what they say, but for what they imply. In other
words, the witnesses cannot be allowed merely to speak for themselves,
after the gossiping fashion familiar in Herodotus; their testimony has
to be interpreted according to the laws of evidence. The past needs to
be reconstructed out of reports, as in geology or archæology it needs to
be reconstructed out of stratifications and ruins. A man’s memory or the
report in a newspaper is a fact justifying certain inferences about its
probable causes according to laws which such phenomena betray in the
present when they are closely scrutinised. This reconstruction is often
very difficult, and sometimes all that can be established in the end is
merely that the tradition before us is certainly false; somewhat as a
perplexed geologist might venture on no conclusion except that the state
of the earth’s crust was once very different from what it is now.

[Sidenote: Verification here indirect.]

A natural science dealing with the past labours under the disadvantage
of not being able to appeal to experiment. The facts it terminates upon
cannot be recovered, so that they may verify in sense the hypothesis
that had inferred them. The hypothesis can be tested only by current
events; it is then turned back upon the past, to give assurance of facts
which themselves are hypothetical and remain hanging, as it were, to the
loose end of the hypothesis itself. A hypothetical fact is a most
dangerous creature, since it lives on the credit of a theory which in
turn would be bankrupt if the fact should fail. Inferred past facts are
more deceptive than facts prophesied, because while the risk of error in
the inference is the same, there is no possibility of discovering that
error; and the historian, while really as speculative as the prophet,
can never be found out.

Most facts known to man, however, are reached by inference, and their
reality may be wisely assumed so long as the principle by which they
are inferred, when it is applied in the present, finds complete and
constant verification. Presumptions involved in memory and tradition
give the first hypothetical facts we count upon; the relations which
these first facts betray supply the laws by which facts are to be
concatenated; and these laws may then be used to pass from the first
hypothetical facts to hypothetical facts of a second order, forming a
background and congruous extension to those originally assumed. This
expansion of discursive science can go on for ever, unless indeed the
principles of inference employed in it involve some present existence,
such as a skeleton in a given tomb, which direct experience fails to
verify. Then the theory itself is disproved and the whole galaxy of
hypothetical facts which clustered about it forfeit their credibility.

[Sidenote: Futile ideal to survey all facts.]

Historical investigation has for its aim to fix the order and character
of events throughout past time in all places. The task is frankly
superhuman, because no block of real existence, with its infinitesimal
detail, can be recorded, nor if somehow recorded could it be dominated
by the mind; and to carry on a survey of this social continuum _ad
infinitum_ would multiply the difficulty. The task might also be called
infrahuman, because the sort of omniscience which such complete
historical science would achieve would merely furnish materials for
intelligence: it would be inferior to intelligence itself. There are
many things which, as Aristotle says, it is better not to know than to
know—namely, those things which do not count in controlling the mind’s
fortunes nor enter into its ideal expression. Such is the whole flux of
immediate experience in other minds or in one’s own past; and just as it
is better to forget than to remember a nightmare or the by-gone
sensations of sea-sickness, so it is better not to conceive the sensuous
pulp of alien experience, something infinite in amount and insignificant
in character.

An attempt to rehearse the inner life of everybody that has ever lived
would be no rational endeavour. Instead of lifting the historian above
the world and making him the most consummate of creatures, it would
flatten his mind out into a passive after-image of diffuse existence,
with all its horrible blindness, strain, and monotony. Reason is not
come to repeat the universe but to fulfil it. Besides, a complete survey
of events would perforce register all changes that have taken place in
matter since time began, the fields of geology, astronomy, palæontology,
and archæology being all, in a sense, included in history. Such learning
would dissolve thought in a vertigo, if it had not already perished of
boredom. Historical research is accordingly a servile science which may
enter the Life of Reason to perform there some incidental service, but
which ought to lapse as soon as that service is performed.

[Sidenote: Historical theory.]

The profit of studying history lies in something else than in a dead
knowledge of what happens to have happened. A seductive alternative
might be to say that the profit of it lies in _understanding_ what has
happened, in perceiving the principles and laws that govern social
evolution, or the meaning which events have. We are hereby launched upon
a region of physico-ethical speculation where any man with a genius for
quick generalisation can swim at ease. To find the one great cause why
Borne fell, especially if no one has ever thought of it before, or to
expound the true import of the French Revolution, or to formulate in
limpid sentences the essence of Greek culture—what could be more
tempting or more purely literary? It would ill become the author of this
book to decry allegorical expressions, or a cavalierlike fashion of
dismissing whole periods and tendencies with a verbal antithesis. We
must have exercises in apperception, a work of imagination must be taken
imaginatively, and a landscape painter must be suffered to be, at his
own risk, as impressionistic as he will. If Raphael, when he was
designing the _School of Athens_, had said to himself that Aristotle
should point down to a fact and Plato up to a meaning, or when designing
the _Disputa_ had conceived that the proudest of intellects, weary of
argument and learning, should throw down his books and turn to
revelation for guidance, there would have been much historical
pertinence in those conceptions; yet the figures would have been
allegorical, contracting into a decorative design events that had been
dispersed through centuries and emotions that had only cropped up here
and there, with all manner of variations and alloys, when the particular
natural situation had made them inevitable. So the Renaissance might be
spoken of as a person and the Reformation as her step-sister, and
something might be added about the troubles of their home life; but
would it be needful in that case to enter a warning that these units
were verbal merely, and that the phenomena and the forces really at work
had been multitudinous and infinitesimal?

[Sidenote: It is arbitrary.]

In fine, historical terms mark merely rhetorical unities, which have no
dynamic cohesion, and there are no historical laws which are not at
bottom physical, like the laws of habit—those expressions of Newton’s
first law of motion. An essayist may play with historical apperception
as long as he will and always find something new to say, discovering the
ideal nerve and issue of a movement in a different aspect of the facts.
The truly proportionate, constant, efficacious relations between things
will remain material. Physical causes traverse the moral units at which
history stops, determining their force and duration, and the order, so
irrelevant to intent, in which they succeed one another. Even the single
man’s life and character have subterranean sources; how should the outer
expression and influence of that character have sources more
superficial than its own? Yet we cannot trace mechanical necessity down
to the more stable units composing a personal mechanism, and much less,
therefore, to those composing a complex social evolution. We accordingly
translate the necessity, obviously lurking under life’s commonplace yet
unaccountable shocks, into verbal principles, names for general
impressive results, that play some rôle in our ideal philosophy. Each of
these idols of the theatre is visible only on a single stage and to duly
predisposed spectators. The next passion affected will throw a
differently coloured calcium light on the same pageant, and there will
be no end of rival evolutions and incompatible ideal principles crossing
one another at every interesting event.

Such a manipulation of history, when made by persons who underestimate
their imaginative powers, ends in asserting that events have directed
themselves prophetically upon the interests which they arouse. Apart
from the magic involved and the mockery of all science, there is a
difficulty here which even a dramatic idealist ought to feel. The
interests affected are themselves many and contrary. If history is to be
understood teleologically, which of all the possible ends it might be
pursuing shall we think really endowed with regressive influence and
responsible for the movement that is going to realise it? Did Columbus,
for instance, discover America so that George Washington might exist and
that some day football and the Church of England may prevail throughout
the world? Or was it (as has been seriously maintained) in order that
the converted Indians of South America might console Saint Peter for the
defection of the British and Germans? Or was America, as Hegel believed,
ideally superfluous, the absolute having become self-conscious enough
already in Prussia? Or shall we say that the real goal is at an infinite
distance and unimaginable by us, and useless, therefore, for
understanding anything?

In truth, whatever plausibility the providential view of a given
occurrence may have is dependent on the curious limitation and
selfishness of the observer’s estimations. Sheep are providentially
designed for men; but why not also for wolves, and men for worms and
microbes? If the historian is willing to accept such a suggestion, and
to become a blind worshipper of success, applauding every issue, however
lamentable for humanity, and calling it admirable tragedy, he may seem
for a while to save his theory by making it mystical; yet presently this
last illusion will be dissipated when he loses his way in the maze and
finds that all victors perish in their turn and everything, if you look
far enough, falls back into the inexorable vortex. This is the sort of
observation that the Indian sages made long ago; it is what renders
their philosophy, for all its practical impotence, such an irrefragable
record of experience, such a superior, definitive perception of the
flux. Beside it, our progresses of two centuries and our philosophies of
history, embracing one-quarter of the earth for three thousand years,
seem puerile vistas indeed. Shall all eternity and all existence be for
the sake of what is happening here to-day, and to me? Shall we strive
manfully to the top of this particular wave, on the ground that its foam
is the culmination of all things for ever?

There is a sense, of course, in which definite political plans and moral
aspirations may well be fulfilled by events. Our ancestors, sharing and
anticipating our natures, may have had in many respects our actual
interests in view, as we may have those of posterity. Such ideal
co-operation extends far, where primary interests are concerned; it is
rarer and more qualified where a fine and fragile organisation is
required to support the common spiritual life. Even in these cases, the
aim pursued and attained is not the force that operates, since the
result achieved had many other conditions besides the worker’s intent,
and that intent itself had causes which it knew nothing of. Every
“historical force” pompously appealed to breaks up on inspection into a
cataract of miscellaneous natural processes and minute particular
causes. It breaks into its mechanical constituents and proves to have
been nothing but an _effet d’ensemble_ produced on a mind whose habits
and categories are essentially rhetorical.

[Sidenote: A moral critique of the past is possible.]

This sort of false history or philosophy of history might be purified,
like so many other things, by self-knowledge. If the philosopher in
reviewing events confessed that he was scrutinising them in order to
abstract from them whatever tended to illustrate his own ideals, as he
might look over a crowd to find his friends, the operation would become
a perfectly legitimate one. The events themselves would be left for
scientific inference to discover, where credible reports did not testify
to them directly; and the causes of events would be left to some theory
of natural evolution, to be stated, according to the degree of knowledge
attained, in terms more and more exact and mechanical. In the presence
of the past so defined imagination and will, however, would not abdicate
their rights, and a sort of retrospective politics, an estimate of
events in reference to the moral ideal which they embodied or betrayed,
might supervene upon positive history. This estimate of evolution might
well be called a philosophy of history, since it would be a higher
operation performed on the results of natural science, to give a needful
basis and illustration to the ideal. The present work is an essay in
that direction.

[Sidenote: How it might be just.]

The ideal which in such a review would serve as the touchstone for
estimation, if it were an enlightened ideal, would recognise its own
natural basis, and therefore would also recognise that under other
conditions other ideals, no less legitimate, may have arisen and may
have been made the standard for a different judgment on the world.
Historical investigation, were its resources adequate, would reveal to
us what these various ideals have been. Every animal has his own, and
whenever individuals or nations have become reflective they have known
how to give articulate expression to theirs. That all these ideals could
not have been realised in turn or together is an immense misfortune, the
irremediable half-tragedy of life, by which we also suffer. In
estimating the measure of success achieved anywhere a liberal historian,
who does not wish to be bluntly irrational, will of course estimate it
from _all_ these points of view, considering all real interests
affected, in so far as he can appreciate them. This is what is meant by
putting the standard of value, not in some arbitrary personal dogma but
in a variegated omnipresent happiness.

It is by no means requisite, therefore, in disentangling the Life of
Reason, to foresee what ultimate form the good might some day take, much
less to make the purposes of the philosopher himself, his time, or his
nation the test of all excellence. This test is the perpetual
concomitant ideal of the life it is applied to. As all could not be well
in the world if my own purposes were defeated, so the general excellence
of things would be heightened if other men’s purposes also had been
fulfilled. Each will is a true centre for universal estimation. As each
will, therefore, comes to expression, real and irreversible values are
introduced into the world, and the historian, in estimating what has
been hitherto achieved, needs to make himself the spokesman for all past
aspirations.

If the Egyptian poets sang well, though that conduces not at all to our
advantage, and though all those songs are now dumb, the Life of Reason
was thereby increased once for all in pith and volume. Brief erratic
experiments made in living, if they were somewhat successful in their
day, remain successes always: and this is the only kind of success that
in the end can be achieved at all. The philosopher that looks for what
is good in history and measures the past by the scale of reason need be
no impertinent dogmatist on that account. Reason would not be reason but
passion if it did not make all passions in all creatures constituents of
its own authority. The judgments it passes on existence are only the
judgments which existence, so far, has passed on itself, and these are
indelible and have their proportionate weight though others of many
different types may surround or succeed them.

[Sidenote: Transition to historical romance.]

To inquire what everybody has thought about the world, and into what
strange shapes every passionate dream would fain have transformed
existence, might be merely a part of historical investigation. These
facts of preference and estimation might be made to stand side by side
with all other facts in that absolute physical order which the universe
must somehow possess. In the reference book of science they would all
find their page and line. But it is not for the sake of making vain
knowledge complete that historians are apt to linger over heroic
episodes and commanding characters in the world’s annals. It is not even
in the hope of discovering just to what extent and in how many
directions experience has been a tragedy. The mathematical balance of
failure and success, even if it could be drawn with accuracy, would not
be a truth of moral importance, since whatever that balance might be for
the world at large, success and benefit here, from the living point of
view, would be equally valid and delightful; and however good or however
bad the universe may be it is always worth while to make it better.

What engages the historian in the reconstruction of moral life, such as
the past contained, is that he finds in that life many an illustration
of his own ideals, or even a necessary stimulus in defining what his
ideals are. Where his admiration and his sympathy are awakened, he sees
noble aims and great achievements, worthy of being minutely studied and
brought vividly before later generations. Very probably he will be led
by moral affinities with certain phases of the past to attribute to
those phases, in their abstraction and by virtue of their moral dignity,
a material efficacy which they did not really have; and his interest in
history’s moral will make him turn history itself into a fable. This
abuse may be abated, however, by having recourse to impartial historical
investigation, that will restore to the hero all his circumstantial
impotence, and to the glorious event all its insignificant causes.
Certain men and certain episodes will retain, notwithstanding, their
intrinsic nobility; and the historian, who is often a politician and a
poet rather than a man of science, will dwell on those noble things so
as to quicken his own sense for greatness and to burnish in his soul
ideals that may have remained obscure for want of scrutiny or may have
been tarnished by too much contact with a sordid world.

[Sidenote: Possibility of genuine epics.]

History so conceived has the function of epic or dramatic poetry. The
moral life represented may actually have been lived through; but that
circumstance is incidental merely and what makes the story worth telling
is its pertinence to the political or emotional life of the present. To
revive past moral experience is indeed wellnigh impossible unless the
living will can still covet or dread the same issues; historical romance
cannot be truthful or interesting when profound changes have taken place
in human nature. The reported acts and sentiments of early peoples lose
their tragic dignity in our eyes when they lose their pertinence to our
own aims. So that a recital of history with an eye to its dramatic
values is possible only when that history is, so to speak, our own, or
when we assimilate it to ours by poetic license.

The various functions of history have been generally carried on
simultaneously and with little consciousness of their profound
diversity. Since historical criticism made its appearance, the romantic
interest in the past, far from abating, has fed eagerly on all the
material incidents and private gossip of remote times. This sort of
petty historical drama has reflected contemporary interests, which have
centred so largely in material possessions and personal careers; while
at the same time it has kept pace with the knowledge of minutiæ attained
by archæology. When historical investigation has reached its limits a
period of ideal reconstruction may very likely set in. Indeed were it
possible to collect in archives exhaustive accounts of everything that
has ever happened, so that the curious man might always be informed on
any point of fact that interested him, historical imagination might grow
free again in its movements. Not being suspected of wishing to distort
facts which could so easily be pointed to, it might become more
conscious of its own moral function, and it might turn unblushingly to
what was important and inspiring in order to put it with dramatic force
before the mind. Such a treatment of history would reinstate that epic
and tragic poetry which has become obsolete; it might well be written in
verse, and would at any rate be frankly imaginative; it might furnish a
sort of ritual, with scientific and political sanctions, for public
feasts. Tragedies and epics are such only in name if they do not deal
with the highest interests and destinies of a people; and they could
hardly deal with such ideals in an authoritative and definite way,
unless they found them illustrated in that people’s traditions.

[Sidenote: Literal truth abandoned.]

Historic romance is a work of art, not of science, and its fidelity to
past fact is only an expedient, often an excellent and easy one, for
striking the key-note of present ideals. The insight attained, even when
it is true insight into what some one else felt in some other age, draws
its force and sublimity from current passions, passions potential in the
auditor’s soul. Mary Queen of Scots, for instance, doubtless repeated,
in many a fancied dialogue with Queen Elizabeth, the very words that
Schiller puts into her mouth in the central scene of his play, “_Denn
ich bin Euer König!_” Yet the dramatic force of that expression, its
audacious substitution of ideals for facts, depends entirely on the
scope which we lend it. Different actors and different readers would
interpret it differently. Some might see in it nothing but a sally in a
woman’s quarrel, reading it with the accent of mere spite and
irritation. Then the tragedy, not perhaps without historic truth, would
be reduced to a loud comedy. Other interpreters might find in the
phrase the whole feudal system, all the chivalry, legality, and
foolishness of the Middle Ages. Then the drama would become more
interesting, and the poor queen’s cry, while that of a mind
sophisticated and fanatical, would have great pathos and keenness. To
reach sublimity, however, that moment would have to epitomise ideals
which we deeply respected. We should have to believe in the sanctity of
canon law and in the divine right of primogeniture. That a woman may
have been very unhappy or that a state may have been held together by
personal allegiance does not raise the fate of either to the tragic
plane, unless “laws that are not of to-day nor yesterday,” aspirations
native to the heart, shine through those legendary misfortunes.

It would matter nothing to the excellence of Schiller’s drama which of
these interpretations might have been made by Mary Stuart herself at any
given moment; doubtless her attitude toward her rival was coloured on
different occasions by varying degrees of political insight and moral
fervour. The successful historical poet would be he who caught the most
significant attitude which a person in that position could possibly have
assumed, and his Mary Stuart, whether accidentally resembling the real
woman or not, would be essentially a mythical person. So Electra and
Antigone and Helen of Troy are tragic figures absolved from historical
accuracy, although possibly if the personages of heroic times were known
to us we might find that our highest imagination had been anticipated
in their consciousness.

[Sidenote: History exists to be transcended.]

Of the three parts into which the pursuit of history may be
divided—investigation, theory, and story-telling—not one attains ideal
finality. Investigation is merely useful, because its intrinsic
ideal—to know every detail of everything—is not rational, and its
acceptable function can only be to offer accurate information upon such
points as are worth knowing for some ulterior reason. Historical theory,
in turn, is a falsification of causes, since no causes are other than
mechanical; it is an arbitrary foreshortening of physics, and it
dissolves in the presence either of adequate knowledge or of clear
ideals. Finally, historical romance passes, as it grows mature, into
epics and tragedies, where the moral imagination disengages itself from
all allegiance to particular past facts. Thus history proves to be an
imperfect field for the exercise of reason; it is a provisional
discipline; its values, with the mind’s progress, would empty into
higher activities. The function of history is to lend materials to
politics and to poetry. These arts need to dominate past events, the
better to dominate the present situation and the ideal one. A good book
of history is one that helps the statesman to formulate and to carry out
his plans, or that helps the tragic poet to conceive what is most
glorious in human destiny. Such a book, as knowledge and ignorance are
now mingled, will have to borrow something from each of the methods by
which history is commonly pursued. Investigation will be necessary,
since the needful facts are not all indubitably known; theory will be
necessary too, so that those facts may be conceived in their pertinence
to public interests, and the latter may thereby be clarified; and
romance will not be wholly excluded, because the various activities of
the mind about the same matter cannot be divided altogether, and a
dramatic treatment is often useful in summarising a situation, when all
the elements of it cannot be summoned up in detail before the mind.

[Sidenote: Its great rôle.]

Fragmentary, arbitrary, and insecure as historical conceptions must
remain, they are nevertheless highly important. In human consciousness
the indispensable is in inverse ratio to the demonstrable. Sense is the
foundation of everything. Without sense memory would be both false and
useless. Yet memory rather than sense is knowledge in the pregnant
acceptation of the word; for in sense object and process are hardly
distinguished, whereas in memory significance inheres in the datum, and
the present vouches for the absent. Similarly history, which is derived
from memory, is superior to it; for while it merely extends memory
artificially it shows a higher logical development than memory has and
is riper for ideal uses. Trivial and useless matter has dropped out.
Inference has gone a step farther, thought is more largely
representative, and testimony conveyed by the reports of others or
found in monuments leads the speculative mind to infer events that must
have filled the remotest ages. This information is not passive or idle
knowledge; it truly _informs_ or shapes the mind, giving it new
aptitudes. As an efficacious memory modifies instinct, by levelling it
with a wider survey of the situation, so a memory of what human
experience has been, a sense of what it is likely to be under specific
circumstances, gives the will a new basis. What politics or any large
drama deals with is a will cast into historic moulds, an imagination
busy with what we call great interests. Great interests are a gift which
history makes to the heart. A barbarian is no less subject to the past
than is the civic man who knows what his past is and means to be loyal
to it; but the barbarian, for want of a trans-personal memory, crawls
among superstitions which he cannot understand or revoke and among
persons whom he may hate or love, but whom he can never think of raising
to a higher plane, to the level of a purer happiness. The whole dignity
of human endeavour is thus bound up with historic issues; and as
conscience needs to be controlled by experience if it is to become
rational, so personal experience itself needs to be enlarged ideally if
the failures and successes it reports are to touch impersonal interests.




