CHAPTER VII

PLASTIC CONSTRUCTION


[Sidenote: Automatic expression often leaves traces in the outer world.]

We have seen how arts founded on exercise and automatic self-expression
develop into music, poetry, and prose. By an indirect approach they come
to represent outer conditions, till they are interwoven in a life which
has in some measure gone out to meet its opportunities and learned to
turn them to an ideal use. We have now to see how man’s reactive habits
pass simultaneously into art in a wholly different region. Spontaneous
expression, such as song, comes when internal growth in an animal system
vents itself, as it were, by the way. At the same time animal economy
has playful manifestations concerned with outer things, such as
burrowing or collecting objects. These practices are not less
spontaneous than the others, and no less expressive; but they seem more
external because the traces they leave on the environment are more
clearly marked.

To change an object is the surest and most glorious way of changing a
perception. A shift in posture may relieve the body, and in that way
satisfy, but the new attitude is itself unstable. Its pleasantness,
like its existence, is transient, and scarcely is a movement executed
when both its occasion and its charm are forgotten. Self-expression by
exercise, in spite of its pronounced automatism, is therefore something
comparatively passive and inglorious. A man has hardly _done_ anything
when he has laughed or yawned. Even the inspired poet retains something
of this passivity: his work is not his, but that of a restless,
irresponsible spirit passing through him, and hypnotising him for its
own ends. Of the result he has no profit, no glory, and little
understanding. So the mystic also positively gloats on his own
nothingness, and puts his whole genuine being in a fancied
instrumentality and subordination to something else. Far more virile and
noble is the sense of having actually done something, and left at least
the temporary stamp of one’s special will on the world. To chop a stick,
to catch a fly, to pile a heap of sand, is a satisfying action; for the
sand stays for a while in its novel arrangement, proclaiming to the
surrounding level that we have made it our instrument, while the fly
will never stir nor the stick grow together again in all eternity. If
the impulse that has thus left its indelible mark on things is constant
in our own bosom, the world will have been permanently improved and
humanised by our action. Nature cannot but be more favourable to those
ideas which have once found an efficacious champion.

[Sidenote: Such effects fruitful.]

Plastic impulses find in this way an immediate sanction in the sense of
victory and dominion which they carry with them; it is so evident a
proof of power in ourselves to see things and animals bent out of their
habitual form and obedient instead to our idea. But a far weightier
sanction immediately follows. Man depends on things for his experience,
yet by automatic action he changes these very things so that it becomes
possible that by his action he should promote his welfare. He may, of
course, no less readily precipitate his ruin. The animal is more subject
to vicissitudes than the plant, which makes no effort to escape them or
to give chase to what it feeds upon. The greater perils of action,
however, are in animals covered partly by fertility, partly by
adaptability, partly by success. The mere possibility of success, in a
world governed by natural selection, is an earnest of progress.
Sometimes, in impressing the environment, a man will improve it: which
is merely to say that a change may sometimes fortify the impulse which
brought it about. As soon as this retroaction is perceived and the act
is done with knowledge of its ensuing benefits, plastic impulse becomes
art, and the world begins actually to change in obedience to reason.

One respect, for instance, in which man depends on things is for the
æsthetic quality of his perceptions. If he happens, by a twist of the
hand, to turn a flowering branch into a wreath, thereby making it more
interesting, he will have discovered a decorative art and initiated
himself auspiciously into the practice of it. Experimentation may
follow, and whenever the new form given to the object improves
it—_i.e._, increases its interest for the eye—the experimenter will
triumph and will congratulate himself on his genius. The garland so
arranged will be said to express the taste it satisfies; insight and
reason will be mythically thought to have guided the work by which they
are sustained in being. It is no small harmony, however, that they
should be sustained by it. The consonances man introduces into nature
will follow him wherever he goes. It will no longer be necessary that
nature should supply them spontaneously, by a rare adventitious harmony
with his demands. His new habit will habitually rear-range her chance
arrangements, and his path will be marked by the beauties he has strewn
it with. So long as the same plastic impulse continues operative it will
be accompanied by knowledge and criticism of its happy results.
Self-criticism, being a second incipient artistic impulse, contrasting
itself with the one which a work embodies, may to some extent modify the
next performance. If life is drawn largely into this deepening channel,
physical proficiency and its ideal sanctions will develop more or less
harmoniously into what is called a school of art.

[Sidenote: Magic authority of man’s first creations.]

The first felt utilities by which plastic instinct is sanctioned are of
course not distinctly æsthetic, much less distinctly practical; they
are magical. A stone cut into some human or animal semblance fascinates
the savage eye much more than would a useful tool or a beautiful idol.
The man wonders at his own work, and petrifies the miracle of his art
into miraculous properties in its product. Primitive art is incredibly
conservative; its first creations, having once attracted attention,
monopolise it henceforth and nothing else will be trusted to work the
miracle. It is a sign of stupidity in general to stick to physical
objects and given forms apart from their ideal functions, as when a
child cries for a broken doll, even if a new and better one is at hand
to replace it. Inert associations establish themselves, in such a case,
with that part of a thing which is irrelevant to its value—its material
substance or perhaps its name. Art can make no progress in such a
situation. A man remains incorrigibly unhappy and perplexed, cowed, and
helpless, because not intelligent enough to readjust his actions; his
idol must be the self-same hereditary stock, or at least it must have
the old sanctified rigidity and stare. Plastic impulse, as yet sporadic,
is overwhelmed by a brute idolatrous awe at mere existence and
actuality. What is, what has always been, what chance has associated
with one person, alone seems acceptable or conceivable.

[Sidenote: Art brings relief from idolatry.]

Idolatry is by no means incident to art; art, on the contrary, is a
release from idolatry. A cloud, an animal, a spring, a stone, or the
whole heaven, will serve the pure idolater’s purpose to perfection;
these things have existence and a certain hypnotic power, so that he may
make them a focus for his dazed contemplation. When the mind takes to
generalities it finds the same fascination in Being or in the Absolute,
something it needs no art to discover. The more indeterminate,
immediate, and unutterable the idol is, the better it induces panic
self-contraction and a reduction of all discourse to the infinite
intensity of zero. When idolaters pass from trying to evoke the
Absolutely Existent to apostrophising the sun or an ithyphallic bull
they have made an immense progress in art and religion, for now their
idols represent some specific and beneficent function in nature,
something propitious to ideal life and to its determinate expression.
Isaiah is very scornful of idols made with hands, because they have no
physical energy. He forgets that perhaps they represent something, and
so have a spiritual dignity which things living and powerful never have
unless they too become representative and express some ideal. Isaiah’s
conception of Jehovah, for instance, is itself a poetic image, the work
of man’s brain; and the innocent worship of it would not be idolatry, if
that conception represented something friendly to human happiness and to
human art. The question merely is whether the sculptor’s image or the
prophet’s stands for the greater interest and is a more adequate symbol
for the good. The noblest art will be the one, whether plastic or
literary or dialectical, which creates figments most truly
representative of what is momentous in human life. Similarly the least
idolatrous religion would be the one which used the most perfect art,
and most successfully abstracted the good from the real.

[Sidenote: Inertia in technique.]

Conservatism rules also in those manufactures which are tributary to
architecture and the smaller plastic arts. Utility makes small headway
against custom, not only when custom has become religion, but even when
it remains inert and without mythical sanction. To admit or trust
anything new is to overcome that inertia which is a general law in the
brain no less than elsewhere, and which may be distinguished in
reflection into a technical and a social conservatism. Technical
conservatism appears, for instance, in a man’s handwriting, which is so
seldom improved, even when admitted, perhaps, to be execrable. Every
artist has his tricks of execution, every school its hereditary,
irrational processes. These refractory habits are to blame for the rare
and inimitable quality of genius; they impose excellence on one man and
refuse it to a million. A happy physiological structure, by creating a
mannerism under the special circumstances favourable to expression, may
lift a man, perhaps inferior in intelligence, to heights which no
insight can attain with inferior organs. As a voice is necessary for
singing, so a certain quickness of eye and hand is needed for good
execution in the plastic arts. The same principle goes deeper.
Conception and imagination are themselves automatic and run in grooves,
so that only certain forms in certain combinations will ever suggest
themselves to a given designer. Every writer’s style, too, however
varied within limits, is single and monotonous compared with the ideal
possibilities of expression. Genius at every moment is confined to the
idiom it is creating.

[Sidenote: Inertia in appreciation.]

Social inertia is due to the same causes working in the community at
large. The fancy, for instance, of building churches in the shape of a
cross has largely determined Christian architecture. Builders were
prevented by a foregone suggestion in themselves and by their patrons’
demands from conceiving any alternative to that convention. Early
pottery, they say, imitates wicker-work, and painted landscape was for
ages not allowed to exist without figures, although even the old masters
show plainly enough in their backgrounds that they could love landscape
for its own sake. When one link with humanity has been rendered explicit
and familiar, people assume that by no other means can humanity be
touched at all; even if at the same time their own heart is expanding to
the highest raptures in a quite different region. The severer Greeks
reprobated music without words; Saint Augustine complained of chants
that rendered the sacred text unintelligible; the Puritans regarded
elaborate music as diabolical, little knowing how soon some of their
descendants would find religion in nothing else. A stupid convention
still looks on material and mathematical processes as somehow
distressing and ugly, and systems of philosophy, artificially
mechanical, are invented to try to explain natural mechanism away;
whereas in no region can the spirit feel so much at home as among
natural causes, or realise so well its universal affinities, or so
safely enlarge its happiness. Mechanism is the source of beauty. It is
not necessary to look so high as the stars to perceive this truth: the
action of an animal’s limbs or the movement of a waterfall will prove it
to any one who has eyes and can shake himself loose from verbal
prejudices, those debris of old perceptions which choke all fresh
perception in the soul. Irrational hopes, irrational shames, irrational
decencies, make man’s chief desolation. A slight knocking of fools’
heads together might be enough to break up the ossifications there and
start the blood coursing again through possible channels. Art has an
infinite range; nothing shifts so easily as taste and yet nothing so
persistently avoids the directions in which it might find most
satisfaction.

[Sidenote: Adventitious effects appreciated first.]

Since construction grows rational slowly and by indirect pressure, we
may expect that its most superficial merits will be the first
appreciated. Ultimate beauty in a building would consist, of course, in
responding simultaneously to all the human faculties affected: to the
eye, by the building’s size, form, and colour; to the imagination, by
its fitness and ideal expression. Of all grounds for admiration those
most readily seized are size, elaboration, splendour of materials, and
difficulties or cost involved. Having built or dug in the conventional
way a man may hang before his door some trophy of battle or the chase,
bearing witness to his prowess; just as people now, not thinking of
making their rooms beautiful, fill them with photographs of friends or
places they have known, to suggest and reburnish in their minds their
interesting personal history, which even they, unstimulated, might tend
to forget. That dwelling will seem best adorned which contains most
adventitious objects; bare and ugly will be whatever is not concealed by
something else. Again, a barbarous architect, without changing his
model, may build in a more precious material; and his work will be
admired for the evidence it furnishes of wealth and wilfulness. As a
community grows luxurious and becomes accustomed to such display, it may
come to seem strange and hideous to see a wooden plate or a pewter
spoon. A beautiful house will need to be in marble and the sight of
plebeian brick will banish all satisfaction.

Less irrational, and therefore less vulgar, is the wonder aroused by
great bulk or difficulty in the work. Exertions, to produce a great
result, even if it be material, must be allied to perseverance and
intelligent direction. Roman bridges and aqueducts, for instance, gain
a profound emotional power when we see in their monotonous arches a
symbol of the mightiest enterprise in history, and in their decay an
evidence of its failure. Curiosity is satisfied, historic imagination is
stimulated, tragic reflection is called forth. We cannot refuse
admiration to a work so full of mind, even if no great plastic beauty
happens to distinguish it. It is at any rate beautiful enough, like the
sea or the skeleton of a mountain. We may rely on the life it has made
possible to add more positive charms and clothe it with imaginative
functions. Modern engineering works often have a similar value; the
force and intelligence they express merge in an æsthetic essence, and
the place they hold in a portentous civilisation lends them an almost
epic dignity. New York, since it took to doing business in towers, has
become interesting to look at from the sea; nor is it possible to walk
through the overshadowed streets without feeling a pleasing wonder. A
city, when enough people swarm in it, is as fascinating as an ant-hill,
and its buildings, whatever other charms they may have, are at least as
curious and delightful as sea-shells or birds’ nests. The purpose of
improvements in modern structures may be economic, just as the purpose
of castles was military; but both may incidentally please the
contemplative mind by their huge forms and human associations.

[Sidenote: Approach to beauty through useful structure.]

Of the two approaches which barbaric architecture makes to beauty—one
through ornamentation and the other through mass—the latter is in
general the more successful. An engineer fights with nature hand to
hand: he is less easily extravagant than a decorator; he can hardly ever
afford to be absurd. He becomes accordingly more rapidly civilised and
his work acquires, in spite of itself, more rationality and a more
permanent charm. A self-sustaining structure, in art as in life, is the
only possible basis for a vital ideal. When the framework is determined,
when it is tested by trial and found to stand and serve, it will
gradually ingratiate itself with the observer; affinities it may have in
his memory or apperceptive habits will come to light; they will help him
to assimilate the new vision and will define its æsthetic character.
Whatever beauty its lines may have will become a permanent possession
and whatever beauties they exclude will be rejected by a faithful
artist, no matter how sorely at first they may tempt him. Not that these
excluded beauties would not be really beautiful; like fashions, they
would truly please in their day and very likely would contain certain
absolute excellences of form or feeling which an attentive eye could
enjoy at any time. Yet if appended to a structure they have no function
in, these excellences will hardly impose themselves on the next builder.
Being adventitious they will remain optional, and since fancy is quick,
and exotic beauties are many, there will be no end to the variations, in
endless directions, which art will undergo. Caprice will follow caprice
and no style will be developed.

[Sidenote: Failure of adapted styles.]

A settled style is perhaps in itself no desideratum. A city that should
be a bazaar of all possible architectures, adding a multitude of new
inventions to samples of every historical style, might have a certain
interest; yet carnival can hardly be enjoyed all the year round and
there is a certain latent hideousness in masquerades in spite of their
glitter. Not only are the effects juxtaposed incongruous, but each apart
is usually shallow and absurd. A perruque cannot bring back courtly
manners, and a style of architecture, when revived, is never quite
genuine; adaptations have to be introduced and every adaptation, the
bolder it is, runs the greater risk of being extravagant. Nothing is
more pitiable than the attempts people make, who think they have an
exquisite sensibility, to live in a house all of one period. The
connoisseur, like an uncritical philosopher, boasts to have patched his
dwelling perfectly together, but he has forgotten himself, its egregious
inhabitant. Nor is he merely a blot in his own composition; his presence
secretly infects and denaturalises everything in it. Ridiculous himself
in such a setting, he makes it ridiculous too by his æsthetic pose and
appreciations; for the objects he has collected or reproduced were once
used and prized in all honesty, when life and inevitable tradition had
brought them forth, while now they are studied and exhibited, relics of
a dead past and evidences of a dead present. Historic remains and
restorations might well be used as one uses historic knowledge, to serve
some living interest and equip the mind for the undertakings of the
hour. An artist may visit a museum but only a pedant can live there.
Ideas that have long been used may be used still, if they remain ideas
and have not been congealed into memories. Incorporated into a design
that calls for them, traditional forms cease to be incongruous, as words
that still have a felt meaning may be old without being obsolete. All
depends on men subserving an actual ideal and having so firm and genuine
an appreciation of the past as to distinguish at once what is still
serviceable in it from what is already ghostly and dead.

[Sidenote: Not all structure beautiful, nor all beauty structural.]

An artist may be kept true to his style either by ignorance of all
others or by love of his own. This fidelity is a condition of progress.
When he has learned to appreciate whatever is æsthetically appreciable
in his problem, he can go on to refine his construction, to ennoble, and
finally to decorate it. As fish, flesh, and fowl have specific forms,
each more or less beautiful and adorned, so every necessary structure
has its specific character and its essential associations. Taking his
cue from these, an artist may experiment freely; he may emphasise the
structure in the classic manner and turn its lines into ornament, adding
only what may help to complete and unite its suggestions. This
puritanism in design is rightly commended, but its opposite may be
admirable too. We may admit that nudity is the right garment for the
gods, but it would hardly serve the interests of beauty to legislate
that all mortals should always go naked. The veil that conceals natural
imperfections may have a perfection of its own. Maxims in art are
pernicious; beauty is here the only commandment. And beauty is a free
natural gift. When it has appeared, we may perceive that its influence
is rational, since it both expresses and fosters a harmony of
impressions and impulses in the soul; but to take any mechanism
whatever, and merely because it is actual or necessary to insist that it
is worth exhibiting, and that by divine decree it shall be pronounced
beautiful, is to be quite at sea in moral philosophy.

Beauty is adventitious, occasional, incidental, in human products no
less than in nature. Works of art are automatic figments which nature
fashions through man. It is impossible they should be wholly beautiful,
as it is impossible that they should offer no foothold or seed-plot for
beauty at all. Beauty is everywhere potential and in a way pervasive
because existence itself presupposes a modicum of harmony, first within
the thing and then between the thing and its environment. Of this
environment the observer’s senses are in this case an important part.
Man can with difficulty maintain senses quite out of key with the
stimuli furnished by the outer world. They would then be useless
burdens to his organism. On the other side, even artificial structures
must be somehow geometrical or proportional, because only such
structures hold physically together. Objects that are to be esteemed by
man must further possess or acquire some function in his economy;
otherwise they would not be noticed nor be so defined as to be
recognisable. Out of these physical necessities beauty may grow; but an
adjustment must first take place between the material stimulus and the
sense it affects. Beauty is something spiritual and, being such, it
rests not on the material constitution of each existence taken apart,
but on their conspiring ideally together, so that each furthers the
other’s endeavour. Structure by itself is no more beautiful than
existence by itself is good. They are only potentialities or conditions
of excellence.

[Sidenote: Structures designed for display.]

An architect, when his main structure is uninteresting, may have
recourse to a subsidiary construction. The façade, or a part of it, or
the interior may still have a natural form that lends itself to
elaboration. This beautiful feature may be developed so as to ignore or
even conceal the rest; then the visible portion may be entirely
beautiful, like the ideal human figure, though no pledges be given
concerning the anatomy within. Many an Italian palace has a false front
in itself magnificent. We may chance to observe, however, that it
overtops its backing, perhaps an amorphous rambling pile in quite
another material. What we admire is not so much a façade as a triumphal
gateway, set up in front of the house to be its ambassador to the world,
wearing decidedly richer apparel than its master can afford at home.
This was not vanity in the Italians so much as civility to the public,
to whose taste this flattering embassy was addressed. However our moral
sense may judge the matter, it is clear that two separate monuments
occupied the architect in such cases, if indeed inside and outside were
actually designed by the same hand. Structure may appear in each
independently and may be frankly enough expressed. The most beautiful
façades, even if independent of their building, are buildings
themselves, and since their construction is decorative there is the
greater likelihood that their decoration should be structural.

In relation to the house, however, the façade in such an extreme case
would be an abstract ornament; and so, though the ornament be structural
within its own lines, we have reverted to the style of building where
construction is one thing and decoration another. Applied ornament has
an indefinite range and there would be little profit in reasoning about
it. Philosophy can do little more at this point than expose the
fallacies into which dogmatic criticism is apt to fall. Everything is
true decoration which truly adorns, and everything adorns which enriches
the impression and pleasantly entertains the eye. There is a decorative
impulse as well as a sense for decoration. As I sit idle my stick makes
meaningless marks upon the sand; or (what is nearer to the usual origin
of ornament) I make a design out of somebody’s initials, or symbolise
fantastically something lying in my thoughts. We place also one thing
upon another, the better to see and to think of two things at once.

[Sidenote: Appeal made by decoration.]

To love decoration is to enjoy synthesis: in other words, it is to have
hungry senses and unused powers of attention. This hunger, when it
cannot well be fed by recollecting things past, relishes a profusion of
things simultaneous. Nothing is so much respected by unintelligent
people as elaboration and complexity. They are simply dazed and overawed
at seeing at once so much more than they can master. To overwhelm the
senses is, for them, the only way of filling the mind. It takes
cultivation to appreciate in art, as in philosophy, the consummate value
of what is simple and finite, because it has found its pure function and
ultimate import in the world. What is just, what is delicately and
silently adjusted to its special office, and thereby in truth to all
ultimate issues, seems to the vulgar something obvious and poor. What
astonishes them is the crude and paradoxical jumble of a thousand
suggestions in a single view. As the mystic yearns for an infinitely
glutted consciousness that feels everything at once and is not put to
the inconvenience of any longer thinking or imagining, so the barbarian
craves the assault of a myriad sensations together, and feels replete
and comfortable when a sort of infinite is poured into him without ideal
mediation. As ideal mediation is another name for intelligence, so it is
the condition of elegance. Intelligence and elegance naturally exist
together, since they both spring from a subtle sense for absent and
eventual processes. They are sustained by experience, by nicety in
foretaste and selection. Before ideality, however, is developed, volume
and variety must be given bodily or they cannot be given at all. At that
earlier stage a furious ornamentation is the chief vehicle for beauty.

[Sidenote: Its natural rights.]

That the ornate may be very beautiful, that in fact what is to be
completely beautiful needs to be somehow rich, is a fact of experience
which further justifies the above analysis. For sensation is the matter
of ideas; all representation is such only in its function; in its
existence it remains mere feeling. Decoration, by stimulating the
senses, not only brings a primary satisfaction with it, independent of
any that may supervene, but it furnishes an element of effect which no
higher beauty can ever render unwelcome or inappropriate, since any
higher beauty, in moving the mind, must give it a certain sensuous and
emotional colouring. Decoration is accordingly an independent art, to be
practised for its own sake, in obedience to elementary plastic
instincts. It is fundamental in design, for everything structural or
significant produces in the first instance some sensuous impression and
figures as a spot or pattern in the field of vision. The fortunate
architect is he who has, for structural skeleton in his work, a form in
itself decorative and beautiful, who can carry it out in a beautiful
material, and who finally is suffered to add so much decoration as the
eye may take in with pleasure, without losing the expression and
lucidity of the whole.

It is impossible, however, to imagine beforehand what these elements
should be or how to combine them. The problem must exist before its
solution can be found. The forms of good taste and beauty which a man
can think of or esteem are limited by the scope of his previous
experience. It would be impossible to foresee or desire a beauty which
had not somehow grown up of itself and been recognised receptively. A
satisfaction cannot be conceived ideally when neither its organ nor its
occasion has as yet arisen. That ideal conception, to exist, would have
to bring both into play. The fine arts are butter to man’s daily bread;
there is no conceiving or creating them except as they spring out of
social exigencies. Their types are imposed by utility: their
ornamentation betrays the tradition that happens to envelop and
diversify them; their expression and dignity are borrowed from the
company they keep in the world.

[Sidenote: Its alliance with structure in Greek architecture.]

The Greek temple, for instance, if we imagine it in its glory, with all
its colour and furniture, was a type of human art at its best, where
decoration, without in the least restricting itself, took naturally an
exquisitely subordinate and pervasive form: each detail had its own
splendour and refinement, yet kept its place in the whole. Structure and
decoration were alike traditional and imposed by ulterior practical or
religious purposes; yet, by good fortune and by grace of that
rationality which unified Greek life, they fell together easily into a
harmony such as imagination could never have devised had it been invited
to decree pleasure-domes for non-existent beings. Had the Greek gods
been hideous, their images and fable could not so readily have
beautified the place where they were honoured; and had the structural
theme and uses of the temple been more complicated, they would not have
lent themselves so well to decoration without being submerged beneath
it.

[Sidenote: Relations of the two in Gothic art.]

In some ways the ideal Gothic church attained a similar perfection,
because there too the structure remained lucid and predominant, while it
was enriched by many necessary appointments—altars, stalls, screens,
chantries—which, while really the _raison d’être_ of the whole edifice,
æsthetically regarded, served for its ornaments. It may be doubted,
however, whether Gothic construction was well grounded enough in utility
to be a sound and permanent basis for beauty; and the extreme
instability of Gothic style, the feverish, inconstancy of architects
straining after effects never, apparently, satisfactory when achieved,
shows that something was wrong and artificial in the situation. The
structure, in becoming an ornament, ceased to be anything else and could
be discarded by any one whose fancy preferred a different image.

For this reason a building like the cathedral of Amiens, where a
structural system is put through consistently, is far from representing
mediæval art in its full and ideal essence; it is rather an incidental
achievement, a sport in which an adventitious interest is, for a moment,
emphasised overwhelmingly. Intelligence here comes to the fore, and a
sort of mathematical virtuosity: but it was not mathematical virtuosity
nor even intelligence to which, in Christian art, the leading rôle
properly belonged. What structural elucidation did for church
architecture was much like what scholastic elucidation did for church
dogma: it insinuated a logic into the traditional edifice which was far
from representing its soul or its genuine value. The dialectic
introduced might be admirable in itself, in its lay and abstruse
rationality; but it could not be applied to the poetic material in hand
without rendering it absurd and sterile. The given problem was
scientifically carried out, but the given problem was itself fantastic.
To vault at such heights and to prop that vault with external buttresses
was a gratuitous undertaking. The result was indeed interesting, the
ingenuity and method exhibited were masterly in their way; yet the
result was not proportionate in beauty to the effort required; it was
after all a technical and a vain triumph.

[Sidenote: The result here romantic.]

The true magic of that very architecture lay not in its intelligible
structure but in the bewildering incidental effects which that structure
permitted. The part in such churches is better than the symmetrical
whole; often incompleteness and accretions alone give grace or
expression, to the monument. A cross vista where all is wonder, a side
chapel where all is peace, strike the key-note here; not that
punctilious and wooden repetition of props and arches, as a builder’s
model might boast to exhibit them. Perhaps the most beautiful Gothic
interiors are those without aisles, if what we are considering is their
proportion and majesty; elsewhere the structure, if perceived at all, is
too artificial and strange to be perceived intuitively and to have the
glow of a genuine beauty. There is an over-ingenious mechanism, redeemed
by its colour and the thousand intervening objects, when these have not
been swept away. Glazed and painted as Gothic churches were meant to be,
they were no doubt exceedingly gorgeous. When we admire their structural
scheme we are perhaps nursing an illusion like that which sentimental
classicists once cherished when they talked about the purity of white
marble statues and the ideality of their blank and sightless eyes. What
we treat as a supreme quality may have been a mere means to mediæval
builders, and a mechanical expedient: their simple hearts were set on
making their churches, for God’s glory and their own, as large, as high,
and as rich as possible. After all, an uninterrupted tradition attached
them to Byzantium; and it was the sudden passion for stained glass and
the goldsmith’s love of intricate fineness—which the Saracens also had
shown—that carried them in a century from Romanesque to flamboyant. The
structure was but the inevitable underpinning for the desired display.
If these sanctuaries, in their spoliation and ruin, now show us their
admirable bones, we should thank nature for that rational skeleton,
imposed by material conditions on an art which in its life-time was
goaded on only by a pious and local emulation, and wished at all costs
to be sumptuous and astonishing.

[Sidenote: The mediæval artist.]

It was rather in another direction that groping mediæval art reached its
most congenial triumphs. That was an age, so to speak, of epidemic
privacy; social contagion was irresistible, yet it served only to make
each man’s life no less hard, narrow, and visionary than that of every
one else. Like bees in a hive, each soul worked in its separate cell by
the same impulse as every other. Each was absorbed in saving itself
only, but according to a universal prescription. This isolation in
unanimity appears in those patient and childlike artists who copied each
his leaf or flower, or imagined each his curious angels and devils,
taking what was told of them so much to heart that his rendering became
deeply individual. The lamp of sacrifice—or perhaps rather of
ignorance—burned in every workshop; much labour was wasted in
forgetfulness of the function which the work was to perform, yet a
certain pathos and expression was infused into the detail, on which all
invention and pride had to be lavished. Carvings and statues at
impossible elevations, minute symbols hidden in corners, the choice for
architectural ornament of animal and vegetable forms, copied as
attentively and quaintly as possible—all this shows how abstractedly
the artist surrendered himself to the given task. He dedicated his
genius like the widow’s mite, and left the universal composition to
Providence.

Nor was this humility, on another side, wholly pious and sacrificial.
The Middle Ages were, in their way, merry, sturdy, and mischievous. A
fresh breath, as of convalescence, breathed through their misery. Never
was spring so green and lovely as when men greeted it in a cloistered
garden, with hearts quite empty and clean, only half-awakened from a
long trance of despair. It mattered little at such a moment where a work
was to figure or whether any one should ever enjoy it. The pleasure and
the function lay here, in this private revelation, in this playful
dialogue between a bit of nature and a passing mood. When a Greek
workman cut a volute or a moulding, he was not asked to be a poet; he
was merely a scribe, writing out what some master had composed before
him. The spirit of his art, if that was called forth consciously at
all, could be nothing short of intelligence. Those lines and none other,
he would say to himself, are requisite and sufficient: to do less would
be unskilful, to do more would be perverse. But the mediæval craftsman
was irresponsible in his earnestness. The whole did not concern him, for
the whole was providential and therefore, to the artist, irrelevant. He
was only responsible inwardly, to his casual inspiration, to his
individual model, and his allotted block of stone. With these he carried
on, as it were, an ingenuous dialectic, asking them questions by a blow
of the hammer, and gathering their oracular answers experimentally from
the result. Art, like salvation, proceeded by a series of little
miracles; it was a blind work, half stubborn patience, half unmerited
grace. If the product was destined to fill a niche in the celestial
edifice, that was God’s business and might be left to him: what
concerned the sculptor was to-day’s labour and joy, with the shrewd
wisdom they might bring after them.

[Sidenote: Representation introduced.]

Gothic ornament was accordingly more than ornament; it was sculpture. To
the architect sculpture and painting are only means of variegating a
surface; light and shade, depth and elaboration, are thereby secured and
aid him in distributing his masses. For this reason geometrical or
highly conventionalised ornament is all the architect requires. If his
decorators furnish more, if they insist on copying natural forms or
illustrating history, that is their own affair. Their humanity will
doubtless give them, as representative artists, a new claim on human
regard, and the building they enrich in their pictorial fashion will
gain a new charm, just as it would gain by historic associations or by
the smell of incense clinging to its walls. When the arts superpose
their effects the total impression belongs to none of them in
particular; it is imaginative merely or in the broadest sense poetical.
So the monumental function of Greek sculpture, and the interpretations
it gave to national myths, made every temple a storehouse of poetic
memories. In the same way every great cathedral became a pious
story-book. Construction, by admitting applied decoration, offers a
splendid basis and background for representative art. It is in their
decorative function that construction and representation meet; they are
able to conspire in one ideal effect by virtue of the common appeal
which they unwittingly make to the senses. If construction were not
decorative it could never ally itself imaginatively to decoration; and
decoration in turn would never be willingly representative if the forms
which illustration requires were not decorative in themselves.

[Sidenote: Transition to illustration.]

Illustration has nevertheless an intellectual function by which it
diverges altogether from decoration and even, in the narrowest sense
of the word, from art: for the essence of illustration lies neither
in use nor in beauty. The illustrator’s impulse is to reproduce
and describe given objects. He wishes in the first place to force
observers—overlooking all logical scruples—to call his work by the
name of its subject matter; and then he wishes to inform them further,
through his representation, and to teach them to apprehend the real
object as, in its natural existence, it might never have been
apprehended. His first task is to translate the object faithfully into
his special medium; his second task, somewhat more ambitious, is so to
penetrate into the object during that process of translation that this
translation may become at the same time analytic and imaginative, in
that it signalises the object’s structure and emphasises its ideal
suggestions. In such reproduction both hand and mind are called upon to
construct and build up a new apparition; but here construction has
ceased to be chiefly decorative or absolute in order to become
representative. The æsthetic element in art has begun to recede before
the intellectual; and sensuous effects, while of course retained and
still studied, seem to be impressed into the service of ideas.




