CHAPTER XXV.

Intention                                                       *396




ANALYSIS,


ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XIV.

SOME NAMES WHICH REQUIRE A PARTICULAR EXPLANATION.


"Quam difficile sit inveteratas, eloquentissimorumque scriptorum
authoritate confirmatas, opiniones, mentibus hominum excutere, non
ignoro. Præsertim cum philosophia vera (id est accurata) orationis
non modo fucum, sed etiam omnia fere ornamenta ex professo rejiciat:
cumque scientiæ omnis fundamenta prima non modo speciosa non sint,
sed etiam humilia, arida, et pene deformia videantur."--_Hobbes
Comput. sive Logica_, cap. i. s. I.

WE have now seen that, in what we call the mental world,
Consciousness, there are three grand classes of phenomena, the most
familiar of all the facts with which we are acquainted,--SENSATIONS,
IDEAS, and the TRAIN OF IDEAS. We have examined a number of the more
complicated cases of Consciousness; and have found that they all
resolve themselves into the three simple elements, thus enumerated.
We also found it necessary to shew, for what ends, and in what
manner, marks were contrived of sensations and ideas, and by what
combinations they were made to represent, {2} expeditiously, trains
of those states of consciousness. Some marks or names, however,
could not be explained, till some of the more complicated states of
consciousness were unfolded; these also are names so important, and
so peculiar in their mode of signification, that a very complete
understanding of them is required. It is to the consideration of
these remarkable cases of Naming that we now proceed.[1]

[Editor's footnote 1: Under the modest title of an explanation of
the meaning of several names, this chapter presents us with a series
of discussions of some of the deepest and most intricate questions
in all metaphysics. Like Plato, the author introduces his analysis
of the most obscure among the complex general conceptions of the
human mind, in the form of an enquiry into the meaning of their
names. The title of the chapter gives a very inadequate notion of
the difficulty and importance of the speculations contained in it,
and which make it, perhaps, the profoundest chapter of the book. It
is almost as if a treatise on chemistry were described as an
explanation of the names air, water, potass, sulphuric acid,
&c.--_Ed._]


SECTION I.

NAMES OF NAMES.


It is of great importance to distinguish this class of terms; to
understand well the function which they perform, and to mark the
subdivisions into which they are formed. There is not, however, such
difficulty in the subject as to require great minuteness in the
exposition.

As we have occasion to speak of _things_; animals, vegetables,
minerals; so we have occasion to speak of the _marks_, which we are
under the necessity of using, in order to record or to communicate
our thoughts respecting them. We cannot record or communicate our
thoughts respecting names, as man, tree, horse, to walk, to fly, to
eat, to converse, without marks for them. We proceed in the case of
names, as we do in other cases. We form them into classes, some
more, some less, comprehensive, and give a name to each.

We have one name, so general as to include them all; Word. That is
not a name of any _thing_. It is a name of the marks which we employ
for discourse; and a name of them all. _John_ is a word, _mountain_
is a word, _to run_ is a word, _above_ is a word, and so on.

They are divided into classes, differently for different purposes.
The grammarian, who regards chiefly the concatenation of words in
sentences, divides them into _noun_, _adjective_, _pronoun_, _verb_,
_adverb_, _preposition_, {4} _conjunction_; these words are none of
them names of things. _Noun_ is not a name of a "thing;" it is a
name of a "class of words," as John, James, man, ox, tree, water,
love, hatred; the same is the case with adjective, verb, and so of
the rest.

The philosopher makes another division of them, adapted to his
purposes, which has a more particular reference to their mode of
signification. Thus, he divides them into universal, and particular;
concrete, and abstract; positive, and negative; equivocal, and
univocal; relative, and absolute; and so on.

It is very easy to see that the word "universal," for example, is
not a name of a _thing_. Things are all individual, not general. The
_name_, "man," is a "universal," because it applies to every
individual of a class; for the same reason the _name_ "ox," the
_name_ "horse," the _name_ "dog," and so on, are universals. The
words, "genus" and "species" are synonymous with "universal;" of
course they also are names of names. Such is the word "number."
"One," "two," "one hundred," "one thousand," are "numbers;" in other
words, "number" is a general name for each and all of those other
names.

Beside our names for names singly, we have occasion to name
combinations of names. Thus we have the name "predication." This is
a name for the combination of three words, "subject," "predicate,"
and "copula." We have the name "sentence," which never can be less,
implicitly or explicitly, than a predication, but is often more. The
same is the account of the word "definition." We have the names
"speech," "oration," "sermon," "conversation," all of them names for
a series of sentences. We have {5} also names of written discourse,
such as a "volume," a "book," a "chapter," a "section," a
"paragraph."[2]

[Editor's footnote 2: A right understanding of the words which are
names of names, is of great importance in philosophy. The tendency
was always strong to believe that whatever receives a name must be
an entity or being, having an independent existence of its own; and
if no real entity answering to the name could be found, men did not
for that reason suppose that none existed, but imagined that it was
something peculiarly abstruse and mysterious, too high to be an
object of sense. The meaning of all general, and especially of all
abstract terms, became in this way enveloped in a mystical haze; and
none of these have been more generally misunderstood, or have been a
more copious source of futile and bewildering speculation, than some
of the words which are names of names. Genus, Species, Universal,
were long supposed to be designations of sublime hyperphysical
realities; number, instead of a general name of all numerals, was
supposed to be the name, if not of a concrete thing, at least of a
single property or attribute.

This class of names was well understood and correctly characterized
by Hobbes, of whose philosophy the distinction between names of
names and of things was a cardinal point.--_Ed._]


{6} SECTION II.

RELATIVE TERMS.


The explanation of Relative Terms will run to a considerable length.
The mode in which they are employed as marks is peculiar; and has
suggested the belief of something very mysterious in that which is
marked by them. It is therefore necessary to be minute in exhibiting
the combinations of ideas of which they are the names.

One peculiarity of Relative Terms, which it is necessary for us to
begin with noticing, is, that they always exist in pairs. There is
no relative without its correlate, either actual or implied. Thus,
we have _Father_ and _Son_; _Husband_ and _Wife_; _Master_ and_
Servant_; _Subject_ and _King_; also _High_ and _Low_; _Right_ and
_Left_; _Antecedent_ and _Consequent_.

In these cases of relative pairs, the two names are two different
words; in other cases, one word serves for both names. Of this sort
are the words _Brother_, _Sister_, _Cousin_, _Friend_, _Like_,
_Equal_, and so on. When we say that John is brother, we always mean
of some one else, as James, whom we also call brother. We call Jane
the sister of Ann, as we call Ann the sister of Jane. When we say
that A is equal to B, we signify, by the same expression, that B is
equal to A; and so on.

It is always to be remembered, that, in speaking, we are only
indicating our own trains; and that of {7} course every word in a
mark of some part of a train. The parts of our trains to which we
give relative names, are either simple, or complex. The simple, are
either the simple sensations, or the ideas of those sensations. The
complex, are either those clusters of simple ideas which we call the
ideas of objects, because they correspond with clustered sensations;
or they are the clusters which the mind puts together arbitrarily
for its own purposes.

If it is asked, why we give names in pairs? The general answer
immediately suggests itself; it is because the things named present
themselves in pairs; that is, are joined by association. But as many
things are joined in pairs by association, which do not receive
relative names, the cause may still be inquired of the
classification. What is the reason that some pairs do, while many
more do not, receive relative names? The cause is the same by which
we are guided in imposing other names. As the various combinations
of ideas are far too numerous for naming, and we are obliged to make
a selection, we name those which we find it of most importance to
have named, omitting the rest. It is a question of convenience,
solved by experience. It will be seen more distinctly hereafter that
relative names are one of the contrivances for epitomising; and that
they enable us to express ourselves with fewer words than we should
be able to do without them.[3]

[Editor's footnote 3: No part of the Analysis is more valuable than
the simple explanation here given of a subject which has seemed so
mysterious to some of the most enlightened and penetrating
philosophers, down even to the present time. The only difference
between relative names and any others consist in their being given
in pairs; and the reason of their being given in pairs is not the
existence between two things, of a mystical bond called a Relation,
and supposed to have a kind of shadowy and abstract reality, but a
very simple peculiarity in the concrete fact which the two names are
intended to mark.

In order to make quite clear the nature of this peculiarity, it will
be desirable to advert once more to the double mode of signification
of concrete general names, viz. that while they denote (or are names
of) objects, they connote some fact relating to those objects. The
fact connoted by any name, relative or not, is always of the same
nature; it is some bodily or mental feeling, or some set of bodily
or mental feelings, accompanying or produced by the object. But in
the case of the ordinary names of objects, this fact concerns one
object only, or rather only that one object and the sentient mind.
The peculiarity in the case of relative names is, that the fact
connoted concerns two objects, and cannot be understood without
thinking of them both. It is a phenomenon in which two objects play
a part. There is no greater mystery in a phenomenon which concerns
two objects, than in a phenomenon which concerns only one. For
example; the fact connoted by the word cause, is a fact in which the
thing which is the cause, is implicated along with another thing
which is the effect. The facts connoted by the word parent, and also
by the word son or daughter, are a long series of phenomena of which
both the parent and the child are parts; and the series of phenomena
would not be that which the name parent expresses, unless the child
formed a part of it, nor would it be that which the name son or
daughter expresses, unless the parent formed a part of it. Now, when
in a series of phenomena of any interest to us two objects are
implicated, we naturally give names expressive of it to both the
objects, and these are relative names. The two correlative names
denote two different objects, the cause and the effect, or the
parent and son; but though what they denote is different, what they
connote is in a certain sense the same: both names connote the same
set of facts, considered as giving one name to the one object,
another name to the other. This set of facts, which is connoted by
both the correlative names, was called by the old logicians the
ground of the relation, _fundamentum relationis_. The _fundamentum_
of any relation is the facts, fully set out, which are the reason of
giving to two objects two correlative names. In some cases both
objects seem to receive the same name; in the relation of likeness,
both objects are said to be like; in the relation of equality, both
are said to be equal. But even here the duality holds, on a stricter
examination: for the first object (A) is not said to be like,
absolutely, but to be like the second object (B); the second is not
said to be like absolutely, but to be like the first. Now though
"like" is only one name, "like A" is not the same name as "like B,"
so that there is really, in this case also, a pair of names.

From these considerations we see that objects are said to be
related, when there is any fact, simple or complex, either
apprehended by the senses or otherwise, in which they both figure.
Any objects, whether physical or mental, are related, or are in a
relation, to one another, in virtue of any complex state of
consciousness into which they both enter; even if it be a no more
complex state of consciousness than that of merely thinking of them
together. And they are related to each other in as many different
ways, or in other words, they stand in as many distinct relations to
one another, as there are specifically distinct states of
consciousness of which they both form parts. As these may be
innumerable, the possible relations not only of any one thing with
others, but of any one thing with the same other, are infinitely
numerous and various. But they may all be reduced to a certain
number of general heads of classification, constituting the
different kinds of Relation: each of which requires examination
apart, to ascertain what, in each case, the state of consciousness,
the cluster or train of sensations or thoughts, really is, in which
the two objects figure, and which is connoted by the correlative
names. This examination the author accordingly undertakes: and thus,
under the guise of explaining names, he analyses all the principal
cases which the world and the human mind present, of what are called
Relations between things.--_Ed._]

{8} I. The only, or at least the principal, occasions, for naming
simple sensations, or simple ideas, in pairs, seem to be these:

1 When we take them into simultaneous view, as such and such;

2. When we take them into simultaneous view, as antecedent and
consequent.

II. The principal occasions on which we name the complex ideas,
called objects, in pairs, are these four:

{9} 1. When we speak of them as having an order in space;

2. When we speak of them as having an order in time;

3. When we speak of them as agreeing or disagreeing in quantity;

4. As agreeing or disagreeing in quality.

III. The occasions on which we name the complex ideas of our own
formation in pairs, are,

{10} 1. When we speak of them as composed of the same or different
simple ideas;

2. When we speak of them as antecedent and consequent.

Whatever it may be necessary to remark, respecting relative terms,
will occur in the consideration of these several cases.

I. 1. We speak of two sensations, as _Same_ or _Different_, _Like_
or _Unlike_.

These words are Relatives of the double signification; each
individual of the pair has the same name. When we say that sensation
A is the "same" with {11} sensation B, we mean that B also is the
"same" with A; "different," "like," and "unlike," have the same
double application.

Another ambiguity needs to be noted in the word "same." When there
are _two_ things, they are not the _same_ thing; for "same," in the
strict sense of the word, means one thing, and that only. Here it
means a great degree of likeness, a sense in which, with respect to
sensations and ideas, it is very frequently used.

Of two sensations, or two ideas, we, in truth, can only say, that
they are like or unlike; or, that the one comes first, the other
after it.

It is now necessary to attend very carefully to what happens, when
we say that two sensations are like, or that they are unlike.

First of all, we have the two sensations. But what is it to have two
sensations? It is merely to be conscious of a change. But to be
conscious of a change in sensation, is sensation. It is an essential
part of the process. Without it we should not be sentient beings. To
have sensation, and not to be conscious of any change, is to have
but one sensation continued. We have already seen that this is a
state which seems incapable of being distinguished from that of
having no sensation. At any rate, what we mean by a sentient being,
is not a being with one unvaried sensation, but a being with
sensations continually varied; the varying being a necessary part of
the having more sensations than one; and the varying, and the being
conscious of the variation, being not two things, but one and the
same thing. Having _two_ sensations, therefore, is not only having
sensation, but the only {12} thing which can, in strictness, be
called having sensation; and the having two, and knowing they are
two, which are not two things, but one and the same thing, is not
only sensation, and nothing else than sensation, but the only thing
which can, in strictness, be called sensation. The having a new
sensation, and knowing that it is new, are not two things, but one
and the same thing.[4]

[Bain's footnote 4: The author is here endeavouring to express the
most fundamental fact of the consciousness--the necessity of change,
or transition from one state to another in order to our being
conscious. He approaches very near to, without exactly touching, the
inference that all consciousness, all sensation, all knowledge must
be of doubles; the state passed from and the state passed to, are
equally recognised by us. Opening the eyes to the light, for the
first time, we know a contrast,--a present light, a past
privation--but for the one we should not have known the other. Any
single thing is unknowable by us; its relative opposite is a part of
its very existence.

In a former page it is stated that relative names are one of the
conveniences of epitomising. This is a narrow view to take of them.
They are an essential part of language; they are demanded by the
intrinsic relativity of all nameable things. If we have a thing
called "light," we have also another thing but for which light could
not be known by us, "dark." It is expedient to have names for both
elements of the mutually dependent couple. And so everywhere.
Language would be insufficient for its purposes if it did not
provide the means of expressing the correlative (called also the
negative) of every thing named.--_B._]

The case between sensation and sensation, resembles that between
sensation and idea. How do I know that an idea is not a sensation?
Who ever thought of asking the question? Is not the having an idea,
{13} and the knowing it as an idea, the same thing? The having
without the knowing is repugnant. The misfortune is, that the word,
know, has associations linked with it, which have nothing to do with
this case, but which intrude themselves along with the word, and
make a complexity, where otherwise there would be none.

This is a matter which deserves the greatest attention. One of the
most unfortunate cases of the illusions, which the close association
of ideas with words has produced, is created by ideas clinging to
words when they ought to be disjoined from them, and mixing
themselves by that means with the ideas under consideration, when
they ought to be considered wholly distinct from them. Nothing was
of more importance, than that the phenomenon, to which we are just
now directing our attention, the very first ingredient in the great
mental composition, should be accurately understood, and nothing
mixed up with it which did not truly belong to it.

There is no doubt that in one of its senses, knowledge is synonymous
with sensation. If I am asked what is my knowledge of pain? I
answer, the feeling of it, the having it. The blind man has not the
knowledge of colours; the meaning is, he has not the sensations: if
deaf also, he is without the knowledge, that is, the sensations, of
sounds: suppose him void of all other sensations, you suppose him
void of knowledge. In many cases, however, we arrive at knowledge,
by certain steps; by something of a process. The word, know, is most
frequently applied to those cases. When we know, by mere sensation,
we say we see, we hear, and so on; when we know by mere ideas, {14}
or rather ideation, if we could use such a word, we say we conceive,
we think. The word know, therefore, being almost constantly joined
with the idea of a process, it is exceedingly difficult, when we
apply it to sensation, not to have the idea of a process at the same
time; and thus exceedingly difficult to conceive that sensation, and
knowing, in this case, are purely synonymous.

As the knowing I have an idea, is merely having the idea; as the
having a sensation, and knowing I have a sensation; the knowing, for
example, that I have the pain of the toothache, and the having that
pain; are not two things, but one and the same thing; so the having
a change of sensation, and knowing I have it, are not two things but
one and the same thing.

Having a change, I have occasion to mark that change. The change has
taken place in a train of feelings. I call the first part by one
name, the last by another, and the marking of the change is
effected. Suppose that, without any organ of sense but the eye, my
first sensation is red, my next green. The whole process is
sensation. Yet the green is not the red. What we call making the
distinction, therefore, has taken place, and it is involved in the
sensation.

My names, green, and red, thus applied, are absolute names. The one
has no reference to the other. Suppose that after green, I have the
sensations, blue, yellow, violet, white, black; and that I mark them
respectively by these names. These are still absolute names. Each
marks a particular sensation, and does nothing more. But, now,
suppose that, after my sensations red, green, blue, &c., I have the
sensation {15} red again; that I recognise it as like the sensation
I had first, and that I have a desire to mark that recognition; it
remains to explain what are the steps of this process.

Having the sensation a second time needs no explanation; it is the
same thing as having it the first. But what happens in recognising
that it is similar to a former sensation?

Beside the _Sensation_, in this case, there is an _Idea_. The idea
of the former sensation is called up by, that is, associated with,
the new sensation. As having a sensation, and a sensation, and
knowing them, that is, distinguishing them, are the same thing; and
having an idea, and an idea, is knowing them; so, having an idea and
a sensation, and distinguishing the one from the other, are the same
thing. But, to know that I have the idea and the sensation, in this
case, is not all; I observe, that the sensation is like the idea.
What is this observation of likeness? Is it any thing but that
distinguishing of one feeling from another, which we have recognised
to be the same thing as having two feelings? As change of sensation
is sensation; as change, from a sensation to an idea, differs from
change to a sensation, in nothing but this, that the second feeling
in the latter change is an idea, not a sensation; and as the passing
from one feeling to another is distinguishing; the whole difficulty
seems to be resolved; for undoubtedly the distinguishing differences
and similarities, is the same thing; a similarity being nothing but
a slight difference.[5] As {16} change from red to green, and
knowing the change, or from a sensation of sight, to one of any
other of the senses, the most different, is all sensation; so change
from one shade of red to another, is assuredly sensation. Its being
a different shade consists in my feeling of it, that is, in my
sensation.

[Bain's footnote 5: More properly Similarity is "agreement in
difference." Difference or discrimination is one thing, one element
of knowledge or cognition; Similarity or agreement in difference is
another thing, the second or completing element of knowledge. The
two work together in closest intimacy, but they should neither be
looked upon as the same fact, nor as merely a various shading of the
same fact. Without difference there would be no similarity; but
similarity is difference and something more. At their roots or first
origins, the two processes lie in almost undistinguishable
closeness; but in their developments they run wide apart. No fact or
attribute is known, or mentally possessed, without the union of many
shocks of difference with many shocks of identity, or agreement in
difference.--_B._]

Passing from red to red, red, red, through a succession of
distinguishable shades, is one train of pure sensation: passing from
red to green, blue, tasting, smelling, hearing, touching, is another
train of pure sensation; that these are not the same trains, but
different trains, consists in their being felt to be so; they would
not be different, but for the feeling: and that a feeling is
different, and known to be so, are not two things, but one and the
same thing. Having two such trains, I want marks to distinguish
them. For this purpose, I invent the words "same," "similar," and
their contraries; by means of which, my object is attained. I call
the parts of a train, such as the first, "same," or "similar;" those
of a train like the last, "different," "dissimilar."

By these relative terms, we name the sensations in pairs. When we
say, same, we mean that sensations {17} A, and B, are the same;
different, that A, and B, are different; like and unlike, the same.
By these words we have four pairs of relative terms.

    A.              B.
  same             same
  different        different
  like             like
  unlike           unlike.

The feeling is perfectly analogous in the case of the _ideas_ of
those sensations; and the naming is the same. Thus the idea of red,
green, and so on, and the ideas of the different shades of red are
distinguished from one another by the ideas themselves. To have
ideas different and ideas distinguished, are synonymous expressions;
different and distinguished, meaning exactly the same thing.

The sensations above mentioned, and their ideas, have the same
absolute names: thus, red is at once the name of the sensation, and
the name of the idea; green, at once the name of the sensation and
the idea; sweet, at once the name of the sensation and the idea. The
relative terms, it is obvious, have the same extent of application.
Same, different, like, and unlike, are names of pairs of ideas, as
well as pairs of sensations.

It seems, therefore, to be made clear, that, in applying to the
simple sensations and ideas their absolute names, which are names of
classes, as red, green, sweet, bitter; and also applying to them
names which denote them in pairs, as such and such; there is nothing
whatsoever but having the sensations, having the ideas, and making
marks for them.[6]

[Editor's footnote 6: The author commences his survey of Relations
with the most universal of them all. Likeness and Unlikeness; and he
examines these as subsisting between simple sensations or ideas; for
whatever be the true theory of likeness or unlikeness as between the
simple elements, the same, in essentials, will serve for the
likenesses or unlikenesses of the wholes compounded of them.

Examining, then, what constitutes likeness between two sensations
(meaning two exactly similar sensations experienced at different
times); he says, that to feel the two sensations to be alike, is one
and the same thing with having the two sensations. Their being alike
is nothing but their being felt to be alike; their being unlike is
nothing but their being felt to be unlike. The feeling of unlikeness
is merely that feeling of change, in passing from the one to the
other, which makes them two, and without which we should not be
conscious of them at all. The feeling of likeness, is the being
reminded of the former sensation by the present, that is, having the
idea of the former sensation called up by the present, and
distinguishing them as sensation and idea.

It does not seem to me that this mode of describing the matter
explains anything, or leaves the likenesses and unlikenesses of our
simple feelings less an ultimate fact than they were before. All it
amounts to is, that likeness and unlikeness are themselves only a
matter of feeling: and that when we have two feelings, the feeling
of their likeness or unlikeness is inextricably interwoven with the
fact of having the feelings. One of the conditions, under which we
have feelings, is that they are like and unlike: and in the case of
simple feelings, we cannot separate the likeness or unlikeness from
the feelings themselves. It is by no means certain, however, that
when we have two feelings in immediate succession, the feeling of
their likeness is not a third feeling which follows instead of being
involved in the two. This question is expressly left open by Mr.
Herbert Spencer, in his "Principles of Psychology;" and I am not
aware that any philosopher has conclusively resolved it. We do not
get rid of any difficulty by calling the feeling of likeness the
same thing with the two feelings that are alike: we have equally to
postulate likeness and unlikeness as primitive facts--as an inherent
distinction among our sensations; and whichever form of phraseology
we employ makes no difference in the ulterior developments of
psychology. It is of no practical consequence whether we say that a
phenomenon is resolved into sensations and ideas, or into
sensations, ideas, and their resemblances, since under the one
expression as under the other the resemblance must be recognised as
an indispensable element in the compound.

When we pass from resemblance between simple sensations and ideas,
to resemblance between complex wholes, the process, though not
essentially different, is more complicated, for it involves a
comparison of part with part, element with element, and therefore a
previous discrimination of the elements. When we judge that an
external object, compounded of a number of attributes, is like
another external object; since they are not, usually, alike in all
their attributes, we have to take the two objects into simultaneous
consideration in respect to each of their various attributes one
after another: their colour, to observe whether that is similar;
their size, whether that is similar; their figure, their weight, and
so on. It comes at last to a perception of likeness or unlikeness
between simple sensations: but we reduce it to this by _attending_
separately to one of the simple sensations forming the one cluster,
and to one of those forming the other cluster, and if possible
adjusting our organs of sense so as to have these two sensations in
immediate juxtaposition: as when we put two objects, of which we
wish to compare the colour, side by side, so that our sense of sight
may pass directly from one of the two sensations of colour to the
other. This act of attention directed successively to single
attributes, blunts our feeling of the other attributes of the
objects, and enables us to feel the likeness of the single
sensations almost as vividly as if we had nothing but these in our
mind. Having felt this likeness, we say that the sensations are
like, and that the two objects are like in respect of those
sensations: and continuing the process we pronounce them to be
either like or unlike in each of the other sensations which we
receive from them.--_Ed._]

{18} 2. The only other relative terms applicable to simple
sensations and ideas, are those which denote them as _Antecedent_
and _Consequent_.

{19} I have sensation red, sensation green. Why I mark them red, and
green, or as "different," has already been seen. What happens in
marking them {20} as "antecedent" and "consequent" comes next to be
considered.

A sensation, the moment it ceases, is gone for ever. When I have two
sensations, therefore, A, and B, one first, the other following,
sensation A is gone, before sensation B exists. But though
_sensation_ A is gone, its idea is not gone. Its idea, called up by
association, exists along with sensation B, or the idea of sensation
B. My knowing that the idea of sensation A is the idea of sensation
A, is my having the idea. Having it, and knowing it, are not two
things, but one and the same thing. _Having_ the idea of sensation
A, that is, having the idea of the immediate antecedent of sensation
B, seems, also, to be the same thing with knowing it as the idea of
that antecedent. Having sensation A, and after it sensation B, is
mere sensation; and having the idea of sensation A, the immediate
antecedent, called up by sensation B, the immediate consequent, is
knowing it for that antecedent. The links of the train are three;
1, sensation A; 2, sensation B; 3, the idea of sensation A, in a
certain order with B, called up by sensation B; and after this,
NAMING.

The case appears mysterious, solely, from the want of words to
express it clearly; and our confirmed habit of inattention to the
process. Suppose, that {21} instead of two sensations, A and B, we
have three, A, B, and C, in immediate succession. I recognise A, as
the antecedent of B; B, as the antecedent of C. What is the process?
The idea of sensation A, is associated with sensation B; and the
idea of sensation B, is associated with sensation C. But sensation
C, is not associated with the idea of sensation B solely, it is
associated also with the idea of sensation A. It is associated,
however, differently with the one and the other. It is associated
with B immediately; it is associated with A, only through the medium
of B; it calls up the idea of B, by its own associating power, and
the idea of B, calls up the idea of A. This second state of
consciousness is different from the first. The first is that in
consequence of which B receives the name "Antecedent," and C the
name "Consequent." When two sensations in a train are such, that,
if one exists, it has the idea of the other along with it, by its
immediate exciting power, and not through any intermediate idea; the
sensation, the idea of which is thus excited, is called the
antecedent, the sensation which thus excites that idea, is called
the consequent.

It is evident that the terms, "antecedent," and "consequent," are
not applied in consequence of sensation merely, but in consequence
of sensation joined with ideas. The antecedent sensation, which is
past, must be revived by the consequent sensation, which is present.
It is the peculiarity of this revival which procures it the name.
If revived by any other sensation, it would not have that name.

The Clock strikes three. My feelings are, three sensations of
hearing, in succession. How do I know {22} them to be three
successive sensations? The process in this instance does not seem to
be very difficult to trace. The clock strikes one; this is pure
sensation. It strikes two; this is a sensation, joined with the idea
of the preceding sensation, and the idea of the feeling (also
sensation), called change of sensation, or passage from one
sensation to another. After two, the clock strikes three; there is,
here, sensation, and a double association; the third stroke is
sensation; that is associated immediately with the idea of the
second, and through the idea of the second, with the idea of the
first. It is observable, that these successive associations soon
cease to afford distinct ideas; they hardly do so beyond the second
stage. When the clock strikes, we may have distinct ideas of the
strokes, as far as three, hardly farther; we must then have recourse
to NAMING, and call the strokes, four, five, six, and so on:
otherwise we should be wholly unable to tell how often the clock had
struck.

In the preceding pairs of relative terms, we have found only one
name for each pair. Thus, when we say of A and B, that A is similar
to B, we say also, that B is similar to A. We have now an instance
of a pair of relative terms, consisting not of the same, but of
different names. If we call A antecedent, we call B consequent. The
first class were called by the ancient logicians, synonymous, the
second heteronymous; we may call them more intelligibly,
single-worded, and double-worded, relatives.[7]

[Editor's footnote 7: The next relation which the author examines is
that of succession, or Antecedent and Consequent. And here again we
have one of the universal conditions to which all our feelings or
states of consciousness are subject. Whenever we have more feelings
than one, we must have them either simultaneously or in succession;
and when we are conscious of having them in succession, we cannot in
any way separate or isolate the succession from the feelings
themselves. The author attempts to carry the analysis somewhat
farther. He says that when we have two sensations in the order of
antecedent and consequent, the consequent calls up the idea of the
antecedent; and that this fact, that a sensation calls up the idea
of another sensation directly, and not through an intermediate idea,
_constitutes_ that other sensation the antecedent of the sensation
which reminds us of it--is not a _consequence_ of the one
sensation's having preceded the other, but is literally all we mean
by the one sensation's having preceded the other. There seem to be
grave objections to this doctrine. In the first place, there is no
law of association by which a consequent calls up the idea of its
antecedent. The law of successive association is that the antecedent
calls up the idea of the consequent, but not conversely; as is seen
in the difficulty of repeating backwards even a form of words with
which we are very familiar. We get round from the consequent to the
antecedent by an indirect process, through the medium of other
ideas; or by going back, at each step, to the beginning of the
train, and repeating it downwards until we reach that particular
link. When a consequent directly recalls its antecedent, it is by
synchronous association, when the antecedent happens to have been so
prolonged as to coexist with, instead of merely preceding, the
consequent.

The next difficulty is, that although the direct recalling of the
idea of a past sensation by a present, without any intermediate
link, does not take place from consequent to antecedent, it does
take place from like to like: a sensation recalls the idea of a past
sensation resembling itself, without the intervention of any other
idea. The author, however, says, that "when two sensations in a
train are such that if one exists, it has the idea of the other
along with it by its immediate exciting power, and not through any
intermediate idea; the sensation, the idea of which is thus excited,
is called the antecedent, the sensation which thus excites that idea
is called the consequent." If this therefore were correct, we should
give the names of antecedent and consequent not to the sensations
which really are so, but to those which recall one another by
resemblance.

Thirdly and lastly, to explain antecedence, _i.e._ the succession
between two feelings, by saying that one of the two calls up the
idea of the other, that is to say, is followed by it, is to explain
succession by succession, and antecedence by antecedence. Every
explanation of anything by states of our consciousness, includes as
part of the explanation a succession between those states; and it is
useless attempting to analyse that which comes out as an element in
every analysis we are able to make. Antecedence and consequence, as
well as likeness and unlikeness, must be postulated as universal
conditions of Nature, inherent in all our feelings whether of
external or of internal consciousness.--_Ed._]

{23} II. Having shewn what takes place in naming simple SENSATIONS,
and simple IDEAS, in pairs, both as {24} such and such, and as
antecedent and consequent, we come to the second case of relative
terms, that of naming the clusters, called EXTERNAL OBJECTS, in
pairs. The principal occasions of doing so we have said are four.

1. When we speak of them, as they exist in the synchronous order,
that is, the order in space, we use such relative terms as the
following: high, low; east, west; right, left; hind, fore; and so
on.

It is necessary to carry along with us a correct idea of what is
meant by synchronous order, that is, the order of simultaneous, in
contradistinction to that of successive, existence. The synchronous
order is much more complex than the successive. The successive {25}
order is all, as it were, in one direction. The synchronous is in
every possible direction. The following seems to be the best mode of
conceiving it.

Take a single particle of matter as a centre. Other particles may be
aggregated to it, in the line of every possible radius; and as the
radii diverge, and other lines, tending to the centre, may be
continually interposed, to any number, particles may be aggregated
in those numberless directions. They may also be aggregated in those
directions to a less or a greater extent. And they may be aggregated
to an equal extent in every direction; or to a greater extent in
some of the directions, a less extent in others. In the first case
of aggregation they compose a globe; in the last, any other shape.

Every one of the particles in this aggregate, has a certain order;
first with respect to the centre particle; next with respect to
every other particle. This order is also called, the Position of the
particle. In such an aggregate, therefore, the positions are
innumerable. It is thence observable, that position is an
exceedingly complex idea; for the position of each of those
particles is its order with respect to every one of the other
innumerable particles; it includes, therefore, innumerable
ingredients. Hence it is not wonderful that, while viewed in the
lump, it should seem obscure and mysterious.

Of positions, thus numberless, it is a small portion, only that have
names. Bulk is a name for an aggregate of particles, greater, or
less. Figure is only a modification, or case, of bulk; it is more or
fewer particles in such and such directions.

These things being explained, it now remains to {26} shew, of what
copies of sensations, peculiarly combined, the complex ideas in
question are composed.

The simplest case of position, or synchronous order, is that of two
or more particles in one direction. Let us take the particle,
conceived as the centre particle, in a preceding supposition, and
let us aggregate to it a number of particles, all in the direction
of a single radius, one by one. We have first the centre particle,
and one other, in juxta-position. This is the simplest case of
synchronous order, and this is the simplest of all positions. Let us
next aggregate a second particle; we have now the centre particle,
and two more. The position of the first of the aggregated particles
with respect to the centre particle is contact, or juxta-position;
that of the second is not juxta-position, but position at the
distance of a particle; the next which is aggregated, is at the
distance of two; the next of three particles, and so on, to any
extent.

Particles thus aggregated, all in the direction of a single radius
from the first, constitute a line of less or greater length,
according to the number of aggregated particles.

Line is a word of great importance; because it is by that, chiefly,
we express ourselves concerning synchronous order; or frame names
for positions. Now it happens, that Line has a duplicity of meaning,
most unfortunate, because it has confounded two meanings, which it
is of the highest importance to preserve distinct.

We have already remarked the distinction between concrete, and
abstract, terms; and explained wherein the difference of their
signification consists. We have {27} also observed, that though in
very many cases, the concrete term, and the abstract term, are
different words, as good and goodness, true and truth, there are
many others in which the concrete and abstract terms are the same;
and this is the case, unhappily, with the word Truth itself, which
is used in the concrete sense, as well as the abstract. Thus we call
a proposition, a Truth; in which phrase, the word Truth, means "True
Proposition;" and in this sense we talk of eternal truths, meaning,
Propositions, always true. "Property," is another word, which is
sometimes concrete, sometimes abstract. Thus, a man calls his horse,
his field, his house, his property. In such phrases the word is
concrete. He also says, he has a property in such and such things.
In these phrases, it is abstract.

Of this ambiguity, the word Line is an instance. It is applied as
well to what we call a physical line, as to what we call a
mathematical line. In the first case, it is a concrete, or
connotative term; in the second case, it is an abstract or
non-connotative term. Let us then conceive clearly the two meanings.
The purest idea of a physical line, is that which we have already
formed; the aggregate of particle after particle, in the direction
of a radius. When this aggregate of particles in this order is
called a line, the word, line, is connotative; it marks or notes the
_direction_, but it also marks or connotes the _particles_; it means
the particles and the direction both; it is, in short, the
_concrete_ term. When it is used as the _abstract_ term, the
connotation is left out. It marks the direction without marking the
particles.

It is here necessary to call to mind, that abstract {28} terms
derive their meaning wholly from their concretes; and that by
themselves they have absolutely no meaning at all. I know a green
tree, a sweet apple, a hard stone, but greenness without something
green, hardness without something hard, are just nothing at all.

The same, in its abstract sense, is the case with line, though we
have not words by which we can convey the conception with equal
clearness. If we had an abstract term, separate from the concrete,
the troublesome association in question would have been less
indissoluble, and less deceptive. If we had such a word as Lineness,
or Linth, for example, we should have much more easily seen, that
our idea is the idea of the physical line; and that linth without a
line, as breadth without something broad, length without something
long, are just nothing at all.[8]

[Editor's footnote 8: This conception of a geometrical line, as the
abstract, of which a physical line is the corresponding concrete, is
scarcely satisfactory. An abstract name is the name of an attribute,
or property, of the things of which the concrete name is predicated.
It is, no doubt, the name of some part, some one or more, of the
sensations composing the concrete group, but not of those sensations
simply and in themselves; it is the name of those sensations
regarded as belonging to some group. Whiteness, the abstract name,
is the name of the colour white, considered as the colour of some
physical object. Now I do not see that a geometrical line is
conceived as an attribute of a physical object. The attribute of
objects which comes nearest to the signification of a geometrical
line, is their length: but length does not need any name but its
own; and the author does not seem to mean that a geometrical line is
the same thing as length. He seems to have fallen into the mistake
of confounding an abstract with an ideal. The line which is meant in
all the theorems of geometry I take to be as truly concrete as a
physical line; it denotes an object, but one purely imaginary; a
supposititious object, agreeing in all else with a physical line,
but differing from it in having no breadth. The properties of this
imaginary line of course agree with those of a physical line, except
so far as these depend on, or are affected by, breadth. The lines,
surfaces, and figures contemplated by geometry are abstract, only in
the improper sense of the term, in which it is applied to whatever
results from the mental process called Abstraction. They ought to be
called ideal. They are physical lines, surfaces, and figures,
idealized, that is, supposed hypothetically to be perfectly what
they are only imperfectly, and not to be at all what they are in a
very slight, and for most purposes wholly unimportant,
degree.--_Ed._]

{29} What are, then, the sensations, the ideas of which, in close
association, we mark by the word line?

Though it appears to all men that they see position, length,
breadth, distance, figure; it is nevertheless true, that what
appear, in this manner, to be sensations of the eye, are Ideas,
called up by association. This is an important phenomenon, which
throws much light upon the darker involutions of human thought.

The sensations, whence are generated our ideas of synchronous order,
are from two sources; they are partly the sensations of touch, and
partly those of which we have spoken under the name of muscular
sensations, the feelings involved in muscular action.[9]

[Bain's footnote 9: In attaining the ideas of synchronous order,
which is another name for Space, or the Extended World, sight is a
leading instrumentality. It is by sight more than by any other sense
that we get somewhat beyond the strict limits of the law of the
successiveness of all our perceptions. Although we can _distinctly_
see only a limited spot at one instant, we can couple with this a
vague perception of an adjoining superficies. This is an important
sign of co-existence, as contrasted with succession, and enters with
various other signs into the very complex notion of the author's
synchronous order, otherwise called the Simultaneous or Co-existing
in Space.--_B._]

{30} A line, we have said, is an order of particles, contiguous one
to another, in the direction of a radius from one particle. Let us
begin from this one particle, and trace our sensations. One particle
may be an object of touch; it may be felt, as we call it, and
nothing more; it may, at the same time, give the sensation of
resistance, which we have already described as a feeling seated in
the muscles, just as sound is a feeling in the ear. Resistance, is
force applied to force. What we feel, is the act of the muscle.
Without that, no resistance. This state of consciousness is, in
reality, what we mark by the name. It is, at the same time, a state
of consciousness not a little obscure; because we habitually
overlook many of the sensations of which it is composed; because it
is, in itself, very complex; and because it is entangled with a
number of extraneous associations.

We have already remarked the habit we acquire of not attending to
the sensations which are seated in the muscles, of attending only to
the occasions of them, and the effects of them; that is, their
antecedents, and consequents; overlooking the intermediate
sensations. In marking, therefore, or assigning our names, it seems
to be rather the occasions and effects, the antecedents and
consequents, than the sensations themselves, which are named. The
word resistance is thus the name of a very complex {31} idea.[10] It
is the name; first, of the feelings which we have when we say we
feel resistance; secondly, of the occasions, or antecedents, of
those feelings; and, thirdly, of their consequents. The feelings
intermediate between the antecedents and consequents, are themselves
complex. There are two kinds of sensations included in them; the
sensation of touch, and the muscular sensations; and there is
something more. When we move a muscle, we Will to move it. This
state of consciousness, the Will to move it, is part of the feeling
of the motion. What that state of consciousness, called the Will,
is, we have not yet explained. At present we speak of it merely as
an element in the compound. Of what elements it is itself compounded
we shall see hereafter. In the idea of resistance, then, there is
the will to move the muscles, the sensations in the muscles, the
occasion or antecedent of those feelings, and the effects or
consequents of them. And there is the common complexity attending
all generical terms, that of their including all possible varieties.

[Bain's footnote 10: Still, when we apply an analysis to the complex
facts indicated by the name, we come to a simple as well as ultimate
experience, which is correctly signified by the name Resistance. The
feeling of muscular energy expended is in all likelihood an
absolutely elementary feeling of the mind; and the form of this
feeling that is least complicated or mixed up with other
sensibilities is what the word Resistance most usually expresses,
namely, the dead strain, that is energy without leading to movement,
or causing movement in such a slight degree as not to depart from
the essential peculiarity of expended force.--_B._]

These things being explained, the learner will now be able to trace,
without error, the formation of one of the most important of all our
ideas, that of {32} resistance, or pressure. We touch one thing,
butter, for instance; it yields to the finger, after a slight
pressure; that is, a certain feeling of ours. The will to move the
muscles, and the sensations in the muscles, are both included in
that feeling; but, for shortness, we shall speak of them, through
the present exposition, under one name, as the feelings or
sensations in the muscles. As we call the butter yellow, on account
of a feeling of sight; odorous, on account of a feeling of smell;
sapid, on account of a feeling of taste; so we call it soft, on
account of a feeling in our muscles. We touch a stone, as we touched
the butter, and it yields not, after the strongest pressure we can
apply. As we called the butter soft, on account of one muscular
feeling, we call the stone hard, on account of another. The
varieties of these feelings are innumerable. Only a small portion of
them have received names. The feeling upon pressure of butter, is
one thing; of honey, another; of water, another; of air, another; of
flesh, one thing; of bone, another. We mark them as we can, by the
terms soft, more soft, less soft; hard, more hard, less hard, and so
on. We have great occasion, however, for a word which shall include
all these different words. As we have "coloured" to include all the
names of sensations of sight; "touch" all the names of sensations of
touch, and so on; we invent the word "resisting," which includes all
the words, soft, hard, and so on, by which any of the sensations of
pressure are denoted.

Such, then, are the feelings which we are capable of receiving from
the particle with which we may suppose a line of particles to
commence. These feelings, in passing along the line, we should
receive in {33} succession from each, if the tactual sense were
sufficiently fine to distinguish particles in contact from one
another. It has not, however, this perfection. Even sight cannot
distinguish minute intervals. If a red-hot coal is whirled rapidly
round, though the coal is present at only one part of the circle at
each instant, the whole is one continuous red. If the seven
prismatic colours are made to pass rapidly in order before the eye,
they appear not distinct colours, but one uniform white. In like
manner, in passing from one to another, in a line of particles,
there is no feeling of interval; there is the feeling we call
continuity; that is, absence of interval.

The sensations, then, the ideas of which combined compose the idea
which we mark by the word line, may thus be traced. The tactual
feeling, and the feeling of resistance, derivable from every
particle, attend the finger in every part of its progress along the
line. What is there besides? To produce the progress of the finger,
there is muscular action; that is to say, there are the feelings
combined in muscular action. That we may exclude extraneous ideas as
much as possible, let us suppose, that, when a person first makes
himself acquainted with a line, he has the sense of touch, and the
muscular sensations, without any other sense. He has one state of
feeling, when the finger, which touches the line, is still; another,
when it moves. He has also one state of feeling from one degree of
motion, another from another. If he has one state of feeling from
the finger carried along, as far as it can extend, he has another
feeling when it is only carried half as far, and so on.

It is extremely difficult to speak of these feelings {34} precisely,
or to draw by language those who are not accustomed to the minute
analysis of their thoughts, to conceive them distinctly; because
they are among the feelings, as we have before remarked, which we
have acquired the habit of not attending to, or rather, have lost
the power of attending to.

It is certain, however, that by sensation alone we become acquainted
with lines; that in every different contraction of the muscles there
is a difference of sensation; and that of the tactual feeling, and
the feelings of the contracted muscles, all the feelings which
constitute our knowledge of a line are composed.

As, after certain repetitions of a particular sensation of sight, a
particular sensation of smell, a particular sensation of sight, and
so on, received in a certain order, I give to the combined ideas of
them, the name rose, the name apple, the name fire, and the like; in
the same manner, after certain repetitions of particular tactual
sensations, and particular muscular sensations, received in a
certain order, I give to the combined ideas of them, the name Line.
But when I have got my idea of a line, I have also got my idea of
extension. For what is extension, but lines in every direction?
physical lines, if real, tactual extension; mathematical lines, if
mathematical, that is, abstract, extension.

It would be tedious to pursue the analysis of extension farther. And
I trust it is not necessary; because the application of the same
method to the remaining cases, appears completely obvious. Take
plane surface for example. It is composed of all the lines which can
be drawn in a particular plane; the idea of it, therefore, is
derived from the tactual feeling, and the feeling of resistance,
combined with the {35} muscular feelings involved in the motion of
the finger in every direction which it can receive on a plane.

Let us now take some of the words which, along with the synchronous
order, connote objects in pairs. The names of this sort are not very
numerous. High, and low, right, and left, hind, and fore, are
examples. These, it is obvious, are names of the principal
directions from the human body as a centre. The order of objects,
the most frequently interesting to human beings, is, of course,
their order with respect to their own bodies. What is over the head,
gets the name of high; what is below the feet, gets the name of low;
and so on. Of the pairs which are connoted by those words, the human
body is always one. The words, right, left, hind, fore, when they
denote the object so called, always connote the body in respect to
which they are right, left, hind, fore. We have already noticed the
cases in which the objects, thus named in pairs, have each a
separate name, as father, son; also those in which both have the
same name, as sister, brother. We have here another case, which
deserves also to be particularly marked, that in which only one of
them has a name. The human body, which is always one of the objects
named, when we call things right, left, hind, fore, and so on, has
no corresponding relative name. The reason is sufficiently obvious;
this, being always one of the pair, cannot, the other being named,
be misunderstood.

For the complete understanding of these words, it does not appear
that any thing remains to be explained. If one line, proceeding from
a central particle, be understood, every line, which can proceed
from it, is also understood. If that central point be a part {36} of
the human body, it is plain that as the hand, passing along a line
in a certain direction from that centre, has certain muscular
actions, passing along in another direction, it has muscular actions
somewhat different. When we say muscular actions somewhat different,
we say muscular feelings somewhat different. Difference of feeling,
when important, needs difference of naming.

A particular case of association is here to be remarked; and it is
one which it is important for the learner to fix steadfastly in his
memory.

We never perceive, what we call an object, except in the synchronous
order. Whatever other sensations we receive, the sensations of the
synchronous order, are always received along with them. When we
perceive a chair, a tree, a man, a house, they are always situated
so and so, with respect to other objects. As the sensations of
positions are thus always received with the other sensations of an
object, the idea of Position is so closely associated with the idea
of the object, that it is wholly impossible for us to have the one
idea without the other. It is one of the most remarkable cases of
indissoluble association; and is that feeling which men describe,
when they say that the idea of space forces itself upon their
understandings, and is necessary.[11]

[Editor's footnote 11: Under the head, as before, of Relative Terms,
we find here an analysis of the important and intricate complex
ideas of Extension and Position. It will be convenient to defer any
remarks on this analysis, until it can be considered in conjunction
with the author's exposition of the closely allied subjects of
Motion and Space.--_Ed._]

{37} 2. We come now to the case of naming OBJECTS in pairs, on
account of the Successive Order.

We have had occasion to observe that there is nothing in which human
beings are so deeply interested, as the Successive Order of objects.
It is the successive order upon which all their happiness and misery
depends; and the synchronous order is interesting to them, chiefly
on account of its connection with the successive.

When we speak of objects, it is necessary to remember, that it is
sensations, not ideas, to which we are then directing our attention.
All our sensations, we say, are derived from objects; in other
words, object is the name we give to the antecedents of our
sensations. And, reciprocally, all our knowledge of objects is the
sensations themselves. We have the sensations, and that is all.
A knowledge, therefore, of the successive order of objects, is a
knowledge of the successive order of our sensations; of all the
pleasures, and all the pains, and all the feelings intermediate
between pleasure and pain, of which the body is susceptible.

Of successions, that is, the order of objects as antecedent and
consequent, some are constant, some not constant. Thus, a stone
dropped in the air always falls to the ground. This is a case of
constancy of sequence. Heavy clouds drop rain, but not always. This
is a case of casual sequence.[12] Human life is {38} deeply
interested in ascertaining the constant sequences of all the objects
from which human sensations are derived. The great business of
philosophy is to find them out; and to record them, in the form most
convenient for acquiring the knowledge of them, and for applying it.

[Editor's footnote 12: This is surely an improper use of the word
Casual. Sequences cannot be exhaustively divided into invariable and
casual, or (as by the author a few pages further on) into constant
and fortuitous. Heavy clouds, though they do not always drop rain,
are not connected with it by mere accident, as the passing of a
waggon might be. They are connected with it through causation: they
are one of the conditions on which, when united, rain is invariably
consequent, though it is not invariably consequent on that single
condition. This distinction is essential to any system of Inductive
Logic, in which it recurs at every step.--_Ed._]

In the successions of objects, it very often happens, that what
appear to us to be the immediate antecedent and consequent, are not
immediately successive, but are separated by several intermediate
successions. Thus, the falling of a spark on gunpowder, and the
explosion of the gunpowder, appear antecedent and consequent; but
several successions in reality intervene; various decompositions,
and compositions, in which, indeed, all the sequences cannot as yet
be traced. Most of the successions, which we are called upon to
notice and to name, are in the same situation. We fix upon two
conspicuous points in a chain of successions, and the intermediate
ones are either overlooked, or unknown.

Thus, we name Doctor and Patient, the two extremities of a pretty
long succession of objects. The Doctor is not the immediate
antecedent of any change in the patient. He is the immediate
antecedent of a certain conception, of which the consequent is,
writing a prescription; the consequent of this, is the sending {39}
it to the apothecary; the consequent of that, is the apothecary's
reading it, and so on; the whole composing a multitudinous train.
Doctor and Patient, therefore, are not only two paired names of two
paired objects, but names of all the successions between the one and
the other. Doctor and Patient, therefore, properly speaking, are to
be considered one name, though made up of two parts. Taken together,
they are the name of the complex idea of a considerable train of
sequences, of which a particular man is one extremity, a particular
man another; just as navigation is the single-worded name of the
complex idea of a very long train, of which the extremities are not
particularly marked. If you say, navigation from the Thames to the
Ganges, you have a many-worded name, by which the extremities of
this long train are particularly marked.

The relative terms, Father and Son, are obviously included in this
explanation. They are the two extremities of a train of great length
and intricacy, very imperfectly understood. They also, both
together, compose, as may easily be seen, but one name. Father is a
word which connotes Son, and whether Son is expressed or not, the
meaning of it is implied. In like manner Son connotes Father; and,
stripped of that connotation, is without a meaning. Taken together,
therefore, they are one name, the name of the complex idea of that
train of which father is the one extremity, son the other.[13]

[Editor's footnote 13: It seems hardly a proper expression to say
that Physician and Patient, or that Father and Son, are one name
made up of two parts. When one of the parts is a name of one person
and the other part is the name of another, it is difficult to see
how the two together can be but one name. Father and Son are two
names, denoting different persons: but what the author had it in his
mind to say, was that they connote the same series of facts, which
series, as the two persons are both indispensable parts of it, gives
names to them both, and is made the foundation or _fundamentum_ of
an attribute ascribed to each.

With the exception of this questionable use of language, which the
author had recourse to because he had not left himself the precise
word Connote, to express what there is of real identity in the
signification of the two names; the analysis which follows of the
various complicated cases of relation seems philosophically
unexceptionable. The complexity of a relation consists in the
complex composition of the series of facts or phenomena which the
names connote, and which is the _fundamentum relationis_. The names
signify that the person or thing, of which they are predicated,
forms part of a group or succession of phenomena along with the
other person or thing which is its correlate: and the special nature
of that group or series, which may be of extreme complexity,
constitutes the speciality of the relation predicated.--_Ed._]

{40} Brother and Brother are a pair of relative terms marking a
still more complex idea. Two brothers are two sons of the same
Father; taken together, they are, therefore, marks of all that Son,
taken twice, is capable of marking. Son, as we have just seen,
always implies Father; and, taken together, they are the name of a
train. The relatives, therefore, brother and brother, are the
compound name; two brothers, are the name of the train marked by the
term, Father and Son, taken twice, the prior extremity of the train
being the same in both cases, the latter different.

The above terms. Father and Son, Brother and {41} Brother, are
imposed on account of sequences which are passed. I do not at this
moment recollect any relative terms imposed on account of sequences
purely future. The terms, Buyer and Seller, are sometimes, indeed,
used in a sense wholly future; when they mean persons having
something to buy and something to sell: but they are also used in a
sense wholly passed, when they signify persons who have effected
purchase and sale. We have, however, many relative terms on account
of trains which are partly passed and partly future. Thus, Lender
and Borrower, are imposed partly on account of the passed train
included in the contract of lending and borrowing; partly on account
of the future train implied in the repayment of the money. The words
Debtor and Creditor are names of the same train, partly passed and
partly future.

The relative terms, Husband and Wife, are of the same class; the
name of a train partly passed, to wit, that implied in entering into
the nuptial contract; and partly future, to wit, all the events
expected to flow out of that contract. Master and Servant are
imposed, on account of a train partly passed and partly future; the
train of entering into the compact of master and servant, and the
train of acts which flow out of it. King and Subject are the name of
a train similarly divided; first, the train which led to the will of
obeying on the part of the people, the will of commanding on the
part of the king; secondly, the trains which grow out of these
wills.

Owner and Property are relative terms, or terms which connote one
another. They also are imposed on account of a train partly passed
and partly future. The part which is passed is the train implied in
the {42} circumstances of the acquisition, whether inheritance,
gift, labour, or purchase. The part which is future is the train
implied in the use which the owner may make of the property.

Of the terms which denote objects in successive pairs, several are
very general. Thus we have antecedent and consequent, which are
applicable to any parts of any train. Prior and Posterior, are
nearly of the same import. First and Last, are applicable to the two
extremities of any train. Second, third, fourth, and so on, are
applicable to the contiguous parts of any train.

We have remarked, above, that successions of objects are to be
distinguished into two remarkable kinds; that of the successions
which are fortuitous, and that of the successions which are
constant. Names to mark the antecedent and consequent in all
constant successions, which are things of such importance to us,
were found of course indispensable. Cause and Effect, are the names
we employ. In all constant successions. Cause is the name of the
antecedent. Effect the name of the consequent. And, beside this,
it has been proved by philosophers,[1*] that these names denote
absolutely nothing.

[Mill's footnote 1: Chiefly by Dr. Brown, of Edinburgh, in a work
entitled "Inquiry into the Relation of Cause and Effect;" one of the
most valuable contributions to science for which we are indebted to
the last generation.--(_Author's Note_.)]

It is highly necessary to be apprized, that each of the two names.
Cause and Effect, has a double meaning. They are used, sometimes in
the concrete sense, sometimes in the abstract. By this ambiguity,
{43} ideas are confounded, which it is of the greatest importance to
preserve distinct. When we say, the sun is the Cause of light, cause
is concrete; the meaning is, that the sun always causes light. When
we say that ice is the Effect of cold air, effect is concrete; the
meaning is, that ice is effected by cold air. "Cause," in these
cases, is merely a short name for "causing object," "Effect," a
short name for "caused object." In abstract discourse, on the other
hand, Cause and Effect are often used in the abstract sense, in
which cases Cause means the same thing as would be meant by
causingness; Effect, the same as would be meant by causedness. They
are merely the connotative or concrete terms, with the connotation
dropped.

As the abstract terms have no meaning, except as they refer to the
concrete, it is in the concrete sense I shall always use the words
Cause and Effect, unless when I give notice to the contrary.

Other terms, pairing the parts of a train, take parts more or less
distant; first and last, take the most distant; father and son, take
parts at a considerable distance; cause and effect, on the other
hand, mean always the proximate parts. It does not, indeed, happen,
that we always apply them to the proximate parts; because the
intermediate sequences are often unknown, at other times overlooked.
They are always, however, applied to the parts regarded as
proximate. For we do not, strictly speaking, say, that any thing is
the cause of a thing, when it is only the cause of another thing,
which is the cause of that thing; still less, when there is a series
of causes and effects, before you arrive at that which you have
marked as _the_ effect, because the ultimate one. In {44} all the
inquiries of philosophers into causes, it is the antecedent and
consequent, really proximate, which is the object of their pursuit.

We have observed, in the case of the relative terms, applied to
objects as successive, that the words, properly speaking, form but
one name,--that of the complex idea of a train of less or greater
length: thus, Doctor and Patient is a name; Father and Son is a
name; each denoting a train of which two individuals are the
principal parts. In like manner, the relative terms Cause and
Effect, taken together, are but one name, the name of a short train,
that of one antecedent and one consequent, regarded as proximate,
and constant.

3. We have now shewn, in what manner the principal Relative Terms
are applied, when we have to speak of objects as having order in
Space, and when we have to speak of them as having order in Time. We
proceed to shew in what manner they are applied, when we have to
speak of objects as differing in Quantity, or differing in Quality;
and first, as differing in Quantity.

We apply the word Quantity, in a very general manner; to things,
which have the greatest diversity. Thus, we use the word quantity,
when we speak of extension; we use the word quantity, when we speak
of weight; we use it, when we speak of motion; we use it, when we
speak of heat; we use it, in short, on almost every occasion, on
which we can use the word degree. Of course, it represents not one
idea, but many ideas, some of which have the greatest diversity.

The relative terms, which we co-apply with {45} quantity, are equal,
unequal, or some particular case included under these more general
terms; as, more heavy, less heavy*; more strong, less strong; whole,
part; and so on.

When quantity is applied to extent, it may be extent either in one,
or more, or every direction; it may mean either quantity in line,
quantity in surface, or quantity in bulk. Accordingly, we can say,
equal, or unequal, lines; equal, or unequal, surfaces; equal, or
unequal, bulks.

Line is the simplest case; the explanation of it will, therefore,
facilitate the rest. We have already traced the sensations, which
constitute our knowledge of a line. We have seen that they are
certain sensations of touch, combined with the muscular sensations
involved in extending the arm.

As the sensations, involved in extending the arm so far, are not the
same with those which are involved in extending it farther; and as
the having different sensations, and distinguishing them, are not
two things, but one and the same thing;--as often as I have those
two cases of sensation, I distinguish them from one another; and,
distinguishing them from one another, I require names to mark them.
The first I mark, by the word, short; the other, by the word, long.
As I call a line long, from extending my arm so far; that is, from
the sensations involved in extending it; I call it longer from
extending it farther. After experience of a number of lines, there
are some which I call long, long, long, one after another, to any
amount; others which I call longer, longer, longer; others which
I call short, short, short; and so on.

When we have perceived the sensations, on account {46} of which we
call lines long, longer, short, shorter, we can be at no loss for
the knowledge of those, on account of which we call them equal, and
unequal. It is to be observed, that in applying the words long,
longer, short, shorter, minute differences are not named. They
cannot be named. The names would be too numerous. A general mark,
however, may be invented, to shew when there is even a minute
difference, and when there is not. When there is not, we call the
two lines equal; when there is, we call them unequal.

We shall presently see, when we come to trace the ideas, which the
class of words, called numbers, are employed to mark, what
distinction of sensation it is which is marked by the words, one,
and two. In the mean time, it is easy to see, that the case of
sensation, when we trace one line, with the hand, and then another,
is different from the case of sensation when we trace one line only,
or even the same line twice; and this diversity needs marks to
distinguish it. It is true, that in tracing one line, and then
another, and marking the distinction, there is something more than
sensation, there is also memory. But to this ingredient in the
compound, after the explanation which has already been given of
memory, it is not, at present, necessary particularly to advert.

When it is seen, what are the sensations which are marked by the
terms longer and shorter, applied to a line, it will not be
difficult to see what are the sensations, which are marked by the
terms, part, and whole.

The terms, a part, and whole, imply division. Of course, the thing
precedes the name. Men divided, before they named the act, or the
consequences of the {47} act. In the act of division, or in the
results of it, no mystery has ever been understood to reside. It is
of importance to remark, that the word division, in its ordinary
acceptation, includes, and thence confounds, things which very much
need to be distinguished. It includes the will, which is the
antecedent of the act; the act itself; and the results of the act.
At present we may leave the will aside; it will be explained
hereafter; and, as it is not the act, but the antecedent of the act,
the consideration of it is not required, for the present purpose.

The act of dividing, like all the other acts of our body, consists
in the contraction and relaxation of certain muscles. These are
known to us, like every thing else, by the feelings. The act, as
act, is the feelings; and only when confounded with its results, is
it conceived to be any thing else. If it be said, that the
contraction of the muscles of my arm, is something more in me than
feelings, because I see the motion of my arm; it is to be observed,
that this seeing, this sensation of sight, is not the act, but one
of its results; the feelings of the act are the antecedent; this
sensation of sight one of the consequents.

In the act of dividing a line, as in the act, already analysed, of
tracing a line, there is a feeling of touch, and there is also a
muscular feeling. There may be more or less of cohesion in the parts
of the line; and thence, more or less of what we call muscular
force, required to disunite them. Of course, what we call more or
less of force, are only names for different states of feeling. The
states of feeling which we mark by the term, force, being
antecedent, all the rest {48} are consequents of this antecedent.
The disunion of the parts of one line is attended with a certain
muscular feeling; I call the feeling a small force. That of another
line is attended with a muscular feeling somewhat different; I call
it a greater force; and so on. This muscular feeling, however, has
various accompaniments; which are closely associated with the idea
of the act, and with its name. Thus there is the sight of the line,
there is the sight of the hands in the act of disruption, and there
is the sight of the line after it is divided. The term division, as
we have mentioned before, includes all; the muscular feeling, the
sight of the line before division, and the sight of it after. I need
a pair of names for the line before division, and the line after.
I call the one whole, the other parts. Like other relative terms,
the one of these connotes the other; whole has no meaning, but when
associated with parts; parts have no meaning, but when associated
with whole. Taken together; that is, whole and parts, used as one
name; they mark a complex idea, consisting of three principal parts;
an undivided line, the act of division, and the consequent of that
antecedent, the line after division.

In the preceding exposition, it is actual division, the actual
making of parts, which has been spoken of. It is observable,
however, that the same language, by which we name actual division,
and actual parts, is applied to conceived division, and conceived
parts. Thus we talk of the parts of a line, when it is not divided,
nor meant to be divided. The exposition of this, however, is easy;
and there is obscurity only when the double use of the terms
confounds the two {49} cases, the division which is actual, with
that which is conceived.

The division of the line may consist of one act, or of more acts
than one. By the first act, it is divided into two parts; by the
second into three; by the third into four, and so on. The parts of
a line are so many lines. These may be equal, or unequal. But the
sensations, on account of which we denominate lines equal, or
unequal, have been already shewn; the equality, and inequality,
therefore, of the parts of a line, need no further explanation.

When the learner conceives distinctly the sensations on account of
which we apply the terms whole and parts to a line, he will not find
it difficult to understand, on what account we apply them to all the
modifications of extension; seeing that all these modifications are
lines combined.

Thus, a plane surface is a number of straight lines, in contact,
in the direction called a plane. It is of greater or less extent,
according as these lines are longer or shorter from a central point;
it is of one shape or another shape, according as the lines are of
the same length, or of different lengths. When they are all of one
length, the surface is called a circle. As they may be of different
lengths in endless variety, the surface may have an endless variety
of shapes, of which only a few have received names. The square is
one of these names, the triangle another, the parallelogram another,
and so on.

Bulk, which is the other great modification of extension, is lines
from a central point in every direction. This bulk is greater or
less, according as these lines are longer or shorter. The figure or
shape of this {50} bulk is different, according as the lines are of
the same or different lengths. If they are of the same length, the
bulk is called round, or, in one word, a sphere; sphere meaning
exactly round bulk. As the lines, when they differ in length, may
differ in endless ways; figures, or the shapes of bulk, are also
endless, as our senses abundantly testify. Of these but a small
number have received names. In this number are the cube, the
cylinder, the cone. We name some shapes by referring to known
objects; thus we speak of the shape of an egg, the shape of a pear,
and so on.

It seems that nothing, therefore, is now wanting, to shew in what
manner the relative terms, expressive of Quantity, are applied to
all the modifications of extension.

After what has been said, it will not be difficult to ascertain the
sensations on account of which we apply the same relative terms to
cases of Weight.

Weight is the name of a particular species of pressure; pressure
towards the centre of the earth. Pressure, as we have already fully
seen, is the name we apply, when we have certain sensations in the
muscles, just as green is the name we apply when we have a certain
sensation in the eye. As green is the name of the sensation in the
eye, pressure is the name of the sensation in the muscles. Pressure
upwards, is one thing; pressure downwards, is another; pressure of a
body, when that body is urged by another body, is one thing;
pressure of a body, when it is not urged by another body, is a
different thing: pressure of a body in altering the position of its
parts is one thing; pressure, when there is no alteration of the
position of its parts, is another thing. Of this last sort is
weight, {51} the pressure downwards, or towards the centre of the
earth, of a body not urged by another body, and not altering the
position of its parts.

In supporting in my hand a stone, I resist a certain pressure; in
other words, have certain muscular feelings, on account of which I
call the stone heavy. I support other stones, and in doing so have
muscular feelings, in one case similar, in another dissimilar. In
the case of similarity, I call two stones equal, meaning in weight;
in the case of dissimilarity, unequal; and so I apply all the other
relative terms by which quantity is expressed.

It seems unnecessary to carry this analysis into further detail. The
words equal, unequal: greater, less; applied to Motion, to Heat, and
other modifications of sensation, have a meaning, which in following
the course so fully exemplified it cannot be difficult to ascertain.

It seems still necessary that I should say something of the word
_Quantus_, from which the word Quantity is derived. _Quantus_ is the
correlate of _Tantus_. _Tantus_, _Quantus_, are relative terms,
applicable to all the objects to which we apply the terms, Great, or
Little; they are applicable, therefore, to all the modifications of
extension, of weight, of heat; in short, to all modifications which
we can mark as degrees.

Of two lines, we call the one _tantus_, the other _quantus_. The
occasions on which we do so are, when the one is as long as the
other. _Tantus_, and _Quantus_, then, in this case, mean the same
thing as equal, equal. They will be found to have the same import as
equal, equal, when applied also to surface, and bulk; and so in all
other compatible cases.

{52} What then, it may be asked, is the use of them? If it should
appear that they were of no use, it would not be very surprising;
considering by whom languages have been made; and that redundancy is
frequent in them as well as defect. In the present case, however, a
use is not wanting.

It is necessary to observe the artifice, to which we are obliged to
have recourse, to name, and even to distinguish, the different
modifications, not of kind but of degree, included under the word
quantity. We are obliged to take some one object, with which we are
familiar, and to distinguish other objects, as differing or agreeing
with that object. Thus, we take some well-known line, the length of
the foot, or the length of the arm, and distinguish and name all
other lengths by that length; which can be divided or multiplied so
as to correspond with them. In like manner, we take some well-known
object as a standard weight, which we call, for example, a pound,
and distinguish and name all other weights, as parts or multiples of
that known weight.

Now it will be recognised, that, in applying the relative terms
equal, equal, or in calling two objects equal, no one of them is
marked as the standard. Both are taken on the same footing. The one
is equal to the other; and the other is equal to that. But when we
say that one thing is _tantus_, _quantus_ another; or one so great,
as the other is great; the first is referred to the last, the
_tantus_ to the _quantus_; the first is distinguished and named by
the last. The _quantus_ is the standard.

It is this which gives its peculiar meaning to the word Quantity,
and has recommended it for that very {53} comprehensive and
generical acceptation, in which it is now received.

Our word Quantity, is the Latin word _Quantitas_; and _Quantitas_ is
the abstract of the concrete _Quantus_. We have no English words,
corresponding to _Tantus_, _Quantus_. We form an equivalent, by aid
of the relative conjunctions; we say, So Great, As Great. But these
concrete terms do not furnish abstracts; we do not say,
As-greatness; in the first place, because it is an awkward
expression; and in the next place, because the relative, "as," is
not steady in its application, since we use "as great" not for
_quantus_ only, but frequently also for _tantus_. As greatness,
therefore, does not readily suggest the idea of the abstract of
_Quantus_.

On what account, then, is it we give to any thing the name
_Quantus_? As a standard by which to name another thing _Tantus_.
The thing called _Quantus_, is the previously known thing, the
ascertained amount, by which we can mark and define the other
amount. Leaving out the connotation of _Quantus_, which is some one
individual body, _Quantitas_ merely denotes such and such an amount
of body. _Quantitas_, if it was kept to its original meaning, would
still connote _Tantitas_; just as paternity connotes filiality. But
in the case of Quantity, even this connotation is dropped; it is
used not as a relative abstract term, but an absolute abstract term;
and is employed as a generical name for any portion of extension,
any portion of weight, of heat, or any thing else, which can be
measured by a part of itself.[14]

[Editor's footnote 14: After analysing Position and Extension under
the head of Relative Terms, the author now, under the same head,
gives the analysis of Quantity and Quality. To what he says on the
subject of Quantity it does not appear necessary to add anything. He
seems to have correctly analysed the phenomenon down to a primitive
element, beyond which we have no power to investigate. As Likeness
and Unlikeness appeared to be properties of our simple feelings,
which must be postulated as ultimate, and which are inseparable from
the feelings themselves, so may this also be said of More and Less.
As some of our feelings are like, some unlike, so there is a mode of
likeness or unlikeness which we call Degree: some feelings otherwise
like are unlike in degree, that is one is unlike another in
intensity, or one is unlike another in duration; in either case one
is distinguished as more, or greater, the other as less. And the
fact of being more or less only means that we feel them as more or
less. The author says in this case, as he had said in the other
elementary cases of relation, that the more and the less being
different sensations, to trace them and to distinguish their
difference are not two things but one and the same thing. It matters
not, since there the difference still is, unsusceptible of further
analysis. The author's apparent simplification amounts only to this,
that differences of quantity, like all other differences of which we
take cognizance, are differences merely in our feelings; they exist
only as they are felt. But (as we have already said of resemblance,
and of antecedence and consequence) they must be postulated as
elements. The distinction of more and less is one of the ultimate
conditions under which we have all our states of
consciousness.--_Ed._]

{54} 4. After tracing the sensations and ideas, which are marked
when we apply relative terms to objects, as agreeing or disagreeing
in _quantity_; we have now to trace the sensations and ideas, which
are marked, when we apply relative terms to objects, on account of
their agreeing or disagreeing in _quality_.

First of all, the learner must take note of what he {55} means by
Quality. We ascribe qualities to an object on account of our
sensations. We call an object green, on account of the sensation
green; hard, on account of the sensation hard; sounding, on account
of the sensation sounding. The names of all qualities of objects,
then, are names of sensations. Are they any thing else? Yes; they
are the names of our sensations, with connotation of a supposed
unknown cause of those sensations. As far, however, as our knowledge
goes, they are names of sensations, and nothing else. The supposed
cause is never known; the effects alone are known to us.

We ascribe qualities to objects, in two cases, which require to be
distinguished: on account of the sensations which we have from them
primarily; on account of those which we have from them secondarily.
The first we call their sensible qualities; as green, hot, hard,
sweet, scented, and so on: the second we more frequently call their
powers; as the power of the loadstone to draw iron, the power of
water to melt sugar. In this latter case, the sensations marked are
not those which are derived from the loadstone, or from water; but
those which are derived from the changes in the iron, and the sugar;
of which changes, we call the loadstone, and the water, the cause.
In the latter case, the train of antecedents and consequents is
longer than it is in the former. When I see an object green; there
is the object, the antecedent; and myself sentient of green, the
consequent. When I see a loadstone draw iron, there is the following
train; the loadstone, antecedent; iron drawn, first consequent;
myself seeing it drawn, second consequent. When I see water melt
sugar, there is the {56} antecedent water; sugar melting, first
consequent; myself seeing it, second consequent. What I call the
powers of an object, then, are its order in respect to certain of my
sensations, the order of antecedence, not proximate, but more or
less remote.

When I say that grass is green, I trace my sensation green, no
farther than to the grass. When I say, the sugar is melting, I trace
my sensations (for they are several) called sugar melting, first to
the sugar, and then to the water. My word green, therefore, is the
notation of a sensation, and connotation of an unknown cause; my
name melting, is the notation of a compound of sensations, and
connotation of two causes, an antecedent and a consequent: the
first, an unknown cause in the sugar; the second, the cause of that
unknown cause, namely, the water.

In speaking of the qualities of an object, it is necessary to take
notice of an inaccuracy of language; which, not only, as Dr. Brown
has well observed, lies at the bottom of many philosophical errors,
but induces men to mistake the very business of the philosopher.

The term, "quality" or "qualities of an object," seems to imply,
that the qualities are one thing, the object another. And this, in
some indistinct way, is, no doubt, the opinion of the great majority
of mankind. Yet, the absurdity of it strikes the understanding, the
moment it is mentioned. The qualities of an object are the whole of
the object. What is there beside the qualities? In fact, they are
convertible terms: the qualities are the object; and the object is
the qualities. But, then, what are the qualities? Why, sensations,
with the association of {57} the object as the cause. And what is
the association of the object as the cause? Why, the association of
other sensations as antecedent. What, for example, are the smell,
and colour, and other qualities of the rose? Is not each of the
names of these qualities, that of the smell, for example, a
connotative name, not only noting the sensation, of which it is
properly the name, but connoting all the sensations of colour, of
consistence, of figure, of position; to which, all combined by
association, so as to form one complex idea, we give the specific
name, rose, the more general name, vegetable, and the still more
general name, object? When the smell of a rose is perceived by me,
or the idea suggested to me, immediately all the other ideas
included under the term rose, are suggested along with it, and their
indissoluble union presupposed. But this belief of the previous
indissoluble union of each of those sensations with all the other
sensations, is all which I really mean when I refer each sensation
to the rose as its cause.

If the learner has fully apprehended the ideas here premised, it
will be easy for him to trace to the bottom the relative terms,
which we apply to objects on account of their agreeing or
disagreeing in _Quality_.

We say, that objects agree or disagree, on account of one quality,
or more than one quality, that is, on account of single sensations,
or combined sensations.

Let us first observe the case of one quality. We say, that a blade
of grass is like the leaf of an oak, meaning, that in the quality of
colour both are green; we say that the leaf of the rose tree, is
unlike the petal of the flower, meaning in colour. By these {58}
words, we name the objects in pairs; first, the pair of leaves, to
each of which, we give the name, like; secondly, the leaf and the
petal, to each of which, we give the name, unlike. We name the first
two objects, "like," on account of the two sensations, green, and
green, one of each object; we name the next two objects unlike, on
account of the two sensations, green of the one, red of the other.
What is done, or rather what is felt, when we give the same, or a
different name, to each of two sensations, has been already so fully
explained, that a bare suggestion of what has been premised, is here
all that will be required.

We have two sensations. A, B. Having two sensations, and knowing
them to be two sensations, that is, not one sensation, is having the
sensations, and nothing more.

Why do I call one sequence of sensations, green, green; another
sequence, green, red? Clearly on account of the sensations. No other
explanation can be given of it, nor can be required. For the same
reason for which I called the sensations of the first sequence
individually, green, green, I call them both, like; and for the same
reason for which I called those of the second sequence, not green,
green, but green, red, I call them, unlike.

Let us next put the case of several sensations. We say, that one
rose is like another. We have only to take the sensations combined
under the name rose, one by one, to see that this, and the former,
case, are in reality the same. The two roses are like in colour,
like in smell, like in consistence, like in form, like in position.
The likeness of the two roses, is a likeness {59} not in one
sensation, but in several. But the likeness of two sensations of
smell, is of the same nature as the likeness of the two sensations
of sight. When I call the smell, therefore, of the two roses like,
it is for the same reason as I call the colour of them like, that
is, the sensations. When I call the shape and consistence, and
position, like, it is for the same reason still; the tactual and
muscular sensations, whence the ideas are derived to which these
names are annexed. In this case, however, the reason is by no means
so clearly seen, first, because the sensations are complex, and
secondly, because they are of that class of sensations which we
habitually overlook.

The Latin words, _Talis_, _Qualis_, are applied to objects in the
same way, on one account, as _Tantus_, _Quantus_, on another; and
the explanation we gave of _Tantus_, _Quantus_, may be applied
_mutatis mutandis_, to the pair of relatives we have now named.
_Tantus_, _Quantus_, are names applied to objects on account of
dimension. _Talis_, _Qualis_, are names applied to objects on
account of all other sensations. We apply _Tantus_, _Quantus_, to a
pair of objects when they are equal; we apply _Talis_, _Qualis_, to
a pair of objects, when they are like.

_Talis_, _Qualis_, however, express the likeness of two objects in a
manner somewhat different from the other pair of nearly equivalent
relatives, "Like," and "Like." When we call two objects Like, the
one is placed on the same footing as the other. No one of them is
taken as the standard. When we apply, _Talis_, _Qualis_, the case is
different. One of the objects is then the standard. The object
_Qualis_, is that to which the reference is made.

{60} This being understood, the extensive meaning which came to be
given to the word Quality, may be easily explained. Quality is the
Latin _Qualitas_, and _Qualitas_ is the abstract of _Qualis_. The
meaning of the abstract is the same with that of the concrete, the
connotation being dropped. When the word _Qualis_, is applied to an
object, it notes something about it in particular, but connotes the
whole object. The _Qualitas_ of that object, is the something noted
in particular, the connotation being dropped. As _Qualis_ is applied
to objects, sometimes on account of one thing belonging to them,
sometimes on account of another, _Qualitas_ comes in turn to be
applied to every thing in them, requiring at any time a separate
notation. _Qualitas_, when first formed from _Qualis_, has the force
of a relative, and connotes the abstract of _Talis_; but in its
frequent use, in marking every thing in objects, which requires
separate notation, this connotation, also, comes to be dropped; and
Quality is finally used as an absolute term, the generical name of
every thing in objects, for which a separate notation is
required.[15]

[Editor's footnote 15: As in the case of Quantity, so in that of
Quality, it is needless to add anything to the author's very
sufficient elucidation. I merely make the usual reserves with
respect to the use of the word Connotation. The concrete names which
predicate qualities (for of abstract relative names the author is
not yet speaking) are said by him to be the names of our sensations;
green, for instance, and red. But it is the abstract names alone
which are this: the names greenness, and redness. And even the
abstract names signify something more than only the sensations: they
are names of the sensations considered as derived from an object
which produces them. The concrete name is a name not of the
sensation, but of the object, of which alone it is predicable: we
talk of green objects, but not of green sensations. It however
connotes the quality greenness, that is, it connotes that particular
sensation as produced by, or proceeding from, the object; as forming
one of the group of sensations which constitutes the object. This,
however, is but a difference, though a very important one, in
terminology. It is strictly true, that the real meaning of the word
is the sensations; as, in all cases, the meaning of a connotative
word resides in the connotation (the attributes signified by it),
though it is the name of, or is predicable of, only the objects
which it denotes.--_Ed._]

{61} III. It was remarked at the beginning of this investigation of
relative terms or names applied in pairs, that we name in pairs--
1, single sensations or ideas; 2, the clusters we call objects;
3, the complex ideas we form arbitrarily for our own purposes. Having
finished the consideration of the two former cases, we shall not
find occasion to speak much at length upon the last.

The clusters, formed by arbitrary association, receive names in
pairs, on two occasions; either,

1. When they consist of the same or different simple ideas; or,

2. When they succeed one another in a train.

1. The ideas which we put together arbitrarily are sometimes less,
sometimes more, complex, for the most part, they are exceedingly
complex.

Of the less complicated kinds, are such ideas as that of the
unicorn, which is a horse with one straight horn growing from the
middle of its forehead; the Cyclops, a gigantic man, with a single
eye in the middle of his forehead; a mermaid, of which the upper
part is a woman, the lower a fish; the Brobdignagian {62} and
Lilliputian of Swift, which are men of greatly reduced, or greatly
enlarged dimensions.

Of the more complicated kinds, are such ideas as those which are
marked by the word Science, by the word Trade, by the word Law, by
the word Religion, by the word Faith, by the words God and Devil, by
the word Value, by the words Virtue, Honour, Vice, Beauty,
Deformity, Space, Time, and so on.

Language has not many relative terms, applicable to ideas of this
class. We speak of pairs of them as like or unlike, same or
different, greater or less; and except when their order in time is
to be noted, we hardly apply to them any other marks in pairs.

We say the Cyclops in Homer, and the Brobdignagian of Swift, are
unlike. We do so precisely in the same way, as we say, the rose and
the lily are unlike; and the explanation which we have given of that
which is distinctively marked by those terms, when applied to
objects, is precisely applicable here. In the case of objects, that
which is named, is, clusters of ideas;[16] in the present case, that
which is named, is clusters of ideas. That one cluster has been
formed in one way, another in another, makes no difference in
annexing marks to the clusters when they are formed.

[Editor's footnote 16: Say rather, in the case of objects, what is
named is clusters of sensations, supplemented by possibilities of
sensation. If an object is but a cluster of ideas, what is there to
distinguish it from a mere thought?--_Ed._]

There is as little difficulty in tracing what is marked by the
relatives, different, and same, when applied to ideas of this class.
We say, the unicorn is different {63} from the horse; because, to
the idea of the horse it adds that of a horn growing in the middle
of the forehead. In the case of very complex ideas, it is much more
difficult to say, with precision, what are the added and subtracted
ideas, on account of which, we apply the term, different; as when we
say, the courage of Ajax was different from that of Achilles; but it
is not the less certain, that it is wholly on account of ideas added
and subtracted, that we so denominate the courage of the two men.

Rather more explanation is needed, to shew what is peculiarly marked
by the relatives equal, unequal, greater, less, when applied to the
class of arbitrarily formed complex ideas.

We have already seen, that those terms are primarily applied to what
we call objects, on account of their extension; objects are equal or
unequal, greater or less, in extension.

We have also seen, that in marking the extension of different
objects, we are under the necessity of taking some known object as a
standard, and by that object naming others. Thus, we take the foot,
and say that other objects are two feet, three feet, or the half or
quarter of a foot, and so on.

Having become familiar with what we call degrees of extension, we
are led to employ the same mode of notation, when we come to mark
analogous differences in other cases of sensation. Thus, when we
perceive the weight of different heavy bodies; as the terms equal,
unequal, greater, less, are applied with convenience to certain
cases of extension, it appears they may be applied with equal
convenience, and even precision, to cases of weight. All other
sensations, {64} having distinguishable differences, may be marked
in the same way: thus sounds are more or less loud, and we speak of
equal, or unequal, less or greater loudness of sound; less or
greater sweetness in objects of the palate; less or greater
resistance; less or greater pain; less or greater pleasure.

When the terms equal, unequal, less, greater, had been applied to
simple sensations of the pleasurable kind, and their ideas; the
transference of them to complex ideas, of the pleasurable or painful
kind, was easy. If the less or greater sweetness of the rose and the
woodbine, was a convenient notation, so was the less or greater
beauty of those two flowers, the less or greater beauty of two
women, the less or greater wisdom or folly, vice or virtue, of two
men.

It thus appears, that, as we apply the term unlike to our complex
ideas, on account of the addition and subtraction of ideas of
_different_ kinds, so we apply to them the term unequal, on account
of the addition and subtraction of ideas of the _same_ kind. Like
and equal we apply, when we neither add, nor subtract.[17]

[Editor's footnote 17: In this passage the author has got as near as
it is perhaps possible to get, to an analysis of the ideas of More
and Less. We say there is more of something, when, to what there
already was, there has been superadded other matter of the same
kind. And when there is no actual superadding, but merely two
independent masses of the same substance, we call that one the
greater which produces the same impression on our senses which the
other would produce if an addition were made to it. So with
differences of intensity. One sweet taste is called sweeter than
another because it resembles the taste which would be produced by
adding more sugar: and so forth. In all these cases there is
presupposed an original difference in the sensations produced in us
by the greater mass and by the smaller: but according to the
explanation now offered, the idea which guides the application of
the terms is that of physical juxtaposition.--_Ed._]

{65} 2. We apply the same relative terms to successive ideas of this
class, which we apply to simple ideas, or the clusters called
objects, when successive. We call them antecedent and consequent, or
names equivalent; as prior, posterior; first, second; or even
successive, which is a name including both antecedent and
consequent.

In speaking of the relative terms applied to objects as successive,
we had occasion to explain the two important terms, Cause and
Effect. We found that Cause and Effect, were only other names for
antecedent and consequent, in a certain set of cases. We do not use
the terms, Cause and Effect, as synonymous with antecedent and
consequent, in those cases in which, though the objects may be
antecedent and consequent to our perception, we know not whether
they are parts of the same series, or parts of two different series.
Within the sphere of our observation, innumerable series of events
are going on; and we are observing, first a part of one series, and
then a part of another, continually. It is thus constantly
happening, that those things, which are immediately antecedent and
consequent to our observation, are not parts of the same series, but
parts of different series; and, of course, in those antecedents and
consequents, there is no constancy; they are accidental, as the
course of each man's attention. This may be illustrated by many
familiar instances. There may be {66} immediately before me, a man
playing on the violin, one series; another man filing a saw, a
second series. My attention may pass immediately from the sight of
the man playing on the violin, to the sound produced by the filing
of the saw. Playing on the violin, and the disagreeable sound of the
file on the saw, are thus antecedent and consequent to my attention.
But, as we recognise such antecedents and consequents, as parts of
different series of events, we do not call them cause and effect.

There are two cases of antecedents and consequents, even when they
are parts of the same series. They may be proximate; or they may be
remote; that is, parts of the series, more or fewer, may come
between them. It is only to the case of the proximate parts of the
same series, that the relatives, cause and effect, are properly and
strictly applied. When the series, however, is the same, the
intermediate links between any two remote parts are constant.
Suppose a series, A, B, C, D; as B is the immediate consequent of A,
C the immediate consequent of B, and D the immediate consequent of
C; when I know A and D as antecedent and consequent, without knowing
the intermediate parts B, and C, there is little inaccuracy in
naming A and D cause and effect; because B and C are surely
intermediate, and the succession of A and D, though not immediate,
is constant. We accordingly do name cause and effect parts of a
series thus removed from one another, in all those cases in which
the intermediate parts are either unknown to us, or habitually
overlooked.

The terms Cause and Effect, thus applied to Objects as antecedent
and consequent, are applied also to {67} Thoughts as antecedent and
consequent. Thus we say, that Evidence is the cause of Belief;
Villany is the cause of Indignation, and so on.

Of objects, antecedent and consequent, we have observed, that
innumerable series are existing at the same time; a separate series,
of vegetation, for example, in every plant, of animalization in
every animal, of composition and decomposition in objects without
number. In the mind, however, there is but one train, not various
trains at the same time; and therefore, according to the sense above
applied to the terms Cause and Effect, each thought in a train is
the cause of that which follows it, and each succeeding thought is
the effect of that which precedes it.

But if thoughts are reciprocally Cause and Effect; that is to say,
if, in trains of thought, the same antecedent is regularly followed
by the same consequent, how happens it that all trains of thought
are not the same? For if the ideas A, B, C, D, &c., constantly
follow one another, every mind into which A may enter, goes on with
B, C, D, &c., and hence all such minds should consist of the same
trains, that is, should be the same.

Supposing the succession of two thoughts to have that constancy to
which we apply the terms cause and effect, trains would still have
that variety which we experience. Our trains consist of two
distinguishable ingredients; sensations and ideas. Sensations depend
upon the innumerable series of objects. They are, therefore, liable
to all that variety which attends the perception of those objects. A
perpetual variety in sensations produces a perpetual variety in the
thoughts which are consequent upon them. The {68} variety of
sensation, is even much greater than is commonly supposed. The most
active of all our sensations is the sight. But in most objects of
sight there are numerous parts. Some of these are more seen, some
are less seen; some not seen at all. Of these, the parts that are
more seen by one man, are less seen by another; whence it is
probable, that from an object of any complexity no two men ever
receive precisely the same sensations. There is a striking
exemplification of this, in the fact, so constantly observed, of the
different manner in which different men are affected by the
comparison of two countenances. To one man there appears a strong
likeness, where another man cannot discover any. Of the minute
particulars, on which the likeness depends, none, or an insufficient
number, is embraced by the vision of the one, while the contrary is
the case with that of the other.

The variety in the sensations, which mix in the trains of men, is
one grand cause of the variety in the ideas, which make up or
complete those trains. The variety in the order of those sensations
is another cause. We have seen that ideas follow one another, in the
order in which the sensations have followed. Thus, a man may be a
kind father to his child. The sight of him to the child is
habitually accompanied with agreeable sensations. The same man may
be a severe master to his slaves. The sight of him to the slaves is
habitually accompanied with painful sensations. A corresponding
difference exists in the case of the ideas. When his image presents
itself to the mind of the child, it is followed by a train of
pleasurable ideas, corresponding to the {69} pleasurable sensations
which the child has habitually enjoyed in his presence. When his
image rises to the mind of the slave, it is followed, from the
contrary cause, by ideas of the contrary description.[18]

[Editor's footnote 18: The author may seem to be anticipating a
difficulty which few will feel, when he asks how it happens that all
trains of thought are not the same. But what he is enquiring into is
not why this happens, but how its happening is consistent with the
doctrine he has just laid down. He is guarding against a possible
objection to his proposition, that "the succession of two thoughts"
has "that constancy to which we apply the terms Cause and Effect."
If (he says) it is by direct causation that an idea raises up
another idea with which it is associated; and if it be the nature
and the very meaning of a cause, to be invariably followed by its
effect; how is it, he asks, that any two minds, which have once had
the same idea, do not coincide in their whole subsequent history?
And how is it that the same mind, when it gets back to an idea it
has had before, does not go on revolving in an eternal round?

Of this difficulty he gives a solution, good as far as it goes--that
it is because the train of ideas is interrupted by sensations, which
are not the same in different minds, nor in the same mind at every
repetition, and which even when they are the same, are connected in
different minds with different associations. This is true, but is
not the whole truth, and a still more complete explanation of the
difficulty might have been given. The author has overlooked a part
of the laws of association, of which he was perfectly aware, but to
which he does not seem to have been always sufficiently alive. The
first point overlooked is, that one idea seldom, perhaps never,
entirely fills and engrosses the mind. We have almost always a
considerable number of ideas in the mind at once; and it must be a
very rare occurrence for any two persons, or for the same person
twice over, to have exactly the same collection of ideas present,
each in the same relative intensity. For this reason, were there no
other, the ideas which the mental state excites by association are
almost always more or less different.

A second point overlooked is, that every sensation or idea is far
from recalling, whenever it occurs, all the ideas with which it is
associated. It never recalls more than a portion of them, and a
portion different at different times. The author has not, in any
part of the Analysis, laid down any law that determines which among
the many ideas associated with an idea or sensation, shall be
actually called up by it in a given case. The selection which it
makes among them depends on the truth already stated, that we seldom
or never have only one idea at a time. When we have several
together, they all exercise their suggesting power, and each of them
aids, impedes, or modifies the suggesting power of the others. This
important case of Association has been treated in a masterly manner
by Mr. Bain, both in his larger treatise and in his Compendium,
under the name of Compound Association, and he lays down the
following as its most general law. "Past actions, sensations,
thoughts, or emotions, are recalled more easily when associated
either through contiguity or similarity, with more than one present
object or impression." (Compendium of Psychology and Ethics, p.
151.) It follows that when we have several ideas in our mind, none
of which is able to call up all the ideas associated with it, those
ideas will usually have the preference which are associated with
more than one of the ideas already present. An idea A, coexisting in
the mind with an idea B, will not select the same idea from among
those associated with it, that it would it it occurred alone or with
a different accompaniment. If there be any one of the ideas
associated with A which is also associated with B, this will
probably be one of those called up by their joint action. If there
be any idea associated with A which not only is not associated with
B, but whose negation is associated with B, this idea will probably
be prevented from arising. If there are any sensations which have
usually been presented in conjunction, not with A alone or with B
alone, but with the combination A B, still more likely is it that
the ideas of these will be recalled when A and B are thought of
together, even though A or B by themselves might in preference have
recalled some other.

These considerations will be found of primary importance in
explaining and accounting for the course of human thought. They
enable us, for example, to understand what it is that keeps a train
of thought coherent, _i.e._ that maintains it of a given quality, or
directs it to a given purpose. The ideas which succeed one another
in the mind of a person who is writing a treatise on some subject,
or striving to persuade or conciliate a tribunal or a deliberative
assembly, are suggested one by another according to the general laws
of association. Yet the ideas recalled are not those which would be
called up on any common occasion by the same antecedents, but are
those only which connect themselves in the writer's or speaker's
mind with the end which he is aiming at. The reason is, that the
various ideas of the train are not solitary in his mind, but there
coexists with all of them (in a greater or less degree of constancy
according to the quality of the mind) the highly interesting idea of
the end in view: and the presence of this idea causes each of the
ideas which pass through his mind while so engaged, to suggest such
of the ideas associated with them as are also associated with the
idea of the end, and not to suggest those which have no association
with it. The ideas all follow one another in an associated train,
each calling up by association the one which immediately follows it;
but the perpetual presence or continual recurrence of the idea of
the end, determines, within certain limits, which of the ideas
associated with each link of the chain shall be aroused and form the
next link. When we come to the author's analysis of the power of the
Will over our ideas, we shall find him taking exactly this view of
it.

Concerning the simultaneous existence of many ideas in the mind, and
the manner in which they modify each other's exercise of the
suggesting power, there is an able and instructive passage in
Cardaillac's Etudes Elémentaires de Philosophie, which has been
translated and quoted by Sir William Hamilton in his Lectures, and
which, being highly illustrative of the preceding remarks, I think
it useful to subjoin.

"Among psychologists, those who have written on Memory and
Reproduction with the greatest detail and precision, have still
failed in giving more than a meagre outline of these operations.
They have taken account only of the notions which suggest each other
with a distinct and palpable notoriety. They have viewed the
associations only in the order in which language is competent to
express them; and as language, which renders them still more
palpable and distinct, can only express them in a consecutive order,
can only express them one after another, they have been led to
suppose that thoughts only awaken in succession. Thus, a series of
ideas mutually associated, resembles, on the doctrine of
philosophers, a chain in which every link draws up that which
follows; and it is by means of these links that intelligence labours
through, in the act of reminiscence, to the end which it proposes to
attain.

"There are some, indeed, among them, who are ready to acknowledge,
that every actual circumstance is associated to several fundamental
notions, and consequently to several chains, between which the mind
may choose; they admit even that every link is attached to several
others, so that the whole forms a kind of trellis,--a kind of
network, which the mind may traverse in every direction, but still
always in a single direction at once,--always in a succession
similar to that of speech. This manner of explaining reminiscence is
founded solely on this,--that, content to have observed all that is
distinctly manifest in the phenomenon, they have paid no attention
to the under-play of the latescent activities,--paid no attention to
all that custom conceals, and conceals the more effectually in
proportion as it is more completely blended with the natural
agencies of mind.

"Thus their theory, true in itself, and setting out from a
well-established principle, the Association of Ideas, explains in a
satisfactory manner a portion of the phenomena of Reminiscence; but
it is incomplete, for it is unable to account for the prompt, easy,
and varied operations of this faculty, or for all the marvels it
performs. On the doctrine of the philosophers, we can explain how a
scholar repeats, without hesitation, a lesson he has learned, for
all the words are associated in his mind according to the order in
which he has studied them; how he demonstrates a geometrical
theorem, the parts of which are connected together in the same
manner: these and similar reminiscences of simple successions
present no difficulties which the common doctrine cannot resolve.
But it is impossible, on this doctrine, to explain the rapid and
certain movement of thought, which, with a marvellous facility,
passes from one order of subjects to another, only to return again
to the first; which advances, retrogrades, deviates, and reverts,
sometimes marking all the points on its route, again clearing, as if
in play, immense intervals; which runs over, now in a manifest
order, now in a seeming irregularity, all the notions relative to an
object, often relative to several, between which no connection could
be suspected; and this without hesitation, without uncertainty,
without error, as the hand of a skilful musician expatiates over the
keys of the most complex organ. All this is inexplicable on the
meagre and contracted theory on which the phenomena of reproduction
have been thought explained. . . . . . .

"To form a correct notion of the phenomena of Reminiscence, it is
requisite that we consider under what conditions it is determined to
exertion. In the first place it is to be noted that, at every crisis
of our existence, momentary circumstances are the causes which
awaken our activity, and set our recollection at work to supply the
necessaries of thought. In the second place, it is as constituting a
want, (and by want I mean the result either of an act of desire or
of volition) that the determining circumstance tends principally to
awaken the thoughts with which it is associated. This being the
case, we should expect, that each circumstance which constitutes a
want, should suggest, likewise, the notion of the object, or
objects, proper to satisfy it; and this is what actually happens. It
is, however, further to be observed, that it is not enough that the
want suggests the idea of the object; for if that idea were alone,
it would remain without effect, since it could not guide me in the
procedure I should follow. It is necessary, at the same time, that
to the idea of this object there should be associated the notion of
the relation of this object to the want, of the place where I may
find it, of the means by which I may procure it, and turn it to
account, &c. For instance, I wish to make a quotation:--This want
awakens in me the idea of the author in whom the passage is to be
found which I am desirous of citing; but this idea would be
fruitless, unless there were conjoined, at the same time, the
representation of the volume, of the place where I may obtain it, of
the means I must employ, &c.

"Hence I infer, in the first place, that a want does not awaken an
idea of its object alone, but that it awakens it accompanied with a
number, more or less considerable, of accessory notions, which form,
as it were, its train or attendance. This train may vary according
to the nature of the want which suggests the notion of an object;
but the train can never fall wholly off, and it becomes more
indissolubly attached to the object, in proportion as it has been
more frequently called up in attendance.

"I infer, in the second place, that this accompaniment of accessory
notions, simultaneously suggested with the principal idea, is far
from being as vividly and distinctly represented in consciousness as
that idea itself; and when these accessories have once been
completely blended with the habits of the mind, and its reproductive
agency, they at length finally disappear, becoming fused, as it
were, in the consciousness of the idea to which they are attached.
Experience proves this double effect of the habits of reminiscence.
If we observe our operations relative to the gratification of a
want, we shall perceive that we are far from having a clear
consciousness of the accessory notions; the consciousness of them
is, as it were, obscured, and yet we cannot doubt that they are
present to the mind, for it is they that direct our procedure in all
its details.

"We must, therefore, I think, admit that the thought of an object
immediately suggested by a desire, is always accompanied by an
escort more or less numerous of accessory thoughts, equally present
to the mind, though, in general, unknown in themselves to
consciousness; that these accessories are not without their
influence in guiding the operations elicited by the principal
notion; and it may even be added that they are so much the more
calculated to exert an effect in the conduct of our procedure, in
proportion as, having become more part and parcel of our habits of
reproduction, the influences they exert are further withdrawn, in
ordinary, from the ken of consciousness. . . . The same thing may be
illustrated by what happens to us in the case of reading. Originally
each word, each letter, was a separate object of consciousness. At
length, the knowledge of letters and words and lines being, as it
were, fused into our habits, we no longer have any distinct
consciousness of them, as severally concurring to the result, of
which alone we are conscious. But that each word and letter has its
effect,--an effect which can at any moment become an object of
consciousness,--is shewn by the following experiment. If we look
over a book for the occurrence of a particular name or word, we
glance our eye over a page from top to bottom, and ascertain, almost
in a moment, that it is or is not to be found therein. Here the mind
is hardly conscious of a single word, but that of which it is in
quest; but yet it is evident, that each other word and letter must
have produced an obscure effect, which effect the mind was ready to
discriminate and strengthen, so as to call it into clear
consciousness, whenever the effect was found to be that which the
letters of the word sought for could determine. But if the mind be
not unaffected by the multitude of letters and words which it
surveys, if it be able to ascertain whether the combination of
letters constituting the word it seeks, be or be not actually among
them, and all this without any distinct consciousness of all it
tries and finds defective; why may we not suppose,--why are we not
bound to suppose, that the mind may, in like manner, overlook its
book of memory, and search among its magazines of latescent
cognitions for the notions of which it is in want, awakening these
into consciousness, and allowing the others to remain in their
obscurity?

"A more attentive consideration of the subject will show, that we
have not yet divined the faculty of Reminiscence in its whole
extent. Let us make a single reflection. Continually struck by
relations of every kind, continually assailed by a crowd of
perceptions and sensations of every variety, and, at the same time,
occupied by a complement of thoughts; we experience at once, and we
are more or less distinctly conscious of, a considerable number of
wants,--wants, sometimes real, sometimes factitious or
imaginary,--phenomena, however, all stamped with the same
characters, and all stimulating us to act with more or less energy.
And as we choose among the different wants which we would satisfy,
as well as among the different means of satisfying that want which
we determine to prefer; and as the motives of this preference are
taken either from among the principal ideas relative to each of
these several wants, or from among the accessory ideas which habit
has established into their necessary escorts;--in all these cases it
is requisite, that all the circumstances should at once, and from
the moment they have taken the character of wants, produce an
effect, correspondent to that which, we have seen, is caused by each
in particular. Hence we are compelled to conclude, that the
complement of the circumstances by which we are thus affected, has
the effect of rendering always present to us, and consequently of
placing at our disposal, an immense number of thoughts; some of
which certainly are distinctly recognised, being accompanied by a
vivid consciousness, but the greater number of which, although
remaining latent, are not the less effective in continually
exercising their peculiar influence on our modes of judging and
acting.

"We might say, that each of these momentary circumstances is a kind
of electric shock which is communicated to a certain portion, to a
certain limited sphere, of intelligence; and the sum of all these
circumstances is equal to so many shocks which, given at once at so
many different points, produce a general agitation. We may form some
rude conception of this phenomenon by an analogy. We may compare it,
in the former case, to those concentric circles which are presented
to our observation on a smooth sheet of water, when its surface is
agitated by throwing in a pebble; and, in the latter case, to the
same surface when agitated by a number of pebbles thrown
simultaneously at different points.

"To obtain a clearer notion of this phenomenon, I may add some
observations on the relation of our thoughts among themselves, and
with the determining circumstances of the moment.

"1°. Among the thoughts, notions, or ideas which belong to the
different groups attached to the principal representations
simultaneously awakened, there are some reciprocally connected by
relations proper to themselves; so that, in this whole complement of
coexistent activities, these tend to excite each other to higher
vigour, and consequently to obtain for themselves a kind of
pre-eminence in the group or particular circle of activity to which
they belong.

"2°. There are thoughts associated, whether as principals or
accessories, to a greater number of determining circumstances, or to
circumstances which recur more frequently. Hence they present
themselves oftener than the others, they enter more completely into
our habits, and take, in a more absolute manner, the character of
customary or habitual notions. It hence results, that they are less
obtrusive, though more energetic, in their influence, enacting, as
they do, a principal part in almost all our deliberations; and
exercising a stronger influence on our determinations.

"3°. Among this great crowd of thoughts, simultaneously excited,
those which are connected with circumstances which more vividly
affect us, assume not only the ascendant over others of the same
description with themselves, but likewise predominate over all those
which are dependent on circumstances of a feebler determining
influence.

"From these three considerations we ought, therefore, to infer, that
the thoughts connected with circumstances on which our attention is
more specially concentrated, are those which prevail over the
others; for the effect of attention is to render dominant and
exclusive the object on which it is directed, and during the moment
of attention it is the circumstance to which we attend that
necessarily obtains the ascendant.

"Thus, if we appreciate correctly the phenomena of Reproduction or
Reminiscence, we shall recognise, as an incontestable fact, that our
thoughts suggest each other not one by one successively, as the
order to which language is astricted might lead us to infer; but
that the complement of circumstances under which we at every moment
exist, awakens simultaneously a great number of thoughts; these it
calls into the presence of the mind, either to place them at our
disposal, if we find it requisite to employ them, or to make them
co-operate in our deliberations by giving them, according to their
nature and our habits, an influence, more or less active, on our
judgments and consequent acts.

"It is also to be observed, that in this great crowd of thoughts
always present to the mind, there is only a small number of which we
are distinctly conscious: and that in this small number we ought to
distinguish those which, being clothed in language, oral or mental,
become the objects of a more fixed attention; those which hold a
closer relation to circumstances more impressive than others; or
which receive a predominant character by the more vigorous attention
we bestow on them. As to the others, although not the objects of
clear consciousness, they are nevertheless present to the mind,
there to perform a very important part as motive principles of
determination; and the influence which they exert in this capacity
is even the more powerful in proportion as it is less apparent,
being more disguised by habit." (Sir William Hamilton's Lectures on
Metaphysics, vol. ii. Lecture xxxii.)--_Ed._]

{70} This, then, is all which seems necessary to be said respecting
the occasions on which we apply Relative {71} Terms, and to show
what it is which they distinctively mark, in the trains of our
sensations and ideas.

{72} ABSTRACT RELATIVE TERMS.

From the _Concrete relative_ terms, _Abstract_ terms are formed, in
the same manner as Abstract terms are {73} *formed from other
Concrete terms. Thus from equal, we have equally; from unequal,
unequally; from {74} like, likeness; from unlike, unlikeness; from
friend, friendship; and so on.

{75} After what has been said about abstract terms in general, it
will not be very difficult to mark what is {76} peculiar in the
nature of this species of them. We have seen that concrete, are
connotative, terms; and {77} that their corresponding abstracts have
the same meaning with the concretes, that which is connoted {78}
being left out. White, for example, has a notation, and a
connotation. It notes a quality, and it connotes {79} something
else, that which is white. The abstract whiteness marks what is
_noted_ by the concrete, but not what is _connoted_.

We are now to see, in what manner this applies to relative terms.
I call two things like: two sensations, for example; let us say,
sensations of red. I call sensation A, like sensation B; and, of
course, sensation B, like sensation A. It is here more easy to
observe distinctly what is connoted, than what is noted. What is
connoted are the two sensations. They are clear and simple. What is
noted is what we call their likeness. What is that? We have
remarked, that, in having two sensations, the _distinguishing_ them
one {80} from another is included; it is part of the compound
process: And that in having two sensations--red, red, and two
sensations red, green, the distinguishing the succession red, red,
from the succession red, green, is included; it being part of the
process, which, though in this case compound, and on that account
obscure, is not the less wholly sensation. In the process of
sensation, then, that part which consists in distinguishing one as
one, another as another, and in distinguishing one succession from
another; red, red, for example, from red, green,--is the part which
is noted by the words like and unlike. The thing noted is not a
distinct sensation, it is part of a process of sensation, and a part
which, being never experienced separate by itself, it is very
difficult to make a distinct subject of attention. Even that part of
the process which consists in distinguishing, is to be distinguished
into two parts. There is that part which consists in distinguishing
the sensations from one another, as one, and one; and there is that
part which consists in distinguishing the two, red, and red, from
the two, red, and green. It is this _latter part_ which is _noted_
by the terms like and unlike. What is _connoted_ is all _the rest of
the process_. When, therefore, we make abstracts, from the terms
like and unlike; that is, cut off the connotative part of their
meaning, retaining the notative only; it is the part of the process
which consists in distinguishing, not one and one, but two and two,
which the terms distinctively mark.

We have also seen, and remarked, that having two sensations, one
after another, and knowing them to be first one and then another, is
a process of sensation and association. The pair of relatives, prior
and {81} posterior, or antecedent and consequent, taken together,
names the whole of the process; each pair is in reality a compound
name of a complex idea, that of a certain process, the process of
having two ideas in succession, in which process the being sensible
of the successiveness is part. By all concrete relatives, something
is noted, something connoted. In the process which is marked by the
relatives prior and posterior, part is noted, part connoted; and the
part which is noted, is the part which it is difficult to make a
separate object of attention,--the part which consists in being
sensible of the successiveness, for which we have not a name. By its
notation and connotation, taken together, each of the terms, prior,
and posterior, is a name of something, and that something is very
distinct; prior is a name of the first sensation and something else;
posterior is a name of the second sensation, and something else. It
is by connotation, however, that each is the name of its respective
sensation. Their notative power relates to the something else, and
not to the whole of that; because prior and posterior, beside
connoting, each its own sensation, connote one another. The notation
and connotation, therefore, are divided between them, in a manner
which renders it difficult to shew what belongs to each. We have not
names adapted to the purpose.

The word prior notes something, and connotes something. When we make
from it the abstract term priority; what was connoted by the
concrete, prior, is dropped; what was noted by it is retained. In
the succession of ideas A, and B, priority is not the name of A, it
is the name of that part of the compound process, which consists in
knowing A, as the {82} first of the two; posteriority is not the
name of B, but of that part of the compound process, which consists
in knowing B, as the last of the two.

There is a peculiarity, however, in the abstract terms formed from
the relative concrete terms. These abstract terms are not, as
whiteness, hardness, wholly void of connotation. They have a
connotation of their own. The abstract of one relative of a pair,
always connotes the abstract of the other; thus, priority always
connotes posteriority, and posteriority priority.

This constitutes a distinction, worth observing, between the force
of the abstracts formed from the pairs of relatives which consist of
different names, as prior, posterior; cause, effect; father, son;
husband, wife;--and those which consist of the same name, as equal,
equal; like, like; brother, brother; friend, friend; and so on.
Priority and Posteriority make together a compound name of
something, of which, taken separately, each is not a name;
Causingness and Causedness, the abstracts of cause and effect, make
up between them the name of something, of which each by itself is
not a name, and so of the rest. The case is different with such
abstracts as likeness, equality, friendship, formed from pairs which
consist of the same name. When we call A like, and B like; the
abstract, likeness, formed from the one, connotes merely the
abstract, likeness, formed from the other. Thus, as priority and
posteriority make a compound name, so, likeness and likeness, make a
compound name. But as likeness and likeness are merely a
reduplication of the same word, likeness taken once very often
signifies the same as likeness taken twice. Priority never signifies
as much as priority and {83} posteriority taken together; but
likeness taken alone very often signifies as much as likeness,
likeness, taken both together. Likeness has thus a sort of a double
meaning. Sometimes it signifies only what is marked by the abstract
of one of the pair, "like, like;" sometimes it signifies what is
marked by the abstracts of both taken together. The same observation
applies to the abstracts equality, inequality; sameness, difference;
brotherhood, sisterhood; friendship, hostility; and so on.[19]

[Editor's footnote 19: The exposition here given of the meaning of
abstract relative names is in substance unexceptionable; but in
language it remains open to the criticism I have, several times,
made. Instead of saying, with the author, that the abstract name
drops the connotation of the corresponding concrete, it would, in
the language I prefer, be said to drop the denotation, and to be a
name directly denoting what the concrete name connotes, namely, the
common property or properties that it predicates: the likeness, the
unlikeness, the fact of preceding, the fact of following, &c.

When the author says that abstract relative names differ from other
abstract names in not being wholly void of connotation, inasmuch as
they connote their correlatives, priority connoting posteriority,
and posteriority priority, he deserts the specific meaning which he
has sought to attach to the word connote, and falls back upon the
loose and general sense in which everything implied by a term is
said to be connoted by it. But in this large sense of the word (as
I have more than once remarked) it is not true that non-relative
abstract names have no connotation. Every abstract name--every name
of the character which is given by the terminations _ness_,
_tion_, and the like--carries with it a uniform implication that
what it is predicated of is an attribute of something else; not a
sensation or a thought in and by itself, but a sensation or thought
regarded as one of, or as accompanying or following, some permanent
cluster of sensations or thoughts.--_Ed._]

{84} Among the abstract terms corresponding to relative concretes,
those corresponding to cause and effect, are the only ones which, on
account of their importance, require to be somewhat more
particularly expounded.

Cause and Effect have not abstract terms formed immediately from
themselves. One of the grand causes of their obscurity is, that they
are not constant in their meaning, but are sometimes used as
concretes, sometimes as their own abstracts.

Cause means "something _causing_;" effect, "something _caused_."
Causingness, therefore, is the proper abstract of cause; and
causedness, the proper abstract of effect. Of two objects, A, and B,
we call the one causing, the other caused, when they are not only
prior and posterior, but parts of the same series; and, if we speak
strictly, proximate parts. Of proximate parts of the same series, we
call the antecedent, causing; the consequent, caused. Causingness,
and causedness, therefore, mean antecedence and consequence, and
something more. The ideas are more complex. Causingness and
causedness, mean, not only antecedence and consequence, but also
sameness of series, and proximity of parts.

As we have seen, that priority and posteriority, taken together,
form a compound name of a certain complex idea, so causingness and
causedness, taken together, form the compound name of a still more
complex idea. Having frequent occasion to express that idea, a
separate name for it was found necessary. Accordingly, we have the
term Power, which means precisely what is meant by causingness and
causedness taken together. Causation has the same {85} meaning with
Power, except that it connotes present time; Power connotes
indefinite time.[20]

[Editor's footnote 20: The term Causation, as the author observes,
signifies causingness and causedness taken together, but I do not
see on what ground he asserts that it connotes present time. To my
thinking, it is as completely aoristic as Power. Power, again, seems
to me to express, not causingness and causedness taken together, but
causingness only. Some of the older philosophers certainly talked of
passive power, but neither in the precise language of modern
philosophy nor in common speech is an effect said to have the power
of being produced, but only the capacity or capability. The power is
always conceived as belonging to the cause only. When any
co-operating power is supposed to reside in the thing said to be
acted upon, it is because some active property in that thing is
counted as a con-cause--as a part of the total cause.--_Ed._]

The connotation of _Time_, by abstract terms, is a circumstance
almost always overlooked, but of which the observation is of the
utmost importance to accuracy of thought.

When we have invented a number of marks to be taken in pairs, as
like, like; equal, equal; antecedent, consequent; master, servant;
husband, wife; father, son; owner, property; author, book; cause,
effect; and so on; we have occasion for a name by which to speak of
that class of names. We have invented such a name. We call those
terms "Relative Terms."

The word "Relative," thus belongs to that class of names, which have
been called "Names of Names." As man, tree, stone, are names of
things, of those clusters which we call objects; as red, green,
hard, soft, are names of sensations; as courage, wisdom, {86} anger,
love, are names of complex ideas arbitrarily composed; so adjective
is the name of one class of names, verb the name of another class of
names; syllable, is the name of one part of a word, letter of
another; and so, also, relative is the name of the class of words
which have this peculiarity, that they are taken in pairs. Thus,
father and son, are relative terms; prior and posterior, are
relative terms; like and like, are relative terms; so equal, equal;
unequal, unequal; brother, brother; friend, friend; and so on.

Relative itself corresponds with the names which it marks, in its
being one of a pair; of that species of pairs, which are formed by a
double use of the same word, as like, like. When we say of father
and son, that they are relative terms, we mean that father is
relative to son, and son relative to father.

As _relative_ is the name of all concrete names, taken in pairs,
such as like, like; friend, friend; causing, caused; so the abstract
relation, formed from relative, is the name given to all the
abstract terms formed from the concrete relatives: thus, equality,
inequality, friendship, power, are abstract terms, which we call by
a general name, relation. As Noun is the name of a certain class of
words, so "Relation," is the name of a certain class of words.

It is not, however, meant to be affirmed, that relative and
relation, are not names which are also applied to things. In a
certain vague, and indistinct way, they are very frequently so
applied. This, however, is strictly speaking, an abuse of the terms,
and an abuse which has been a great cause of confusion of ideas. In
this way, it is said, of two brothers, that {87} they are relative;
of father and son, that they are relative; of two objects, that they
are relative in position, relative in time; we speak of the relation
between two men, when they are father and son, master and servant;
between two objects, when they are greater, less, like, unlike,
near, distant, and so on.

What, however, we really mean, when we call two objects relative
(and that is a thing which it is of great importance to mark) is,
that these objects have, or may have, relative names. On what
accounts we give them relative names, has just been explained, and
the explanation need not be repeated. When we say that Socrates and
the Emperor Napoleon are unlike, the men are, each, a man, distinct,
separate, absolute. We only give them a pair of related names, for
the convenience of discourse. In like manner, Charles I. and George
IV. are separate, distinct, absolute individuals. We only give them
the relative names Predecessor, Successor, for the convenience of
discourse, to mark the place which they occupied in a certain series
of events. From this appears also what is meant, when we say of two
objects, that they have a relation to one another. The meaning is,
that the objects may have relative names, and that these names may
have abstracts which we call relation. Thus we say that two brothers
have a relation to one another. That relation is brotherhood. But
brotherhood is merely the abstract of the relative names. We say
that father and son have a relation. That relation is fathership and
sonship. These are merely the abstracts of the two relative names.
We say of two events, a stab with a sword, and death of the person
stabbed, that they have a relation to one another. That relation is
{88} causingness and causedness, the abstract of cause and effect,
or, in one word, power.[21]

[Editor's footnote 21: The application of the word Relative to
Things is not only an offence against philosophy, but against
propriety of language. The correct designation for Things which are
called by relative names, is not Relative, but Related. A Thing may,
with perfect propriety both of thought and of language, be said to
be related to another thing, or to have a relation with it--indeed
to be related to all things, and to have a prodigious variety of
relations with all; because every fact that takes place, either in
nature or in human thought, which includes or involves a plurality
of Things, is the _fundamentum_ of a special relation of those
Things with one another: not to mention the relations of likeness or
unlikeness, of priority or posteriority, which exist between each
Thing and all other Things whatever. It is in this sense that it is
said, with truth, that Relations exhaust all phenomena, and that all
we know, or can know, of anything, is some of its relations to other
things or to us.--_Ed._]


{89} SECTION III.

NUMBERS.


We have already observed, that objects exist, with respect to us, in
two orders; in the synchronous order, and the successive order; and
that we have great occasion for marks to represent them to us as
they exist in both orders. We have also to observe, that the
synchronous order, the order in which things exist together; that
is, as we otherwise name it, the order of position, or the order in
place; is interesting to us chiefly on account of the successive
order. The order in which objects *succeed one another, that is, the
order of the changes which take place, the order of events, depends
almost entirely upon the synchronous order. In other words, the
synchronous order is part of every successive order; it is the
antecedent of every consequent; or as we otherwise express it, the
cause of every effect. Thus the synchronous order, or the order in
place, of the spark and the gunpowder, is the antecedent of the
explosion; the synchronous order of my finger and the candle, is the
antecedent or the cause of the pain which I feel.

In regard to the explosion, also, it is less or greater, according
as the quantity of the gunpowder is less or greater. Of the
synchronous order, therefore, one part which I am particularly
interested in knowing correctly is, the amount of the things. A
certain amount of gunpowder produces one set of effects, another
{90} another: a certain amount of men produce one set of effects,
another another; and so of all other things.

It is of the last importance to me not only to be able to ascertain,
and know, these amounts, with accuracy, but to be able to mark them.

For ascertaining and knowing amounts, some contrivance is requisite.
It is necessary to conceive some small amount, by the addition or
subtraction of which, another becomes larger or smaller. This forms
the instrument of ascertainment. Where one thing, taken separately,
is of sufficient importance to form this instrument, it is taken.
Thus, for ascertaining and knowing different amounts of men, one
individual is of sufficient importance. Amounts of men are
considered as increased or diminished by the addition or subtraction
of individuals. A grain of gunpowder might also be taken; but it is
not of sufficient importance; the quantity, taken as the instrument
of measurement, must have an ascertainable influence upon the
effect, for the sake of which, the ascertaining of the amount is of
importance. In their simple state, men use principally the hand for
their elementary ascertainments. A pinch, or as much as could be
held between the finger and the thumb, was a small amount distinctly
conceived, and formed the principle of measurement where small
additions were important; a handful was not less distinctively
conceived, and was the instrument, where only larger additions were
of importance.

When one addition was made, or needed to be made, after another, and
another after that, and so on, the next point of importance was to
conceive exactly how often the addition was made. A few {91}
additions are distinct to sense. Place one billiard-ball by another,
the sight of the two is distinct. Place three or four, it is still
distinct. Soon, however, it ceases to be so. Place a dozen, and you
will not probably be able to distinguish them from eleven. You must
count them, or divide them. If you divide them by the eye, into two
parcels, you may see that one is six and another six; but to benefit
by this, you must know the art of putting six and six together.

The next step, therefore, necessary in the process of ascertaining
amounts, was, to mark these additions, one after another, in such a
manner, as to make known to what extent they had gone. When men were
familiar with the operation of assigning names as marks of their
ideas, the course which would suggest itself to them is obvious;
they would employ a name as the mark of each addition. They would
say, one, for the first, two, for the second, three, for the third,
and so on. These marks it was very useful to make connotative, that
the other important ingredient of the process, the thing added,
might be made known at the same time. Thus we say, one man, two men;
one horse, two horses; and so of all other things, the enumeration
of which we are performing.

Numbers, therefore, are not names of objects. They are names of a
certain process; the process of addition; of putting one
billiard-ball to another; not more mysterious than any other
process, as walking, writing, reading, to which names are assigned.
One, is the name of this once performed, or of the aggregation
begun; two, the name of it once more performed; three, of it once
more performed; and so on. The words, however, in these concrete
forms, beside {92} their power in noting this process, connote
something else, namely, the things, whatever they are, the
enumeration of which is required.

In the case of these connotative, as of other connotative marks, it
was of great use to have the means of dropping the connotation; and
in this case, it would have been conducive to clearness of ideas, if
the non-connotative terms had received a mark to distinguish them
from the connotative. This advantage, however, the framers of
numbers were not sufficiently philosophical to provide. The same
names are used both as connotative, and non-connotative; that is,
both as abstract, and concrete; and it is far from being obvious, on
all occasions, in which of the two senses they are used. They are
used in the connotative sense, when joined as adjectives with a
substantive; as when we say two men, three women; but it is not so
obvious that they are used in the abstract sense, when we say three
and two make five; or when we say fifty is a great number, five is a
small number. Yet it must, upon consideration, appear, that in these
cases they are abstract terms merely; in place of which, the words
oneness, twoness, threeness, might be substituted. Thus we might
say, twoness and threeness are fiveness.[22] [23]

[Editor's footnote 22: The vague manner in which the author uses the
phrase "to be a name of" (a vagueness common to almost all thinkers
who have not precise terms expressing the two modes of signification
which I call denotation and connotation, and employed for nothing
else) has led him, in the present case, into a serious misuse of
terms. Numbers _are_, in the strictest propriety, names of objects.
_Two_ is surely a name of the things which are two, the two balls,
the two fingers, &c. The process of adding one to one which forms
two is connoted, not denoted, by the name two. Numerals, in short,
are concrete, not abstract names: they denote the actual collections
of things, and connote the mental process of counting them. It is
not twoness and threeness that are fiveness: the twoness of my two
hands and the threeness of the feet of the table cannot be added
together to form another abstraction. It is two balls added to three
balls that make, in the concrete, five balls. Numerals are a class
of concrete general names predicable of all things whatever, but
connoting, in each case, the quantitative relation of the thing to
some fixed standard, as previously explained by the author.--_Ed._]

[Grote's footnote 23: Here the process of numeration generally,
together with the function of numbers carrying their separate names,
are clearly set forth; after which we find the remark, that no
distinction is made in the name of the number, when used as an
abstract and when used as a concrete. Mr. James Mill thinks that it
would have been conducive to clearness if such distinction had been
marked by an inflexion of the name. "The names of numbers are used
in the connotative (concrete) sense, when joined as adjectives with
a substantive, as when we say, two men, three men: but it is not so
obvious that they are used in the abstract sense, when we say three
and two make five: or when we say fifty is a great number, five is a
small number. Yet it must upon consideration appear, that in these
cases they are abstract terms merely: in place of which, the words
oneness, twoness, threeness, might be substituted. Thus we might
say, twoness and threeness are fiveness."

The last part of what is here affirmed cannot, in my judgment, be
sustained. Connecting itself with one among the many arguments
between Aristotle and Plato, it lays down a position from which both
of them would have dissented. In the last book but one (Book M) of
Aristotle's "Metaphysica," this argument will be found set forth at
length; though with much obscurity, which is cleared up by the lucid
commentary of Bonitz. Plato distinguished two classes of
numbers--the mathematical, and the ideal. The first class were the
Quanta of equal and homogeneous units (One, Two, Three, &c.), any or
all of which might be added so as to coalesce into one total sum.
The second class were, the ideal or abstract numbers, Two _quatenus_
Two, &c., represented by Dyad, Triad, Tetrad, Pentad, Dekad, &c.,
the characteristic property of which was, that they could not be
added together nor coalesce into one sum. These were uncombinable
numbers, "[Greek a)rithmoi\ a)su/mblêtoi]--numeri inconsociabiles."--
See Aristot. Metaph. M. 6. 1080. b. 12. Bonitz Comment. p. 540,
541, seq.

Plato regarded these uncombinable numbers as the highest
representative specimens or coryphæi of the Platonic Ideas. In this
character Aristotle reasoned against them, contending that they did
nothing to remove the many objections against Plato's ideal theory.
With the question thus opened, I have no present concern: all that
I wish to point out is the view which Plato originated and upon which
Aristotle reasoned, viz.: That these ideal or abstract numbers could
not be added together, or fused into one sum total. The abstract
term Twoness means Two _so far forth as two_: so also Threeness and
Fiveness. You cannot truly predicate anything of Twoness which would
be inconsistent with this fundamental characteristic: you cannot add
it to Threeness so as to make Fiveness, nor can you subdivide
Fiveness into Twoness and Threeness, without suppressing the
fundamental characteristic of each. Neither of them admit of
increase or diminution. In like manner, a Triangle, or every
particular Triangle, may have one of its sides taken away, or two
more sides added to it: on each of which suppositions it ceases to
be a triangle. But if we speak of a Triangle _so far forth as
Triangle_, neither of these suppositions is admissible. We may say
that its three angles are equal to two right angles, but we cannot
subtract from it one of its sides, nor add to it one or two other
sides. The subject of predication is so limited and specialised,
that no predicate can be allowed which would efface its
characteristic feature--Triangularity.

Bonitz remarks truly that the class of numbers set forth by
Plato--the ideal or uncombinable numbers which could not be either
added or subtracted--were divested of all the useful aptitudes and
functions of numbers, and passed out of the category of Quantity
into that of Quality. The Triad was one quality; the Pentad was
another: there was no common measure into which both could be
resolved (Bonitz, Comment. p. 540--553). _Two_, _three_, _five_, are
quantifying names, designating each so many numerable units: and the
units counted in each list may be added to, or subtracted from, the
units counted in the others. But when we say, Twoness or the
Dyad--Threeness or the Triad--Fiveness or the Pentad--we then
recognise a peculiar quality, founded upon each separate variety of
aggregation or quantification: so that these separate varieties are
no longer resolvable into any common measure of constituent units.
Each quality stands apart from the others, and has its own
predicates. In the view of Plato and the Pythagoreans, the Dekad
especially was invested with magnificent predicates.

I cannot therefore agree with Mr. James Mill in his opinion that,
"when we say three and two make five, we use these numbers in the
abstract sense." We clearly do not mean that three, _so far forth as
three_, and two, _so far forth as two_, make five. But this would be
what we should mean, if we used these names of numbers in the
abstract sense. What we do mean is, that the units constituting
three may be added to those constituting two, so as to make five:
and that this is equally true, whether the units are men, horses,
stones, or any other objects. Two, three, five, &c., are general or
universal terms, capable of being joined with units of indefinite
variety: but they do not become abstract terms, until we limit them
by _quâtenus_, [Greek: katho/son, ê(=|], _so far forth as_, &c., or
by a suffix such as _ness_. Such abstracts would have been of little
use as to the ordinary functions of numbers; and accordingly they
have never got footing in familiar speech, though they are
occasionally employed in metaphysical discussions.--_G._]

{93} It is necessary to observe, that the process, marked by the
names called numbers, though used for the {94} purpose of
ascertaining synchronous order, is in the mind successive; one
addition follows another. {95} Numbers, therefore, in reality, name
successions; and are easily applied to mark certain particulars of
the {96} successive order, when the marking of those particulars is
of importance.

It is of importance, when successions take place all of one kind;
and when consequences of importance depend upon the less or greater
length of the train. It is then of importance, to mark the degrees
of that length, which is correctly done by the enumeration of the
links.

To take a simple and familiar instance, that of the human steps.
They are successions all of one kind. Consequences of importance
may, and often do result from a knowledge of the length of any
particular series of steps. The ascertainment of an aggregate, in
this order, is made in the same way, as that which we have traced in
the synchronous order. An element of aggregation is taken; by its
successive aggregations, the amount of the aggregate is correctly
conceived; and, by a proper mark for each successive aggregation, it
is also correctly denoted. The continued successions of day and
night are all of one kind; and it is of the greatest importance for
us to know accurately the length of a series of those successions;
of the series between such and such events; between the sowing of
the seed in the ground, for example, and the maturity of the crop.
This is done, accurately, by putting a several mark upon each {97}
several succession, one for the first, two for the one after that,
three for the one after that, and so on.

If there be no mystery in one sensation after another, or one idea
after another; and, if having them in that order and associating the
idea of the antecedent with the sensation of the consequent be to
know that they are in that order; then there is no mystery in
Numbers, for they are only marks to shew that one is after another.

That there is no mystery in the ideas of priority and posteriority,
which are relative terms, has been shewn under the preceding head of
discourse.

The word Number itself, which is only a name of the names, one, two,
&c., nothing being a number but some one of those names, has also
been explained, when the class of words which are distinguished as
Names of Names was under consideration.

In using the terms, one, two, three, four, and so on, the object is
to ascertain with precision, the amount of the aggregate in
question. In some cases, however, it is of importance to ascertain
the order of aggregation, as well as the amount; and that, whether a
synchronous, or a successive, aggregate be the object in view. This
purpose is answered by a set of names, called the ordinal numbers,
which, applied to the units of aggregation in the order in which
they are taken, mark precisely the order of each. Thus, when we say,
first, second, third, fourth, and so on; each of these concrete, or
connotative names, notes a certain position, if in the synchronous
order; a certain link, if {98} in the successive; and connotes the
precise object which holds that position, or forms that link.

As there is no difficulty whatsoever in tracing the ideas, which, on
each occasion, receive those marks, there is no need of multiplying
words in their illustration.


{99} SECTION IV.

PRIVATIVE TERMS.


Privative terms are distinguished from other terms, by this; that
other terms are marks for objects, as present or existent; privative
terms are marks for objects, as not present or not existent.[24]

[Editor's footnote 24: The author gives the name of Privative terms
to all those which are more commonly known by the designation of
Negative; to all which signify non-existence or absence. It is usual
to reserve the term Privative for names which signify not simple
absence, but the absence of something usually present, or of which
the presence might have been expected. Thus blind is classed as a
privative term, when applied to human beings. When applied to stocks
and stones, which are not expected to see, it is an admitted
metaphor.

This, however, being understood, there is no difficulty in following
the author's exposition by means of his own language.--_Ed._]

Thus the word Light, is the mark of a certain well-known object, as
existent or present.

The word Darkness, on the contrary, is the mark of the same object,
as not existent or not present. Ask any man, what he means by
darkness; he says the absence of light. But the absence of light, is
only another name for light absent; and light absent, is only
another name for light not present. Darkness, therefore, is another
name for light not present.

It thus appears, that the idea called up by the {100} word light, is
that of a certain object associated with its presence; the idea
called up by the word darkness, is that of the same object
associated with its absence.

After the explanations which have been so often given, what I mean,
when I speak of the idea of an object, as one thing; the idea of its
presence, as another thing; ought not to be obscure. Its presence,
is its existence; its absence, is its non-existence; at least, at a
particular time and place. What ideas and sensations I mark by the
word existent, has already been explained. The word non-existent is
the mere negation of the same sensations and ideas.

We have repeatedly seen, that what we call existence, is an
inference from our sensations. We have clusters of sensations; these
call up the ideas of antecedents, which we call qualities; these the
idea of an antecedent common to all the qualities, which we call
_Substratum_; and the _Substratum_, with its qualities, we call the
Object.

When we speak, then, of this _Substratum_ and its qualities, as
present, at a particular time and place: which is what we mean by
its existence; what we affirm is this; that if there be sentient
organs at such a time and place, there will be such and such
sensations. When we speak of it as absent, we affirm, that though
there be sentient organs at such a time and place, there will not be
those sensations. These ideas, then, forming in combination a very
complex idea, are what, in the respective cases, we call the
presence, and the absence of an object. Any further analysis would
be superfluous in this place.

{101} A law of some importance, which has been already explained,
is, that in complex ideas there is very often some one part, so
prominent, as to throw the rest into the shade, and confine the
attention almost wholly to itself. There is a curious
exemplification of this law, in the pair of cases before us. Thus,
in the complex idea of "the object and its presence," marked by the
word Light, the object is the prominent part, and the presence is so
habitually neglected, that it is with some trouble it is recognised.
The case is reversed in the complex idea of "the object and its
absence," marked by the word Darkness. In this, the absence is the
prominent part, and it so completely engrosses the attention, that
it requires reflection, to discover, that the idea of the object is
necessarily combined.

There is something more in these two cases, which it is of great
importance to remember. We have two sets of indissoluble
associations, both exceedingly numerous, the one with the idea of
the object as present, the other with the idea of it as absent; that
is, the one set with light, the other set with darkness. Whenever we
have the perception of light, we habitually have, along with it, the
perception of objects; that is, of all sorts of colours, all sorts
of shapes, all sorts of magnitudes, all sorts of distances, and so
on. With the idea of light, then, are indissolubly associated the
ideas of all sorts of objects; of extension in all its
modifications, colour in all its modifications, motion in all its
modifications; the word light, therefore, serves as a name, not
merely of the fluid which acts upon the eye, but of that along with
its innumerable associations. Such are the perceptions and {102}
ideas, which, when we have the perception of light, we have along
with it. What are the perceptions and ideas, which, when we have not
the perception of light, we have along with that state of privation?
There is, first, the want of all the perceptions, which we have
along with that of light. There is, next, the disagreeable
sensations we experience from not knowing what objects are
approaching us, either by our motions, or by theirs; hence the idea
of dangerous objects approaching; hence, also, the inability to
perform many of the acts which are conducive either to our being, or
well-being. With the idea of darkness, then, are indissolubly
associated a multitude of ideas, of pain, of privation, of weakness;
all disagreeable; with little or no mixture of any of an opposite
kind. And the word darkness, therefore, stands as a name not merely
of light absent, but of that along with all the accompanying
sensations and ideas.

The reader will observe, and it is necessary he should well observe,
that all terms might have corresponding privative terms. We have
already stated, that the ordinary names of objects are names both of
the object, and of its presence or existence, combined in one
complex idea. Thus, rose, horse, are names of the objects as
present or existent. We might have had names of them as absent or
not existent. It is only, however, in a few cases, that the absence
of an object is a matter of first-rate importance. It is only in
those cases that it has been found requisite to have for it a
particular name. The absence of light is obviously a case of the
greatest importance. Consequences of the very first order, and
infinite in number, {103} depend upon it. An appropriate name,
therefore, was of the highest utility.

This explanation will enable us to see, without a minute analysis,
the composition of the clusters marked by other Privative Terms.

Let us take Silence, as the next example. Silence is the absence of
sound, either all sound, which is sometimes its meaning; or of some
particular sound, which at other times is its meaning. Sound is the
name of a well-known something, as present. Silence is the name of
the same well-known something, as absent. The first word, is the
name of the thing, and its presence. The second, is the name of the
thing, and its absence. In the case of the combination marked by the
first, namely, the thing and its presence, the thing is the
prominent part, and the presence generally escapes attention. In the
case of the second, the thing and its absence, the absence is the
important part, and the thing is feebly, if at all, attended to.

Ignorance is easily explained, in the same manner. Knowledge is the
name of a certain well-known something, as present or existent.
Ignorance is the name of the same well-known something, as absent or
nonexistent.

Having a sensation, or an idea, is one state of consciousness; not
having it is another state of consciousness.[2*] The state of
consciousness called "not having" {104} it is no doubt very various;
for it is any sensation or idea different from the one in question.
The "Having" one sensation and another sensation, or one idea and
another idea; and the "Knowing" that the one is not the other; we
have often observed to be the same thing. The great majority of
names are invented, to mark sensations and ideas as "had;" there
are, however, cases, in which it is necessary to mark them as "not
had." In what manner, in the more remarkable cases, this marking is
performed by privative names, has now been shewn. But, beside the
marks for particular cases, it was necessary to have a comprehensive
or _general_ mark; which should include all cases, as well those
provided with particular names, as those not so provided. "Absent"
was such a word. "Absent," standing by itself, and unrestricted by
connection with any other word, is a name of any thing, joined with
the idea of its not being _then_ and _there_. What is included in
that Idea has already been shewn in explaining Belief in Existence.
The mark "Absent," joined with any particular name, becomes a
particular Privative Term. We have observed, that the word rose, is
a mark not merely of the thing, but the thing with the idea of its
presence; we have also observed, that such Presence-affirming Terms,
except {105} in remarkable cases, have not corresponding Privative,
or Absence-affirming Terms. But if we say "absent" rose, we have a
Privative Term, double worded, indeed, instead of single worded,
exactly corresponding to the Presence-affirming Term, rose. And, by
the use of the same word, we can form Privative Terms of this
description, in all cases in which they can be wanted; thus we can
say, absent man, absent horse, absence of food, &c.

[Mill's footnote 2: Mr. Locke recognised the fact, but gave an
erroneous account of it: "I should offer this as a reason why a
privative cause might produce a positive idea; _viz._, that, all
sensation being produced in us, only by different degrees and modes
of motion in our animal spirits, variously agitated by external
objects, the abatement of any former motion, must as necessarily
produce a new sensation, [for "abatement of any former motion,"
read, ceasing of a particular sensation; and for "new sensation,"
read, new feeling, or, new state of consciousness,] as the variation
or increase of it: and so introduce a new idea. B. II. ch. viii. s.
4.--(_Author's Note_.)]

The word Nothing, _Nihil_, is another _generical_ Privative Term.
That this word has a very important marking power, every man is
sensible in the use which he makes of it. But if it marks, it names;
that is, names something. Yet it seems to remove every thing; that
is, not to leave anything to be named.

The preceding explanations, however, have already cleared up this
mystery. The word Nothing is the Privative Term which corresponds to
Every Thing. Every Thing is a name of all possible objects,
including their existence. Nothing is a name of all possible
objects, including their non-existence.[25]

[Editor's footnote 25: The analysis of the facts, in all these
cases, is admirable, but I still demur to the language. I object to
saying, for instance, that silence is "the name of sound and its
absence." It is not the name of sound, since we cannot say Sound is
silence. It is the name of our state of sensation when there is no
sound. The author is quite right in saying that this state of
sensation recalls the idea of sound; to be conscious of silence as
silence, implies that we are thinking of sound, and have the idea of
it without the belief in its presence. In another of its uses,
Silence is the abstract of Silent; which is a name of all things
that make no sound, and of everything so long as it makes no sound;
and which connotes the attribute of not sounding. So of all the
other terms mentioned. "Nothing" is not a name of all possible
objects, including their non-existence. If Nothing were a name of
objects, we should be able to predicate of those objects that they
are Nothing. Nothing is a name of the state of our consciousness
when we are not aware of any object, or of any sensation.--_Ed._]

{106} "Absent," in its unrestricted sense, above explained, comes
near to this marking power of the word Nothing, but differs from it
in one respect. Absent is the Privative name of all possible
objects, taken one by one. Nothing is the privative name of them,
taken altogether. This distinction, I presume, is sufficiently
obvious, and intelligible, thus expressed; and stands in no need of
a more wordy explanation.[3*]

[Mill's footnote 3: The account of Privative Terms which is given by
Locke, is the same with that which is presented in the text. The
difference is, that Locke, who has stated the case correctly, has
not attempted its analysis. He says (B. II. ch. viii.), "We have
negative names, such as insipid, silence, _nihil_, &c., which words
denote positive ideas; _v.g._, taste, sound, being; with a
signification of their absence."--(_Author's Note_.)]

We shall now take notice of the Privative Term EMPTY, which is a
word of great importance.

Empty is a name applicable to all the things to which the name,
full, is applicable; in other words, to all the things which are
calculated to contain other things in position, or in the
synchronous order, that is, in the order of particle adjoining
particle. It is necessary to mark this limitation of the word
contain; because, in another sense, a complex idea is said to
contain the simple ideas of which it consists; and a chemical
compound is said to contain the simple {107} substances into which
it can be decomposed. Empty, and Full, are names of those things
only which contain, or are adapted to contain, things in position,
or in the order of particle adjoining particle.

Things adapted to contain other things in position, are, themselves,
a peculiar combination of positions, to which we must very
attentively advert. To understand this combination, it will be
necessary to remember exactly the analysis of position; of lines,
surfaces, and bulks; as it has been already given in our explanation
of Relative Terms.

The word "containing," applied to anything, as when we speak of a
box containing books, a cask containing liquor, a room containing
furniture, generally includes the idea of limitation. That which
contains, has certain boundaries within which the things contained
are placed, or have their position. This idea of things having their
position within another thing, is a very complex idea, the
composition of which we must be at some pains to understand.

It consists, first, of the thing containing; secondly, of the things
contained.

The thing containing, again, consists of two parts; first, its
boundaries; and, secondly, its containing capacity within its
boundaries.

Its boundaries are surfaces. How we become acquainted with surfaces;
in other words, what are the sensations, the copies of which form
our complex idea of surface, has been already explained. They are
certain sensations of touch, and certain sensations of muscular
action. This complex idea is easily distinguished into two parts;
first, a certain idea of resistance; secondly, the idea of
extension. The sides {108} of a box I call resisting, and I call
them extended; and I call them by both names on account of certain
sensations. Let us conceive the box without a lid; each of the sides
is extended and resisting. What is the top without a lid? Extended,
and non-resisting. The idea of the top is that of extension without
resistance; extension, in a particular direction, that of a plane
surface. What is the idea of the inside of the box without its
contents? That of extension in all directions without resistance.
This is emptiness.

So far is plain, and not doubtful. There are still, however, some
things which require explanation. What are we distinctly to
understand by extension without resistance? Whenever we use the
concrete extended, we mean something extended; and by that something
we always mean something that resists. What do we mean when we use
the abstract extension? It will be easily recollected that all this
is a case of association, which has been already fully explained.

Concrete Terms are Connotative Terms; Abstract Terms are
Non-connotative Terms. Concrete terms, along with a certain quality
or qualities, which is their principal meaning, or notation, connote
the object to which the quality belongs. Thus the concrete red,
always means, that is, connotes, something red, as a rose. We have
already, by sufficient examples, seen, that the Abstract, formed
from the Concrete, notes precisely that which is noted by the
Concrete, leaving out the connotation. Thus, take away the
connotation from red, and you have redness; from hot, take away the
connotation, and you have heat.

{109} The very same is the distinction between the concrete
extended, and the abstract extension. What extended is with its
connotation, extension is without that connotation. We have then to
explain, wherein the connotation consists.

When we say extended, meaning something extended, we mean one or
other of three things, a line, a surface, or bulk. We have already
explained sufficiently in what manner we come by the ideas of line,
surface, and bulk. We have certain sensations of touch, and of
muscular action, conjoined, and the ideas of those sensations, in
conjunction, form our ideas of line, surface, and bulk. The
sensation, or sensations, which we mark by the word resisting, seem
to be those alone which are connoted by the word extending; for it
is most important to observe, that what we call extending in the
parts of our own body, by the operation of its own muscles, is that
which we call extended in all other things; and thus the essential
connotation of the concrete, extended, is, resisting, and nothing
else. In other concrete terms the connotation is greater. Thus red,
connotes a surface, that is, something extended; and extended
connotes resisting. And thus red connotes both extended and
resisting, while extended connotes resisting alone. It is true, that
persons enjoying the faculty of seeing cannot conceive any thing
extended, without conceiving it coloured; because in them the idea
of something extended includes, by association, the visual, as well
as the tactual, and muscular, ideas; and the visual being accustomed
to predominate, the tactual, and muscular, are faintly observed.
This, however, cannot be the case in persons born blind, {110} who
have the tactual, and muscular, feelings, and not the visual at all.

Now, then, we can easily understand what extension is in all its
cases. Linear extension is the idea of a line, the connotation
dropped, that is, the idea of resisting, dropped; superficial
extension is the idea of a surface, the same connotation dropped;
and solid extension, or bulk, is merely the idea of bulk, the
connotation, or resisting, dropped. But bulk, the connotation
(_i.e._ resistance) dropped, is what? The place for bulk: Position.
But place is, what? A portion of SPACE; or, more correctly speaking.
SPACE itself, with limitation.

We thus seem to have arrived, without any difficulty, at an exact
knowledge of what is noted or marked by the word SPACE; a phenomenon
of the human mind hitherto regarded as singularly mysterious. The
difficulty which has been found in explaining the term, even, by
those philosophers who have approached the nearest to its meaning,
seems to have arisen, from their not perceiving the mode of
signification of Abstract Terms; and from the obscurity of that
class of sensations, a portion of which we employ the word
"extended" to mark. The word "space" is an abstract, differing from
its concrete, like other abstracts, by dropping the connotation.
Much of the mystery, in which the idea has seemed to be involved, is
owing to this single circumstance, that the abstract term, space,
has not had an appropriate concrete. We have observed, that, in all
cases, abstract terms can be explained only through their concretes;
because they note or name a part of what the concrete names, leaving
out the rest. If we were {111} to make a concrete term,
corresponding to the abstract term space, it must be a word
equivalent to the terms "infinitely extended." From the ideas
included under the name "infinitely extended," leave out resisting,
and you have all that is marked by the abstract Space.[26]

[Editor's footnote 26: There is great originality as well as
perspicacity in the explanation here given of Space, as a privative
term, expressing when analysed, the absence of the feeling of
resistance in the circumstances in which resistance is frequently
felt, namely, after the sensations of muscular action and motion.
The only part of the exposition to which I demur is the classing of
Space among abstract terms. I have already objected to calling the
word line, when used in the geometrical sense, an abstract term.
I hold it to be the concrete name of an ideal object possessing
length but not breadth. In like manner a Space may be said to be the
concrete name of an ideal object, extended but not resisting. The
sensations connoted by this concrete name, are those which accompany
the motion of our limbs or of our body in all directions: and along
with these sensations is connoted the absence of certain others,
viz. of the muscular sensations which accompany the arrest of that
motion by a resisting substance. This being the meaning of a Space,
Space in general must be a name equally concrete. It denotes the
aggregate of all Space.--_Ed._]

In the idea of SPACE, the idea of Infinity is included. What the
idea of Infinity is, needs therefore to be explained. When the word
Infinite is not used metaphorically, as it is when we speak of the
infinite perfections of God, in which case it is not a name for
ideas, but for the want of them, it is applied only to Number,
Extension, and Duration.

We increase numbers by adding one to one, one to two, and so on,
without limit, giving a name to {112} each aggregate. The
association of ideas which constitutes the process has been already
explained. With each number, one, two, three, four, as we go on, the
idea of one more is so strongly associated, that we cannot help its
existing in immediate conjunction. However high, therefore, we go in
numbering, the idea of one more always forces itself upon us; and
hence we say that number is infinite. That this, literally, is not
true; that, indeed, it is a verbal contradiction, is obvious.
Number, is something numbered; but if numbered, limited; that is,
not infinite. Number is the negation of infinite; as black is the
negation of white. The name infinite, in this case, is, in reality,
nothing but a mark for that state of consciousness, in which the
idea of one more is closely associated with every succeeding number.
And Infinity, the abstract term, is the peculiar idea, without the
connotation.

When we apply "infinite" to extension, we do so equally to all its
three modifications, to lines, surfaces, and bulk. How we do so is
obvious. We know no infinite line, but we know a longer, and a
longer. A line is lengthened, as number is increased, by continual
additions; a line of any length, say of an inch, is increased by the
continual addition of other lengths, say of an inch. In the process,
then, by which we conceive the increase of a line, the idea of one
portion more, is continually associated with the preceding length;
and to what extent soever it is carried, the association of one
portion more, is equally close and irresistible. This is what we
call the idea of infinite extension; and what some people call the
_necessary_ idea; which only means, that the idea of a {113} portion
more, rises necessarily, that is, by indissoluble association, so
that we cannot help its rising. Infinite is the concrete term, here
connoting Line; drop the connotation, you have Infinity, the
abstract.

If such be the whole of what is involved in the idea of Infinity, in
the case of a line; call it necessary idea, if you will; the idea of
it, in the case of surface, and of bulk, is also explained; for
surface, and bulk, are only lines, in such and such, or in all
directions. The idea of a portion more, adhering, by indissoluble
association, to the idea of every increase, in any or in all
directions, is the idea of "infinitely extended," and the idea of
"infinitely extended," the connotation dropped, is the idea of
Infinite Space. It has been called a simple idea (so little has the
real nature of it been understood); while it is thus distinctly
seen, to be one of the most complex ideas, which the whole train of
our conscious being presents. Extreme complexity, with great
closeness of association, has this effect--that every particular
part in the composition is overpowered by the multitude of all the
other parts, and no one in particular stands marked from the rest;
but all, together, assume the appearance of ONE. Something perfectly
analogous occurs, even in sensation. If two or three ingredients are
mixed, as wine and honey, we can distinguish the taste of each, and
say it is compound. But if a great many are mixed, we can
distinguish no one in particular, and the taste of the whole appears
a simple peculiar taste.[27]

[Editor's footnote 27: This explanation of the feeling of Infinity
which attaches itself to Space, is one of the most important
thoughts in the whole treatise; and, obvious as its truth is to a
mind prepared by the previous exposition, it has great difficulty in
finding entrance into other minds.

Every object is associated with some position: not always with the
same position, but we have never perceived any object, and therefore
never think of one, but in some position or other, relative to some
other objects. As, from every position. Space extends in every
direction (i.e. the unimpeded arm or body can move in any
direction), and since we never were in any place which did not admit
of motion in every direction from it, when such motion was not
arrested by a resistance; every idea of position is irresistibly
associated with extension, beyond the position: and we can conceive
no end to extension, because the place which we try to conceive as
its end, raises irresistibly the idea of other places beyond it.
This is one of the many so-called Necessities of Thought which are
necessities only in consequence of the inseparableness of an
association: but which, from unwillingness to admit this
explanation, men mistake for original laws of the human mind, and
even regard them as the effect and proof of a corresponding
necessary connexion between facts existing in Nature.--_Ed._]

{114} This, indeed, is one great cause of the mistakes, which have
been committed, in the examination of abstract ideas. We have shewn
that they are all complex, and in the highest degree. Yet the
greater number of them have always been treated as simple. Mr. Locke
shewed that some of them, which he calls mixed modes, were
undoubtedly compounded, as obligation, crime, &c. But they are no
otherwise complex, than as power, quality, chance, fate, position,
and space, are complex.

It is truly remarkable, how many of the cases of indissoluble
association are all united in the idea of SPACE. First of all, with
the idea of every object, the idea of _position_ or _place_, is
indissolubly united. {115} Secondly, with the idea of position or
place, the idea of _extension_ is indissolubly united. Thirdly, with
the idea of extension the idea of _infinity_ is indissolubly united.
Fourthly, by the unfortunate ambiguity of the _Copula_, the idea of
_existence_ is indissolubly united with SPACE, as with other
abstract terms. What these several ingredients, the ideas of
Position, Extension, Infinity, Existence, are composed of, we have
already seen. All these, forced into combination, by irresistible
association, constitute the idea of SPACE.


{116} SECTION V.

TIME.


As SPACE is a comprehensive word, including all Positions, or the
whole of synchronous order; so TIME is a comprehensive word,
including all Successions, or the whole of successive order.

The difficulty of the exposition, in this case, consists not in the
ideas; for they are clear and certain enough; but in finding
expressions which will have even a chance of conveying to readers,
who are not familiar with the analysis of mental phenomena, the
ideas which it is my object to impart.

As all objects, considered as existing together, are said to exist
in SPACE, so all objects considered as existing one after another,
are said to exist in TIME.

Objects, however, are said to exist in Time, in two distinguishable
cases; either when they are in constant flow; or, when they have,
what we call, stability or duration. The constant passage of men,
horses, vehicles, &c., in a busy and crowded street, is in Time; the
permanence of St. Paul's, in its well-known position, is also in
Time. If Time mean the succession of the objects in the one case, it
must mean something else in the other. It cannot mean the succession
of St. Paul's. But it may mean the idea of St. Paul's, associated
with the idea of other successions.

Of TIME itself we conceive, that it is never still. It is a
perpetual flow of instants, of which only one can ever be present.
The very idea of Time, therefore, is {117} an idea of successions.
It consists of this, and of nothing else.

But there are no real successions, save successions of objects, that
is of feelings in our minds.[28] What, then, are the successions of
TIME, which are the successions of nothing? To those who have
thoroughly familiarized themselves with the account which we have
given of abstract terms, and who can promptly and steadily conceive
the mode of their signification, we can render an answer, which will
be understood at once, and will be felt to be complete and
satisfactory.

[Editor's footnote 28: There is an unusual employment of language
here, which if attention is not formally drawn to it, may embarrass
the reader. By objects are commonly meant, those groups or clusters
of sensations and possibilities of sensation, that compose what we
call the external world. A single sensation, even external, and
still less if internal, is not called an object. In a somewhat
larger sense, whatever we think of, as distinguished from the
thought itself and from ourselves as thinking it, is called an
object; this is the common antithesis of Object and Subject. But in
this place, the author designates as objects, all things which have
real existence, as distinguished from the instants of mere Time,
which, as he is pointing out, have not; and a puzzling effect is
produced by his applying the name Object, in even an especial
manner, to sensations: to the tickings of a watch, or the beatings
of a patient's pulse.--_Ed._]

We have shewn, how we form the abstracts, redness, from red;
sweetness, from sweet; hardness, from hard; by simply dropping the
connotation of the concrete term. Thus red, always means something
red; redness, is the red without the something; so of sweetness,
hardness, and so forth. When the ideas are more {118} complicated,
the case is still the same. When we use the concrete, living, it
always connotes something living; a living man, a living quadruped,
a living bird, fish, insect, and so forth. When we use the abstract,
life, we convey all that we convey by the term living, except the
connotation. We say that John is healthy, James is healthy, on
account of circumstances the idea of which forms a very complex
idea. The concrete healthy always connotes an individual. Use the
abstract, health, you have the idea without the connotation.

In applying this doctrine to the case of successions, we are ill
supplied with appropriate names; and hence the difficulty of the
case, both to the teacher, and the learner.

We have said that there are no real successions, but successions of
objects. The tickings of my watch are successive sounds, that is,
sensations. The beatings which are felt by the physician, in the
artery of his patient, are successive feelings or sensations of
touch.

When the different particulars of a scene in which a man has been
engaged, of a battle, for example, in which he has commanded, pass
through his mind, there is a succession of ideas. In all these cases
of the successions of sensations, or ideas, there is always one
present, others past, and others to come, that is, future. Drop the
connotation of "something past," "something present," "something
future." You have pastness, presentness, and futureness. But
pastness, presentness, and futureness, are TIME. TIME can neither be
shewn, nor conceived, to be any thing else. It is a single-worded
abstract, involving the meaning {119} of these three several
abstracts. The true meaning of these abstracts is clearly made out
from their concretes. The precise idea, therefore, marked by the
word TIME; if the meaning of these abstracts is sufficiently
apprehended; is at last apparent. Nor is there any mysteriousness in
it whatsoever, but that which has arisen from misapprehension of
that grand department of Naming, which belongs to abstract terms;
and from inattention to that class of words, which are invented to
supply the place, each of them singly, of several other words.

To our conclusion, that TIME is the equivalent of Pastness,
Presentness, and Futureness, combined, it may be objected, that the
word Time is applicable to all the three cases; as we can say, past
time, present time, and future time, all with equal propriety. This,
however, is so far from being any presumption against the
conclusion, that it is a clear confirmation of it; since Time,
standing by itself, marks no particular case, and, in order to do
so, must have another mark applied to it to limit its signification.
It is only because Time marks all the cases of pastness,
presentness, and futureness, that it needs the marks past, present,
or future, to confine its meaning; present time being merely another
name for presentness, future time, for futureness, and past time,
for pastness. The same thing is seen in the case of all other
abstracts. Redness is the name of a certain colour, in all its
modifications, and to whatever object belonging. But by the addition
of an appropriate mark, we confine its meaning to any particular
case; as when we say, the redness of a rose, the redness of scarlet,
and so on.

{120} The accounts, which have been rendered of Time by different
philosophers, so far as they have in them any acknowledged accuracy,
are, all of them, parts, and but parts, of the analysis which we
have thus been presenting. Dr. Reid says, Memory gives us the
conception and belief of finite intervals of duration; and these we
enlarge by our mental processes to infinity.[4*] We have already
seen what Memory is. It is not a faculty, as Dr. Reid supposes,
which "gives" any thing; it is an idea, formed by association of the
particulars of a certain train; a train of antecedents and
consequents, of which the present feeling is one extremity. Pastness
is included under the term Memory. Memory is the name of a certain
whole, and Pastness is the name of a part of that whole. Memory is a
connotative term; what it notes, is the antecedence and consequence
of the several parts of that which forms the chain of the
remembrance; what it connotes, are the feelings themselves, the
objects remembered. When what it connotes is left out, and what it
notes is retained, we have the idea which is expressed by pastness.

[Mill's footnote 4: Intellect. Powers. Essay III. ch. v. p. 583.]

In the chain of memory, consisting of antecedent, antecedent,
antecedent, traced back to any length from the present feeling, we
call that which immediately precedes the present, the nearest; the
next, we call more distant; the next, more distant still; and that,
between which and the present feeling the greatest number of
successions intervenes, we call the most distant, also the farthest
back; but the farthest back of a series of successions, is the
oldest, that between {121} which and the present time the greatest
length of time has intervened. Greatest length of time, therefore,
in this case, is only another name for greatest number of
successions.

It has been already seen, that there is nothing in which we are so
deeply interested, as an accurate knowledge of the antecedents and
consequents, in the midst of which we exist. Of the different
innumerable trains of antecedents and consequents which it is
important for us carefully to mark, it is observed, that some
succeed more quickly, some less. While the long pendulum of an
eight-day clock is performing one oscillation, the short pendulum of
a table-clock performs two or three.

What that is, to which we give the name of quickness, or slowness,
in those successions; in other words, what is the state of
consciousness which we have thus occasion to mark; has already been
seen. Every succession, observed by us, is a case of sensation and
memory; sensation of the consequent, memory of the antecedent. If we
have observed simultaneously the oscillations of the two pendulums,
mentioned above, we remember two or three antecedent oscillations of
the short pendulum, before we get back to one of the long. It is a
mere case, therefore, of the greater or less number of antecedents
in a chain of memory, expounded in a preceding chapter.

In the knowledge, so important to us, of antecedents and
consequents, it is not enough that we know what antecedents are
followed by what consequents; much depends upon the quickness or
slowness of the successions. It is, therefore, of the highest
importance that we should have the means of marking them.

{122} What we do is, to take some well-known case of successions,
and to make that a standard, by which to ascertain the rest. We
take, for example, the oscillations of a pendulum. So many of these
we call a minute. So many minutes we call an hour. These minutes and
hours, then, are so many oscillations, that is successions. We call
them measures of time. But things are measurable only by parts of
themselves; extension by extension, weight by weight, and so on.
What is *measured by succession, therefore, is itself nothing but
succession.

Having assumed a certain case of successions as a standard, and
marked it into quantities, by distinctive names, we mark or name all
other successions, by the names applied to the standard case. Thus,
that grand succession, on which so much of what we are interested in
depends, a revolution of the earth upon its own axis, we
distinguish, by the term, twenty-four hours; which we also call by
the name, day; and afterwards make use of, as a standard, to mark
still slower successions, such as a revolution of the moon about the
earth, a revolution of the earth about the sun. In all these
measurements, and expressions, of time, it is still seen, that there
is nothing in reality conceived but successions.

Beside the standards, more distinctly conceived and expressed, there
is always, in these estimates of time, a tacit reference to another
standard, which is regarded as the unit, or minimum of time. The
case here is precisely analogous to that of the unit, or minimum, of
extension, which we have already observed. Our tactual, and
muscular, senses are not sufficiently fine to discern objects of
less than a certain magnitude. {123} The least which they can
discern is tacitly assumed as the unit of extension. Nor are any of
our senses fine enough to discern successions which have more than a
certain degree of rapidity. Thus, if the seven primitive colours are
made to pass with a certain velocity before the eye, they do not
appear separate, but blended into one continuous white. In like
manner, if sounds are made to succeed one another, at first, slowly,
afterwards, with greater and greater rapidity, they cannot, at last,
be distinguished as different sounds, but appear as one continuous
sound. In fact, this is probably the account of all sounds, which
are merely effects of the vibrations in the air, and therefore
pulses; but often so quick, in succession, that no interval is
distinguishable, and the perception is that of a continuous sound.

The close resemblance, in this respect, between sensations and
ideas, is remarkable. When sensations are brought into close
conjunction they become blended, and appear, not several, but one.
We have seen, in a most important case of association, that when
ideas are called up together in close conjunction, they, too, cease
to be distinguishable, and, being blended together, assume, even
where there is the greatest complexity, the appearance, not of many
ideas, but of one. Of this we have very remarkable examples, in the
two cases of SPACE, and TIME.

There is a certain succession, then, of sensations and ideas, in
which the antecedent and consequent can be distinguished: another,
in which the antecedent and consequent, on account of quickness,
cannot be distinguished. The quickest that can be distinguished, is
that to which, as the unit or minimum, a tacit {124} reference is
made, in our several estimates of time.

Having thus shewn how far the account of TIME, presented by one of
the most recent Philosophers of high name, goes in expounding the
phenomenon, and how far it leaves it unexpounded; it will be
instructive next to observe, how far the genius of the ancient Greek
Philosophers carried them, in this important inquiry. It is
satisfactory, that we can refer the unlearned reader to a very clear
and accurate exposition of their doctrines, in a well known work in
our own language, the "Hermes" of Mr. Harris; from which, for the
sake of this convenience, the present account of those ancient
doctrines shall be drawn.

"Time and Space," says that author,[5*] "have this in common, that
they are both of them by nature _continuous_. But in this they
differ, that all the parts of Space exist _at once_ and _together_,
while those of Time only exist in _Transition_ or Succession." This
is only transcribing the common language. What remained was, to shew
what are the real facts couched under this language.[6*]

[Mill's footnote 5: Hermes, B. I. ch. vii.]

[Mill's footnote 6: The expression of Ammonius, here quoted by
Harris, comes nearer the fact than his own--[Greek: o( chro/nos
u(phi/sta/tai kata/ mo/non to\ NUN, e)n ga/r tô=| gi/nesthai kai/
phthei/resthai to/ ei=nai e)/chei]. Time subsists only in a single
NOW or INSTANT, for it hath its being in beginning and ceasing to
be. In other words, Time never is; all you can say of it is only
this, it has been, or it is about to be.--(_Author's Note_.)]

"In every given time we may assume anywhere a _Now_ or _Instant_,
and therefore, in every given _Time_, there may be assumed infinite
_Nows_ or _Instants_.

{125} "A NOW or INSTANT is the _Bound_ of every finite _Time_. But
although a _Bound_, it is not a _Part of Time_. If this appear
strange, we may remember, that if a _Now_ or _Instant_ were a _Part
of Time_ it being essential to the character of Parts, that they
should measure the _Whole_, it would contain within itself infinite
other nows; and this, it is evident, would be absurd and
impossible."

"_The same Now_ or _Instant_, may be the end of one _Time_, and the
_Beginning_ of another; the first, necessarily Past Time, as being
previous to _the Now_ or _Instant_, which both Times include; the
other necessarily FUTURE, as being _subsequent_. As, therefore,
every NOW or INSTANT always exists in Time, and without being Time,
is _Time's Bound_; the Bound of _Completion_ to the _Past_, and the
Bound of _Commencement_ to the Future: from hence we may conceive
its nature or end, which is _to be the Medium of Continuity between
the Past and the Future, so as to render Time, through all its
parts, one Intire and Perfect Whole_."

It must be obvious to every one, who has correctly followed me
through the preceding deductions, that this mysterious language, if
applied to actual successions, has a distinct meaning; if not so
applied, it is jargon merely, without one idea annexed. This NOW,
which is not _Time_, and, not being _Time_, is of course nothing
else; this NOTHING, then, which, though nothing is the medium of
continuity between Somethings, namely, time past, and time future,
seems to be only a mysterious name for that link which is supposed
to be between every antecedent and its consequent; which supposition
of a link, or medium of continuity, we have already shewn to be a
mere case {126} of association, involving a prejudice; the
antecedent and consequent, and nothing else, being really included
in a case of succession. Thus understood, however, it is a medium of
continuity, forming the "_Bound of Completion_" to the previous
train of successions, the "_Bound of Commencement_" to the
following.

Mr. Harris proceeds to shew some of the conclusions, resulting from
the account which he had thus rendered of Time. "_In the first
place_," he says, "_there cannot_ (strictly speaking) _be any such
thing as time present_." We will draw from this a conclusion, which
Mr. Harris appears not to have seen, or does not choose to
acknowledge; That, if there be no such thing as Time present,
neither can there be any such thing as Time past. For what is the
past, but that which has been present? But if there be no such thing
as time present, or time past, there can be no such thing as time
future. Time, therefore, is an impossibility.

Mr. Harris himself, indeed, goes a certain way toward this
conclusion. "If _no Portion_ of time," he says, "be the object of
_any Sensation_; further, if the Present _never_ exist; if the past
be _no more_; if the Future be not as yet; and if these are all the
parts, out of which _Time_ is compounded: how strange and shadowy a
Being do we find it? How nearly approaching to a perfect
non-entity?"[7*]

[Mill's footnote 7: It is but justice to Aristotle, to say, that he
expressed the right conclusion much more distinctly than Harris
thought proper to do. His mode of inferring, as translated by
Harris, is as follows: That, therefore, _Time_ exists not at all, or
at least, has but a faint and obscure existence, one may suspect
from hence. A part of it has been, and is no more; a part of it is
coming, and is not as yet; and out of these is made that Time, which
is without end, and ever to be assumed farther and farther. Now,
that which is made up of nothing but non-entities, it should seem
was incapable ever to participate of Entity.--(_Author's Note_.)]

{127} Mr. Harris then says, "Let us try, however, since the senses
fail us, if we have not faculties of higher power, to seize this
fleeting Being." What then is it he does in the search of those
"faculties of higher power?" It will be seen, from the following
quotation, that he merely describes a few cases of actual
succession; and says, that from them, by the help of memory, and
imagination, we come by the idea of Time. But the Memory and
Imagination of successions present to us nothing but the successions
themselves. If then the Memory and Imagination of successions, give
us the idea of Time, the idea of Time can only be some part or the
whole of the idea of the successions.

"The World has been likened to a variety of Things, but it appears
to resemble no one more than some moving spectacle (such as a
procession or a triumph) that abounds in every part with splendid
objects, some of which are still departing, as fast as others make
their appearance. The Senses look on, while the sight passes,
perceiving as much as is immediately present, which they report with
tolerable accuracy to the Soul's superior powers. Having done this,
they have done their duty, being concerned with nothing, save what
is present and instantaneous. But to the _Memory_, to the
_Imagination_, and above all, to {128} the _Intellect_, the several
_Nows_ or _Instants_, are not lost, as to the _Senses_, but are
presented and made objects of _steady_ comprehension, however, in
their own nature, they may be _transitory_ and _passing_.

"Now it is from contemplating two or more of these Instants under
one view, together with that Interval of Continuity, which subsists
between them, that we acquire insensibly the Idea of TIME. For
example: _The Sun rises_: this I remember: _it rises again_: this
too, I remember. These Events are not together; there is an
_Extension_ between them--not however of _Space_, for we may suppose
the place of rising the same, or at least, to exhibit no sensible
difference. Yet still we recognise some Extension between them. Now
what is this Extension, _but a natural day_? And what is that, but
pure _Time_? It is after the same manner, by recognising two new
Moons, and the Extension between these; two several Equinoxes, and
the extension between these; that we gain Ideas of other Times, such
as _Months_ and _Years_, which are all so many Intervals, described
as above; that is to say, _passing Intervals of Continuity between
two Instants viewed together_.

"And thus it is THE MIND acquires the Idea of TIME. But this Time it
must be remembered is PAST TIME ONLY, which is always the _first
Species_, that occurs to the human Intellect. How then do we acquire
the Idea of TIME FUTURE? The answer is, we acquire it by
_Anticipation_. Should it be demanded still further, _And what is
Anticipation_? We answer, that, in this case, it is a kind of
reasoning by analogy from similar to similar; from successions of
events, that are past already, to similar successions, {129} that
are presumed hereafter. For example: I observe, as far back as my
memory can carry me, how every day has been succeeded by a night;
that night, by another day; that day, by another night; and so
downwards in order to the Day that is now. Hence, then, I
_anticipate a similar succession_ from the present Day, and thus
gain the Idea of days and nights in _futurity_. After the same
manner, by attending to the periodical returns of New and Full
Moons; of Springs, Summers, Autumns, and Winters, all of which, in
Time past, I find never to have failed, I anticipate a like orderly
and diversified succession, which makes Months, and Seasons, and
Years, _in Time future_."

It is to be observed, that, in the above passage, Harris, beside
Memory and Imagination, introduces the name of _Intellect_, as
concerned in generating the idea of Time. But it will be seen that
he makes no use of it, whatsoever, in giving his explanation, nor
mentions any other operations than those of, memory for the past,
and anticipation for the future. Indeed, it appears from a passage
of his work, immediately following, that when Mr. Harris, in this
inquiry, uses the word Intellect, he means nothing but Anticipation
and Memory. "There is nothing," he says, "appears so clearly an
object of the MIND or INTELLECT only, as _the Future_ does, since we
can find no place for its existence any where else. Not but the
same, if we consider, is equally true of _the Past_.*"[8*] Here we
see, that {130} both _the Future_, and _the Past_, are said to be
objects of the INTELLECT only. But the future is the object of
anticipation, the past of memory; and both memory, and anticipation,
as we have seen, are cases of association.

[Mill's footnote 8: _Ibid_. He goes on to say, that, from this same
doctrine, that Time exists only in the mind, some philosophers
inferred, that if mind did not exist, neither could Time. [Greek:
Po/teron de\ mê\ ou)/sês psuchê=s ei)/ê| a)\n o( chro/nos,
a)porê/seien a)/n tis]. (_Aristot. Nat. Auscult._ 1. iv. c. 20.)
Themistius, who comments the above passage, expresses himself more
positively. [Greek: Ei) toi/nun dichô=s le/getai, to/ te
a)rithmêto\n, kai\ to\ a)rithmou/menon, to\ me\n, to\ a)rithmêto\n
dêladê\, duna/mei, to\ de\ e)nergei/a|, tau=ta de\ ou)k a)\n
u(postai/ê|, mê\ o)/ntos tou= a)rithmê/sontos, mê/te duna/mei mê/t'
e)nergei/a|,--phanero\n ô(s ou)k a)\n o( chro/nos ei)/ê|, mê\
ou)/sês psuchê=s]. (_Them._ p. 48. Edit. Aldi.)--(_Author's
Note_.)]

In the cases of succession which he adduces, as examples, to shew,
in what manner we acquire, he says, "insensibly," the idea of time,
he tells us, there is sensation of the consequent, memory of the
antecedent, and beside these, "contemplation of two or more instants
under one view, together with that Interval of continuity, which
subsists between them." But the contemplation of two instants, one
prior, another posterior, in one view, with the interval between
them, is a circumlocution for memory. It denotes obscurely, and
imperfectly, that union, in one idea, of all the parts of a train,
to which the name memory is affixed. From this contemplation, he
says it is, "that we acquire the idea of Time." The real meaning is
thus shewn to be, that we acquire it from memory. Mr. Harris,
therefore, at the bottom, agrees with Dr. Reid; and the same
observations by which we shewed {131} the imperfection of Dr. Reid's
account, are equally applicable to that, of Mr. Harris. The case, in
truth, is, that neither of them does any thing more than merely
state the fact, without an attempt to explain it. That we cannot
have the idea of time, without the observation of successions; and
that memory is joined with sense in the observation of
successions,--is the matter of fact. What TIME is, distinct from the
memory and the sensations, they ought to have told us, but have not.
They would not have found it difficult, had they been familiar with
the distinction (of such infinite importance, in all accurate
inquiries into the human mind) between the mode of signification of
concrete words, and the mode of signification of abstract ones; the
latter, in its more complicated cases, of not very easy
comprehension. Unfortunately, we have no concrete term,
corresponding with Time. Hence a great part of the difficulty of
conceiving distinctly the meaning of the abstract. Time, also, is
not the abstract name of any one train, but of all trains; as
redness is not the name of one red, but of all reds. And there is
this further complication, that the word "time" is never applied to
any train, in particular; as time of a race, time of a battle, and
so on; without the predominating association of that particular
train, whatever it be, minutes, hours, or days, which we are
accustomed to employ, as the measure of other successions. Without
much and accurate practice, therefore, in conceiving the meaning of
abstract terms, especially in the more complex and intricate cases;
it is extremely difficult steadily to contemplate either TIME, as
the {132} abstract name of all successive, or SPACE, as the abstract
name of all simultaneous order.[9*]

[Mill's footnote 9: "Multos autem in errorem ducit, quod voces
generales et abstractas in disserendo utiles esse videant, nec tamen
earum vim satis capiant. Partim vero à consuetudine vulgari inventæ
sunt illæ ad sermonem abbreviandum, partim à philosophis ad
docendum excogitatæ, non quod ad naturas rerum accommodatæ sint, quæ
quidem singulares et concretæ existunt, sed quod idoneæ ad tradendas
disciplinas, propterea quod faciant notiones, vel saltem
propositiones, universales."--_Berkeley de Motu_, s. 7. No
predecessor of Berkeley was so fully aware, as he was, of the
deceptions practised on the human mind by abstract
terms.--(_Author's Note_.)]

It will be instructive, to recapitulate the indissoluble
associations which are contained in the idea of Time. With every
present event, is indissolubly associated the idea of an antecedent;
with that antecedent, the idea of another antecedent; and so on
without end. These are the ideas of Succession, and of Infinity;
forced upon us by indissoluble association. The events of the
present moment, are innumerable. With every one of these we
associate the ideas of antecedents without end. This is the Past; an
Infinity of simultaneous successions, each having antecedents,
running back without end. These are successions in the concrete;
successions of objects. Drop the connotation, to form the abstract,
as is done in other cases; you have then successions without the
objects; which is precisely the meaning of the word TIME.

As with every present event, and those infinite in number, is
indissolubly associated the idea of a series of antecedents, without
end, which, in the abstract, is {133} TIME PAST, so with every such
event, is indissolubly associated the idea of a consequent, with
that the idea of another consequent, and so on, without end; which,
in the abstract, is TIME FUTURE.

The synchronous Line, or Line of _Extension_, and the successive
Line, or Line of _Time_, bear a pretty close analogy. As, in the
Line of _Extension_, we have the concrete line, and the abstract
line; the concrete line being the positions with the objects; the
abstract or mathematical line, the positions without the objects;
so, in the line of _Time_, we have the concrete line, and the
abstract line; the concrete line being the successions with the
objects; the abstract line, the successions without the objects; to
which abstract line, we give the name TIME.

We have before remarked, as an important case of indissoluble
association, that the idea of Position, that is, of a modification
of Space, is indissolubly associated with the idea of every sensible
object. It is now to be remarked, as a not less important case, that
the idea of succession or of antecedent and consequent, that is, a
modification of Time, is indissolubly associated with the idea of
every object. The idea of a modification of Space, and the idea of a
modification of Time, form parts of our complex idea of every
object. It is no wonder that they appear to be necessary, seeing
that they force themselves upon us, by irresistible association,
with the idea of every object.[29] [30]

[Editor's footnote 29: As is shewn in the text. Time is a name for
the aggregate of the successions of our feelings, apart from the
feelings themselves. I object, however, in the case of time, as
I did in the {134} case of Space, to considering it as an abstract
term. Time does not seem to me to be a name (as the author says) for
the pastness, the presentness, and the futureness of our successive
feelings. It is rather, I think, a collective name for our feeling
of their succession--for what the author called, in a previous
section, the part of the process "which consists in being sensible
of their successiveness," for which part, he then said, "we have not
a name." This taking notice of the successiveness of our feelings,
whether we prefer to call it a part of the feelings themselves, or
another feeling superadded to them, is yet something which, in the
entire mass of feeling which the successive impressions give us, we
are able to discriminate, and to name apart from the rest.
A perception of succession between two feelings is a state of
consciousness _per se_, which though we cannot think of it
separately from the feelings, we can yet think of as a completed
thing in itself, and not as an attribute of either or both of the
two feelings. Its name, if it had one, would be a concrete name. But
the entire series of these perceptions of succession has a name,
Time; which I therefore hold to be a concrete name.

However inextricably these feelings of succession are mixed up with
the feelings perceived as successive, we are so perfectly able to
attend to them, and make them a distinct object of thought, that we
can compare them with one another, without comparing the successive
feelings in any other respect. We can judge two or more successions
to be of equal, or of unequal, rapidity. And if we find any series
of feelings of which the successive links follow each other with
uniform rapidity, such as the tickings of a clock, we can make this
a standard of comparison for all other successions, and measure them
as equal to one, two, three, or some other number of links of this
series: whereby the aggregate Time is said to be divided into equal
portions, and every event is located in some one of those portions.
The succession of our sensations, therefore, however closely
implicated with the sensations themselves, may be abstracted from
them in thought, as completely {135} as any quality of a thing can
be abstracted from the thing.

The apparent infinity of Time the author, very rightly, explains in
the same manner as that of Space.--_Ed._]

[Grote's footnote 30: In this section Mr. James Mill explains Time.
He tells us that "it is a comprehensive word including all
successions, or the whole of successive order" (p. 116)--"a
perpetual flow of instants, of which only one can ever be present.
The very idea of Time is an idea of successions. It consists of this
and of nothing else" (pp. 116--117)--"it is the single worded
abstract, involving the meaning of the three several abstracts,
pastness, presentness, futureness" (p. 118). In the line of "Time,
we have the concrete line, and the abstract line: the concrete line
being the successions with the objects: the abstract line, the
successions without the objects: to which abstract line, we give the
name Time" (p. 133).

In p. 120 he gives us in a few words Dr. Reid's explanation of
Time:--and in pp. 124--130 he cites at greater length Aristotle's
explanation, as reproduced by Harris in the Hermes.

Both Aristotle and Reid include in their meaning of Time, not merely
succession, but duration or continuity. Mr. James Mill includes only
succession--antecedents and consequents. He thinks that continuity
is nothing else than an illusion or prejudice, arising from extreme
rapidity of succession (pp. 123--125).

"Time and Space (says Harris, cited p. 124) have this in common,
that they are both of them by nature continuous. But in this they
differ--that all the parts of space exist at once and together;
while those of Time only exist in Transition or Succession." Mr.
James Mill proceeds to say--"This is only transcribing the common
language. What remained was, to show what are the real facts couched
under this language."

Undoubtedly these facts ought to be shewn, and shewn fully. But I
cannot think that they are shewn fully in the {136} present Chapter
of the Analysis. On the contrary, a most important part of the case
is omitted--Duration or Continuity--which Aristotle has put in the
front of his exposition, and after him *Reid as well as Harris.

If it were true that the word Time is the abstract, having for its
concrete succeeding objects and nothing more, we should not need the
term at all. The abstract term "Succession" already answers this
purpose, much more perspicuously and obviously. But Time includes
something more than succession. It comprehends not merely
potentiality for succeeding objects or events, but also potentiality
for continuous motions or sensations: it embraces duration as well
as succession.

The exposition of Aristotle is adapted to readers and debates so
different from those of the present day, that it often appears
strange, and even mystical, when ever so well translated. In the
present case, however, we derive satisfaction from knowing, that his
doctrine is, with a very small reserve, adopted by Hobbes, the most
anti-mystical of all philosophers. (Hobbes' First Grounds of
Philosophy--Part II., Sect. 7. 3). Aristotle has given a theory of
Time at great length, perfectly clear as to its main features,
though in several of its details, obscure and difficult to follow.
I will add that throughout nearly the whole exposition, he keeps the
abstract in close implication with the concrete: the neglect of
which precaution, by many philosophers, is so justly censured by the
Author of the Analysis.

Aristotle, according to a practice frequent with him, begins by
enumerating various puzzles and difficulties which stand in the way
of any theory ([Greek: diaporê=sai] Physic. IV. 10. p. 217. 6. 30).
In doing this, here as elsewhere, he states the difficulties in a
manner somewhat paradoxical. The citation of page 126, (together
with note, page 127,) are all taken from this preliminary excursion,
the beginning and end of which Aristotle distinctly marks (Physica
IV. c. 10. p. 217 b. 30. p. 218 a. 30). He then proceeds to
exposition; and after remarking that Time is one and alike every
where, amidst the greatest {137} diversity of events succeeding each
other--he says that it is not indeed identical with Motion, (as some
theorists considered it), but that it is nevertheless inseparable
from Motion being one of the aspects or appurtenances of Motion.
Magnitude or Body moved--Motion--Time--all go together in
Aristotle's conception. Magnitude is continuous: Motion is
continuous: Time is continuous (Physica IV. 11. p. 219. a. 12. 223.
a. 10): Line is continuous. On the other hand, the Point is separate
and indivisible; no two Points have any common term: a Line is not
made up of Points, but of smaller Lines; and every Line has Points
for its bounds or limits. What the Point is to a Line, the Now or
Instant is to Time: the Instant is not a portion of Time, but the
boundary of each portion, and the conjoining boundary between Time
past and Time future. (Physica IV. 11. p. 220. a. 5-25--VI. 3. 234.
a. 1-24).

Aristotle defines Time as the Number of Motion according to Former
and Later: _i.e._, Continuous Motion, considered as numerable and
successive. To take the words of Harris, from Aristotle (cited p.
128 of the Analysis)--"It is from contemplating two or more Instants
under one view, together with that Interval of Continuity which
subsists between them, that we acquire insensibly the Idea of
Time."--"Months and Years are all so many Intervals described as
above; that is to say, passing Intervals of Continuity between two
Instants viewed together."

Mr. James Mill hardly does justice to this exposition, when he
observes (p. 131)--"Neither Harris *nor Reid does anything more than
merely state the fact, without an attempt to explain it. That we
cannot have the idea of time, without the observation of succession;
and that memory is joined with sense in the observation of
successions,--is the matter of fact. What Time is, distinct from the
memory and the sensations, they ought to have told us, but have
not."--In this passage, the word "sensations" is evidently used by
Mr. James Mill as equivalent to "successions" or successive {138}
sensations: and the observation appears to me not well founded.
I think that Aristotle has told us, and Harris after him, what Time
is, distinct from the successive sensations. It includes Motion and
the Continuity of Motion. These are elements of which Mr. James Mill
takes no notice: and they supply the deficiency of which he
complains.

It is one of the many merits of Mr. James Mill's Analysis that he
has paid more attention to movements and muscular sensibility, as
elements of our consciousness, than philosophers had done before
him. But in this chapter unfortunately, he has left them out, and
has confined himself to successions. The explanation of Time, given
in the main by Aristotle, is completed and elucidated by Professor
Bain in his work on the Senses and the Intellect (chapter on the
Muscular Feelings, sect. 20--23, pp. 95, 96; compare also p. 183, in
ed. 3rd). The feeling of continuance in our muscular exertions, of
longer or shorter duration in the sweep of our limbs, is one of the
primordial varieties of sensibility. A longer expenditure of our
energy affects the consciousness differently from a shorter.
In a full sweep of the arm, we are conscious of the instant of
commencement as antecedent,--the interval of continued effort,--and
the instant of termination as following. This is the clearest
illustration of that which Aristotle and Harris describe as Time:
two instants former and later, with continuous interval between
them. Motion is the most striking and obvious example of Continuity,
and is therefore employed by Aristotle as the basis for his
exposition of Time. The eternal and uniform motions of the celestial
bodies were to him the most impressive of all phenomena; the great
standard by which all other motions were to be measured. Hobbes also
takes the Line as the proper exponent of time. But though motion
affords the best and amplest illustrations of Continuity, it is not
motion only that is felt as continuous. The sense of continuance is
felt in regard to other impressions also. Professor Bain
observes--"All impressions made on the mind, whether those of
muscular energy, or those of the ordinary senses, are felt
differently according as they endure {139} for a longer or a shorter
time. This is true of the higher emotions also. The continuance of a
mental state must be discriminated by us from the very dawn of
consciousness; and hence our estimate of time is one of our earliest
mental aptitudes. It attaches to every feeling that we possess"--(p.
93).

We thus perceive that the sense of continuance is just as much an
original presentation to our consciousness, as the sense of
succession. This is an important fact, which has not been
sufficiently adverted to in the exposition of complex ideas such as
Time and Space. The _fundamentum_ of Continual Quantity is an
immediate manifestation of our sensitive discriminations not less
than that of Discrete Quantity. The complex Idea of Time embodies
both.[a] Mr. James Mill insists everywhere, with laudable emphasis,
upon the necessity of seeking the meaning of every abstract term in
the concrete particulars out of which it grows. But in explaining
Time, he has not set before himself all the concrete particulars in
their full variety and amplitude. Confining himself to Succession,
and scarcely touching Continuance, he has not been led to follow out
the facts of motion in all their diversified aspects, nor the many
abstractions and generalisations which {140} spring from comparison
of motions with each other, under some one of these aspects.

[Footnote a: Aristotle's definition of Time was much discussed by
his contemporaries and successors. Both his pupils, Theophrastus and
Eudemus, accepted it: but there were many objectors, and the
earliest of them notified to us is, Straton of Lampsakus, pupil and
successor of Theophrastus. Straton objected on the ground that the
definition combined Number and Motion--Discrete Quantity and
Continual Quantity--which combination he held to be inadmissible.
But this seems no valid objection. Aristotle very properly
recognises the two as distinct varieties of Quanta--(see Categor.
p. 4, b. 20): but that is no reason why both of them may not be
combined in the same complex idea--especially when we see that each
of them has its distinct root in different original presentations of
our discriminative consciousness.

See Simplikius ad Aristot. Physic. IV. Scholia, p. 394, b. 27--47.
Brandis.]

In a note to this chapter of the Analysis (p. 129) attention is
called by Mr. James Mill to another important doctrine cited by
Harris out of Aristotle--to the relative nature of Time. Can there
be any time, apart from the percipient mind? asks Aristotle--since
time is the numerable element in motion, and there can be no
numeration without a rational mind to number.[b] He does not affirm
positively, but he speaks as conceiving number and the numbering
mind to be Relatum and Correlatum, so that the former cannot exist
without the latter.[c] Both Alexander of Aphrodisias and Themistius
thought so likewise after him: though Boëthius and other
commentators dissented from the opinion.[d] Upon this general
question of relativity, Aristotle is not always consistent with
himself. Though he declares explicitly, that Relata reciprocate in
predication, and are implicated each with the other--and though he
says that "the Soul is in a certain sense all things" (_i.e._ is the
implied correlate of all our beliefs and disbeliefs, affirmations
and negations)--yet in other places, he limits this {141} universal
principal by exceptions, which some of his commentators deprecate as
inadmissible.[e]--_G._

[Footnote b: Aristot. Physica. IV. 14, p. 223, a. 26.]

[Footnote c: So also Hobbes' First Philosophy, Part II. 7, 3,
5:--"Seeing all men confess a year to be time, and yet do not think
a year to be the accident or affection of any body, they must needs
confess it to be, not in the things without us, but only in the
thought of the mind." (Here Hobbes goes too far, divesting time of
all objective character; instead of considering it as relative to
the mind, which implies a subjective and an objective aspect
combined. The next passage exhibits this.) "Time is the phantasm of
before and after in motion: which agrees with the definition of
Aristotle. Time is the number of motion according to former and
latter--for that numbering is an act of the mind. To divide Space or
Time, is nothing else but to consider one and another within the
same--division is not made by the operation of the hands, but of the
mind."]

[Footnote d: Themistius ad Aristot. Physic. IV. p. 337, in Spengel's
edition of Themistius--partly extracted by Brandis in Scholia to
Aristotle, p. 393, b. 27.]

[Footnote e: Aristot. Categor., c. 7, p. 6, a. 37, b. 28; p. 7,
b. 23. Scholia ad Categor., p. 65, b. 10--20. Brandis.

Aristot. de Animâ, III., 8, 431, b. 21, [Greek: ê( psuchê\ ta\
o)/nta pô/s e)sti pa/nta; ê)\ ga\r ai)sthêta\ ta\ o)/nta ê)\ noêta\,
e)/sti d' ê( e)pistê/mê me\n ta\ e)pistêta/ pôs, ê( d' ai)/sthêsis
ta\ ai)sthêta/].]]


{142} SECTION VI.

MOTION.


It is necessary to take notice of this term, because the idea which
is named by it is apt to present the appearance of something
mysterious, though, after the expositions with which we are now
familiar, the materials of which it is compounded, will not be
difficult to find.

The word Motion, is the abstract of Moving. What we have to
investigate, therefore, are the sensations, on account of which, we
call a body "moving;" motion being merely moving, the connotation
dropped.

All motion is in a Line, either a straight line, or some other line.
The idea of "moving," therefore, contains, for one ingredient, the
idea of a line.

A body "moving," is a body which is successively at every point of a
line. Every point of a line, as we have seen, is a particular
position. A body "moving," therefore, is a body first in one
position, then in another, then in another, through a certain
series.

In the idea of a Body moving, then, we can enumerate the following
particulars: the idea of a body, the idea of a position, the idea of
a line, the idea of succession. These are all complex ideas; some of
them highly complex; united into one idea, motion, they compose one
of the most complex of all our {143} ideas. The ingredients,
however, being already explained, there can be no great difficulty
in understanding the compound.

It is commonly said, that motion includes the idea both of Space,
and of Time. As it includes the idea of Succession, it includes the
idea of Time, successions in the abstract (otherwise called
instants), without end, receiving the name of Time. As it includes
the idea of a Line, it includes the idea of extension in one
direction. As it includes the idea of Position, which is that of
lines, in every direction, it includes the idea of extension in
every direction; but extension in every direction, taken abstractly,
is Space.

It is important to observe, that, though we receive, and that the
most frequently, information of motions by the eye, it is not from
the sensations of sight, that the idea of motion is derived. It is
by association of ideas alone, that we fancy we see motion, as it is
thence we fancy that we see figure, and distance. The classes of
sensations, from which we derive the idea of motion, and the idea of
extension, are the same; they are the muscular and tactual
sensations. The man born blind, is not without the idea of motion,
as he is without that of colour; on the contrary, he has the idea
probably much more precise, than we who have entangled it
inextricably with the perceptions of sight.

To recur to the exposition which we have already given; we may
remember, that the sensations (taking the simplest case), on account
of which we apply the name Line, are partly sensations of Touch,
partly sensations of Muscular Action. If we touch a line at one
point with any part of our bodies, say the finger; so long as the
finger is still, we have merely the {144} sensations, on account of
which we call the line tangible. As soon as we move the finger along
the line, we have the sensations and ideas, on account of which we
call it extended. But these new feelings, on account of which we
call the line extended, are also the feelings, on account of which
we call the finger moved. The sensations, therefore, whence we
derive our ideas of extension, and of motion, exist simultaneously.
We have a certain compound of feelings, partly sensations, and
partly ideas; for we have already seen, that the perception of
succession consists in a present sensation, associated with the idea
of a past one; and we assign to this compound, not one name, as on
other occasions, but two names, after a very peculiar and remarkable
manner. These two names are, Line Extended, Finger Moved. The
complication of the feelings here, and of course the obscurity of
them, is very remarkable; though the naming, as in certain other
cases of obscure ideas, is very distinct. We are never misled in the
application of the terms, Line Extended, Finger moved; though we may
be very much puzzled to shew, of the compound of feelings which are
thus named, and which, in the compound, are easily, and infallibly
traced, how much is included under the one term, and how much under
the other. A certain portion of the sensations in the compound is
peculiar to what is called the Line, another portion is peculiar to
what is called the Finger. The rest is common to both. The common
part, united to what is peculiar to line, is called line extended;
the same common part, united with what is peculiar to finger, is
called Finger moved.

Our ideas of extension and motion, are, no doubt, {145} originally
derived from the action of our own bodies. I touch something, and
have the sensation of resistance. The idea of resistance is the
fundamental part in every combination to which I give the name of
object. In this case, there is the object touched, and there is the
finger touching. A certain action is given to my finger, still
touching the object. That action involves certain feelings; these
I combine both with the object, and with the finger, and to these
two combinations I give the two names, Object Extended, Finger Moved.

If any one shut his eyes, excluding as much as possible, the ideas
of sight, and conceiving, without admixture, the feelings in the
finger and the arm, while the finger passes along a line, he will
get some notion of the series of antecedents and consequents, whence
the idea of Motion is derived. They are feelings, which language
does not enable us to communicate by words; but it does not seem
very difficult for any man to raise the ideas of them in himself.

Let any one suppose, that the line commences opposite to the centre
of his body. He begins by touching it at that point with the finger
of his right hand; and in this there is one state of feeling. He
gives the finger the smallest perceptible motion towards the right:
this is another state of feeling. He gives it a further motion, the
smallest perceptible, in the same direction: this is another state
of feeling; and so on, as far as the arm can reach. The antecedent
states are in each instance united with the present by memory, and
by the amount of the states, thus united, the amount of the motion
is computed.

Conceiving the case of a man born blind, the more {146} easily to
exclude the illusions of association; it is obvious, that such a man
can obtain the idea of another body in motion, only by accompanying
it with his hand; or by associating the ideas, on account of which
he calls the hand, moved, with the body in question. By frequent
operations of the hand, such as that described above, he becomes
familiar with the idea of the hand moved. The ideas of the
sensations, on account of which, he calls it moved, are easily
raised, easily form themselves into combination, and easily
associate themselves with the object, Hand. The idea of Hand, and
the idea of Hand moved, having become very familiar, it is an easy
case of association to transfer the term _moved_ to other things, as
the foot moved, the body moved, the stone moved. When he has become
familiar with the application of Moved, as a connotative term, to
various objects, it is easy, in this, as in other cases, to drop the
connotation; and then he has the abstract, MOTION.[31] [32]

[Bain's footnote 31: The author correctly, in my opinion, refers to
our muscular sensibility (aided by Touch), the fundamental notions
of Resistance, Motion, Extension, Space. He also remarks properly,
that the idea of motion and the idea of extension are the same; they
are merely different modes of viewing one experience. In a mutually
involved series of properties such as these, the Analysis may
proceed in several different arrangements, no one being apparently
very decisive. The following mode is suggested as on the whole, the
most consecutive.

The feeling of Resistance expresses what is probably the most
fundamental state of all, the consciousness of muscular energy or
expended force. Taking the case of a dead strain, or a pressure
without movement, we have mere muscular energy and nothing else. We
have an indivisible, unanalysable, mode {147} of consciousness,
distinct from all modes of passive sensation, and from all forms of
emotion. It is a kind of consciousness remarkably constant in its
character; it varies in degree, but with this peculiarity that
because a man is physically weaker than usual, he does not on that
account exaggerate or misrepresent the degree of his muscular
expenditure; the feeling of lifting two pounds is not made the same
as the feeling of lifting four pounds, although in some of the
incidents of exertion, as in the organic state of exhaustion, the
smaller expenditure in one state is held to be equal to the greater
expenditure in another state. The consciousness of putting forth
power is the most uniform, the least variable, of all our
sensibilities; the same amount of actual force expended is estimated
as nearly the same under all circumstances.

In being conscious of expended energy, we discriminate its degrees,
within certain limits; we know when we increase or diminish the
amount; and our sensibility is measured by the smallness of the
difference that makes a change in our consciousness. This
discrimination is the basis of our estimate of the property termed
Force, Resistance, Momentum, in moving bodies. Our idea of force is
a muscular idea, an idea of muscular force of a certain amount.
Force may be viewed in other ways, or from other aspects, but its
direct and simple estimate is muscular energy in the dead strain.

2. We are farther conscious of muscular energy as more or less
enduring or continuing. Our consciousness varies according as a
strain is protracted; a weight supported half a minute gives a
feeling different from a weight supported a quarter of a minute.

Farther, it is important to remark that increase of continuance is
not confounded with increase of force in the same time. Mechanically
speaking, it is the same to us, whether we support two pounds one
minute, or one pound two minutes; the energy gone out of us, the
oxidation, or consumption of material, must be the same for both.
But the consciousness is not the same for both; each has a character
of its own, and we recognise the distinction in clear consciousness.
If we {148} confounded all modes of expended energy that are
dynamically equal, we should be disqualified from attaining the
ideas of motion and extension.

When energy is accompanied by _movement_, there is a new and
characteristic mode of consciousness, of vital importance. Energy in
the dead strain and energy with motion may be equal as regard
expended force, but they are not the same to our feelings.
Continuance in the one is a different fact from continuance in the
other. The feeling of continuance in moving energy is the fact that
we call motion; and also the fundamental property, the starting
point, with reference to Extension; although much more is wanted to
complete that cognition. Mere dead strain would not amount to
extension; and the discriminating of dead strain from moving strain
is thus of essential moment. From the sense of this distinction, and
the estimate of degree of continuance in movement, we begin at once
the experience of motion and the ground-work of extension.

The consciousness of continuance whether of dead strain or of
movement is also a consciousness of duration, but not the only mode
of becoming versed in this property. All our mental states,--whether
muscular feelings, sensations, emotions, thoughts, volitions,--are
different as they are more or less continued, and this consciousness
of difference is a consciousness of Duration or Time. Hence the
usual saying that Time is a property common to the Object and to the
subject. The object experiences of motion and extension are the most
convenient modes of measuring time, they are the most accurate and
discriminative, but they are not the only nor the chief concrete
embodiments of it. We often measure time by the duration and
succession of our feelings and thoughts.

3. Another mode of discrimination inhering in our muscular
consciousness is the degree of movement, as slow or quick. We are
differently affected according to the rapidity of our movements; an
accelerated pace in the arm, or in the whole body, sensibly alters
our feelings. Farther, we do not compound this alteration with its
dynamical equivalents in the {149} other modes--with increase in the
amount of the dead strain, in the continuance of the dead strain, or
in the continuance of movement. A characteristic mode of feeling
attends this special form of augmenting or reducing our expenditure
of force. The consequence is, a feeling of velocity or speed of
movement. But this feeling of speed is not all. We gain another
equivalent of degrees of extension; more speed in the same time
being equal to more time with the same speed. It is proper to
remark, however, that we are premature in speaking of extension, or
in regarding it as arrived at, at once by our primary experiences of
movement; much has to be gone through before this is fully formed or
developed. Motion is the fundamental fact, but motion is a fact of
succession, and can do nothing to suggest a group of contemporaneous
phenomena, an outspread universe of the co-existing in time. Our
primary sensibility is a mere thread of succession, duration, or
continuance; we have to acquire by a process of aggregation and
association, the highly artificial experience of things permanently
situated in a relationship of co-existence in space or extension.

It is at this point that Sensation comes to our aid. Passive
sensation by itself is incompetent to give us the foundations of
extension; through it, we have neither resistance nor movement, nor
any fact partaking in what is essential to the extended or object
universe. Mere warmth, odour, relish, touch, sound, colour, contain
no elements of extension. The co-operation with moving energy is
what introduces us to the object world.

How then does Sensation aid muscularity in evolving Extension? In
various ways, but chiefly thus. Our movements are not performed in
vacuo, but in conjunction with sensation. The movements of the hand
and arm, are usually conjoined with sensations of touch. We draw the
hand across a table; there is an arm sensibility, purely motor or
energetic, which is distinct from every mode of passive sensation.
There accompanies it, however, a series of tactile sensations,
making a united experience, active and passive. If this conjunction
{150} were to happen but once, nothing would be thought of it
farther than as a mere experience of succession. Again, in another
situation the sweep of the movement ends in a contact or sensation
of touch, or begins in the loss of such a contact. So far, these are
mere casual conjunctions, unions of moving energy and passive
sensibility. But in the course of many trials, there arise uniform
conjunctions of movement with passive sensibility: the same movement
being associated with the same tactile series, or with the same
beginning or ending of tactile sensation. Take the case of the
movement of the hand over the surface of our own body. A certain
definite start, and definite amount of exertion brings with it a
uniform tactile sensation, as in drawing the hand over the face.
This uniformity generates an expectation that the same sensation
will follow on the same definite energy. Many such conjunctions are
formed in this manner. There is an interesting variety of the
experience of such concurrences; namely, when we reverse a movement,
and find a series of sensations identified as the same in an
inverted order. The hand passed along the side of a knife,
experiences movement coupled with sensations, as often as the
movement is made; the inverted movement inverts the sensations.

The supposition, hitherto, has been confined to Touch. When we take
in sight, the scope for the operation is greatly enlarged. Almost
all our movements are conjoined with optical changes--sensations of
colour and of visible form in a certain sequence. We speedily detect
a number of uniform occurrences of movement and visible sensation.
The same movement gives the same series of appearances at all times;
and an inverted movement corresponds with an inverted order. Here
too we attain to a number of uniformities of coincidence, with the
expectation of future occurrence. A certain movement of the eyes is
accompanied with an optical series, as scanning the starry heavens;
as often as the movement is repeated from the same stand-point, the
optical series is repeated; the inverted movement gives the inverted
series. We {151} contract an expectation, that such a coincidence
will occur in the future, and this expectation is our idea of the
starry space.

Our idea of extended things is thus completed by sensation. It is a
series of conjunctions, or associations, of movements and
sensations, in a fixed order. We do not in our idea of space,
command an entire view at one glance; the successive perception of
points or limited portions is what we begin with, and is the
character of the mind's working even after we are educated to the
utmost. The co-existing in space, is the mind's potentiality of
finding definite sensations by means of definite movements; and it
seems impossible to assign any other meaning or import to the
phenomena. The genesis of the idea of space determines our mode of
settling the great question of the Perception of a material
world.--_B._]

[Editor's footnote 32: It will be both useful and interesting to the
inquiring reader, if I add to the analysis of these very complex
ideas by the author of the present treatise, and to that by Mr.
Bain, the analysis given of them by the other great living master of
the Association psychology, Mr. Herbert Spencer. The following
passages are from his "Principles of Psychology." First, of
Resistance:

"On raising the arm to a horizontal position and keeping it so, and
still more on dealing similarly with the leg, a sensation is felt,
which, tolerably strong as it is at the outset, presently becomes
unbearable. If the limb be uncovered, and be not brought against
anything, this sensation is associated with no other, either of
touch or pressure." This is the sensation of Muscular Tension.

"Allied to the sensation accompanying tension of the muscles, is
that accompanying the act of contracting them--the sensation of
muscular motion. . . . While, from the muscles of a limb at rest, no
sensation rises; while, from the muscles of a limb in a state of
continuous strain, there arises a continuous sensation which remains
uniform for a considerable time; from the muscle of a limb in
motion, there arises a sensation which is {152} ever undergoing
increase or decrease, or change of composition.

"When we express our immediate experiences of a body by saying that
it is _hard_, what are the experiences implied? First, a sensation
of pressure, of considerable intensity, is implied; and if, as in
most cases, this sensation of pressure is given to a finger
voluntarily thrust against the object, then there is simultaneously
felt a correspondingly strong sensation of muscular tension. But
this is not all: for feelings of pressure and muscular tension may
be given by bodies which we call soft, provided the compressing
finger follows the surface as fast as it gives way. In what then
consists the difference between the perceptions? In this; that
whereas when a soft body is pressed with increasing force, the
synchronous sensations of increasing pressure and increasing
muscular tension are accompanied by sensations of muscular movement;
when a hard body is pressed with increasing force these sensations
of increasing pressure and tension are not accompanied by sensations
of muscular movement. Considered by itself, then, the perception of
softness may be defined as the establishment in consciousness of a
relation of simultaneity between three series of sensations--a
series of increasing sensations of pressure; a series of increasing
sensations of tension; and a series of sensations of motion. And the
perception of hardness is the same, with omission of the last
series." (pp. 212, 218.)

Of Extension; and first, of Form or Figure:

"It is an anciently established doctrine that Form or Figure, which
we may call the most complex mode of extension, is resolvable into
relative magnitude of parts. An equilateral triangle is one of which
the three sides are alike in magnitude. An ellipse is a symmetrical
closed curve, of which the transverse and conjugate diameters are
one greater than the other. A cube is a solid, having all its
surfaces of the same magnitude, and all its angles of the same
magnitude. A cone is a solid, successive sections of which, made at
right angles to the axis, are circles regularly decreasing in {153}
magnitude as we progress from base to apex. Any object described as
narrow is one whoso breadth is of small magnitude when compared with
its length. A symmetrical figure is a figure in which the homologous
parts on opposite sides are equal in magnitude. Figures which we
class as similar to each other, are such that the relation of
magnitude between any two parts of the one, is equal to the relation
of magnitude between the corresponding parts of the other. Add to
which, that an alteration in the form of anything, is an alteration
in the comparative sizes of some of its parts--a change in the
relations of magnitude subsisting between them and the other parts,
and that by continuously altering the relative magnitudes of its
parts, any figure may be changed indefinitely. Hence, figure being
wholly resolvable into relations of magnitude we may go on to
analyze that out of which these relations are formed--magnitude
itself." (pp. 224, 225.)

Next therefore, of Magnitude:

"What is a magnitude, considered analytically? The reply is, It
consists of one or more relations of position. When we conceive
anything as having a certain bulk, we conceive its opposite limiting
surfaces as more or less removed from each other; that is, as
related in position. When we imagine a line of definite length, we
imagine its termini as occupying points in space having some
positive distance from each other; that is, as related in position.
As a solid is decomposable into planes; a plane into lines; lines
into points; and as adjacent points can neither be known nor
conceived as distinct from each other, except as occupying different
places in space--that is, as occupying not the same position, but
relative positions--it follows that every cognition of magnitude, is
a cognition of one or more relations of position, which are
presented to consciousness as like or unlike one or more other
relations of position." (p. 226.)

And finally, of Position:

"This analysis of itself brings us to the remaining space-attribute
of body--Position. Like magnitude, Position cannot be known
absolutely; but can be known only relatively. {154} The notion of
position is, in itself, the notion of relative position. The
position of a thing is inconceivable, save by thinking of that thing
as at some distance from one or more other things. The essential
element of the idea will be best seen, on observing under what
conditions only, it can come into existence. Imagine a solitary
point A, in infinite space; and suppose it possible for that point
to be known by a being having no locality, what now can be
predicated respecting its place? Absolutely nothing. Imagine another
point B to be added. What can now be predicated respecting the two?
Still nothing. The points having no attributes save position, are
not comparable in themselves; and nothing can be said of their
relative position, from lack of anything with which to compare it.
The distance between them may be either infinite or infinitesimal,
according to the measure used; and as, by the hypothesis, there
exists no measure--as space contains nothing save these two points;
the distance between them is unthinkable. But now imagine that a
third point C is added. Immediately it becomes possible to frame a
proposition respecting their positions. The two distances, A to B,
and A to C, serve as measures to each other. The space between A and
B may be compared with the space between A and C; and the relation
of position in which A stands to B becomes thinkable, as like or
unlike the relation in which A stands to C. Thus, then, it is
manifest that position is not an attribute of body in itself, but
only in its connection with the other contents of the universe.

"It remains to add, that relations of position are of two kinds:
those which subsist between subject and object; and those which
subsist between either different objects, or different parts of the
same object. Of these the last are resolvable into the first. It
needs but to remember, on the one hand, that in the dark a man can
discover the relative positions of two objects only by touching
first one and then the other, and so inferring their relative
positions from his own position towards each; and on the other hand,
that by vision no knowledge of their relative positions can be {155}
reached save through a perception of the distance of each from the
eye; to see that ultimately all relative positions may be decomposed
into relative positions of subject and object.

"These conclusions--that Figure is resolvable into relative
magnitudes; that magnitude is resolvable into relative positions;
and that all relative positions may finally be reduced to positions
of subject and object--will be fully confirmed on considering the
process by which the space-attributes of body become known to a
blind man. He puts out his hand and touching something, thereby
becomes cognizant of its position with respect to himself. He puts
out his other hand, and meeting no resistance above or on one side
of the position already found, gains some negative knowledge of the
thing's magnitude--a knowledge which three or four touches on
different sides of it serve to render positive. And then, by
continuing to move his hands over its surface, he acquires a notion
of its figure. What, then, are the elements out of which, by
synthesis, his perceptions of magnitude and figure are framed? He
has received nothing but simultaneous and successive touches. Each
touch established a relation of position between his centre of
consciousness and the point touched. And all he can know respecting
magnitude and figure--that is, respecting the relative position of
these points to each other--is necessarily known through the
relative positions in which they severally stand to himself.

"Our perceptions of all the space-attributes of body being thus
decomposable into perceptions of position like that gained by a
single act of touch; we have next to inquire what is contained in a
perception of this kind. A little thought will make it clear that to
perceive the position of anything touched, is really to perceive the
position of that part of the body in which the sensation of touch is
located. Whence it follows that our knowledge of the positions of
objects, is built upon our knowledge of the positions of our members
towards each other--knowledge both of their fixed relations, and of
those temporary relations they are placed in by every change of
muscular adjustment. That {156} this knowledge is gained by a mutual
exploration of the parts--by a bringing of each in contact with the
others--by a moving over each other in all possible ways; and that
the motions involved in these explorations, are known by their
reactions upon consciousness; are propositions that scarcely need
stating. But it is manifestly impossible to carry the analysis
further without analysing our perception of motion. Relative
position and motion are two ideas of the same experience. We can
neither conceive motion without conceiving relative position, nor
discover relative position without motion. In the present,
therefore, we must be content with the conclusion that, whether
visual or tactual, the perception of every statical attribute of
body is resolvable into perceptions of relative position which are
gained through motion." (pp. 226--229.)

In further prosecution of the analysis:

"How do we become cognizant of the relative positions of two points
on the surface of the body? Such two points, considered as
coexistent, involve the germinal idea of Space. Such two points
disclosed to consciousness by two successive tactual sensations
proceeding from them, involve the germinal idea of Time. And the
series of muscular sensations by which, when self-produced, these
two tactual sensations are separated, involve the germinal idea of
Motion. The questions to be considered then are--In what order do
these germinal ideas arise? and--How are they developed?

"... Taking for our subject a newly-born infant, let us call the two
points on its body between which a relation is to be established, A
and Z. Let us assume these points to be anywhere within reach of the
hands--say upon the cheek. By the hypothesis, nothing is at present
known of these points; either as coexisting in Space, as giving
successive sensations in Time, or as being brought into relation by
Motion. If, now, the infant moves its arm in such a way as to touch
nothing, there is a certain vague reaction upon its consciousness--a
sensation of muscular tension. This {157} sensation has the
peculiarity of being indefinite in all its commencement; indefinite
in its termination; and indefinite in all its intermediate changes.
Its strength is proportionate to the degree of muscular contraction.
Whence it follows that as the limb starts from a state of rest, in
which there is no contraction; and as it can reach a position
requiring extreme contraction only by passing through positions
requiring intermediate degrees of contraction; and as the degrees of
contraction must therefore form a series ascending by infinitesimal
increments from zero; the sensations of tension must also form such
a series. And the like must be the case with all subsequent
movements and their accompanying sensations; seeing that, be it at
rest or in action, a muscle cannot pass from any one state to any
other without going through all the intermediate states. Thus, then,
the infant, on moving its arm backwards and forwards without
touching anything, is brought to what we may distinguish as a
nascent consciousness--a consciousness not definitely divisible into
states; but a consciousness the variations of which pass insensibly
into each other, like undulations of greater or less magnitude. And
while the states of consciousness are thus incipient--thus
indistinctly separated, there can be no clear comparison of them; no
thought, properly so called; and consequently no ideas of Motion,
Time, or Space, as we understand them. Suppose, now, that the hand
touches something. A sudden change in consciousness is produced--a
change that is incisive in its commencement, and, when the hand is
removed, equally incisive in its termination. In the midst of the
continuous feeling of muscular tension, vaguely rising and falling
in intensity, there all at once occurs a distinct feeling of another
kind. This feeling, beginning and ending abruptly, constitutes a
definite state of consciousness; becomes, as it were, a mark in
consciousness. By similar experiences other such marks are produced;
and in proportion as they are multiplied, there arises a possibility
of comparing them, both in respect to their degrees and their
relative positions; while at the same {158} time, the feelings of
muscular tension being, as it were, divided out into lengths by
these superposed marks, become similarly comparable; and so there
are acquired materials for a simple order of thought. Observe, also,
that while these tactual sensations may, when several things are
touched in succession, produce successive marks in consciousness,
separated by intervening muscular sensations, they may also become
continually coexistent with these muscular sensations; as when the
finger is drawn along a surface. And observe further, that when the
surface over which the finger is drawn is not a foreign body, but
some part of the subject's body, these muscular sensations, and the
continuous tactual sensation joined with them, are accompanied by a
series of tactual sensations proceeding from that part of the skin
over which the finger is drawn. Thus, then, when the infant moves
its finger along the surface of its body from A to Z, there are
simultaneously impressed upon consciousness three sets of
sensations--the varying series of sensations proceeding from the
muscles in action; the series of tactual sensations proceeding from
the points of the skin successively touched between A and Z; and the
continuous sensation of touch from the finger-end.... As subsequent
motions of the finger over the surface from A to Z always result in
the like simultaneous sets of sensations, these, in course of time,
become indissolubly associated. Though the series of tactual
sensations, A to Z, being producible by a foreign body moving over
the same surface, can be dissociated from the others; and though, if
the cheek be withdrawn by a movement of the head, the same motion of
the hand, with its accompanying muscular sensations, may occur
without any sensation of touch; yet, when these two series are
linked by the tactual sensation proceeding from the finger-end, they
necessarily proceed together; and become inseparably connected in
thought. Whence it obviously results that the series of tactual
sensations A to Z, and the series of muscular sensations which
invariably accompanies it when self-produced, serve as mutual
equivalents; and being {159} two sides of the same experience,
suggest each other in consciousness.

"Due attention having been paid to this fact, let us go on to
consider what must happen when something touches, at the same
moment, the entire surface between A and Z. This surface is supplied
by a series of independent nerve-fibres, each of which at its
peripheral termination becomes fused into, or continuous with, the
surrounding tissue; each of which is affected by impressions falling
within a specific area of the skin; and each of which produces a
separate state of consciousness. When the finger is drawn along this
surface these nerve-fibres A, B, C, D . . . Z, are excited in
succession; that is--produce successive states of consciousness. And
when something covers, at the same moment, the whole surface between
A and Z, they are excited simultaneously; and produce what tends to
become a single state of consciousness. Already I have endeavoured
to shew in a parallel case, how, when impressions first known as
having sequent positions in consciousness are afterwards
simultaneously presented to consciousness, the sequent positions are
transformed into coexistent positions, which, when consolidated by
frequent presentations, are used in thought as equivalent to the
sequent positions.[f] ... As the series of tactual {160} impressions
A to Z, known as having sequent positions in consciousness, are, on
the one hand, found to be equivalent to the accompanying series of
muscular impressions; and on the other hand, to the simultaneous
tactual impressions A to Z, which, as presented together, are
necessarily presented in coexistent positions; it follows that these
two last are found to be the equivalents of each other. A series of
muscular sensations becomes known as equivalent to a series of
coexistent positions; and being habitually joined with it, becomes
at last unthinkable without it. Thus, the relation of coexistent
positions between the points A and Z (and by implication all
intermediate points) is necessarily disclosed by a comparison of
experiences: the ideas of Space, Time, and Motion, are evolved
together. When the successive states of consciousness A to Z, are
thought of as having relative positions, the notion of Time becomes
nascent. When these states of consciousness, instead of occurring
serially, occur simultaneously, their relative positions, which were
before sequent, necessarily become coexistent; and there arises a
nascent consciousness of space. And when these two relations of
coexistent and sequent positions are both presented to consciousness
along with a series of sensations of muscular tension, a nascent
idea of Motion results.

[Footnote f: "Objects laid upon the surface will come to be
distinguished from each other by the relative lengths of the series
they cover; or, when broad as well as long, by the groups of series
which they cover. . . . By habit these simultaneous excitations,
from being at first known indirectly by translation into the serial
ones, will come to be known directly, and the serial ones will be
forgotten: just as in childhood the words of a new language, at
first understood by means of their equivalents in the mother tongue,
are presently understood by themselves; and if used to the exclusion
of the mother tongue, lead to the ultimate loss of it." We see that
"a set of [nervous] elements may be excited simultaneously as well
as serially; that so, a _quasi_ single state of consciousness
becomes the equivalent of a series of states; that a relation
between what we call coexistent positions thus represents a relation
of successive positions, and that this symbolic relation being far
briefer, is habitually thought of in place of that it symbolizes;
and that, by the continued use of such symbols, and the union of
them with more complex ones, are generated our ideas of . . .
extension--ideas which, like those of the algebraist working out an
equation, are wholly unlike the ideas symbolized, and which yet,
like his, occupy the mind to the entire exclusion of the ideas
symbolized."--(pp. 222--224.)]

"The development of these nascent ideas, arising as it does from a
still further accumulation and comparison of experiences, will be
readily understood. What has been above described as taking place
with respect to one relation of coexistent positions upon the
surface of the skin--or rather, one {161} linear series of such
coexisting positions, is, during the same period, taking place, with
respect to endless other such linear series, in all directions over
the body. The like equivalence between a series of coexistent
impressions of touch, a series of successive impressions of touch,
and series of successive muscular impressions, is being established
between every pair of points that can readily be brought into
relation by movement of the hands. Let us glance at the chief
consequences that must ultimately arise from this organization of
experiences.

"Not only must there gradually be established a connection in
thought between each particular muscular series, and the particular
tactual series, both successive and simultaneous, with which it is
associated; and not only must there, by implication, arise a
knowledge of the special muscular adjustments required to touch each
special part, but, by the same experiences, there must be
established an indissoluble connection between muscular series in
general and series of sequent and coexistent positions in general,
seeing that this connection is repeated in every one of the
particular experiences. And when we consider the infinite repetition
of these experiences, we shall have no difficulty in understanding
how their components become so consolidated, that even when the hand
is moved through empty space, it is impossible to become conscious
of the muscular sensations, without becoming conscious of the
sequent and coexistent positions--the Time and Space, in which it
has moved.

"Observe again, that as, by this continuous exploration of the
surface of the body, each point is put in relation not only with
points in some directions around it, but with points in all
directions--becomes, as it were, a centre from which radiate lines
of points known first in their serial positions before
consciousness, and afterwards in their coexistent positions--it
follows, that when an object of some size, as the hand, is placed
upon the skin, the impressions from all parts of the area covered
being simultaneously presented to consciousness, are placed in
coexistent positions before {162} consciousness: whence results an
idea of the superficial extension of that part of the body. The idea
of this extension is really nothing more than a simultaneous
presentation of all the impressions proceeding from the various
points it includes, which have previously had their several relative
positions measured by means of the series of impressions separating
them. Any one who hesitates respecting this conclusion, will,
I think, adopt it, on critically considering the perception he has
when placing his open hand against his cheek--on observing that the
perception is by no means single, but is made up of many elements
which he cannot think of altogether--on observing that there is
always one particular part of the whole surface touched, of which he
is more distinctly conscious than of any other--and on observing
that to become distinctly conscious of any other part, he has to
traverse in thought the intervening parts; that is, he has to think
of the relative positions of these parts by vaguely recalling the
series of states of consciousness which a motion over the skin from
one to the other would involve." (pp. 257--263).

These three different expositions of the origin of our ideas of
Motion and Extension, by three eminent thinkers, agreeing in
essentials, and differing chiefly in the comparative degrees of
development which they give to different portions of the detail,
will enable any competent reader of such a work as the present to
fill up any gaps by his own thoughts. Many pages of additional
commentary might easily be written; but they would not add any
important thought to those of which the reader is now in possession;
and belonging rather to the polemics of the subject than to its
strictly scientific exposition, they would jar somewhat with the
purely expository character of the present treatise.

I will only further recommend to particular attention, the opinion
of Mr. Spencer, also adopted by Mr. Bain, that our ascribing
simultaneous existence to things which excite successive sensations,
is greatly owing to our being able to vary or reverse the order of
the succession. When we pass our hands {163} over an object, we can
have the tactual and muscular sensations in many different orders,
and after having them in one order, can have them in another exactly
the reverse. They do not, therefore, become associated with each
other in a fixed order of succession, but are called up in any order
with such extreme rapidity, that the impression they leave is that
of simultaneousness, and we therefore hold the parts of tangible
objects to be simultaneous.--_Ed._]


{164} SECTION VII.

IDENTITY.


There is one other term, which still requires explanation; and that
is, IDENTITY, about which there would not have appeared any
difficulty, had it not been for Personal Identity; which is, indeed,
a complicated case, and, of course, involves the obscurity which
great complexity implies.

We have already seen, on what account we use the marks, same, and
different, when we apply them to two simple sensations, or when we
apply them to two ideas, simple, or complex. In these cases, the
terms are relative terms, and name the objects in pairs.

There is another case, that which now it is our business to explain,
in which the name is not applied to two objects, but to the same
object, at two different times. Thus it is, that I say, The bridge
at Westminster, by which I crossed the Thames thirty years ago, is
the same by which I crossed it yesterday. The crown which was placed
on the head of George IV. at his coronation, is the same by which
the kings of England have been crowned for many centuries. The words
which we read in the Gospel of Matthew, are the same which were
written by that evangelist. The words which we read in the poem
called the Æneid are the same which were written by the poet Virgil.
The church which is now at Loretto, is the same with that which
belonged to the Virgin Mary at Nazareth, which in the month of May,
in the year 1291, was {165} carried through the air by Angels, from
Galilee to Tersato, in Dalmatia; and again on the 10th of December,
1294, about midnight, by what conveyance is not known, was set down
in a wood in Italy, in the district of Ricanati, about a thousand
paces from the sea.

It is evident, from the contemplation of these instances, which
might be multiplied to any extent, that the word SAME, in this mode
of applying it, is merely the name of a certain case of Belief: a
belief which, in some of the instances, is, memory; in some, is
grounded upon testimony; in some, upon circumstantial evidence; and,
in some, upon both testimony and circumstances. Thus, the case of
belief respecting Westminster-bridge, which I mark by the word,
same, is Memory. The cases of belief respecting the crown of
England, respecting the words of the gospel, respecting the church
of Loretto, marked respectively by the word same, are founded on
testimony, joined with circumstances.

As we have already shewn wherein Belief, in all its cases, consists,
we have implicitly afforded the exposition of Identity. From same,
the concrete, comes, in the usual way, sameness, the abstract,
dropping only the connotation of the concrete. And Identity and
Sameness are equivalent terms.

From the importance, however, which has been attached to these
words, it seems necessary to shew to the learner, somewhat more
particularly, the mode of tracing the simple ideas composing the
clusters which they are employed to mark.

The Lily, when it produces its brilliant flower in summer, I call
the same, with the plant which began {166} to shew itself above the
surface of the ground, in spring, from a bulb, which I had planted
in a particular spot of my garden. I also called it the same, from
one day to another, though changing every day in its size, and other
appearances, from its germination to the present time. For what
reason have I done so? On account of certain circumstances, which
every body can enumerate; its rising from a certain root; the
uninterrupted continuity, by means of the stalk, between the root
and the other parts of the plant; its being always found in the same
place, that is, in the same synchronous order with certain other
things; its corresponding with other plants, the growth of which
I have observed, and so on. If it had grown in a flower pot, and
been transferred from one to another, the enumeration of the
circumstances would have been different; the evidence of its having
grown from the same root would have been drawn from other
circumstances. When I say, then, that the Lily I see, with its
flowers in July, is the same with the Lily just emerging from the
ground in April, I only express my belief of its having sprung from
a certain root, and of its having vegetated, in connexion with that
root, in the way of the plants grouped in the class called Lily.

I have a male Calf, of singular beauty, produced from my cow.
I observe him from day to day. From day to day I call him the Same;
and I do so when he has grown a bull of the greatest size. When I do
so, I merely express my belief in a certain train of antecedents and
consequents, with which experience has rendered me familiar. There
is a certain train of antecedents and consequents, known to me by
{167} observation, which I call the birth, growth, maturity; and, in
one word, the Life, of the animal. The birth, growth, and maturity
of one animal, is one series of successions; the birth, growth, and
maturity of another animal, is another series of successions. When
I apply the name Same, then, to any animal, I merely express my
belief, that my present sight of the animal is part of a particular
series, of which that perception is the last link.

The case, it will not be doubted, is perfectly analogous, when
I transfer the term from one of the lower animals to one of my fellow
men. The birth, infancy, childhood, youth, manhood, of a human
being, are names for different parts of a certain series of
antecedents and consequents. This series is known to me by
experience; that is, by sensation, by memory, and other cases of
association. The life of one man is one series. The life of another
man is another series. When I say, then, that a man is the same,
I merely express my belief in one of those series; belief that the
particular man, of the present instant, is the last link of such and
such a chain, and not of any other.

It is, however, to be observed, that the chain, thus believed, and
the evidence upon which it is believed, are different things; and
that this evidence is different in different cases. In the case of a
person whom I have lived with from his birth, and seen every day,
the evidence, to a great degree, is sense and memory. Sometimes the
sameness of an individual is proved in a court of justice, by
evidence, such as is applicable to any other matters of fact; by
written documents, marks on the body, articles of property found
{168} with the child, and the testimony of those whose knowledge has
been uninterrupted from one time to another.

It is not to be doubted, that when I transfer the word Same, from
another man to myself, all that I do is to express my belief in one
of those series; and the only difference in the case is, that it is
a series of which I have evidence of a very particular kind, and of
which many parts are known to me, which can be known to nobody else.

As far as memory reaches, the evidence, in regard to myself, is
memory and sensation. In the case of Evidence by memory and
sensation, we have observed a peculiarity, necessary to be
remembered, that the Evidence, and the Belief, are not different
things, but the same thing. The memory which I have of my own
existence, that is, the memory of a certain train of antecedents and
consequents, is the Belief of them; on account of which belief,
I apply to myself the term same, in the same way as I apply it to any
other of my fellow men.

But I apply the term same to myself beyond the point to which memory
reaches; as far back, in short, as to other men. This is true:
I believe, that a train of antecedents and consequents, corresponding
to that which forms the existence of other men, has also formed my
existence. Part of this train I believe, by consciousness, memory.
Part, namely, that which precedes memory, I believe on other
evidence. What that evidence is, it is not difficult to see. We
have, in the first place, the evidence of testimony; namely, that of
all the persons who knew us from our birth, to the time to which
memory extends. We have next {169} the evidence of what happens in
the existence of all other men; or that case of association which
unites inseparably the idea of like antecedents with like
consequents.

It may be said, however, that my belief in the Identity of other
men, is a very different thing from belief in my own Identity; and
that the foregoing exposition does not sufficiently account for the
difference which every one remarks between them.

The foregoing exposition, when duly attended to, will be found to
account completely for the difference. We have remarked, that the
evidence which I have for a great part of the series, in the case of
other men, and of myself, is remarkably different. In the case of
other men, it consists of observation and memory; in the case of
myself, it consists of consciousness and memory. In these several
and respective circumstances, Observation, and Consciousness, the
distinction wholly consists. The memory of a chain of facts
observed, is the evidence in the one case. The memory of a chain of
states of Consciousness, is the evidence in the other.

I doubt not that this, without further analysis, will be seen by
many of my readers to be a complete solution of the question. It
may, however, be still objected, that we resolve observation itself
into states of consciousness; and, if so, that the memory of a chain
of states of Consciousness, is the evidence in both cases.

This brings us to the very bottom of the matter. Every body
recognises, at once, that the memory of a state of consciousness,
and the memory of something {170} observed, are two distinct things;
that the memory, for example, of one of my own sensations, and the
memory of an outward fact, as of the death of my father, are
specifically different: or, to take two cases still easier perhaps
to distinguish; no one will say, that the memory of one's own pain
is any thing like the same state of consciousness with the memory of
seeing another man in pain. In the one case, the state of
consciousness remembered is the pain itself; in the other it is the
sensations of sight or hearing, which indicated to me the pain of
the other man, or called up the idea of his pain by association. In
the one case, the memory is memory of my own sensations purely; in
the other case, it is the memory of my sensations, as the evidence
only of outward things.

Each of the terms, therefore, I, Thou, He, marks a particular chain
of antecedents and consequents, terminating with the I, the Thou,
the He, of the present moment. The I, the Thou, the He, of the
present moment, is marked, by these terms, _primarily_; the
preceding links are marked, _secondarily_, that is, connoted. When
I say, "I, Thou, or He, did any thing," it is the I, the Thou, the
He, of the moment spoken of, that is specially noted. The rest of
the chain is not particularly adverted to, except when there is
particular occasion for it.

Since the I, the Thou, the He, stand for the names of three men, and
equally denote the antecedents and consequents, forming what is
familiarly called the thread of life, of each of those individuals;
how does it happen, that the idea, which is called up by the term I,
appears to be so different, from that which is {171} called up by
the term Thou, or any term denoting the vital chain of any other
man?

In what has been already stated, is found the answer. In that chain
of antecedents and consequents which I mark by the term "same man,"
two species of things are included; 1. The antecedents and
consequents which form the successive states of his body;
2. The successive states of his consciousness.

In knowing the antecedents and consequents, which form the
successive states of my own body and of that of another man, the
mode, though in some respects different, is, in so many respects,
the same, that it does not here require explanation. But the mode of
knowing the successive states of my own consciousness, and of those
of other men, is totally different; and in this consists the
peculiarity which appears to belong to the idea which I annex to the
term I, or myself. The knowledge of my own states of consciousness
is consciousness itself, for the present moment, and memory of that
consciousness for all the past. Of the states of consciousness of
other men, I have no direct knowledge. I draw my belief of them only
from signs. These signs, too, are significant only by reference to
my own states of consciousness. Certain things cognizable by my
senses, are accompanied in myself by certain states of
consciousness, single, or in trains. These objects of sense (sights,
sounds, &c.) are closely associated with the ideas of those states
of consciousness. When presented to me, therefore, as objects of
sense to other men, they excite the ideas of those states of
consciousness; and hence what I call my knowledge and belief of the
mental trains of other men. It is not necessary to go further in the
{172} analysis. It is very obvious, that two complex ideas must be
different, which are formed in these different ways; nor is any
thing more necessary to account for the difference between the idea
annexed to the pronoun I, and that annexed to the pronoun Thou.[33]

[Editor's footnote 33: The author has avoided an error in the mode
and order of the enquiry, which has greatly contributed to make the
explanations given by psychologists of Personal Identity, so
eminently unsatisfactory as they are. Psychologists have almost
always begun with the most intricate part of the question. They have
set out by enquiring, what makes me the same person to myself? when
they should first have enquired what makes me the same person to
other people? or, what makes another person the same person to me?
The author of the Analysis has done this, and he easily perceived,
that what makes me the same person to others, is precisely what
makes a house, or a mountain, the same house or mountain to them
to-day which they saw yesterday. It is the belief of an
uninterrupted continuity in the series of sensations derivable from
the house, or mountain, or man. There is not this continuity in the
actual sensations of a single observer: he has not been watching the
mountain unintermittedly since yesterday, or from a still more
distant time. But he believes, on such evidence as the case affords,
that if he had been watching, he should have seen the mountain
continuously and unchanged during the whole intervening time
(provided the other requisites of vision were present--light to see
it by, and no cloud or mist intervening): and he further believes
that any being, with organs like his own, who had looked in that
direction at any moment of the interval during which he himself was
not looking, would have seen it in the same manner as he sees it.
All this applies equally to a human object. I call the man I see
to-day the same man whom I saw yesterday, for the very reason which
makes me call the house or the mountain the same, viz., my
conviction that if my organs had been in the {173} same position
towards him all the time as they are now, and the other conditions
necessary for seeing had been present, my perception of the man
would have continued all the time without interruption.

If we now change the point of view, and ask, what makes me always
the same person to myself, we introduce, in addition to what there
was in the other case, the entire series of my own past states of
consciousness. As the author truly says, the evidence on which
I accept my own identity is that of memory. But memory reaches only a
certain way back, and for all before that period, as well as for all
subsequent to it of which I have lost the remembrance, the belief
rests on other evidence. As an example of the errors and
difficulties in which psychologists have involved themselves by
beginning with the more complex question without having considered
the simpler one, it is worth remembering that Locke makes personal
identity consist in Consciousness, which in this case means Memory;
and has been justly criticised by later thinkers for this doctrine,
as leading to the corollary, that whatever of my past actions I have
forgotten, I never performed--that my forgotten feelings were not my
feelings, but were (it must therefore be supposed) the feelings of
somebody else. Locke, however, had seen one part of the true state
of the case; which is, that to _myself_ I am only, properly
speaking, the same person, in respect of those facts of my past life
which I remember; but that I nevertheless consider myself as having
been, at the times of which I retain no remembrance, the same person
I now am, because I have satisfactory evidence that I was the same
to other people; that an uninterrupted continuity in the sensations
of sight and touch caused or which could have been caused to other
people, existed between my present self and the infant who I am told
I was, and between my present self and the person who is proved to
me to have done the acts I have myself forgotten.

These considerations remove the outer veil, or husk, as it were,
which wraps up the idea of the Ego. But after this is removed, there
remains an inner covering, which, as far as I can perceive, is
impenetrable. My personal identity consists {174} in my being the
same Ego who did, or who felt, some specific fact recalled to me by
memory. So be it: but what is Memory? It is not merely having the
idea of that fact recalled: that is but thought, or conception, or
imagination. It is, having the idea recalled along with the Belief
that the fact which it is the idea of, really happened, and moreover
happened to myself. Memory, therefore, by the very fact of its being
different from Imagination, implies an Ego who formerly experienced
the facts remembered, and who was the same Ego then as now. The
phenomenon of Self and that of Memory are merely two sides of the
same fact, or two different modes of viewing the same fact We may,
as psychologists, set out from either of them, and refer the other
to it. We may, in treating of Memory, say (as the author says) that
it is the idea of a past sensation associated with the idea of
myself as having it. Or we may say, in treating of Identity, (as the
author also says), that the meaning of Self is the memory of certain
past sensations. But it is hardly allowable to do both. At least it
must be said, that by doing so we explain neither. We only show that
the two things are essentially the same; that my memory of having
ascended Skiddaw on a given day, and my consciousness of being the
same person who ascended Skiddaw on that day, are two modes of
stating the same fact: a fact which psychology has as yet failed to
resolve into anything more elementary.

In analysing the complex phenomena of consciousness, we must come to
something ultimate; and we seem to have reached two elements which
have a good prima facie claim to that title. There is, first, the
common element in all cases of Belief, namely, the difference
between a fact, and the thought of that fact: a distinction which we
are able to cognize in the past, and which then constitutes Memory,
and in the future, when it constitutes Expectation; but in neither
case can we give any account of it except that it exists; an
inability which is admitted in the most elementary case of the
distinction, viz. the difference between a present sensation and an
idea. Secondly, in addition to this, and setting out from the belief
{175} in the reality of a past event, or in other words, the belief
that the idea I now have was derived from a previous sensation, or
combination of sensations, corresponding to it, there is the further
conviction that this sensation or combination of sensations was my
own; that it happened to myself. In other words, I am aware of a
long and uninterrupted succession of past feelings going as far back
as memory reaches, and terminating with the sensations I have at the
present moment, all of which are connected by an inexplicable tie,
that distinguishes them not only from any succession or combination
in mere thought, but also from the parallel successions of feelings
which I believe, on satisfactory evidence, to have happened to each
of the other beings, shaped like myself, whom I perceive around me.
This succession of feelings, which I call my memory of the past, is
that by which I distinguish my Self. Myself is the person who had
that series of feelings, and I know nothing of myself, by direct
knowledge, except that I had them. But there is a bond of some sort
among all the parts of the series, which makes me say that they were
feelings of a person who was the same person throughout, and a
different person from those who had any of the parallel successions
of feelings; and this bond, to me, constitutes my Ego. Here,
I think, the question must rest, until some psychologist succeeds
better than any one has yet done in shewing a mode in which the
analysis can be carried further.--_Ed._]




{176} CHAPTER XV.

REFLECTION.


SO much use has been made of the word REFLECTION, and results of so
much importance have been referred to it, that it is necessary to
shew what state of Consciousness it denotes, in all the possible
acceptations of it.

Mr. Locke defines it, "That notice which the mind takes of its own
operations."

When we have a sensation, we have already seen, on various
occasions, that the having the state of consciousness, and taking
notice of it, are not two things, but one and the same thing. When
we say that one sensation is more attended to than another, this, as
we shall see hereafter, is really tantamount to saying, that the one
is more a sensation than the other.

In like manner, when we have an idea; the having the idea, the being
conscious of the idea, knowing the idea, observing the idea, are
only different names for the same thing. They mean the being
conscious in a particular way. But the being conscious is to take
notice of the consciousness. To be conscious, and not to take
notice, is the same thing as to be {177} conscious, and not
conscious. The notice is the consciousness, and the consciousness is
the notice.

Thus far, therefore, it appears, with abundant evidence that
Reflection is nothing but Consciousness; and Consciousness is the
having the sensations and ideas. But what will be objected is, that
we not only have Ideas; but we are capable of forming the idea of
that particular state of mind which exists when we have an idea. It
requires a close examination, to discover what is really meant by
the language in which this objection is conveyed. The thing,
however, to which it imperfectly points, can be made out; though,
from the imperfection of the language which we must employ, it is
not easy to explain it, with a certainty of being understood.

When it is said, that we can not only have a particular idea, but
can form an idea of that state of mind, generally, which is called
having an idea; this can mean nothing but the distinction between
the particular and the general idea. It is affirmed, that we can not
only have this idea, and that idea, but we can have the general idea
of all ideas. This is true. But we know, by previous elucidations,
what all this means. We can have the idea not only of this man, or
that man, but we can have the idea of men in general. That is to
say, we can group all individuals of a certain description into one
class, to which class we give a name, equally applicable to every
individual; which name, accordingly, being associated equally with
individuals indefinite in number, calls up the ideas of individuals,
indefinite in number, on every application of it.

This points out a double meaning of the word Idea; from which all
the confusion of the language {178} about REFLECTION seems to have
been derived. The same word, Idea, is both the _particular_, and the
_general_ name. It cannot be disputed, that so far as regards
individual Ideas, the having an idea, and knowing it, the being in
the state of consciousness, and knowing the state of consciousness,
are one and the same thing. And, if the being in a state of
consciousness, and knowing it, does not express all that is meant by
reflecting upon it (where reflecting is not used in another sense,
as equivalent with remembering), it will remain for those who
believe there is anything more, to shew what it is.

That the general is derived from the particular, there will be no
hesitation in allowing. The fact, therefore, so imperfectly stated,
is, that, from individual states of consciousness, we rise, by
generalization, as in other cases, to the general idea which
embraces a class. General Ideas, on account of their complexity, are
all apt to appear, to persons little accustomed to examine them
closely, more or less mysterious. But general ideas, not of the
steady objects of sense, but the fleeting states of consciousness,
which we have so little under command, and for the naming of which
we are so ill provided with terms, cannot fail to appear mysterious
in a much greater degree. What we are now, therefore, contemplating
is a case of generalization, which, how certainly soever, from the
common laws of the human mind, we know that it is made, it is far
from easy distinctly to conceive. And those of my readers, who have
followed me easily in this deduction, may be satisfied they have
made no slight progress in metaphysical science.

{179} It is evident, when all this is clearly understood, that what
has been mysteriously set forth, under the name of an Idea of
REFLECTION, is simply the generalization of particular states of
consciousness; which particular states of consciousness are our
sensations and ideas.

There are various cases of this generalization, some more, some
less, extensive.

In the same manner as we generalize the having of a single idea; and
conceive, not the having of this idea, or that idea, but the having
of any idea, and all ideas; we also generalize the having two
associated ideas, and, from particulars, mount up to the general
idea of the association, or train, of ideas.

It is needless to be particular in referring to the specific cases.
We have seen what combination of ideas constitutes the case of
memory. Individual instances of memory are generalized; these
peculiar combinations are viewed as a class; hence the general idea,
and general name of the class.

The explanation is obviously the same, in other cases, as Judgment,
Reasoning, Belief, Willing. We know what is the particular case of
association on which each of these names is bestowed. We know what
is the state of consciousness, on each individual occasion of
Judging, Reasoning, and so forth. Generalization is performed. The
particular instances are viewed as composing a class. The Idea of
the class is the Idea of Reflection.[34]

[Editor's footnote 34: To reflect on any of our feelings or mental
acts is more properly identified with _attending_ to the feeling,
than, (as stated in the text) with merely having it. The author
scarcely {180} recognises this as a difference. He sometimes indeed
seems to consider attention as mental repetition; but in his chapter
on the Will, we shall find that he there identifies attending to a
feeling with merely having the feeling. I conceive, on the contrary,
(with the great majority of psychologists) that there is an
important distinction between the two things; the ignoring of which
has led the author into errors. What the distinction is, I have
endeavoured to shew in my note to the chapter on Consciousness; and
the subject will return upon us hereafter.--_Ed._]




{181} CHAPTER XVI.

THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE INTELLECTUAL AND ACTIVE POWERS OF THE
HUMAN MIND.


"It is the greatest triumph of philosophy to refer many, and
seemingly very various, phenomena, to one, or a very few, simple
principles: and the more simple and evident such a principle is,
provided it be truly applicable to all the cases in question, the
greater is its value and scientific beauty."--_Elements of Logic_,
_by Dr. Whately_, p. 32.

THE Phenomena of Thought have long appeared to be divisible into two
great classes; which were distinguished by the names, the one of the
Intellectual, the other of the Active, Powers of the Human Mind. In
the phenomena which compose the first of those classes, and which we
have now pretty completely surveyed, the sensations and ideas are
considered merely as existing. In the phenomena which compose the
second of the two classes, the sensations and ideas are to be
considered as not merely existing, but also as exciting to
action.[35]

[Bain's footnote 35: Instead of "The phenomena of _Thought_,"
substitute the phenomena of Mind, the Subject, or the Subject
Consciousness. The use of the word "Thought" seems to justify an
opinion held by Hamilton and by the German philosophers, that
thought, or the cognitive function is the basis of mind, instead of
being co-ordinate with the other leading functions (Feeling and
Will.) There is no evidence elsewhere that the author shares this
opinion.

The defectiveness of the two-fold classification of the mind, which
seems to have descended from Aristotle, and is only in the present
generation supplanted by an explicitly worked-out triple division,
is especially apparent in the handling of all the succeeding
chapters of the present work. The Will, or the activity of the
system, is spoken of as set on indiscriminately by "sensations and
ideas;" which, as will be seen, is to mix together a number of
entirely distinct processes.

There is no adequate separation of the emotional part of a
Sensation, from its intellectual or knowledge-giving part. The same
confusion extends to the word "idea," which, without premonition, is
employed for the memory of pleasures and pains, and for the memory
of sensations of the intellectual or knowledge-giving kind. There
is, as might be expected, an insufficient treatment of the special
forms of Emotion; there being no basis laid for their exhaustive or
natural classification.--_B._]

{182} With respect to the sensations and ideas which compose the
phenomena of the first class, we have observed, that they are apt to
be formed into clusters of more or less complexity; and that they
follow one another, in trains, according to certain laws.

The sensations and ideas, which compose the phenomena of the second
class, are equally formed into clusters, with those composing the
phenomena of the former class; and follow one another, in trains,
according to the same laws.

So far, the two classes of phenomena agree; and so far, the
analysis, which we have endeavoured to effect of the former class,
is to be taken as the analysis also of the latter. Our object, now,
is, to trace to their {183} source the differences which constitute
this a separate class; to mark the subdivisions into which it can be
most conveniently distributed; and to demonstrate the simple laws,
into which the whole phenomena of human life, so numerous, and
apparently so diversified, may all be easily resolved.




{184} CHAPTER XVII.

PLEASURABLE AND PAINFUL SENSATIONS.


THERE is a remarkable difference of sensations, which has been
mentioned before, but which must now be more particularly attended
to.

Some sensations, probably the greater number, are what we call
indifferent. They are not considered as either painful, or
pleasurable. There are sensations, however, and of frequent
recurrence, some of which are painful, some pleasurable. The
difference is, that which is felt. A man knows it, by feeling it;
and this is the whole account of the phenomenon. I have one
sensation, and then another, and then another. The first is of such
a kind, that I care not whether it is long or short; the second is
of such a kind that I would put an end to it instantly if I could;
the third is of such a kind, that I like it prolonged. To
distinguish those feelings, I give them names. I call the first
Indifferent; the second, Painful; the third. Pleasurable; very
often, for shortness, I call the second, Pain, the third, Pleasure.

We formerly shewed, that having a sensation and {185} knowing it,
are not two things, but one and the same thing; that having two
sensations and knowing them, are not two things, but one and the
same thing. It is obvious, therefore, that having three sensations,
an Indifferent, a Pleasurable, and a Painful, and knowing them for
what they are, are not different things, but one and the same thing.

The pleasurable and painful sensations are common to all the senses.
We have pleasures and pains of the eye, of the ear, of the touch,
the taste, the smell, and also of many internal parts of the body,
for which, though, as we shall presently see, they hold a great
share in composing the springs of human action, we have not names,
nor any means of accurate estimation.[36]

[Editor's footnote 36: In the case of many pleasurable or painful
sensations, it is open to question whether the pleasure or pain,
especially the pleasure, is not something added to the sensation,
and capable of being detached from it, rather than merely a
particular aspect or quality of the sensation. It is often
observable that a sensation is much less pleasurable at one time
than at another, though to our consciousness it appears exactly the
same sensation in all except the pleasure. This is emphatically the
fact in cases of satiety, or of loss of taste for a sensation by
loss of novelty. It is probable that in such cases the pleasure may
depend on different nerves, or on a different action of the same
nerves, from the remaining part of the sensation. However this may
be, the pleasure or pain attending a sensation is (like the feelings
of Likeness, Succession, &c.) capable of being mentally abstracted
from the sensation, or, in other words, capable of being attended to
by itself. And in any case Mr. Bain's distinction holds good,
between the emotional part or property of a sensation (in which he
includes the {186} pleasure or pain belonging to it) and its
intellectual or knowledge-giving part. It must be remembered,
however, that these are not exclusive of one another; the
knowledge-giving part is not necessarily emotional, but the
emotional part is and must be knowledge-giving. The pleasure or pain
of the feeling are subjects of intellectual apprehension; they give
the knowledge of themselves and of their varieties.--_Ed._]




{187} CHAPTER XVIII.

CAUSES OF THE PLEASURABLE AND PAINFUL SENSATIONS.


NEXT in order to the Pleasurable and Painful Sensations, it is
necessary to take notice of the causes of them. We can generally
trace them to certain constant antecedents; and it is evidently of
the greatest importance to us to be able to do so; as it is by those
means only, we can lessen the number of the painful sensations,
increase the number of the pleasurable.

Of the causes of our Pleasurable and Painful Sensations, it is
necessary to distinguish two classes; first, the immediate causes;
secondly, the remote causes; a remote, being not, strictly speaking,
the cause of the sensation, but the cause of that cause. Thus, the
lash of the executioner is the immediate cause of the pain of the
criminal. The sentence of the Judge, is the cause of that cause. The
sound of the violin is the immediate cause of the pleasure of my
ear; the performance of the musician, the cause of that sound; the
money with which I have hired the musician, the cause of that
performance. The money is, in this case, the cause of the cause of
the cause of the sensation; or the cause, at two removes.

{188} It is necessary to be remarked, respecting the causes of our
pleasurable and painful sensations, that, they are apt to become
greater objects of concern to us, to rank higher in importance, than
the sensations themselves. It is a vulgar observation, with respect
to money, for example, that, though useful only for obtaining
pleasure, or saving from pain, it is often employed for neither
purpose, but hugged as a good in itself.

The importance attached to the cause of the sensation, is a case of
association easy to be traced. The pleasurable and painful
sensations themselves are, specifically, not numerous. The causes of
them, on the other hand, are exceedingly numerous, and diversified.
Again; the mind is not much interested in attending to the
sensation. The sensation provides for itself. The mind, however, is
deeply interested in attending to the cause; that we may prevent, or
remove it, if the sensation is painful; provide, or detain it, if
the sensation is pleasurable. This creates a habit of passing
rapidly from the sensation, to fix our attention upon its cause.




{189} CHAPTER XIX.

IDEAS OF THE PLEASURABLE AND PAINFUL SENSATIONS, AND OF THE CAUSES
OF THEM.


WE have already seen, that all sensations are capable of being
revived, without that action on the organs of sense which originally
produced them; and that, when so revived, we call them ideas or
copies of the sensations.

The sensations which are pleasurable and painful, are revived in the
same manner as those which are indifferent; but, as the sensations
which are pleasurable and painful form a class of sensations
remarkably distinguished from sensations of the indifferent class,
the ideas of the pleasurable and painful sensations form a class of
ideas, no less remarkably distinguished from the ideas of the
indifferent sensations.

It is necessary to endeavour by a particular effort to distinguish
accurately from all other feelings that peculiar state of
consciousness, which we call the idea of a pleasurable or painful
sensation; in other words, that sensation revived, after the
operation upon the senses has ceased.

This state of consciousness, like other states, is known only by
having it. What it is felt to be, it is. {190} We can afford,
therefore, no aid to the reader in distinguishing it, otherwise than
by using such expressions as seem calculated to fix his attention
upon it. It is his own inward, invisible state, which only he can
mark for himself.

The idea of a pain or pleasure, is not a pain or pleasure. We do not
say that the idea of the hand scalded is a pain, or the idea of a
sweet smell is a pleasure. But this is not very satisfactory
language; for it, in reality, means little more, than that the idea
of a pleasurable or painful sensation, is not a sensation. That
there are some trains of ideas, however, which it is agreeable to
have, others which it is disagreeable, is one among the most
familiar facts of our nature. There is, therefore, a distinction
among ideas, analogous to that of pleasurable and painful among
sensations.

It is difficult to think of any one sensation by itself; because
each is so combined with others, that the idea of one can never
present itself, but in company with more. This is peculiarly the
case with sensations of the pleasurable and painful kinds: and hence
the cause of the indistinctness, which seems to accompany the idea
of any of those sensations, when we endeavour to take it apart, and
consider what it is in itself.

An idea is the revival of a former state of feeling. The first thing
which I have to consider is, what is my precise state of
consciousness, when I receive a pleasurable or painful sensation.

When the sensation was present, suppose a painful one, it was a
state of consciousness, so interesting to me, that it was important
to find a mark for it. I {191} called it Pain. It is a state of
consciousness known to every man by his having had it, and it can be
known by no other means. We call it by various names; an odious
state, a disagreeable state, and so on; but these are only several
modes of marking what is felt, and tell to no man anything more than
his feeling has told. Except for his own knowledge of his own
feeling, the words would be utterly without a meaning.

Such is the state of consciousness under the sensation. I revive the
sensation.

My state of consciousness under the sensation I called a pain. My
state of consciousness under the idea of the pain, I call, not a
pain, but an aversion. An aversion is the idea of a pain. Whatever
is included under the term idea of pain, is included precisely under
the term aversion. They are not two things, but two names for the
same thing.

The same explanation applies to the case of a pleasurable sensation.
The state of consciousness under the sensation, that is, the
sensation itself, differed from other sensations, in that it was
agreeable. A name was wanted to denote this peculiarity; to mark, as
a class, the sensations which possess it. The term, Pleasure, was
adopted. I revive the sensation; in other words, have the idea; and
as I had occasion for a name to class the sensations, I have
occasion for a name to class the ideas. My state of consciousness
under the sensation, I call a Pleasure: my state of consciousness
under the idea, that is, the idea itself, I call a Desire. The term
"Idea of a pleasure," expresses precisely the same thing as the
term, Desire. It does so by the very import of the words. The {192}
idea of a pleasure, is the idea of something as good to have. But
what is a desire, other than the idea of something as good to have;
good to have, being really nothing but desirable to have? The terms,
therefore, "idea of pleasure," and "desire," are but two names; the
thing named, the state of consciousness, is one and the same.

There is an ambiguity, however, in the terms Aversion, and Desire,
which contributes not a little to cast darkness upon this part of
our inquiry.

They are applied to the ideas of the Causes of our Pleasurable and
Painful Sensations, as well as to the ideas of those Sensations;
and, of course, in a different sense. We say we have an aversion to
certain kinds of food, or certain drugs; we have a desire for water
to drink, for fire to warm us, and so on.

When we examine these phrases narrowly, we find that it is not
literally, but by a sort of figure of speech, that the terms
"Aversion," and "Desire," are applied to the Causes of Pains and
Pleasures. Properly speaking, it is not to the food, or the drug,
that we have the aversion, but to the disagreeable taste. The food
is a substance of a certain colour, and consistence; so is the drug.
There is nothing in these qualities which is offensive to us; only
the taste. In like manner, it is not the water we desire, but the
pleasure of drinking; not the fire we desire, but the pleasure of
warmth.

The illusion is merely that of a very close association. There is no
case, indeed, of association, in which the union is more intimate,
than that between the idea of a pungent sensation, and its customary
cause; and hence, there is no wonder that the name {193} which
properly belongs to the one, should be bestowed upon the other, or
rather, that the name which belongs properly to one, should be given
to the two, formed into a complex idea, in conjunction.

There is another source of perplexity, which arises from the
connotative power of the terms Desire, and Aversion. They are Nouns,
in the future tense; that is, they connote futurity; just as Verbs,
in the future tense, connote futurity. Though the feeling, called
the idea of a pleasurable sensation, is precisely the feeling called
desirableness; desirableness, and the idea of something pleasurable,
being convertible terms, the word Desire, whenever it is applied to
a particular case, carries with it a tacit reference to future time.
When the idea of a sensation is present, the sensation itself is not
present. The sensation has been, or is to be. It is difficult,
therefore, to have the idea of a pleasurable sensation, without the
association of the past, or the future. The idea of a pleasurable
sensation with the association of the Past, is never called Desire.
The word Desire, is commonly used to mark the idea of a pleasurable
sensation, when the Future is associated with it. The idea of a
pleasurable sensation, to come, is what is commonly meant by Desire.
We have, however, no other name to mark the idea, when it is
considered by itself, and without reference to the past, or the
future. In these cases, Desire, and the idea of a pleasurable
sensation; Aversion, and the idea of a painful sensation, are
convertible terms.

From this exposition, it follows, that the number of our desires is
the same with that of our pleasurable sensations; the number of our
aversions, the same {194} with that of our painful sensations; just
as the number of our simple ideas of sight, is the same with that of
our sensations of sight; the number of our simple ideas of sound,
taste, or smell, the same with that of our sensations of sound,
taste, or smell.[37]

[Editor's footnote 37: The principal doctrine of this chapter is,
that Desire, and Aversion, are nothing but the idea of a pleasurable
sensation, and the Idea of a painful sensation: which doctrine is
then qualified by saying, that a desire is the idea of a pleasure
associated with the future, an aversion the idea of a pain
associated with the future.

But according to the whole spirit of the author's speculations, and
to his express affirmation in the beginning of the next chapter, the
idea of any sensation associated with the future, constitutes the
Expectation of it: and if so, it rested with him to prove that the
expectation of a pleasure, or of a pain, is the same thing with the
desire, or aversion. This is certainly not conformable to common
observation. For, on the one hand, it is commonly understood that
there may be desire or aversion without expectation; and on the
other, expectation of a pleasure without any actual feeling of
desire: one may expect, and even look forward with satisfaction to,
the pleasure of a meal, although one is not, but only expects to be,
hungry. So perfectly is it assumed that expectation, and desire or
aversion, are not necessarily combined, that the case in which they
are combined is signified by a special pair of names. Desire
combined with expectation, is called by the name of Hope; Aversion
combined with expectation, is known by the name of Fear.

I believe the fact to be that desire is not Expectation, but is more
than the idea of the pleasure desired, being, in truth, the
initiatory stage of Will. In what we call Desire there is, I think,
always included a positive stimulation to action; either to the
definite course of action which would lead to our {195} obtaining
the pleasure, or to a general restlessness and vague seeking after
it. The stimulation may fall short of actually producing action:
even when it prompts to a definite act, it may be repressed by a
stronger motive, or by knowledge that the pleasure is not within
present reach, nor can be brought nearer to us by any present action
of our own. Still, there is, I think, always, the sense of a
tendency to action, in the direction of pursuit of the pleasure,
though the tendency may be overpowered by an external or an internal
restraint. So also, in aversion, there is always a tendency to
action of the kind which repels or avoids the painful sensation. But
of these things more fully under the head of Will.--_Ed._]




{196} CHAPTER XX.

THE PLEASURABLE AND PAINFUL SENSATIONS, CONTEMPLATED AS PASSED OR AS
FUTURE.


WE have considered, what the pleasurable and painful sensations are
when present; what the ideas of them, considered as present, are;
and what the ideas of their causes.

Those sensations, however, together with their causes, we may
contemplate, either as passed, or as future: and so contemplated,
they give rise to some of the most interesting states of the human
mind.

To contemplate any feeling as Passed, is to remember it; and the
explanation of Memory we need not repeat. To contemplate any feeling
as Future, is merely a case of that Anticipation of the future from
the passed, of which, also, we have already given the explanation.

When my finger was in the flame of the candle and burned, the
painful sensation was present. The state of consciousness, however,
was complex, and consisted of several ingredients; the sight of the
burning candle, the sight of my finger, the sense of a certain
position or locality, namely, that of my {197} finger and the
candle, the painful sensation, and the belief that it was my
sensation; in other words, the association of that thread of
consciousness in which, to me, my being consists, with the present
sensation. The painful feeling was thus a feeling deeply imbedded
among others.

When I remember this state of consciousness, the idea of it, which
makes part of the memory, is by no means a simple idea. It is
composed of the ideas of all the above-mentioned sensations,
together with that of the train of consciousness, which I call
myself. This last is necessary to constitute it _my_ idea. This
idea, thus existing as my idea, and my present idea, is associated
with that part of my train or thread of consciousness which has
intervened, between the present state and the remembered state; and
by this last association the idea becomes memory.

The anticipation of the Future is the same series of association;
with this difference, that, in memory, the association of the train
of consciousness, which converts the idea into memory, is from
consequent to antecedent, that is, backwards; the association in the
case of anticipation is from antecedent to consequent, forwards.

In anticipation, as in memory, there is, first, the complex idea, as
above; next, the passage of the mind forwards from the present state
of consciousness, the antecedent, to one consequent after another,
till it comes to the anticipated sensation. Suppose, that, as a
punishment, a man is condemned to put his finger after two days in
the flame of a candle; wherein consists his anticipation? The
complex idea, as described above, of the painful sensation, with all
its {198} concomitant sensations and ideas, is the first part of the
process. The remainder is the association with this idea of the
events, one after another, which are to fill up the intermediate
time, and terminate with his finger placed in the flame of the
candle. The whole of this association, taken together, comprises the
idea of the pain as his pain, after a train of antecedents.

The process of anticipation is so precisely the same, when the
sensation is of the pleasurable kind, that I deem it unnecessary to
repeat it.[38]

[Editor's footnote 38: This is the first place in which the author
gives his analysis of Expectation; and his theory of it is, as all
theories of it must be, the exact counterpart of the same person's
theory of Memory. He resolves it into the mere Idea of the expected
event, accompanied by the "idea of the events, one after another,"
which are to begin with the present moment, and end with the
expected event. But in this case, as in that of Memory, the
objection recurs, that all this may exist in the case of mere
Imagination. A man may conceive himself being hanged, or elevated to
a throne, and may construct in his mind a series of possible or
conceivable events, through which he can fancy each of these results
to be brought about. If he is a man of lively imagination, this idea
of the events "which are to fill up the intermediate time" may be at
least as copious, as the idea of the series of coming events for a
year from the present time, which according to the author's theory
I have in my mind when I look forward to commencing a journey twelve
months hence. Yet he neither expects to be hanged, nor to be made a
king, still less both, which, to bear out the theory, it would seem
that he ought.

The difference between Expectation and mere Imagination, as well as
between Memory and Imagination, consists in the presence or absence
of Belief; and though this is no explanation of either phenomenon,
it brings us back to one and the same real problem, which I have so
often referred to, and which neither the author nor any other
thinker has yet solved--the difference between knowing something as
a Reality, and as a mere Thought; a distinction similar and parallel
to that between a Sensation and an Idea.--_Ed._]

{199} In contemplating a painful or pleasurable sensation as past,
that is, remembering it, the mind is in general tranquil. The state
is not, perhaps, a state of indifference; but it is not so far
removed from it, as to call attention to itself, or require a name
to mark it.

The case is different, when the sensation is contemplated as future,
or anticipated. The state of consciousness is then far removed from
a state of indifference. It admits of two cases. One is, when the
sensation is contemplated as certainly future; the other is, when it
is contemplated as not certainly future.

When a pleasurable sensation is contemplated as future, but not
certainly, the state of consciousness is called Hope. When a painful
sensation is contemplated as future, but not certainly, the state of
consciousness is called Fear.[39]

[Editor's footnote 39: The author's definitions of Hope and Fear
differ from those offered in my note (p. 194). He considers these
words to signify that the pleasure or the pain is contemplated as
future, but without certainty. It must be admitted that the words
are often applied to very faint degrees of anticipation, far short
of those which in popular language would be spoken of as
Expectation: but I think the terms are not inconsistent with the
fullest assurance. A man is about to undergo a painful surgical
operation. He has no doubt whatever about the event; he fully
intends it; there are no other means, perhaps, of saving his life.
Yet the feeling with which he looks forward to it, and with which he
contemplates the preparations for it, are such as would, I think, by
the custom of language, be designated as fear. Death, again, is the
most certain of all future events, yet we speak of the fear of
death. It is perhaps more doubtful whether the fully assured
anticipation of a desired enjoyment would receive, in ordinary
parlance, the name of Hope; yet some common phrases seem to imply
that it would. We read even on tombstones "the sure hope of a joyful
immortality."

A still more restricted application of the word Fear, also justified
by usage, is to the case in which the feeling amounts to a
disturbing passion; and to this meaning Mr Bain, as will be seen in
a future note, thinks it desirable to confine it.--_Ed._]

{200} Again: When a pleasurable sensation is anticipated with
certainty, we call the state of consciousness Joy. When a painful
sensation is thus anticipated, we call it Sorrow. Neither of the two
terms is good; because not confined to this signification. Both are
applied to name other things, also, which we shall presently have
occasion to notice. They are, therefore, a source of confusion.




{201} CHAPTER XXI.

THE CAUSES OF PLEASURABLE AND PAINFUL SENSATIONS, CONTEMPLATED AS
PASSED, OR AS FUTURE.


SECTION I.

THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES OF PLEASURABLE AND PAINFUL SENSATIONS,
CONTEMPLATED AS PASSED, OR AS FUTURE.


BESIDE the Sensations, the Causes of them are capable of being
contemplated, both as passed, and as future.

It may be regarded as remarkable, that though the idea or thought of
a disagreeable sensation, as passed, is nearly indifferent, the
thought of the cause of a painful passed sensation is often a very
interesting state of consciousness. This state of consciousness we
sometimes call Antipathy, sometimes Hatred; though hatred, as we
shall afterwards see, is more frequently the name of the Motive to
which it gives birth. We have, however, but one concrete term for
both of these abstracts, the verb "to hate," which, of course,
performs its business ill. From this, however, it no doubt comes,
that the word Hatred is often used as synonymous with Antipathy.

{202} This is a case of association, which deserves a little
attention. The idea of the cause of a painful sensation is so
closely associated with that of the sensation, that the one never
exists without the other. But this is not all. The anticipation of
the future from the passed, is so strong an association, that, in
interesting cases, it is indissoluble. The thought of the Cause of a
passed painful sensation, is the idea of an antecedent and a
consequent. The idea of the passed antecedent and consequent is
instantly followed by that of a future antecedent and consequent;
and thus the feeling partakes of the nature of the anticipation of a
future painful sensation. The association may be but momentary, as
it may instantly be checked by other associations. But, being
momentary, it existed, and its existence is sufficient to account
for the difference, which is often observable, between the state of
consciousness when the sensation is remembered, and the state of
consciousness when the cause of the sensation is remembered. When
the sensation is remembered singly, there is not that association of
a passed antecedent and consequent, which is instantly followed by
that of a future antecedent and consequent of the same kind. That
association takes place in the case of the remembered cause; and
hence the difference, with which every man is acquainted.[40]

[Editor's footnote 40: The difference here brought to notice between
the very slight emotion excited in most cases by the idea of a past
pain, and the strong feeling excited by the idea of the cause of a
past pain, will be confirmed by every one's experience; and is
rightly explained by the author, as arising from the fact that what
has caused a past pain has an interest affecting the future, since
it may cause future pains. It is noticeable that the author nowhere
explains why the thought of a pain as future is so much more
painful, than the thought of a past pain when detached from all
apprehension for the future; why the expectation of an evil is
generally so much worse than the remembrance of one. This fact might
have made him doubt the sufficiency of his theory of Memory and
Expectation; since, according to his analysis, neither of them is
anything but the idea of the pain itself, associated in each case
with a series of events which may be intrinsically indifferent; and
if there were no elements in the case but those which he has pointed
out, no sufficient reason is apparent why there should be any
inequality of painfulness between the remembrance and the
expectation.--_Ed._]

{203} The thought of the cause of a passed agreeable sensation or
sensations, is also very often an interesting state of
consciousness. It is called by the names both of Sympathy, and Love.
Neither of the terms is confined to this signification; they are
both, therefore, bad names, and a great cause of confusion of ideas;
as we shall see in other instances hereafter.

The pleasurable sensations not being so pungent as the painful, it
but rarely happens that the immediate cause of a single passed
pleasurable sensation is an object of interest: the cause of the
cessation, however, of a painful sensation is so, not unfrequently.
The traveller, who was ready to perish with thirst in the desert,
can never afterwards think of the well which relieved him, without
emotion.

The states of consciousness which exist when we contemplate the
causes of our painful and pleasurable sensations as _Future_, are
easily analysed, after what has been shewn. It is a case of the
anticipation of the future from the passed; with this peculiarity,
that {204} the final antecedent and consequent are interesting, the
one as a pleasurable or painful Feeling, the other as the cause of
it.

If the anticipated sensation is painful, and contemplated as
certain, the associated ideas of the cause and effect constitute a
state of consciousness, which we mark by various forms of
expression, but for which we have no appropriate name. We call it
Hatred, we call it Aversion, we call it Horror. We call the object
hateful, or disgusting, or loathsome, according to the nature of the
anticipated sensation. When the sensation is contemplated as not
certainly future, the state of mind is what we call Dread, in some
one or other of its numerous modifications.

When the cause of a pleasure is contemplated as certainly future,
such object is associated with the feeling called Joy; when it is
contemplated as not certainly future, it is associated with the
feeling called Hope. What the feelings, Joy, and Hope, are, we have
so recently seen, that it cannot be forgotten. In the association of
the cause of a pleasure with both, the state of consciousness has no
more appropriate name than that of Love. An object contemplated as a
future cause of future pleasure, is an object _loved_, whether the
anticipation is certain or uncertain.[41]

[Bain's footnote 41: A distinction should be drawn between Aversion
and Fear. We may be very much averse to a thing, and yet not fear
it. A courageous person is not necessarily wanting in aversions or
dislikes, or in labours for warding off what is disagreeable.
Anything that gives us pain, when approaching or imminent, is viewed
with aversion, and stimulates efforts of counteraction, or escape;
and yet it may not inspire the state properly named Fear. The
distinguishing characteristic of fear is an unhinging {205}
excitement, a disturbance of the serenity and balance of the mind,
inducing exaggerated, disproportioned or misplaced exertions. One of
the causes of fear is approaching evil, but the effect does not
always happen. The evil may work its proper effect upon the will,
namely to prevent or evade it, without any of the perturbing
accessories called being terrified or afraid.--_B._]


{206} SECTION II.

THE REMOTE CAUSES OF PLEASURABLE AND PAINFUL SENSATIONS,
CONTEMPLATED AS PAST, OR FUTURE.


Before entering into the detail of this part of the subject, one
important observation is to be made; that the remote causes of our
Pains and Pleasures are apt to be objects, far more deeply
interesting, than those which are immediate. This at first sight
appears paradoxical. It is the necessary result, however, of the
general Law of our nature.

The immediate causes of our pleasurable and painful sensations have
never any very extensive operation. The idea of any one is rarely
associated with more than a limited number of pains or pleasures.
Food, for example, the cause of the pleasures of eating; pleasures,
perhaps, from the frequency with which they are repeated, and the
portion of life over which they are spread, more valuable, as a
class, than any other which we enjoy; has never appeared an object
of sufficient interest, to make the affection with which it is
regarded be thought worthy of a name. The idea of Food, though
associated with pleasures which constitute so important a class, is
associated with the pleasures but of one class: some of the remote
causes are associated with the pleasures of almost every class.
Money, for example, instrumental in procuring the causes of almost
all our pleasures, and removing the {207} causes of a large
proportion of our pains, is associated with the ideas of most of the
pleasurable states of our nature. The idea of an object associated
with a hundred times as many pleasures as another, is of course a
hundred times more interesting.

       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-SECTION I.

_Wealth_, _Power_, _and Dignity_, _and their Contraries_,
_Contemplated as Causes of our Pleasures and Pains_.


As among the remote causes of our pleasures and pains may be
reckoned everything which in any way contributes to them, it follows
that the number of such causes is exceedingly great. Of course it is
only the principal cases which have been attended to, and classed
under Titles. They are mostly comprehended under the
following:--Wealth, Power, Dignity, as regards the pleasurable
sensations;--Poverty, Impotence, Contemptibility, as regards the
painful sensations. What our states of consciousness are, when we
are said to contemplate these causes of pains and pleasures, with
reference to ourselves, or as causes of our own pleasures and pains,
we now proceed to inquire.

One remarkable thing is first of all to be noticed: the three, above
named, grand causes of our pleasures agree in this, that they all
are the means of procuring for us the Services of our
fellow-creatures, and themselves contribute to our pleasures in
hardly any other way. It is obvious from this remark, that the grand
{208} cause of all our pleasures are the services of our
fellow-creatures; since Wealth, Power, and Dignity, which appear to
most people to sum up the means of human happiness, are nothing more
than means of procuring those services. This is a fact of the
highest possible importance, both in Morals, and in Philosophy.

That Wealth, Power, and Dignity do procure for us pleasurable
sensations only by procuring for us the services of our
fellow-creatures, a short illustration will suffice to shew.

Wealth enables us either to purchase directly the services of other
men, as of those whom we desire to have in attendance about us; or
to purchase commodities; or, it adds to our Power and Dignity. As
far as it purchases the services of others directly, the truth of
what we have advanced is obvious. It is hardly less obvious, that
when we purchase commodities, which are the fruit of other men's
labour, we, in reality, do nothing but purchase the services of
those men, who, in fact, were working for us, when working at the
goods which we ultimately consume. In as far as Wealth adds to
Power, and Dignity, it is included under those several heads.

A man's Power means the readiness of other men to obey him. Now one
man obeys another, from the prospect, either of good if he obeys, or
of evil if he does not obey. Wealth is the great means of procuring
obedience, through the medium of good. All hire of services, is
through that medium. The power of inflicting evil, in case of
disobedience, and of procuring services by fear, is what in the more
peculiar sense, is meant by the term Power. It is to be {209}
observed, that the range of obedience, obtained by fear, is capable
of much greater enlargement, than that which is obtained by hope.
The means any man has of paying for the services of others, extends
at most to some thousands; the means which some men have had of
imposing their commands on other men, through fear, has extended to
many millions.

Dignity is a word of much more vague signification, than Wealth, or
Power. It is, therefore, much more difficult, to describe clearly
its mode of operation.

Dignity, is commonly said to be that which procures us the respect
of other men. But what is this respect? It is not a mere barren
feeling in the mind of another man, regarded as wholly unconnected
with his actions. It is regarded as a sentiment in his breast, from
which actions favourable to us may proceed. It derives its whole
value to us from the actions which it is likely to produce.

For the present purpose, therefore, we consider the word Dignity, as
expressing all that, in, and about, a man, which is calculated to
procure him the services of others, without the immediate
application either of reward, or of fear.

Wealth, and Power, are the grand constituents of Dignity; and
procure a man services beyond the immediate sphere, either of the
good, or the evil, he can dispense. This is a remarkable case of
association; and a source of very important consequences in human
life.

Our proneness to sympathize with the Rich and Great, has often been
taken notice of, as a remarkable phenomenon in human nature. This
has been described {210} as a readiness to go along with them in
their affections; to desire the accomplishment of their ends; and to
lend ourselves for the attainment of them.

I believe it will be sufficient, if I barely indicate the mode of
analysing the complicated sentiment, which is thus described. With
command over the means of all sorts of pleasures, we associate
strongly the idea of happiness; the idea of happiness, is an
agreeable idea; and the idea of whatever disturbs it, painful. The
first idea is a desire; the second, an aversion.

Beside this; with the Power of dispensing a great deal of good, or
evil, we associate strongly the idea of the actual dispensation;
that is, the idea of a great number of individuals benefited, or
hurt. But no association of good or evil to individuals is so
constant and inseparable with the causes of them, as that of good or
evil to ourselves. This association takes place in the case which we
are now considering. It may have been but momentary. It may have
been instantly overpowered by other associations, by association of
the circumstances which exclude the Belief. Still it had a momentary
existence; and, in its consequences, presents a remarkable instance
of those two very important facts, first pointed out distinctly to
the attention of philosophers by Professor Stewart; First, that
feelings, so momentary as not to be recognised the moment after they
have passed, may not only have existed, but have given its whole
character to some important phenomenon of the human mind; and,
Secondly, that there is no conception, that is, idea, without the
momentary belief of the existence {211} of its object.[42] The
momentary conception and belief of good and evil to ourselves, in
the association constituting the idea of a man of wealth and power,
has a great share in the character which that association bears.

[Editor's footnote 42: This is the place where the author most
clearly enunciates the doctrine which is the indispensable basis of
his theory of Belief, viz. that there is no idea "without the
momentary belief of the existence of its object." This opinion, as
the author observes, is maintained also by Dugald Stewart; but I
have never seen any positive evidence in its favour. All which has
been established is, that the belief _may_ have momentarily existed,
although immediately afterwards forgotten, and replaced by
disbelief. But no proof of this momentary existence has been given,
except that it is supposed that what is not believed to be real
cannot cause strong emotion (terror, for instance), nor prompt to
outward action. Yet nothing can be more certain than that a mere
idea can exercise direct power over our nerves of motion, and
through them, over the muscles; as the author shows by examples
further on. It is true that, as Mr. Bain has pointed out, this power
of an idea over the active energies is the only germ of belief which
exists originally, and the foundation of the power of Belief in
after life; but it is not the less true that the power of Belief as
it exists in after life, stands broadly distinguished from the power
of the Fixed Idea, and that this last may operate not only without,
but in defiance of, a positive Belief. That a contrary belief has
momentarily intervened is a mere conjecture, which can neither be
refuted nor proved.--_Ed._]

The Power of doing good or evil, though the foundation of our idea
of Dignity, is not the only ingredient in it; the Disposition to
make use of it enters for a great share. The disposition to make use
of it only for evil, if carried, to a certain pitch, would {212}
sink the idea of dignity, and leave dread and abhorrence in its
place.

Beside the disposition to make a good use of wealth and power, which
is virtue; Knowledge, and Wisdom enter as an important ingredient in
Dignity. In the possessor of wealth and power, they are necessary to
give effect to his good disposition; in all men they are an
instrument of power; and they are intimately associated, in
well-educated minds, with the idea of the great benefits to mankind,
which have been, and will be, derived from them. In such minds,
they, therefore, inspire a very lively sympathy.

I do not think it necessary to lengthen this exposition, by offering
any analysis of the corresponding causes of pain,--Poverty,
Weakness, and Contemptibility. The reader, after what he has
learned, will, without difficulty, perform it for himself

What we have now to consider, is the affection or state of mind,
which is formed, when we contemplate each of those causes, first, as
the past cause of past sensations, and secondly, as the future cause
of future sensations.

We are singularly ill-provided with names, to mark those several
states of our consciousness. It is very obvious, that we ought to
have two names for each cause; for example, one, to mark the state
of mind, when Wealth is contemplated as the _past_ cause, of _past_
sensations, and one to mark the state of mind, when it is
contemplated as the _future_ cause of _future_ sensations. We have
but one name for both. We call by the single name, "Love of Wealth,"
both the pleasurable state when we associate with the idea of our
past wealth the past pleasures we have derived from it, and {213}
when we anticipate the future, and associate with the idea of future
wealth, the idea of the pleasures to be derived from it. There is no
wonder that the two states should be confounded; and that the love
of wealth should be a vague, indefinite term.

The imperfection of our language is the same in regard to the two
other causes of our pleasures. The Love of Power, and the Love of
Dignity, are names for both states of mind, both the contemplation
of the past, and the contemplation of the future. The indistinctness
of our language here, too, prevents the distinctness of our ideas.

The word Hatred, renders the same service in regard to the causes of
evil. Hatred of poverty, is the name for both states of mind, both
that in which the future, and that in which the past, is the object
of contemplation. Hatred of imbecility, hatred of contemptibility,
are not common expressions, but we have for the states in question
no other names.

It is to be observed, that Wealth, Power, and Dignity, derive a
great portion of their efficacy, from their comparative amount; that
is, from their being possessed in greater quantity than most other
people possess them. In contemplating them with the satisfaction
with which powerful causes of pleasure are contemplated, we seldom
fail to include the comparison. And the state of consciousness,
formed by the contemplation and comparison taken together, is called
Pride.

We are said to be proud of our Wealth, proud of our Power, proud of
our Dignity; and also, of any of the ingredients of which our powder
or dignity is {214} composed; of our knowledge, of our eloquence, of
our family, of our personal beauty.

Of course the name has a very different meaning in each of these
applications; a difference, however, which in ordinary minds, the
use of the same term, almost completely confounds.

It is obvious, that, in the contemplation of our own Wealth, Power,
and Dignity, as greater, we include the contemplation of another
man's Wealth, Power, and Dignity, as less. As the state of
consciousness, thus formed, is called Pride when the reference is to
ourselves, it is called Contempt when the reference is to others.

When the case is reversed, and a man contemplates his Wealth, Power,
and Dignity as less than those of other men, the state of
consciousness is called Humility. As towards the other member of the
comparison, the men who possess the greater amount of those
advantages, it has the name of Respect, or Admiration.

       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-SECTION II.

_Our Fellow-Creatures contemplated as Causes of our Pleasures and
Pains_.


Wealth, Power, and Dignity, being the origin of such powerful
affections as we find them to be, though the causes of Pleasure to
us only by being the causes of the actions of our Fellow-creatures;
it would be wonderful, if our Fellow-creatures themselves, the {215}
more immediate causes of those actions, should not be the origin of
affections.

This is not the case. Our Fellow-creatures are the origin of
affections of the greatest influence in human life; to the
examination of which it is now our business to proceed. It is, in
the first place, however, to be observed, that Wealth, Power, and
Dignity, afford perhaps the most remarkable of all examples of that
extraordinary case of association, where the means to an end, means
valuable to us solely on account of their end, not only engross more
of our attention than the end itself, but actually supplant it in
our affections. What the associating process is by which this effect
is produced, we need not stay to inquire. That it is produced, to a
remarkable degree, in the case of Wealth, Power, and Dignity, is
familiar to every man's observation. How few men seem to be at all
concerned about their fellow-creatures! How completely are the lives
of most men absorbed, in the pursuits of wealth, and ambition! With
how many men does the love of Family, of Friend, of Country, of
Mankind, appear completely impotent, when opposed to their love of
Wealth, or of Power! This is an effect of misguided association,
which requires the greatest attention in Education, and Morals.

We contemplate our Fellow-creatures as causes of our Pleasures,
either Individually, or in Groups. We shall consider the several
cases, which have attracted sufficient attention to be distinguished
by names: 1st, That of Friendship; 2dly, That of Kindness; 3dly,
That of Family; 4thly, That of Country; 5thly, That of Party; and
6thly, That of Mankind.

{216} 1.--_Friendship_.

In what manner the associations are formed constituting that feeling
towards another man which we call friendship, it seems not very
difficult to trace. The states of circumstances in which the Feeling
originates are very numerous. But they are all, without exception,
of one kind. They are all states of circumstances, in which a
greater proportion than usual of our own pleasures, come to be
associated with the idea of the Individual. It often originates in
companionship, between men who for some time have indulged their
Tastes, and prosecuted their pleasures in company. It is perfectly
obvious how the idea of such men will occur to one another, not
simply as the idea of a man, but so enveloped by the trains of
pleasurable ideas associated with the man, that the idea of him is
upon the whole a highly pleasurable idea. When to this is added, the
expectation of future pleasures, not merely the continuation of the
companionship, but services of importance; when the wisdom of the
man promises light and guidance from his counsels; when his fidelity
makes it safe to trust him; when his benevolence towards us makes us
count upon his services, whenever they are required, and his
reputation and influence in the world are such as to give weight to
his endeavours, there is a sufficient accumulation of pleasurable
ideas with that of the individual to account for the affection
denominated Friendship.

2.--_Kindness_.

There is nothing which more instantly associates with itself the
ideas of our own Pleasures, and Pains, {217} than the idea of the
Pleasures and Pains of another of our Fellow-creatures. The
expositions already afforded sufficiently indicate the source of
this association, which exerts a powerful and salutary influence in
human life.

The idea of a man enjoying a train of pleasures, or happiness, is
felt by every body to be a pleasurable idea. The idea of a man under
a train of sufferings or pains, is equally felt to be a painful
idea. This can arise from nothing but the association of our own
pleasures with the first idea, and of our own pains with the second.
We never feel any pains and pleasures but our own. The fact, indeed,
is, that our very idea of the pains or pleasures of another man is
only the idea of our own pains, or our own pleasures, associated
with the idea of another man. This is one not of the least
important, and curious, of all cases of association, and instantly
shews how powerfully associated trains of ideas of our pains and
pleasures must be with a feeling so compounded.[43]

[Editor's footnote 43: That the pleasures or pains of another person
can only be pleasurable or painful to us through the association of
our own pleasures or pains with them, is true in one sense, which is
probably that intended by the author, but not true in another,
against which he has not sufficiently guarded his mode of
expression. It is evident, that the only pleasures or pains of which
we have direct experience being those felt by ourselves, it is from
them that our very notions of pleasure and pain are derived. It is
also obvious that the pleasure or pain with which we contemplate the
pleasure or pain felt by somebody else, is itself a pleasure or pain
of our own. But if it be meant that in such cases the pleasure or
pain is consciously referred to self, I take this to be a mistake.
By the acts or other signs exhibited by another person, the idea of
a pleasure (which is a pleasurable idea) or the idea of a pain
(which is a painful idea) are recalled, sometimes with considerable
intensity, but in association with the other person as feeling them,
not with one's self as feeling them. The idea of one's Self is, no
doubt, closely associated with all our experiences, pleasurable,
painful, or indifferent; but this association does not necessarily
act in all cases because it exists in all cases. If the mind, when
pleasurably or painfully affected by the evidences of pleasure or
pain in another person, goes off on a different thread of
association, as for instance, to the idea of the means of giving the
pleasure or relieving the pain, or even if it dismisses the subject
and relapses into the ordinary course of its thoughts, the
association with its own self may be, at the time, defeated, or
reduced to something so evanescent that we cannot tell whether it
was momentarily present or not.--_Ed._]

{218} The Pleasurable association composed of the ideas of a man and
his pleasures, and the painful association composed of the ideas of
a man and his pains, are both Affections, which have so much of the
same tendency that they are included under one name, Kindness;
though the latter affection has a name appropriate to itself,
Compassion.

3.--_Family_.

The Group, which consists of a Father, Mother, and Children, is
called a Family. The associations which each member of this group
has of his pains and pleasures, with the pains and pleasures of the
other members, constitute some of the most interesting states of
human consciousness.

The affection of the husband and wife is, in its origin, that of two
persons of different sex, and need {219} not be further analysed. To
this source of pleasurable association is added, when the union is
happy, all those other associations, just enumerated, which
constitute the affection of Friendship. To this another addition is
made by the union of interests; or that necessity, under which both
are placed, of receiving pain and pleasure from the same causes. As,
in too many instances, these pleasurable associations are
extinguished, by the generation of others of an opposite
description; in other cases, they are carried to such a height, as
to afford an exemplification of that remarkable state of mind, in
which a greater value is set upon the means, than upon the end.
Persons have been found, the one of whom could not endure to live
without the other.

The Parental affection requires to be somewhat more minutely
analysed.

First of all, there can be no doubt, that all that power of exciting
trains of ideas of our own pains and pleasures, which belongs to the
pains and pleasures of any of our fellow-creatures, is possessed by
the pains and pleasures of a man's child.

In the next place, it is well known that the pains and pleasures of
another person affect us; that is, associate with themselves the
ideas of our own pains and pleasures, with more or less intensity,
according to the attention which we bestow upon his pains or
pleasures. A parent is commonly either led or impelled to bestow an
unusual degree of attention upon the pains and pleasures of his
child; and hence a habit is contracted of sympathizing with him, as
it is commonly, and not insignificantly named; in other words, a
facility of associating the ideas of {220} his own pains and
pleasures, with those of the child.

Again, a man looks upon his child as a cause to him of future pains
or pleasures, much more certain, than any other person. The father
regards the son somewhat in the light of another self, a great
proportion of the effects of whose acts, whether good or evil, will
redound to himself. An object regarded as a great future cause to us
of future pains or pleasures, we call an object of intense interest;
in other words, a train of interesting ideas, that is, of ideas of
pains or pleasures, is associated with it.

The vivacity and simplicity of the expressions of the pains and
pleasures of children, in their looks, and tones, and attitudes, as
well as words, give them a peculiar power of exciting sympathy, that
is, of associating with them trains of the analogous feelings of
ourselves. The frequency with which a parent is called upon to
attend to those expressions in his child, gives him a habit of
forming the associations to which they lead.

The perfect dependence of the child upon the parent is a source of
deep interest. The whole of its pleasures being the fruit of his
acts, he more easily associates with them the trains of his own
pleasures, than with those of any person not so connected with him.
His acts, too, being required to save it from the worst of pains,
and from destruction, the idea of its pains, arising from any
relaxation of his care, calls up, in strong association, both the
analogous pains of himself, and also the opposite pleasurable
feelings arising from the continuance of the acts by which the
pleasures of the child are produced. And to all these {221} sources
of association is added, that which is always agreeable, the train
making up the idea of our own power; no case of power being so
perfect as that of the parent over his helpless offspring.

Another important source of agreeable association is yet to be
mentioned. Man becomes fond (it is a matter of daily observation) of
that on which he has frequently conferred benefits. This is a fact
of considerable importance in human nature; for, under the little
care which hitherto has been bestowed in generating, by education,
the associations on which Beneficence depends, a considerable part
of the beneficence existing in the world has been produced by this
cause. It is also a case of association, which strongly illustrates
the fact, that pleasures, produced by our own acts, have a peculiar
power in associating with them trains of the ideas of our own
pleasures. Not only a Fellow-creature, but even one of the lower
animals, by having been the object of repeated acts of kindness,
becomes an object of affection. Trains of our own pleasures are so
often united with the idea of such an object of our kindness, that
the idea of the object becomes at last an idea made up of the
original idea of the individual and of trains of our own pleasures:
a compound idea, made up, in great part, of pleasurable ideas; that
is, an Affection.

That the whole of the parental affection is derived from these and
similar associations, is proved by some decisive facts.

Whenever it happens that a man is placed in circumstances which
produce those associations, he feels the parental affection, without
parentage. Facts of this description are so frequent, and so
notorious, that {222} it is hardly necessary to produce an instance
of them. How else does it happen, that a man who does not suspect
the infidelity of his wife, rears as his own, and without any
difference of affection, the offspring of the man who has injured
him? Cases, for the credit of our nature, are not wanting, and when
education is better, they will be less rare, in which a family of
orphans is taken under the protection of a man of virtue. By acting
towards them the part of a parent, he never fails to acquire for
them the affection of a parent.

There are equally notorious and decisive facts to prove, that
whenever the parent is placed in circumstances which either wholly,
or to a great degree, prevent the formation of the associations with
the child to which we ascribe the parental affection, there is a
corresponding want of the affection. The case of illegitimate
children is pregnant with evidence to this point. In the great
majority of cases of this description, no affection exists. The
parent may feel the obligation of maintaining the child, because
public opinion, or perhaps the law, requires it: but this is the
extent of the bond.

The circumstances of Families, in the two opposite states, of great
poverty, and great opulence, are unfavourable to the formation of
those associations of which the parental affection consists.

In cases of extreme poverty, which alone are the cases here
understood; because, in the more moderate cases of poverty, the
parental affection exists in considerable strength; the
circumstances which lead to the formation of agreeable associations
with the child, are either wanting, or counteracted by circumstances
{223} of an opposite tendency. The parent has little the means of
bestowing pleasures on his child; he has not the means of saving it
from an almost constant series of pains. The means which he employs
in saving the child from pains, are taken from the means of saving
himself from pains. Constantly occupied in the labours which yield
him a scanty means of subsistence, he spends but little time in the
company of his child, and has therefore little opportunity of
attending to the engaging expressions of its pains and pleasures. It
is needless to carry the enumeration of particulars farther. The
circumstances which tend to generate agreeable associations with the
child are few. The circumstances which tend to generate painful
associations with it are many.

In Families of great opulence, the attention of the parent, averted
either by the calls of pleasure, or the avocations which his
position in society creates, is but little bestowed upon his
children. Where the pains and pleasures of others are not attended
to, no association with those pains and pleasures exists; where
there is not a habit of forming the associations, the Affection does
not exist.

The mode in which the child of the man of opulence is maintained and
educated, proceeds so remotely from the acts of the parent, that the
agreeable associations, which we have with our own acts of
beneficence, are, in the case of such a parent, very imperfectly
formed.

The man of opulence naturally regards his children as part of his
state; as the inheritors of his fortune; or as belonging to the same
line of ancestors with himself; and with both those constituents of
his {224} dignity he has many agreeable associations. But these are
an imperfect substitute for the habits of agreeable association
which are generated in more favourable circumstances.

Hitherto, we have considered only the parental affection of the
Father. The parental affection of the Mother differs from that of
the Father in the associations which she forms with her child in her
own peculiar situations of gestation and nursing. That these are
such as to create intense associations every one will admit. Every
movement of the child during the period of gestation is to her a
sensation. Every thought of it is connected with that flood of hopes
and fears attached to the awful hour, never absent from her
thoughts, which, through a series of cruel pains, will either
stretch her a lifeless corpse, or render her a rejoicing mother. As
a nurse, the child is to her a source, both of agreeable sensations,
and agreeable ideas. On the sensations we need not dilate. They are
known only to those who have experienced them. But it is not
possible to conceive a case more calculated to associate strongly
the ideas of our own pleasures, with the ideas of the pleasures we
bestow, than that of the mother, when she presses her infant to her
bosom, and communicates to him the means of life, and the only
pleasures he is capable of enjoying, not only by her own acts, but
from her own substance; and when she perceives how soon in the mind
of the child, the idea of herself is associated with the existence
of all his pleasures, and the removal of all his pains; in other
words, how quickly she becomes not only the object of his
affections, but the one and only object.

{225} Having explained at so much length the grand case of the
Domestic Affections, we may pass over the rest with a very cursory
notice.

Even the Filial affection has in it nothing peculiar. In the child,
the idea of his parent, as a being with power almost unlimited over
him, creates the associations which constitute reverence, and
respect; and the perpetual use of that power on the part of the
parent to give him pleasures, or the command of pleasures, to remove
from him pains, or give him the means of removing them, naturally
creates the associations which constitute affection.

The affection which exists among Brothers and Sisters, has in it
most of the ingredients which go to the formation of Friendship.
There is first of all Companionship; the habit of enjoying
pleasures, in common, and also of suffering pains: hence a great
readiness in sympathizing with one another; that is, in associating
trains of their own pains and pleasures, with the pains and
pleasures of one another. There is next, when the Education is good,
a constant reciprocation, to the extent of their power, of
beneficent acts. And lastly there is their common relation to the
grand source of all their pleasures, the Parent.

When the affections of the domestic class exist in perfection (in
such a state of Education and Morals as ours this rarely can
happen), they afford so constant a succession of agreeable trains,
that they form, perhaps, the most valuable portion of human
happiness. Acts of beneficence to larger masses of mankind, afford
still more interesting trains to those who perform them. But they
are the small number. The happiness of the Domestic affections is
open to all.

{226} 4.--_Country_.

The word country is the name of an idea of great complexity. In that
idea are included all the multitudes of persons, and all the
multitudes of things, and all the multitudes of positions, in a
certain portion of the Globe of the Earth. Nor are these present
existences alone included in that idea: the HISTORY of the country
is included, that is, the whole series of prior existences; and not
the PAST HISTORY only, but the FUTURE HISTORY also, or series of
future existences, as far as our power of anticipation reaches. This
is a remarkable example of the power of association, to unite ideas
without number in such closeness, that their individuality is
unperceived, and the cluster, however large, resembles a single
uncompounded idea.

This cluster is not wholly made up of indifferent ideas. There is
included in it the sources of all our pleasures, and almost all the
objects with which we have been accustomed to associate trains of
agreeable ideas. The plains, the mountains, the valleys, the rivers,
with which we have formed agreeable associations, are all there; the
individual objects with which we have formed similar associations,
the trees, the houses; the house, for example, in which we were
born, the tree under which we have sat to enjoy the affections of
our parents, or indulge our sympathies with other objects of our
love, the paths in which we have strayed, the fields through which
we have roamed, the riches wherewith we have seen them periodically
clothed, the labours of those fields, the labourers, their manners,
appearance, and character, {227} the flocks and herds, the cities
and towns, with all their inhabitants, and all their operations, the
wonderful proceedings of the manufacturers, the arrival and
departure of ships, loaded with the precious commodities of the
different regions of the Earth.

To these sources of Interest is to be added, all that portion of our
fellow-creatures with whom we have been accustomed to associate our
Pains and Pleasures. Here are our Parents, our Brothers and Sisters,
our Sons and Daughters. Here are the men, and here the women, who
have engaged our affections. Here are our Benefactors, here are our
Instructors, here are the manners which alone from habit are
agreeable to us. And here are the Institutions from which we have
derived Protection, and to which, in their usual state of
imperfection, we are apt to lend a reverence, such is the strength
of the association, far beyond the measure of their worth.

Sufficient sources have now been pointed out, to shew whence it is
that the Idea of country, as it involves a great number of agreeable
associations, becomes, or more properly speaking is, an Affection,

5.--_Party; Class_.

That which constitutes a Party, or class, is always some community
of Interest: in other words, some thing or things, to be obtained,
secured, or augmented, by the common endeavours of the class, and
operating as a cause of pleasure to all of them.

The People, that is, the Mass of the community, are sometimes called
a class; but that is only to distinguish them, like the term Lower
Orders, from the {228} Aristocratical class. In the proper meaning
of the term class, it is not applicable to the People. No interest
is in common to them, which is not in common to the rest of the
community. There is nothing which can operate as a cause of benefit
to them exclusively. Whatever operates as a cause of benefit to them
in common, operates equally as a cause of benefit to every part of
the community, saving and excepting those who are in possession of
some mischievous power over a portion, greater or less, of the
community. It may no doubt very easily happen, that what is a
benefit to the rest of the community, is an evil to the possessors
of such power; as what is an evil, and the greatest of all Evils, to
the Community, is a Benefit to them.

There is no Love of Class, therefore, but in a Privileged Order. The
Patricians, in ancient Rome, were a Class of this sort. And in
modern Europe there are two such classes: the Nobility, in each
Country: and the Incorporated Clergy; calling themselves the Church,
in Catholic countries, the Established Church, in Non-catholic
countries.

The associations which the members of a governing class have with
one another, individually, as fathers, sons, companions, friends,
are not here to be taken into account. The associations connected
with the privileges which constitute any body of men a class, are
alone concerned in forming the states of mind which we now are
explaining.

Such privileges consist of Wealth, Power, Dignity, one, or all,
conferred by Legislative act: that is, not the result of natural
acquisition, but of a sort of force, or compulsion, put upon other
people.

{229} We need not again enter into an explanation of the agreeable
associations which every man has with his own Wealth, Power, and
dignity, and with the causes, either of their existence, or of their
increase, or of their security. When these causes to one man, are
causes also to a circle of other men, the whole Body has both
individually and collectively the associations with those causes,
which constitute Affection.

6.--_Mankind_.

The word Mankind is the name of another of those remarkable
associations, by which countless ideas are so combined, that their
individuality is sunk, and the aggregate is, to appearance, one
idea.

The Idea Mankind, like the Idea Country, is not made up wholly of
indifferent ideas. It has in it all the trains of pleasurable ideas
which we associate, either with individuals, or with subdivisions,
of the whole mass.

We have interesting associations with the idea of a man, as a man.
The idea of his pains, and his pleasures, call up, unavoidably,
trains of the ideas of our own pains and pleasures. The Idea of a
man, therefore, naturally includes, the love of his pleasures,
hatred of his pains.

From our earliest Infancy, we have had experience of nothing more
constantly than this; that a great proportion of our pleasures
proceeded from a certain disposition towards us, on the part of
those of our fellow-creatures who were near us; and a great
proportion of our Pains from a certain other disposition on their
part. Those Dispositions, taken in the most {230} general sense, are
Kindness, which we have already explained; and its opposite,
Unkindness. We have, therefore, very intense associations of
Pleasure, with the idea of the Disposition towards us, called
Kindness, in other men; and very intense associations of Pain with
that of the Disposition in them called Unkindness towards us.

In our Idea of each individual man, therefore, is included not only
the Love of his Pleasures and Aversion to his Pains; but, in
addition to this, the Love of his Disposition of Kindness towards
us, and Aversion to his Disposition of Unkindness towards us.

Now, as our complex Idea of Mankind, is made up of the aggregate of
the ideas of Individuals, including the interesting trains called
Love of their Pleasures, Hatred of their Pains; Love of their
Kindness, Aversion to their Unkindness; the generation of the
affection, called Love of Mankind, is, for our present purpose,
sufficiently shewn.[44] [45]

[Bain's footnote 44: As carrying out the principle of association,
in the domain of the Feelings, the foregoing chapters, from XIX.
onwards, are unexceptionable and cogent. As furnishing the complete
account of the Benevolent and Malevolent Affections, and of the
Sympathies or disinterested impulses, they are defective. Indeed,
the whole subject of the Emotions is placed by the author upon a too
narrow basis. Any theory that looks solely to the circumstance of
pleasure and pain, (important as that is) fails to grapple with all
the facts. For example, there is no account rendered of the very
familiar emotion of Wonder.

That the Emotions are all compounded of elements of Sense (in the
widest comprehension, that is, with Muscularity included) may be
maintained on good grounds. Nevertheless, in order to a satisfactory
analysis of even the commoner emotions, such as Tenderness, there is
wanted a more exhaustive detail of the pleasures and pains of sense
than is furnished in the present work.

A few remarks on the generic example of the Tender Feeling, on which
the author has expended the greatest part of his illustration, will
show the method to be pursued. It is a case where certain primary
sensibilities, correctly ranked under Sensation, together with the
associating principle, seem to account for the whole of the
phenomenon. In such a case as Wonder, the explanation involves an
additional element.

The pleasures of Tender Feeling, or Love and the Affections, are no
doubt, as remarked in the text, in a considerable part associations
with other pleasures, such as nourishment. An animal and a child
would contract a pleasurable association with the person that brings
them their food, or ministers to their bodily wants. Still, there is
something different from this in Tenderness or Love. The fact
essential to the state is the gratification from the acts of
caressing, fondling, and embracing; a pleasure that has its
independent sources in the human and animal sensibilities, and does
not need the association with being fed and cared for, although
enhanced and stimulated by that association. Even apart from the
powerful element of sexuality, there is a great mass of pleasurable
animal feeling awakened in the loving embrace of two individuals of
the warm-blooded species. We may instance, among these, the
pleasures of Touch in the soft warm contact; the muscular pleasures
co-operating; the organic feelings connected with secretions
stimulated in the act, of which the lachrymal is the prominent but
not the solitary case; the peculiar sensibility of the pharynx,
which is probably the sign of a less acute but more extended
influence in the alimentary canal generally; to all which, is to be
added, in women, the genial secretion of the breasts, going on
incessantly, although more profuse in nursing mothers. The coalition
of these tactile, muscular, and organic sensibilities, is the
pleasure of love by itself, or as it might be felt between two
living sentient creatures, in no other way the givers or receivers
of benefits. Nor does this exhaust the circle. The eye, and the ear,
and even the smell, may be also included. The visible aspects of
living beings are often highly agreeable from the first, and become
so to a farther extent by association with the tactile and organic
pleasures. Similarly, the ear may be charmed with the sounds emitted
by another human being or animal, and may also form associations
with the still more potent pleasures above named. Once more, the
odour of one animal may be intrinsically sweet to another animal;
while here too, associations may be added.

The pleasure of Tender feeling must therefore be pronounced to have
an independent standing in the sentient framework, although
susceptible of being analysed into the primary pleasures of the
senses, together with the influence of association. All the
affections derive the chief part of their strength from this complex
source. For, although the acts of fondling and caressing are not
universally practised between every two persons that have a mutual
affection, or are so only in the very limited form of the shake of
the hand, yet there is an echo of these, and a stimulus to the
organic accompaniments, in the sight of each other, in the sounds of
the voice, and in the more intellectual forms of indicating
attachment. It can be proved that the two higher senses enter deeply
into the tender emotion, (as they do into the Beautiful). The
well-known Dr. Kitto, who was stone-deaf, in describing his
experience, states that, as regarded his pleasures, the loss that
affected him most was his inability to hear the voices of his
children. It is evident that the same remark, as to the mutilation
of an organ of tender feeling, is applicable to the blind. The
pathos of the lines in Paradise Lost contains this
implication.--_B._]

[Editor's footnote 45: The two preceding subsections are almost
perfect as expositions and exemplifications of the mode in which, by
the natural course of life, we acquire attachments to persons,
things, and positions, which are the causes or habitual concomitants
of pleasurable sensations to us, or of relief from pains: in other
words, those persons, things, and positions become in themselves
pleasant to us by association; and, through the multitude and
variety of the pleasurable ideas associated with them, become
pleasures of greater constancy and even intensity, and altogether
more valuable to us, than any of the primitive pleasures of our
constitution. This portion of the laws of human nature is the more
important to psychology, as they show how it is possible that the
moral sentiments, the feelings of duty, and of moral approbation and
disapprobation, may be no original elements of our nature, and may
yet be capable of being not only more intense and powerful than any
of the elements out of which they may have been formed, but may
also, in their maturity, be perfectly disinterested: nothing more
being necessary for this, than that the acquired pleasure and pain
should have become as independent of the native elements from which
they are formed, as the love of wealth and of power not only often
but generally become, of the bodily pleasures, and relief from
bodily pains, for the sake of which, and of which alone, power and
wealth must have been originally valued. No one thinks it necessary
to suppose an original and inherent love of money or of power; yet
these are the objects of two of the strongest, most general, and
most persistent passions of human nature; passions which often have
quite as little reference to pleasure or pain, beyond the mere
consciousness of possession, and are in that sense of the word quite
as disinterested, as the moral feelings of the most virtuous human
being.

The author, then, has furnished a most satisfactory and most
valuable explanation of certain of the laws of our affections and
passions, and has traced the origin and generation of a great number
of them. But it must be remarked of the whole exposition, that it
accounts truly, but only partially, for this part of human nature.
It affords a sufficient theory of what we may call the mental, or
intellectual element of the feelings in question. But it does not
furnish, nor does the author anywhere furnish, any theory of what
may be called the animal element in them. Yet this is no unimportant
ingredient in the emotional and active part of human nature: and it
is one greatly demanding analysis. Let us take the case of any of
the passions: and as one of the simplest as well as one of the most
powerful of them, let us take the emotion of Fear. The author gives
no account of Fear but that it is the idea of a painful sensation,
associated with the idea of its being (more or less uncertainly)
future. Undoubtedly these elements are present in it; but do they
account for the peculiar emotional character of the passion, and for
its physiological effect, such as pallor, trembling, faltering of
the voice, coldness of the skin, loss of control over the
secretions, and general depression of the vital powers? The case
would be simpler if these great disturbances of the animal functions
by the expectation of a pain were the same in kind as the smaller
modifications produced by the mere idea. This, however, is by no
means the case; Ideas do produce effects on the animal economy, but
not those particular effects. The idea of a pain, if it acts on the
bodily functions at all, has an action the same in kind (though much
less in degree) as the pain itself would have. But the passion of
fear has a totally different action. Suppose the fear to be that of
a flogging. The flogging itself, if it produced any physical
demonstrations, would produce cries, shrinkings, possibly muscular
struggles, and might by its remoter effects disturb the action of
the brain or of the circulation; and if the fear of a flogging
produced these same effects, in a mitigated degree, the power of
fear might be merely the power of the idea of the pain. But none of
these are at all like the characteristic symptoms of fear: while
those characteristic symptoms are much the same whatever be the
particular pain apprehended, and whether it be a bodily or a purely
mental pain, provided it be sufficiently intense and sufficiently
proximate. No one has ever accounted for this remarkable difference,
and the author of the Analysis does not even mention it. The
explanation of it is one of those problems, partly psychological and
partly physiological, which our knowledge of the laws of animal
sensibility does not yet enable us to resolve. In whatever manner
the phenomena are produced, they are a case of the quasi-chemistry
of the nervous functions, whereby the junction of certain elements
generates a compound whose properties are very different from the
sum of the properties of the elements themselves.

This is the point which the author's explanations of the emotional
part of human nature do not reach, and, it may even be said, do not
attempt to reach. Until, however, it is reached, there is no
guarantee for the completeness of his analysis of even the mental
element in the passions: for when the effect exhibits so much which
has not, in the known properties of the assigned cause, anything to
account for it, there is always room for a doubt whether some part
of the cause has not been left out of the reckoning. This doubt,
however, does not seriously affect the most important of the
author's analyses, viz. those which, without resolving the emotions
themselves into anything more elementary, expound their transfer by
association from their natural objects to others; with the great
increase of intensity and persistency which so often accompanies the
transfer, and which is in general quite sufficiently accounted for
by the causes to which the author refers it.--_Ed._]

       *       *       *       *       *

SUB-SECTION III.

_The Objects called Sublime and Beautiful, and their Contraries,
contemplated as Causes of our Pleasures and Pains_.


These objects have received much of the attention of Philosophers;
and great progress has been made in {231} analysing the associations
which form the complicated feelings, ranged under the name of
Emotions of the Sublime and Beautiful.

{232} It does not belong to the present purpose to go into the
details of this subject, which, for obvious reasons, have been
pursued to great length. It is necessary, {233} however, for that
purpose, to shew, into what general laws the phenomena are capable
of being resolved.

The feelings which are marked under the name of {234} Emotions of
the Sublime and Beautiful, are so much alike, that the distinction
of them into two species is somewhat arbitrary. Though the Romans
did apply {235} the word _sublimis_, and its abstract, _sublimitas_,
in a certain rhetorical way, to objects of Taste, their word
_Pulchrum_, properly denoted all that is expressed by {236} our
Sublime and Beautiful, taken together. The Greek word, [Greek:
kalo/n], also clearly included every thing which we rank under the
name of Sublime. Longinus, indeed, who lived at a very late and
degenerate period of Grecian literature, wrote a treatise to which
he gave the affected Title, [Greek: Pe/ri U(psou=s], or "About
Height;" and as that has been a very popular treatise in modern
times, it is not improbable, that the use of the word Sublime, which
has become so prevalent in the discourse of the moderns, derives its
origin from no higher source.

Mr. Alison, who wrote a very pleasing, and, to a certain degree, a
Philosophical Book, on the Emotions of Taste, has shewn by an
abundance of well-chosen illustrations, that it is not the immediate
sensations, received by us from the objects of Taste, which
constitute them a cause of our pleasures. The immediate sensations
are commonly indifferent, or approaching the indifferent. It is only
when they introduce, by association, a train of pleasurable ideas,
that the feelings called the pleasures of Taste, are ever enjoyed.

I believe that I may assume this as an established {237} fact in our
nature; and I shall only adduce as much of the evidence as may teach
those of my readers, to whom these inquiries may be new, the mode in
which the truth of the proposition becomes apparent. I also think it
useful to avail myself, not only of the illustrations, but as much
as possible of the words, of Mr. Alison, as exhibiting the clear
conviction of the wonderful effects of association, in one instance,
on the part of a writer, who seems to have had no idea of its
affording an equally satisfactory solution of the other complex
phenomena of mind.

What are called the external objects of Taste, are mostly objects of
Hearing, objects of Sight, or objects of that Muscular Sense, from
which we derive the idea of extension.

That the feelings we have by these senses are generically distinct
from the emotions of Sublimity and Beauty, might, I imagine, be
trusted to an appeal to each man's consciousness. There are
innumerable cases, however, which may be regarded as decisive
experiments upon the subject.

Of the sounds which can be adduced as Sublime or Beautiful, there
is, perhaps, not one, which is not often heard in circumstances,
wherein no tendency to Emotion is felt. The circumstances in which
the Emotion is felt, and those in which it is not felt, are those in
which a train of pleasurable ideas is, or is not, introduced by
association.

"All sounds," says Mr. Alison, "are in general SUBLIME, which are
associated with Ideas of great Power or Might: the Noise of a
Torrent,--the Fall of a Cataract,--the Uproar of a Tempest,--the
Explosion of Gunpowder,--the Dashing of the Waves, &c.

{238} "All sounds, in the same manner, are sublime, which are
associated with Ideas of Majesty, or Solemnity, or deep Melancholy,
or any other strong Emotion: the Sound of the Trumpet, and all other
warlike instruments,--the Note of the Organ,--the Sound of the
Curfew,--the Tolling of the Passing bell, &c.

"There is a great variety of sounds also, that occur in the scenes
of Nature, which are productive of the Emotion of BEAUTY: the Sound
of a Waterfall,--the Murmuring of a Rivulet,--the Whispering of the
Wind,--the Sheepfold-bell,--the sound of the Curfew, &c.

"That the Notes or Cries of some Animals, are Sublime, every one
knows: the Roar of the Lion, the Growling of Bears, the Howling of
Wolves, the Scream of the Eagle, &c. In all those cases, those are
the notes of animals remarkable for their strength, and formidable
for their ferocity. It would seem very natural, therefore, that the
sublimity of such sounds should arise from the qualities of which
they are expressive.

"The Bleating of a Lamb, is beautiful in a fine day in spring: the
Lowing of a Cow at a distance, amid the scenery of a pastoral
landscape in summer. The Call of a Goat among rocks is strikingly
beautiful, as expressing wildness and independence. The Hum of the
Beetle is beautiful in a fine summer evening, as appearing to suit
the stillness and repose of that pleasing season. The Twitter of the
Swallow is beautiful in the morning, and seems to be expressive of
the cheerfulness of that time."

This enumeration of cases, which is only a selection from those of
Mr. Alison, is far more than {239} sufficient for the purpose, as
indeed it is one defect of his book that his propositions are
overlaid with evidence.

That these sounds, as sensations, do not constitute the pleasures
enjoyed, he demonstrates, by shewing that on many occasions, on
which the sensations exist as perfectly as on any other occasion, no
pleasure is felt. He also shews, that when the pleasures are felt,
a train of pleasurable ideas is introduced by association.

"The sound of Thunder, he says, is perhaps of all others in Nature,
the most Sublime." Yet the rolling of stones from a cart, produces a
sound so exactly the same, that it is often mistaken for thunder.
While the mistake lasts, the feeling of sublimity lasts. When the
mistake is corrected, it instantly vanishes; that is, the
association is dissolved.

"There is scarcely in nature," says Mr. Alison, "a more trifling
sound than the buzz of Flies; yet, I believe, there is no man of
common Taste, who, in the deep silence of a summer's noon, has not
found something strikingly sublime, in this inconsiderable sound.
The falling of a drop of water, produces in general a very
insignificant and unexpressive sound; yet sometimes in Vaults, and
in large Cathedrals, a single drop is heard to fall, at distant
intervals, from the roof; than which, I know not if there is a
single sound more strikingly sublime."

Mr. Alison further remarks, that to those who have no trains of
pleasurable ideas associated with sounds, "or who consider them
simply as sounds, they have no beauty. It is long before children
shew any sensibility to the beauty of sounds. To the greater {240}
number of the sounds which we denominate beautiful, the common
people, in the same manner, are altogether indifferent. To the
peasant, the Curfew is only the mark of the hour of the
evening,--the Sheep-bell, the sign of the neighbourhood of the
flock,--the sound of a Cascade, the sign of the falling of water,
&c. Give him the associations which men of cultivated imagination
have with such sounds, and he will infallibly feel their beauty."

Mr. Alison shews, that when the notes or cries of animals are
stripped of certain associations, they are unproductive of Emotions
of sublimity or beauty. "There is not one of these sounds," he says,
"which may not be imitated in some manner or other; and which, while
we are ignorant of the deception, does not produce the same Emotion
with the real sound: when we are undeceived, however, we are
conscious of no other Emotion, but that, perhaps, of simple pain
from its loudness. The howl of the Wolf is little distinguished from
the howl of the Dog, either in its tone or in its strength, but
there is no comparison between their sublimity. Few, if any, of the
sounds felt as sublime are so loud as the most common of all sounds,
the lowing of a Cow; yet this is the very reverse of sublimity.
Imagine this sound, on the contrary, expressive of Fierceness and
Strength, and there can be no doubt, that it would become sublime.
The scream of the Eagle is simply disagreeable, when the bird is
either tamed or confined; it is Sublime, only when it is heard amid
Rocks and Deserts, and when it is expressive to us, of Liberty and
Independence, and savage Majesty. The noise of the Rattlesnake (that
most dangerous animal of all his tribe) {241} is very little
different from the noise of a child's play-thing; yet who will deny
its sublimity? The growl of the Tiger, resembles the purring of a
Cat; the one is sublime, the other insignificant."

Mr. Alison, with great propriety, adds, "Upon the principle of the
absolute and independent Sublimity or Beauty of Sounds, it is very
difficult to account for the different sounds which have been
mentioned as productive of these Emotions. There is certainly no
resemblance, as sounds, between the noise of Thunder, and the
hissing of a Serpent,--between the growling of a Tiger, and the
explosion of Gunpowder,--between the scream of an Eagle, and the
shouting of a multitude; yet all of these are sublime. In the same
manner, there is as little resemblance, between the tinkling of the
Sheepfold-bell, and the murmuring of the Breeze; between the hum of
the Beetle and the song of the Lark; between the twitter of the
Swallow, and the sound of the Curfew; yet all of these are
beautiful. Upon the principle of association, they are all perfectly
accountable."

I shall not follow Mr. Alison in his illustrations of the beauty and
sublimity felt in the tones of the human voice, or in the
composition of sounds, called Music; because I have no doubt but it
will be allowed that they derive the whole of what is called their
expression,--in other words, their power of pleasing,--from the
associations connected with them.[46] I {242} shall also produce a
very few specimens of the illustrations which he adduces to show
that what is called the Beauty and Sublimity of objects of sight, is
derived wholly from association.

[Editor's footnote 46: What the author thinks himself dispensed from
either proving or illustrating because he has no doubt that it will
be allowed, is, on the contrary, one of the most disputable parts of
his theory. That very much of the pleasure afforded by Music is the
effect of its expression, i.e. of the associations connected with
sound, most people will admit: but it can scarcely be doubted that
there is also an element of direct physical and sensual pleasure. In
the first place, the quality of some single sounds is physically
agreeable, as that of others is disagreeable. Next, the concord or
harmony of pleasant sounds adds a further element of purely physical
enjoyment. And thirdly, certain successions of sounds, constituting
melody or tune, are delightful, as it seems to me, to the mere
sense. With these pleasures those of the associated ideas and
feelings are intimately blended, but may, to a certain extent, be
discriminated by a critical ear. It is possible to say, of different
composers, that one (as Beethoven) excels most in that part of the
effect of music which depends on expression, and another (as Mozart)
in the physical part.

That the full physical pleasure of tune is often not experienced at
the first hearing, is a consequence of the fact, that the pleasure
depends on succession, and therefore on the coexistence of each note
with the remembrance of a sufficient number of the previous notes to
constitute melody: a remembrance which, of course, is not possessed
in perfection, until after a number of repetitions proportioned to
the complexity and to the unfamiliar character of the
combination.--_Ed._]

The following observations are general, and very instructive.

"The greatest part of colours are connected with a kind of
established Imagery in our minds, and are considered as expressive
of many very pleasing and affecting Qualities.

"These Associations may perhaps be included in the following
Enumeration: 1st, Such as arise from {243} the nature of the objects
thus permanently coloured: 2ndly, Such as arise from some analogy
between certain Colours, and certain Dispositions of mind: and,
3rdly, Such as arise from accidental connexions, whether national or
particular.

"1. When we have been accustomed to see any object capable of
exciting Emotion, distinguished by some fixed or permanent colour,
we are apt to extend to the Colour the Qualities of the object thus
coloured, and to feel from it, when separated, some degree of the
same emotion which is properly excited by the object itself.
Instances of this kind are within every person's observation. White,
as it is the colour of Day, is expressive to us of the cheerfulness
or gaiety which the return of day brings. Black, as the colour of
Darkness, is expressive of gloom and melancholy. The colour of the
heavens, in serene weather, is Blue: Blue, is therefore expressive
to us of somewhat of the same pleasing and temperate character.
Green, is the colour of the Earth, in Spring: it is, consequently,
expressive to us of some of those delightful Images which we
associate with that season. The expressions of those colours, which
are the signs of particular passions in the Human countenance, and
which, from this connexion, derive their effect, every one is
acquainted with.

"2. There are many colours which derive expression from some analogy
we discover between them and certain affections of the Human Mind.
Soft or Strong, Mild or Bold, Gay or Gloomy, Cheerful or Solemn,
&c., are terms, in all languages, applied to colours; terms
obviously metaphorical, and the use of which indicates their
connexion with particular {244} qualities of Mind. In the same
manner, different degrees or shades of the same colour have similar
characters, as Strong, or Temperate, or Gentle, &c. In consequence
of this Association,--which is, in truth, so strong, that it is to
be found in all mankind,--such colours derive a character from this
resemblance, and produce in our mind some faint degree of the same
Emotion, which the qualities they express are fitted to produce.

"3. Many colours acquire character from accidental Association.
Purple, for instance, has acquired a character of Dignity, from its
accidental connexion with the Dress of Kings. The colours of Ermine
have a similar character, from the same cause. The colours, in every
country, which distinguish the Dress of Magistrates, &c., acquire
dignity in the same manner. Every person will, in the same manner,
probably, recollect the particular colours which are pleasing to
him, from their having been worn by people whom he loved, or from
some other accidental association."

That it is not from the sensation, but from those trains of
associated Ideas, that the feeling of Beauty in colours, whenever we
have it, is derived, he demonstrates, by adducing some well-chosen
instances to shew that the sensation may exist as well without the
association as with it; and that, as often as it is unaccompanied
with the association, it is unaccompanied with any feeling of
Beauty. When it has the association. Beauty is felt: when it has not
the association, Beauty is not felt. The association, therefore, is
the cause of the Beauty.

{245} "Black," says Mr. Alison, "is to us an unpleasant colour,
because it is the colour appropriated to mourning. In Venice and
Spain, it is agreeable, because it is the colour which distinguishes
the dress of the Great. White is beautiful to us, in a supreme
degree, as emblematical both of Innocence and Cheerfulness. In
China, on the other hand, it is the colour appropriated to
Mourning, and, consequently, very far from being generally
beautiful.

"The common colours of the indifferent things which surround us,--of
the Earth, of Stone, of Wood, &c.,--have no kind of Beauty. The
things themselves are so indifferent to us, that they excite no kind
of emotion; and, of consequence, their colours produce no greater
emotion as the signs of such qualities, than the qualities
themselves. The colours, in the same manner, which distinguish the
ordinary Dress of the Common People, are never considered as
beautiful. It is the colours only of the Dress of the Great, of the
Opulent, or of Distinguished Professions, which are ever considered
in this light.

"No new colour is ever beautiful, until we have acquired some
pleasing associations with it. This is peculiarly observable in the
article of Dress; and indeed it is the best instance of it, because
no other circumstance intervenes by which the experiment can be
influenced. Every man must have observed, that, in the great variety
of new colours, which the caprice of Fashion is perpetually
introducing, no new colour appears at first sight as beautiful.
A few weeks, even a few days alter our opinion; as soon as it is
generally adopted by those who lead {246} the public Taste, and has
become in consequence the mark of Rank and Elegance, it immediately
becomes beautiful.

"When the particular associations we have with such colours, are
destroyed, their beauty is destroyed at the same time.

"The different machines, instruments, &c., which minister to the
convenience of Life, have, in general, from the materials of which
they are composed, or from the uses to which they are applied, a
fixed and determinate colour. This colour becomes accordingly in
some degree beautiful, from its being the sign of such qualities;
change the accustomed colour of such objects, and every man feels a
kind of disappointment. This is so strong, that, even if a colour
more generally beautiful is substituted, yet still our
dissatisfaction is the same; and the new colour, instead of being
beautiful, becomes the reverse. Rose-colour, for instance, is a more
beautiful colour than that of Mahogany: yet, if any man were to
paint his doors and windows with Rose-colour, he would certainly not
add to their beauty. The colour of a polished steel grate is
agreeable, but is not in itself very beautiful. Suppose it painted
green, or violet, or crimson, all of them colours much more
beautiful, and the beauty of it is altogether destroyed. Instances
of this kind are innumerable."[47]

[Editor's footnote 47: The elements contributed by association are
certainly more predominant in the pleasure of colours than in that
of musical sounds; yet I am convinced that there is a direct element
of physical pleasure in colours, anterior to association. My own
memory recals to me the intense and mysterious delight which in
early childhood I had in the colours of certain flowers; a delight
far exceeding any I am now capable of receiving from colour of any
description, with all its acquired associations. And this was the
case at far too early an age, and with habits of observation far too
little developed, to make any of the subtler combinations of form
and proportion a source of much pleasure to me. This last pleasure
was acquired very gradually, and did not, until after the
commencement of manhood, attain any considerable height. The
examples quoted from Alison do not prove that there is no original
beauty in colours, but only that the feeling of it is capable, as no
one doubts that it is capable, of being overpowered by extraneous
associations.

Whether there is any similar organic basis of the pleasure derived
from form, so far at least as this depends on proportion, I would
not undertake to decide.

The susceptibility to the physical pleasures produced by colours and
musical sounds, (and by forms if any part of the pleasure they
afford is physical), is probably extremely different in different
organisations. In natures in which any one of these susceptibilities
is originally faint, more will depend on association. The extreme
sensibility of this part of our constitution to small and unobvious
influences, makes it certain that the sources of the feelings of
beauty and deformity must be, to a material extent, different in
different individuals.--_Ed._]

{247} Mr. Alison produces a very long line of illustrations to show
that the Beauty of FORMS is not the mere sensation of Form, but
consists, as in the case of sounds and colours, in the train of
pleasurable ideas associated with the sensation. Mr. Alison is less
happy, and more tedious, in the illustration of this than the
preceding parts of his subject. We shall make little use of his
proofs; because we can arrive, by a short process, at a very
satisfactory conclusion.

Mr. Alison seems not to have been aware of the {248} origin of our
ideas of Form; and thence in expounding them has found many
difficulties which do not in reality belong to the subject. He
supposes that Form is altogether a sensation of sight. In a former
part of this Inquiry, we ascertained the sensations: we saw that
Form, in all its cases, is merely a modification of extension; that
it is made known to us, by those feelings, which accompany the
motion of certain of our members, as that of a finger, or a hand.
Those feelings are in no danger of being confounded with the emotion
of Beauty. They are feelings so completely indifferent, that in most
of the associations into which the ideas of them enter as essential
ingredients they are overlooked, and the very existence of them is
commonly unknown.

If the sensation is no cause of the Pleasure derived from Forms, it
will not be questioned that association is the cause.

Forms are either Animate or Inanimate. The associations with the
Animate only differ from those with the Inanimate, in holding some
additional ingredients. Some Forms affect us, by their magnitude,
naturally associated with the idea of Power; some, by the uses to
which they are applied, as the more powerful instruments of war;
some, by the extent of their duration, with which we have obvious
associations; some, by the splendour or magnificence, with the ideas
of which they are associated,--the Throne, the Diadem, the Triumphal
Car.

The natural movements of the arm, from its turning in its socket as
round a centre, are all waving; circles, or portions of circles,
running into one another. All other movements are forced upon it,
{249} and the effect of constraint. Hence the beauty of waving
lines, because associated with the agreeable ideas of Ease, and
absence of Restraint.

As nothing is more agreeable to us than to trace the operation of
design, of successful contrivance, some Forms affect us strongly by
the idea of their Fitness, of their adaptation to an End.

Others affect us not only by the idea of their adaptation to an end,
but by the value which we attach to the end. In this case it is by
their utility that they are said to please us.

We associate with the idea of certain states of the Human Body, or
at least of the Bodies of Animals in general, certain inward
Dispositions; with great strength we associate great Wilfulness, and
little regard of others; with frailness, we associate Delicacy, the
ideas of gentleness, compliance, and regard for others. The forms of
inanimate objects sometimes bear such an analogy to the Delicate and
Frail in human Forms, that the ideas associated with the animate,
are called up by the inanimate, and produce the emotion of Beauty.

This emotion, however, is altogether prevented, when the more potent
idea of Fitness intervenes. Any thing analogous to the slender form,
which is so exquisitely beautiful in the more elegant grasses, would
be a real deformity in the oak.

More than one of those sources of agreeable association are often
united in the same subject, and increase the emotion produced by it.

Mr. Alison goes on to the exposition of the associations which
constitute the Beauty of Motion, and the Beauty of the Human Form
and Countenance. {250} But after what has been said, these
associations are not difficult to trace; and I have already carried
the illustration of this subject farther than I should have done, if
I had not regarded this case of Association as affording most
important aid toward the developement of all the more mysterious
phenomena of the Human Mind.

We have here a class of Pleasures; the Feeling of Beauty, the
Feeling of Sublimity; exercising a great influence over all
cultivated minds. These Feelings, when taken as objects of general
contemplation, appear perfectly simple. To such a degree have they
assumed the appearance of simple and original feelings of our
nature, even to Philosophers of eminence, that a particular sense
has been supposed necessary to account for their existence. Yet all
this apparent simplicity is only an exemplification of that
association, by which a multitude of ideas are so intimately, and
instantaneously blended together, that they appear to be not many
ideas, but one idea.

Of this highly important fact, we have had occasion to take notice
of various leading cases, before. In the present case, however,
there is a peculiarity; which it has in common with the various
cases called Affection, which we have recently been engaged in
considering. In the cases which occurred for examination, in the
earlier part of this Inquiry, where we found long trains of Ideas so
blended together, by association, as to appear not many ideas, but
one; that of Motion, that of Space, that of Time, that of Personal
Identity; the ideas associated were those of _indifferent_
sensations. The ideas, on the other hand, which are associated under
the terms {251} Beauty and Sublimity, are ideas of _pleasurable_
sensations. The difference is that which is testified by every man's
consciousness.

That there should be a remarkable difference between a train
composed of ideas of the indifferent class, and a train composed of
ideas of the pleasurable class, can be easily supposed. It is
necessary further to observe, that between two trains, both of the
pleasurable class, there are such important differences, as to have
suggested the use of marking them by different names. Thus, even in
the class which we have been now considering, one train is composed
of pleasurable ideas, of such a kind, that we call it sublime;
another, of pleasurable ideas of such a kind, that we call it
Beautiful. From the train of ideas associated with the form of the
statue called the Venus de Medicis, we call it beautiful. We have a
train of ideas, also pleasurable, associated with the bust of
Socrates. But this is a train not reckoned to belong to the class
either of the beautiful or the sublime; it is a train including all
the grand associations connected with the ideas of intellectual, and
moral, worth.

A particular description of the sort of ideas which constitute each
of the more remarkable cases of our pleasurable trains (that they
are of one kind in one train, of another kind in another train,--of
one kind, for example, in the trains called Sublimity, another in
the trains called Beauty, another in the trains for which we have no
better name than moral approbation, no one can doubt) would be
highly necessary in a detailed account of Human Nature. It is not
necessary for the Analysis which is the object of this {252} Work;
and would engage us in too tedious an exposition.[48]

[Editor's footnote 48: The objection commonly made to the
psychological analyses which resolve Beauty into association, is
that they confound the Beautiful with the merely agreeable. This
objection is urged, for example, by Coleridge, in his Biographia
Literaria. He admits, with every one else, that things not in
themselves agreeable, are often made agreeable by association; that
is, the pleasantness which belongs to the ideas with which they are
associated, adheres to themselves: but this cannot, it is asserted,
be the cause of their producing the particular emotion to which we
attach the name of Beauty; because, as no feeling of beauty belongs
to the ideas that are supposed to generate the emotion, no such
feeling can be transferred from them to what they are associated
with.

Any one who has studied the Analysis up to this point, is aware of
the inconclusiveness of this last argument. That a complex feeling
generated out of a number of single ones, should be as unlike to any
of those from which it is generated, as the sensation of white is
unlike the sensations of the seven prismatic colours, is no
unexampled or rare fact in our sensitive nature.

But it will also, I think, be found, in the case of our feelings of
Beauty, and still more, of Sublimity, that the theory which refers
their origin mainly to association, is not only not contradictory to
facts, but is not even paradoxical. For if our perceptions of beauty
and sublimity are of a more imposing character than the feelings
ordinarily excited in us by the contemplation of objects, it will be
found that the associations which form those impressions are
themselves of a peculiarly imposing nature. This is apparent even
from Alison; and if the Author of the Analysis had written later, he
might have referred to a deeper thinker than Alison, and a more
valuable because an unconscious witness to the truth of the
Association theory. Mr. Ruskin, with profounder and more thoughtful
views respecting the beauties both of Nature and of Art than any
{253} psychologist I could name, undertakes, in the second volume of
"Modern Painters," to investigate the conditions of Beauty. The
result he brings out is, that every thing which gives us the emotion
of the Beautiful, is expressive and emblematic of one or other of
certain lofty or lovely ideas, which are, in his apprehension,
embodied in the universe, and correspond to the various perfections
of its Creator. He holds these ideas to be, Infinity, Unity, Repose,
Symmetry, Purity, Moderation, and Adaptation to Ends. And he is, in
my judgment, to a very considerable degree successful in making out
his case. Mr. Ruskin, it is true, never thinks of inferring that our
feelings of Beauty are the actual consequence of our having those
elevating or cheering ideas recalled to us through manifold channels
of association. He deems the emotion to be arbitrarily attached to
these ideas by a pre-established harmony. But the evidence which he
adduces goes far to prove the other point. If he succeeds, as I
think he does, in showing that the things which excite the emotions
of beauty or sublimity are always things which have a natural
association with certain highly impressive and affecting ideas
(whether the catalogue which he has made of those ideas is correct
and complete or not), we need no other mode of accounting for the
peculiar character of the emotions, than by the actual, though vague
and confused, recal of the ideas. It cannot be deemed surprising
that a state of consciousness made up of reminiscences of such ideas
as Mr. Ruskin specifies, and of the grand and interesting objects
and thoughts connected with ideas like those, must be of a more
elevated character, and must stir our nature to a greater depth,
than those associations of commonplace and every-day pleasures,
which often combine with them as parts of the mass of pleasurable
feeling set up in us by the objects of Nature and Art. In a windy
country, a screen of trees so placed as to be a barrier against the
prevailing winds, excites ideas of warmth, comfort, and shelter,
which belong to the "agreeable," as distinguished by Coleridge from
the Beautiful; and these enter largely into the pleasurable feeling
with which we contemplate the trees, without contributing to give
{254} them the peculiar character distinctive of æsthetic feelings.
But besides these there are other elements constituting the beauty,
properly speaking, of the trees, which appeal to other, and what we
are accustomed, not without meaning, to call higher, parts of our
nature; which give a stronger stimulus and a deeper delight to the
imagination, because the ideas they call up are such as in
themselves act on the imagination with greater force.

As is observed by the author of the Analysis, the exposition in
detail of the associations which enter into our various feelings of
the sublime and beautiful, would require the examination of the
subject on a scale not suited to the character nor proportioned to
the dimensions of this Treatise. Of all our feelings, our acquired
pleasures and pains, especially our pleasures, are the most complex;
resulting from the whole of our nature and of our past lives, and
involving, consequently, a greater multitude and variety of
associations than almost any other phenomena of the mind. And among
our various pleasures, the æsthetic are without doubt the most
complex. It may also be remarked, and is a considerable confirmation
of the association theory, that the feelings of beauty or sublimity
with which different people are affected by the contemplation of the
same object, are evidently as different, as the pleasurable
associations of different persons with the same object are likely to
be. But there are some ingredients which are universally, or almost
universally, present, when the emotions have their characteristic
peculiarity; and to which they seem to be mainly indebted for the
extraordinary power with which they act on the minds which have the
greatest susceptibility to them. These ingredients are probably more
numerous and various than is commonly suspected; but some of the
most important and powerful of them are undoubtedly pointed to, and
illustrated with great force, in the discussion which I have
mentioned, by Mr. Ruskin; to whose work I willingly refer the
psychological student, as a copious source of at least far-reaching
suggestions, and often of much more.

Supposing that all Beauty had been successfully analysed {255} into
a lively suggestion of one or more of the ideas to which it is
referred by Mr. Ruskin, the question would still remain for
psychologists, why the suggestion of those ideas is so impressive
and so delightful. But this question may, in general, be answered
with little difficulty. It is no mystery, for example, why anything
which suggests vividly the idea of infinity, that is, of magnitude
or power without limit, acquires an otherwise strange impressiveness
to the feelings and imagination. The remaining ideas in Mr. Ruskin's
list (at least if we except those which, like Moderation, are
chiefly ancillary to the others, by excluding what would jar with
their effect) all represent to us some valuable or delightful
attribute, in a completeness and perfection of which our experience
presents us with no example, and which therefore stimulates the
active power of the imagination to rise above known reality, into a
more attractive or a more majestic world. This does not happen with
what we call our lower pleasures. To them there is a fixed limit at
which they stop: or if, in any particular case, they do acquire, by
association, a power of stirring up ideas greater than themselves,
and stimulate the imagination to enlarge its conceptions to the
dimensions of those ideas, we then feel that the lower pleasure has,
exceptionally, risen into the region of the æsthetic, and has
superadded to itself an element of pleasure of a character and
quality not belonging to its own nature.--_Ed._]




{256} CHAPTER XXII.


MOTIVES.

SECTION I.

PLEASURABLE OR PAINFUL STATES, CONTEMPLATED AS CONSEQUENTS OF OUR
OWN ACTS.


IN contemplating pains and pleasures as future; in other words,
anticipating them, or believing in their future existence; we
observe, that, in certain cases, they are independent of our
actions; in other cases, that they are consequent upon something
which may be done, or left undone by us.

Thus, in certain cases, we foresee that a painful sensation or
sensations will be given us, but that something may be done by us
which will prevent it: Again, that a pleasurable sensation, or
sensations will be given us, but not unless something be done by us,
of which the sensations are the consequence.

It is necessary that those two cases, a pain to be prevented, and a
pleasure to be obtained, by our own actions, should be distinguished
from one another; but as they both rank under the title of a good,
and, as it will shorten our phraseology to name them {257} together,
we shall speak of the removal of pain, in the present section, at
least, under the denominations of a pleasure.

We have seen what is the state of consciousness, produced by the
contemplation of a pleasurable sensation as future; that it is
called Joy, if the pleasure is contemplated as certainly future, in
other words, believed; that it is called Hope, if the sensation is
contemplated as not certainly future, that is, if the anticipation
does not amount to belief.

We have also seen what is our state of consciousness, when we
contemplate the cause of a future pleasure, and the pleasure,
together. It is a mixture of Love, and Joy; Love as regards the
cause; Joy as regards the sensation.

The association which constitutes those States of Mind (AFFECTIONS,
as they are commonly called) it is hardly necessary to repeat. The
anticipation of a future sensation, is merely the association, the
result of prior sensations, of a certain number of antecedents and
consequents. I anticipate, for example, the pleasing sensation of
light, at a certain hour to-morrow morning. The meaning is, that
with my sensations of the present moment, are associated those of
the next; with those of the next those of the following; and so on,
till sleep; after sleep, waking, and then the anticipated sensation.

When the cause is contemplated along with the sensation, the
association which constitutes the process of anticipation is the
same, till we arrive at the link which immediately precedes the
sensation. Thus, if instead of the pleasurable sensation of light,
the pleasure of breakfast, is my anticipation of to-morrow {258}
morning; in that case, the idea of the pleasure of eating is
associated with the idea of the food, not as with an ordinary
antecedent, but that peculiar antecedent which is called a cause.

When the idea of the Pleasure is associated with an action of our
own as its cause; that is, contemplated as the consequent of a
certain action of ours, and incapable of otherwise existing; or when
the cause of a Pleasure is contemplated as the consequent of an
action of ours, and not capable of otherwise existing; a peculiar
state of mind is generated which, as it is a tendency to action, is
properly denominated MOTIVE.

The word MOTIVE is by no means steadily applied to its proper
object. The pleasure, for example, which is the consequent of the
act, is apt to be regarded as alone the impelling principle, and
properly entitled to the name of _Motive_. It is obvious, however,
that the idea of the pleasure does not constitute the motive to
action without the idea of the action as the cause; that it is the
association, therefore, to which alone the name belongs.

As every pleasure is worth having; for otherwise it would not be a
pleasure; the idea of every pleasure associated with that of an
action of ours as the cause, is a motive; that is, leads to the
action. But every motive does not produce the action. The reason is,
the existence of other motives which prevent it. A man is tempted to
commit adultery with the wife of his friend; the composition of the
motive obvious. He does not obey the motive. Why? He obeys other
motives which are stronger. Though pleasures are associated with the
immoral act, pains are {259} associated with it also; the pains of
the injured husband; the pains of the injured wife; the moral
indignation of mankind; the future reproaches of his own mind. Some
men obey the first, rather than the second motive. The reason is
obvious. In them, the association of the act with the pleasure, is,
from habit, unduly strong; the association of the act with the
pains, is, from want of habit, unduly weak. This is a case of bad
Education; and one highly unfortunate, for the value of the
pleasures in question is infinitely outweighed by the value of the
pains. The business of a good education is to make the associations
and the values correspond.

In the preceding paragraph, I have spoken of the abstaining from an
act, as an act. Though this language is not rigidly correct, yet as
it will lead to no confusion, and will often permit the use of
abridged expressions, I shall not scruple, as often as I find
occasion, to adopt it.

In the cases adduced above, of one man who obeys the motive to
commit a crime, of another who obeys the motive to abstain from it,
we have an example of an important fact; that, among the different
classes of motives, there are men who are more easily and strongly
operated upon by some, others by others. We have also seen, that
this is entirely owing to habits of association. This facility of
being acted upon, by motives of a particular description, is that
which we call DISPOSITION. And it is necessary to take notice of the
name and its meaning here; because we shall find that many of the
names of _Motives_ are names also of the corresponding
_Dispositions_; and we should not, therefore, be able to exhibit
distinctly the {260} marking power of such names, without an
accurate conception of what it is which, in this mode of using them,
they are employed to mark.

Each of the senses affords sensations, which, associated with the
act which is its proper antecedent, may be considered as forming a
class of motives.

In most of its cases, this association, taking place uniformly and
habitually, is, like the motion of the eyelids, unnoticed, and not
provided with a name.

Two cases, however; one, the pleasures of the palate; the other,
those of sex; act so important a part in human life, that the
motives they constitute by association with their antecedents, have
not been left without names; though very defective ones have been
applied to them.

Thus, for the motive of Eating, we have the name Gluttony: but
gluttony is applied to it only when it is unduly strong. In like
manner, we have the name Lust for the motive of sex; but that, too,
only when the motive is unduly strong, or in some other respect
faulty.

We have here an instance of that confusion of names which was
noticed above; the same word employed as the mark of two different
things; first, the Motive; secondly, the readiness to be acted upon,
and strongly acted upon, by it. The name Gluttony is not only the
name of a certain _Motive_; it is also the name of the corresponding
_Disposition_; a readiness to obey that motive. The name Lust is not
only the name of the _Motive_; but also of the _Disposition_, or a
readiness to obey the motive.

Drunkenness is a name used in the same way exactly as the preceding
two. It is the name of a motive, {261} only in the case of excess.
And it is a name with a double meaning, being applied both to the
Motive, and the Disposition.

For these several motives, in the cases which are not considered as
in excess, we have none but circumlocutory names; as, love of
eating; love of drinking; love of sex. It is to be observed, also,
that the circumlocutory names have the same double meaning, as the
preceding single name; they are the names both of the _Motive_, and
the _Disposition_.

The motives, arising from the pleasures of the palate, and from the
pleasures of sex, are sometimes spoken of as two species of one
genus. To this the name _Sensuality_ is applied. The fact, however,
rather is, that the cases of excess, named Gluttony, Drunkenness,
Lust, are considered as the species of a certain genus. Sensuality
is rather a generical name of the cases of excess, than of those of
moderation.

_Sensuality_ has the same duplicity of meaning, with all the other
names, just enumerated; it is the name, both of the _Motive_ and of
the _Disposition_.

_Temperance_, and _Intemperance_, are names of Dispositions, which
have a reference to pleasures generally.

We have seen, from a previous illustration, that when the motive
resulting from the association of a pleasure is not obeyed, it is
owing to the association of a pain. When the association of the pain
resulting from any act so balances that of the pleasure, that when
the value of the pain exceeds that of the pleasure, the pleasure
never prevails,--the {262} Disposition called _Temperance_ exists;
that is, an equal facility of associating with any act both its
pleasures and its pains.

When the association in the two cases is not in this manner equally
balanced; that is, when the association of the pleasures is an
overmatch for the pains, the Disposition called _Intemperance_
exists.[49]

[Editor's footnote 49: A Motive is that which influences the will;
and the Will is a subject we have not yet arrived at the
consideration of. Meanwhile, it is here shewn that a motive to an
act consists in the association of pleasure with the act; that a
motive to abstain from an act, is the association of pain with it;
and we are prepared to admit the truth deduced therefrom, that the
one or the other motive will prevail, according as the pleasurable
or the painful association is the more powerful. What makes the one
or the other more powerful, is (conformably to the general laws of
association) partly the intensity of the pleasurable or painful
ideas in themselves, and partly the frequency of repetition of their
past conjunction with the act, either in experience or in thought.
In the latter of these two consists the efficacy of education in
giving a good or a bad direction to the active powers.

In further elucidation of Motives, I cite the following passages
from the First Appendix to the author's "Fragment on Mackintosh"
(pp. 389, 390):--

"A motive is something which moves--moves to what? To action. But
all action, as Aristotle says, (and all mankind agree with him) is
for an end. Actions are essentially means. The question, then, is,
what is the end of action? Actions, taken in detail, have ends in
detail. But actions, taken in classes, have ends which may be taken
in classes. Thus the ends of the actions which are subservient to
the pleasures of sense, are combined in a class, to which, in
abstract, we give the name sensuality. The class of actions which
tend to the {263} increase of power, have a class of ends to which
we give the name ambition, and so on. When we put all these classes
together, and make a _genus_; that is, actions in general; can we in
like manner make a genus of the ends; and name ends in general?

"If we could find what the several classes of ends; sensuality for
example; ambition; avarice; glory; sociality, &c.; have in common,
we could.

"Now, they have certainly this in common, that they are all
agreeable to the agents. A man acts for the sake of something
agreeable to him, either proximately or remotely. But agreeable to,
and pleasant to; agreeableness, and pleasantness, are only different
names for the same thing; the pleasantness of a thing is the
pleasure it gives. So that pleasure, in a general way, or speaking
generically; that is, in a way to include all the species of
pleasures, and also the abatement of pains; is the end of action.

"A motive is that which moves to action. But that which moves to
action is the end of the action, that which is sought by it; that
for the sake of which it is performed. Now that, generically
speaking, is the pleasure of the agent. Motive, then, taken
generically is pleasure. The pleasure may be in company or
connection with things infinite in variety. But these are the
accessaries; the essence, is the pleasure. Thus, in one case, the
pleasure may be connected with the form, and other qualities of a
particular woman; in another, with a certain arrangement of colours
in a picture; in another, with the circumstances of some
fellow-creature. But in all these cases, what is generical, that is
the essence, is the pleasure, or relief from pain.

"A motive, then, is the idea of a pleasure; a particular motive, is
the idea of a particular pleasure; and these are infinite in
variety.

"Another question is, in what circumstances does the idea of a
pleasure become a motive? For it is evident, that it does not so in
all. It is only necessary here to illustrate, not to resolve the
question. First, the pleasure must be {264} regarded as attainable.
No man wills an act, which he knows he cannot perform, or which he
knows cannot effect the end. In the next place, the idea of the
particular pleasure must be more present to the mind, than any other
of equal potency. That which makes the idea of one pleasure more
potent than another; or that which makes one idea more present to
the mind than another, is the proximate cause of the motive, and a
remote cause of the volition. The cause of that superior potency, or
of that presence to the mind, is a cause of the volition, still more
remote, and so on.--_Ed._]


{265} SECTION II.

CAUSES OF OUR PLEASURABLE AND PAINFUL STATES, CONTEMPLATED AS THE
CONSEQUENTS OF OUR OWN ACTS.


The motives which are formed by the association of our actions, not
with our pleasures immediately, but the causes of them, are much
more numerous than those which are formed by the association of them
with the pleasures themselves; and give birth to a much greater
number of actions.

The cause of this we have already explained, and need not explain it
again.

The causes of our Pleasures, including as well the remote as the
proximate, are so numerous, that it is necessary to speak of them in
classes.

We have surveyed them under the following Heads; Wealth, Power,
Dignity, our Fellow-creatures, the objects called Sublime and
Beautiful; and having fully explained the associations by which they
become AFFECTIONS, we have now only to shew, by what additament
these Affections are converted into MOTIVES.

It is not difficult to trace the course of association. The idea of
the pleasure carries us to the idea of the cause; the idea of that
cause, to the idea of its cause; and so on till we arrive at that
action of ours which is the commencing cause, and gives birth to all
the {266} rest. This association forms a complex state of
consciousness, which receives the name of MOTIVE.

It is also to be observed, that when a grand cause of pleasures has
been associated with a great many pleasures, and a great many times,
the association acquires a peculiar character and strength. The idea
of the cause, as cause, is so lost among the innumerable ideas of
the pleasures combined with it, that it seems to become the idea of
pleasure itself. An instance commonly adduced to illustrate the
important class of associations to which this belongs, is that of
_Money_; and a remarkable instance it is. Many are the instances in
which the association of pleasures with money constitutes so
vehement an affection that it is an overmatch for all others.

In those cases the association which constitutes the motive seems to
consist of a single link. The money is the passion; the idea of the
action which is to add to it, or prevent its diminution, associated
with the passion, constitutes the Motive.

The Motive which leads to the acquisition of wealth, great as is the
part which it plays in human life, has no appropriate name. Avarice,
Rapacity, like the words Gluttony, and Lust, are only names for
cases of excess. It is observable, however, that they have the
above-noticed duplicity of meaning; that they are names both of the
Motive, and of the Disposition.

We have noticed three states of consciousness into which the idea of
a cause of our pleasures enters as a main ingredient: 1. The mere
contemplation of it as a cause, past or future; which is called the
AFFECTION: 2. The association of an act of ours, as the {267} cause
of the cause; which is called the MOTIVE: 3. A readiness to obey
this motive, which is called the DISPOSITION.

We have seen, that in regard to Wealth, we had no other name for the
first of those states of Consciousness, or the AFFECTION, than the
term "Love of Wealth." It is here of importance to observe, that for
the Motive also, or the second of those states, unless in its cases
of excess, we have no other name than the name of the affection. We
call the _Motive_ also, "love of wealth." Nor have we any other name
for the _Disposition_. This, therefore, is a case of great
confusion. We have but one name for the _Affection_, for the
_Motive_, and for the _Disposition_. They are states of
consciousness, therefore, perpetually confounded.

Power, as a cause of pleasure, is rather a less distinct and
definite idea, than Wealth. The associations formed with it partake
of this indistinctness. The _Motive_ which is formed by association
of the idea of Power, with that of an act of ours, which is to add
to it, is a more vague idea than that formed of the idea of Wealth
associated with the ideas of the acts which are to add to it. Our
present purpose, however, does not require a minute analysis. The
acts by which, in the different degrees in which it is possessed,
men are commonly enabled to add to their power, are vulgarly known.
Power, like wealth, becomes itself a sort of primary affection. The
association with it of acts of ours as causes of its increase,
constitutes the state of mind called the Motive.

This Motive receives the name of Ambition; and that name is so
applied pretty generally; though its {268} original and more
appropriate application seems to be, to great acquisitions of power,
or additions made to great acquisitions.

The same duplicity of meaning, which we have so often remarked,
meets us here. In whatever sense Ambition is the name of the
_Motive_, it is also a name of the _Disposition_.

The term "Love of Power," which we have found to be the name of the
_Affection_, is also applied to the two other states of mind, the
_Motive_, and the _Disposition_. The three, therefore, _Affection_,
_Motive_, _Disposition_, are commonly confounded.

Dignity is a more vague term than even Power; including a still
greater number of undefined particulars. But to understand
sufficiently the three states of mind which it contributes to form,
no further enumeration of those particulars is necessary. The idea
of Dignity, as cause, associated with the idea of pleasures as
effect, constitutes the state of mind called _Affection_. The state
of mind called affection associated with the idea of an act of ours
as cause of the cause, is the state of mind called the _Motive_. And
a facility of being acted upon by the motive, is the _Disposition_.

We have only one name, "Love of Dignity," for all the three.

We have seen that the value of Wealth, Power, and Dignity, is
greatly enhanced, by their comparative amount; that is, the degree
in which they are possessed by us, compared with the degree in which
they are possessed by others.

We have seen in what manner this comparison generates certain
affections, which have received the {269} names of Pride, on the one
hand, Contempt, on the other; Humility, on the one hand, Respect,
Admiration, on the other. We have now to shew in what manner this
comparison generates both _Motives_, and _Dispositions_.

As it is not only of value to me to have more Wealth, Power, and
Dignity; but of additional value to have more than other men; the
surpassing of other men becomes, thus, a cause of Pleasure; and
hence the idea of this surpassing, associated with the ideas of my
own acts, as the cause, becomes a _Motive_.

We may endeavour to surpass other men, by either of two ways; by
adding to our own Wealth, Power, Dignity; or, by abstracting from
theirs.

When only the acts which add to our advantages enter into the
Motive, it is called Emulation. When those which abstract from the
advantages of another enter into it, it is called Envy.

Emulation is sometimes the name of the _Disposition_, as well as of
the _Motive_. Ambition, however, is very often used as the name of
the Disposition corresponding to the _Motive_, Emulation.

Envy, is the name both of the _Disposition_ and the _Motive_. It has
the appearance also of being the name of the corresponding
_Affection_; or of the state of consciousness arising from the
comparison of another man's greater, with our own less advantages.
This, however, is only Humility. It is never Envy, but when the
Motive to reduce them is felt. It may be a Motive without effect,
being counteracted by other motives. And it is this state in which
it assumes the appearance of an _Affection_.

In these instances, the same end is attainable by {270} two sets of
means; the one virtuous; the other vicious. The man who takes the
virtuous course, that is, obeys the virtuous motive, is the man who
has formed the habit of associating his idea of the good to be
derived from surpassing others, with the acts which lead to the
increase of his own advantages. The man who takes the vicious
course, is the man who has formed the habit of associating with his
idea of the benefit of surpassing others, the acts, by which their
advantages are diminished.

This a case of the greatest importance, in Education, and Ethics.

We now come to the explanation of that important class of Motives
which arise from the contemplation of our FELLOW-CREATURES, as the
cause of our Pleasures, and Pains.

With respect to our Fellow-creatures, a distinction must be
carefully observed. They are sources to us of Pleasure or Pain, in
two ways; either by their STATES; or, by their Actions. Their
ACTIONS give birth to a set of Associations of the greatest
importance, which remain to be considered under a Head by
themselves. What the _Affections_ are, which are generated by the
association of our pains and pleasures, with the STATES of our
Fellow-creatures, taken individually, or in groups, we have recently
examined. We have now only to shew, and for this a few words will
suffice, what are the _Motives_, generated by the association of
acts of ours with those STATES; acts contemplated as causes of such
alterations in the States as render them to a greater or less degree
causes of our pleasures or pains.

1. What the state of my _Friend_ is, as respects both {271} his
outward circumstances and his inward disposition, which renders him,
more or less, a source, to me, of pleasure on the one hand, or pain
on the other, it is not necessary, after what has been said, any
further to illustrate. When alterations can be effected in that
state by my actions, of a kind to render my Friend more a cause of
Pleasure to me, or less a cause of Pain, the association takes place
of my pleasures as effect with such alterations as cause of those
pleasures, and with my own acts, as cause of those alterations.

The MOTIVE, therefore, exists. And when a facility of forming this
association, in other words, a readiness of obeying the MOTIVE, is
contracted, the Disposition exists.

It is important to observe, that the word, _Friendship_, has all
that equivocation, or variety of meaning, which we have detected in
other words expressing our states of mind towards the causes of our
pleasures or pains. It is, at once, the name of the AFFECTION, the
name of the MOTIVE, and the name of the DISPOSITION.

2. We have seen what the State of any one of our fellow-creatures
is, which so associates with it the ideas of our own pains and
pleasures, as to make him an object of _Kindness_. It is easy to see
in what manner the ideas of our own acts are so joined to those
associations, as to constitute _Motives_. When the idea of additions
to the pleasures of a man, calls up the idea of additions to our
pleasures; the idea of a diminution of his pains, the idea of a
diminution of our pains; and when to this is added the idea of our
own acts as cause of those additions and diminutions, the
association exists which we call MOTIVE.

{272} The motive, which we are now considering, though in most men,
owing to a bad education, in which so important an association has
been neglected, it is too feeble, not to give way to any of the
stronger propensities of our nature, is, nevertheless, from the
constancy of its action, a powerful agent in human life, and the
cause of no small portion of all the happiness which exists in the
world.

A readiness to be acted upon by this MOTIVE; a main object of good
Education; constitutes the DISPOSITION.

The AFFECTION, the MOTIVE, the DISPOSITION, have all but one name.
Each is denominated _Kindness_. When the more immediate effect is
the removal of pain, we use the term _Compassion_; which is, in like
manner, a name of the affection, the motive, and the disposition.

3. The State of the group, denominated a Family, is a copious source
of pain, or pleasure, to the members of it. We have explained,
above, the associations which constitute the Family _Affections_.
The formation of the _Motives_ it is now easy to trace.

To take the principal case, that of the Parent; The pleasurable
associations which he has with the pleasures, and removal of the
pains, of his child, joined with the idea of his own acts, as cause
of those pleasures and removals, constitute a MOTIVE, the importance
of which we daily observe. Notwithstanding the defects of the
parental associations, under such a state of Education and Morals as
ours, no other source of generosity in Human Nature produces
uniformly so large a portion of its proper effects.

It is not necessary to explain in what manner the affections, either
of the child towards the parent, or of {273} brothers and sisters
towards each other, become motives. That such motives often exist,
and in great strength; and that no small portion of human happiness
is derived from them, is matter of experience.

We have no appropriate name for either the AFFECTION, or the MOTIVE,
or the DISPOSITION, in the case, either of the parent toward the
child, or of the child toward the Parent, or of the children among
themselves. We are under the necessity of forming circumlocutory
names, by aid of the general term Love. We say the Love of Family;
the Love of a Parent toward his offspring; the Love to one another
of brothers and sisters. And these are names, at once, of the
AFFECTION, the MOTIVE, and the DISPOSITION. So imperfectly have some
of the most interesting and important of our states of consciousness
been distinguished.

4. The idea of our _Country_ is associated, as in some sort their
cause, with a great portion of all the pleasures which we enjoy. And
the difference of the states, in which it may be placed, makes a
prodigious difference in the amount of pleasures, which we derive
from it. When actions of ours, therefore, can influence the state of
our country, we associate the idea of those acts as causes, with the
pleasurable results as effects, and hence the MOTIVE exists.

To individuals of the great body of the people, wholly in most
countries deprived of power, their country can seldom present itself
in the light of a motive, because with few acts of theirs as cause,
can they associate a benefit to their country as the Effect. Their
exertions in repelling from it the invasion of a destructive enemy,
or freeing it from the power of a {274} mischievous government, are
the principal exceptions to this general rule.

The way in which the idea of Country becomes a _Motive_ to a man
whose actions are more widely operative, may thus be conceived. In
the prosperity of his country, is included a portion of his own
prosperity, and of that of all the individuals who are objects of
his affection. Such actions of his, therefore, as are calculated to
add to the prosperity of his country, are associated with all the
agreeable trains, which additions to the prosperity of himself, and
of all those with whom he has any sympathies, imply.

There are cases, though rare, in which this motive has existed in
extraordinary force; in which men have been found capable of
sacrificing every thing for their country. This happens most readily
in times of great excitement; that is, when public opinion holds out
a great reward; and when the object rather is, to ward off some
great calamity, than to obtain an accession of good.[50]

[Editor's footnote 50: It is too limited a view of the effect of
"times of great excitement" in intensifying the patriotic feelings,
to identify it with the influence of a more than usual reward held
out by public opinion. That fact often contributes its share, but
there are other causes fully as effectual. In times of excitement,
the idea of Country, the ideas of all the interests involved in it,
and of the manner in which those interests will be affected by our
action or by our forbearance to act, exist in the mind in greater
intensity, and are recalled with far greater frequency, than in
ordinary times. Moreover, the fact that a feeling is shared by all
or many of those with whom we are in frequent intercourse,
strengthens, by an obvious consequence, all the associations, both
of resemblance and of contiguity, which give that feeling its force.
This is the well-known influence of sympathy, so strikingly evinced
by the vehement feelings of a crowd. To these might be added another
influence, belonging rather to physiology than to psychology. When
the nervous system has been highly strung up by the influence of any
strong feeling, it seems to become more acutely sensible to feeling
of any sort, those feelings excepted which jar with, and are
counteracted by, the prevailing tone of the system.--_Ed._]

{275} It is important to observe, that this motive tends different
ways, according to the different positions of the individual. Where
the inhabitants of a country are divided into classes, a Ruling
Class, and a Subject Class, the members of the Ruling Class have
hardly any sympathies, except with one another; in other words, have
agreeable associations with the pleasures, and removal of the pains,
of hardly any persons, but those who belong to the same class. In
this class are contained, their Parents, their Brothers and Sisters,
their Sons and Daughters, their Companions, whether Male or Female,
and their Friends: the manners of this class, are to them the only
agreeable manners; the morals of this class the only virtue. It
hence appears, that the principal part of the associations, which
make the idea of country an AFFECTION, are, in their case, connected
exclusively with the good of their own class. When their own acts,
as causes, are associated with accessions to this good, as effects,
the _Motive_ created is that of benefit to the class. Patriotism, in
their case, means, literally, 1st, Affection for their own class;
2ndly, The Motive to benefit that class; and 3rdly, A readiness to
obey that Motive.

It is to be observed, that Patriotism is the only {276} name
provided for all the three states of the agreeable trains connected
with the idea of country, the AFFECTION, the MOTIVE, and the
DISPOSITION,--and that it is commonly used in a laudatory sense; to
mark an unusual degree of the Affection, the Motive, or the
Disposition.

It follows, from what has been said, that there can be no real
Patriotism, no pointing of the _Affection_, the _Motive_, and
_Disposition_, steadily to the good of the whole, without preference
of any particular part; except, either in men of elevated minds and
affections, in whom the larger associations, generated by a good
Education, control the narrow associations, growing out of a
particular position; or, in men whose position is such as to give
them pleasurable associations chiefly with individuals of the
general mass, whose good has this happy quality, that it is always
identified with that of the community at large.

5. The group, called a _Party_, or _Class_, generates associations,
which have produced great, we may say terrible, effects, in human
life; and which thence deserve a great degree of attention. The
associations, of which the AFFECTION consists, and by which the
interest of the class comes to be identified, as it were, with the
interest of the individual, have been already pointed out. From this
the generation of the MOTIVE is easily traced.

When the interests of the class are contemplated as capable, either
of receiving increase, or of being preserved from diminution, by the
acts of the class, collectively, or individually; that is, when the
increase, or the preservation from diminution, is associated, as
{277} effect, with acts of the class, collectively, or individually,
as cause, the MOTIVE exists.

When a readiness to obey this MOTIVE; that is, a facility of forming
the associations which constitute the MOTIVE exists, the
corresponding DISPOSITION exists.

There are no appropriate names for these states of consciousness. We
make, by the usual forced service of the word Love, a name for
necessary occasions. A nobleman says, he has a Love for his Order;
and that term, Love of his Order, is the name for all the three
states, the AFFECTION, the MOTIVE, and the DISPOSITION.

The Clergy have invented a name for their own case. It is Love of
the Church. This means, the love of the interests of the class; of
the Wealth, Power, and Dignity, of the Clergy. The term Love of the
Church has the usual variety of meaning. It is the name not only of
the AFFECTION, but also of the MOTIVE, and the DISPOSITION.

It is moreover a name well contrived for the purposes of the class;
because it is calculated to keep the real character of the
associations out of sight.

6. The aggregate, included under the comprehensive term _Mankind_,
is in so many ways associated with our pains and pleasures, that the
interest of each individual appears, in some degree, bound up in the
interest of the race. Any act of ours, then, by which the interest
of the race can be promoted, is associated in our minds with our own
interest; and becomes a motive. A readiness to act upon this MOTIVE,
is the DISPOSITION and the AFFECTION, the {278} MOTIVE, and the
DISPOSITION, have but one name, Love of Mankind.

This motive operates feebly, and is easily overruled by other
motives, in the great majority of men. A very general idea, such as
that of _Mankind_, is an indistinct idea; and no strong association
is formed with it, except by the means of Education. In the common
run of men, the narrow sympathies, alone, act with any considerable
force. Such men can sympathize with this individual, and the other
individual, with their own Family, or their own class. But to
sympathize with mankind at large, or even with the body of the
people in their own country, exceeds the bounds of their contracted
affections.

Large Classes, which cannot be the object of our Senses, become
steady subjects of contemplation, only through the medium of General
Terms. Applied, in comprehensive, and important Propositions,
General Terms call forth associations of the most interesting
nature; and to men, who are in the habit of so applying them, become
the source of an affection, powerful enough to control every other
propensity of their nature. It is only by a Philosophical Education,
that men are early trained to the use of General Terms, and
comprehensive Propositions; and have the means of forming those
associations, on which the most ennobling of all the states of Human
Consciousness depends.[51]

[Editor's footnote 51: This Section is devoted to an exposition of
the manner in which facts which are not pleasures or pains, but
causes of pleasures or of pains, become so closely associated in
thought {279} with the pains and pleasures of which they are causes,
as not only to become themselves pleasurable or painful, but to
become also, by their association with acts of our own by which they
may be brought about, motives of the greatest strength. The value of
a due understanding of this fact, both for the purposes of
psychological science and for those of practical education, is
evidently very great: and the author, to whose mind the bearings of
speculative philosophy on the practical interests of the human race
were ever present, has not failed to make some ethical and political
applications of the psychological truth which he has here so
excellently illustrated.--_Ed._]




{280} CHAPTER XXIII.

THE ACTS OF OUR FELLOW-CREATURES, WHICH ARE CAUSES OF OUR PAINS AND
PLEASURES, CONTEMPLATED AS CONSEQUENTS OF OUR OWN ACTS.


WE are now in a condition to explain the Phenomena, which have been
classed under the titles of Moral Sense, Moral Faculty, Sense of
Right and Wrong, Moral Affection, Love of Virtue, and so on, which
are all names of similar import.

We have already remarked, that, of all the Causes of our Pleasures
and Pains, none are to be compared in point of magnitude, with the
actions of ourselves, and our Fellow-creatures. From this class of
causes, a far greater amount of Pleasures and Pains proceed, than
from all other causes taken together. It follows, that these causes
are objects of intense affection to us; either favourable, if they
are the cause of Pleasure; or unfavourable, if they are the cause of
Pain.

The actions from which men derive advantage have all been classed
under four Titles; Prudence, Fortitude, Justice, Beneficence.

We apply the names Prudent, Brave, Just, {281} Beneficent, both to
our own acts, and to the acts of other men.

When those names are applied to our own acts, the first two, Prudent
and Brave, express acts which are useful to _ourselves_, in the
first instance; the latter two, Just, and Beneficent, express acts,
which are useful to _others_, in the first instance.

When we apply the same names, not to our own acts, but to the acts
of other men, the first two, Prudent and Brave, express acts which
are useful to them in the first instance; the latter two, Just and
Beneficent, express acts which are useful to others, in the first
instance.

It is further to be remarked, that those acts of ours, which are
primarily useful to ourselves, are secondarily useful to others; and
those which are primarily useful to others, are secondarily useful
to ourselves. Thus, it is by our own Prudence and Fortitude, that we
are best enabled to do acts of Justice and Beneficence to others.
And it is by acts of Justice and Beneficence to others, that we best
dispose them to do similar acts to us.

Again, in the case of other men, the acts which are primarily useful
to themselves, their Prudence, their Fortitude, are secondarily
useful to others, as by them they are the better enabled to be
always just and beneficent; and the acts by which they are primarily
useful to others, their Justice, their Beneficence, are secondarily
useful to themselves, as disposing others the more to be just and
beneficent toward them.

We have two sets of associations, therefore, with the acts which are
thus named; one set of associations {282} with them, when they are
considered as our own acts; another set of associations with them,
when they are considered as the acts of other men.

1. When they are considered as our own acts; in other words, when we
consider our own Prudence, Bravery, Justice, and Beneficence, we
have associations with them of the following kind. With our own acts
of Prudence and Bravery, we associate good to ourselves; that is,
either Pleasure, or the cause of Pleasure, as the immediate
consequent. Acts of PRUDENCE, for example, are divided into two
sorts; the sort productive of good, and the sort preventive of evil.
All acts which add to our Wealth, Power, and Dignity, or any one of
them, so far as they produce this effect without counterbalancing
evil, may be called acts of Prudence. Thus, incessant Labour, by all
those to whom it is necessary for subsistence, or for reputation, is
a course of Prudence. Prudence, however, in its common acceptation,
is more employed to denote the acts by which we avoid evils, than
those by which we obtain good; those by which we reject present
pleasures when followed by pains which overbalance them, and by
which we endure present pains when they prevent the following of
greater pains, or secure the following of pleasures which
overbalance them.

It thus appears, that, for the most perfect performance of acts of
prudence, the greatest measure of knowledge is required. It is the
choice made, among all the innumerable acts within our power, of
those, the consequences of which, when the pleasurable and painful
are balanced against one another, constitute the greatest amount of
good. To this is requisite a {283} knowledge of all the train of
consequences, which each act can produce; that is, a knowledge of
the qualities of almost every thing, animate and inanimate, with
which we are surrounded; and a judgment, constantly upon the alert,
to draw correct conclusions from what we know.

When we perform acts of COURAGE or FORTITUDE, the chance of Evil,
that is, danger, is incurred for the sake of a preponderant good. If
the good were not something more than a balance for the chance of
Evil, the consequences of the act would not be a balance of good,
but of evil. It would, therefore, be an immoral, not a moral, act;
and would have no title to the name of Courage.[52]

[Bain's footnote 52: The virtue of Prudence might apparently have
included Courage or Fortitude; we cannot be said to be prudent, if
we are unable to face a certain amount of evil or danger, for the
sake of a greater good. Doubtless, however, the author felt that
Prudence does not suggest the full scope of so eminent a quality as
Courage. The reasons of this are interesting to explore.

Of various considerations that might be adduced, by far the most
pertinent is the following. Courage, as a virtue esteemed and
extolled in all ages, involves a certain amount of self-sacrifice.
If it were limited to the control of the state of fear, so as to
enable one never to fail in the pursuit of one's own interest, by
giving way to unreasonable alarms, it would be respected as a
manifestation of strength, but it would not receive the warm
admiration that we usually bestow upon courageous men. The nobility
of courage is its devotedness. The courageous soldier is not he that
maintains a post of apparent danger unmoved, knowing there is no
real danger; which would be the prudent man's courage. Something
very different is exacted in return for the epithet "a brave
man."--_B._]

Knowledge is, therefore, as necessary to the exercise of this virtue
as to that of Prudence. Courage, in fact, is but a species of the
acts of Prudence: a class selected for distinction by a particular
name; that class, in which evils, of great magnitude, or rather of a
particular description, are to be hazarded, for the sake of a
preponderant good. But how is the {284} amount of the good, or of
the evil, to be ascertained, but by that power of tracing the
consequences of acts, for which the greatest knowledge, and the most
accurate judgment, are required?

When, with the ideas of our acts of Prudence, and acts of Courage,
past, and future, have been associated, sufficiently often, the
classes of benefits which are the consequences of them, the Ideas of
those acts are no longer SIMPLE IDEAS, INDIFFERENT IDEAS; they are
PLEASURABLE IDEAS; that is, AFFECTIONS.

The MOTIVE, in this case, presents a peculiarity, which requires
attention. In the case of the Love of Wealth, Power, or Dignity, the
Love of Individuals, the Love of Family, and all other causes of our
Pleasures, we have uniformly found the _Affection_ to be one thing,
the _Motive_ another. The _Affection_ consisted of the association
of the idea of the object as Cause, with that of our Pleasures as
Effect. The _Motive_ consisted of the association of the idea of the
object, as cause, with that of our pleasures, as effect, and the
idea of an act of ours, as cause of that cause. When it is an act of
our own, however, which is the cause of our Pleasure, there is no
act of ours to be associated as cause of that cause. The {285} ideas
of the act, and its consequences, are the Motive. The MOTIVE,
therefore, and the AFFECTION, are in this case the same.

The next two classes of acts are those to which the names, Justice,
and Beneficence, have been applied. Taken together, they are the
names of all those acts of a man, by which he does good to others.
Out of these, the name Justice selects a particular class, and all
the rest are Beneficence.

Men, in society, have found it essential, for mutual benefit, that
the powers of Individuals, over the general causes of good, should
be fixed by certain rules; that is, Laws. Acts done in conformity
with those rules are called Just Acts; and, when duly considered,
they are seen to include the main portion of acts of beneficence in
general; of those acts of ours, the immediate object of which is the
good of others. To the performance of a certain portion of the acts
of Justice, our Fellow-creatures compel us, by annexing penalties to
the non-performance of them. A large portion, however, remain to be
performed without compulsion.

Our Beneficent acts are either causes of pleasure to others
immediately, or causes of the causes of their pleasures. The act of
him who gives a cup of water to the thirsty traveller in the Desert,
may be said to be cause of the pleasure of the Traveller. The act of
him who instructs the Traveller, before he proceeds on his journey,
where in the Desert water is to be found, is the cause of the cause
of his Pleasure. To speak generally, all acts of ours, by which
increase is imparted to the Wealth, Power, and Dignity of another
person, and to the favourable disposition of {286} other persons
towards him; or by which diminution of those advantages is
prevented, are acts of Beneficence towards him.

It is easy to trace in what manner the ideas of those acts become
_Affections_. In the first place, we have associations of pleasure
with all the pleasurable feelings of a Fellow-creature. We have
associations of pleasure, therefore, with those acts of ours which
yield him pleasure. In the second place, those are the acts which
procure to us one of the most highly valued of all the sources of
our pleasures, the favourable Disposition of our Fellow-men. With
our acts of Justice and Beneficence, therefore, we have associations
of all the pleasures which the favourable disposition of other men
towards us is calculated to produce. By those associations, the Idea
of our own beneficent acts is no longer an INDIFFERENT IDEA; it
becomes a PLEASURABLE IDEA, that is, an AFFECTION.[53]

[Bain's footnote 53: The affirmations in this paragraph require to
be tested in the detail, in order to find out their limitations.

That "we have associations of pleasure with all the pleasurable
feelings of a Fellow-creature" is true in a great many instances. By
the law of association, the signs of happiness tend to suggest the
happy feelings themselves, and even to induce these to some extent
upon the beholder. The sight of happy beings is a positive
contribution to our own happiness; the obverse fact being equally
well marked. We are delighted with the playful gambols of animals,
and of children, and with the pleased expression of our
fellow-creatures generally. On this ground, we have an interest in
conferring happiness upon all our associates, and upon every one
whose signs of pleasure and of displeasure come under our notice.
Hence, in the absence of other motives, we are disposed to be the
authors of pleasure, rather than of pain, wherever we go. Our first
impulse towards a stranger would always be, from this consideration,
to confer some benefit or perform some agreeable act. From this
origin, there flows a considerable fraction of the generosity and
the courtesy of human beings.

But the tendency is thwarted, and often extinguished, by other
powerful impulses of the mind. There are two principal
counteractives,--Rivalry in interests generally, and the Love of
Power.

If the expression of pleasure manifested by any sentient being, is
procured at our expense, we fail to realise the happy feelings; we
are, on the contrary, pained and embittered by the display. Now this
is a fact of very frequent occurrence in all conditions of human
beings; and, to the extent of its occurrence, it mars the strength
and purity of the association.

The Love of Power works in the same direction. It not only
reconciles the mind to displays of pain, but it may render these a
delight and luxury. Being an emotion little checked in ordinary
human beings, it provides a considerable share of gratification,
through the infliction of pain. This, therefore, is a second
interference with the law that would connect the signs of happiness
with a thrill of pleasure in the beholder. One can easily suppose,
and one frequently finds, the emotion of power in such a pitch of
development as to make the pleasure of seeing happy beings the
exception, and not the rule.

So much for the first of the two motives in the text. The
second,--the procuring of reciprocal benefits by benefits
conferred,--is everything that a motive can be. We are all our lives
engaged in working out good for ourselves, and if, by doing good to
others, we obtain a corresponding measure of our own advantage, we
employ that instrumentality. But then the prospect must be clear;
the instrument must be a promising one. Now there are some
situations wherein we have a reasonable security of a return. When
there is a legal guarantee, as in bargains, and in covenanted
services, we are (as a rule) ready to fulfil our own share. Also, in
very little things, such as the courtesies of civilised society, we
contribute our part willingly; we are nearly sure of a full return
for the trifling nature of the service. But there are multitudes of
cases where (as we suppose) there would be no adequate return, or no
return at all; all of which interfere with the growth of the
association between benefits conferred and pleasure to ourselves.

It is not necessary, in order to the pleasure of benevolence, that
the return should be either in kind, or in flattery. If we can only
obtain love for our benefits, we think them well bestowed. A great
many benefits are conferred with no other view; and the appreciation
of the extent of this motive is necessary to do justice to the
author's theory of the derivation of Benevolence from Prudence.

It does not admit of question, that if all the services that each
person is disposed to bestow, were fairly requited in kind, in
praise, or in love, the motive to seek the good of others would have
an overpowering strength of association, such as the author assigns
to it. The finishing stroke, in all cases of strong and unremitted
association,--the transfer to the means of the feeling originally
due to the end, and even the sinking of the end out of view,--would
be a sure result of the operation. But so partial, as human beings
are now constituted, is the operation of the principle; so seldom
are people satisfied, that they have the full equivalent of benefits
imparted;--that, unless in select instances, there is as much of
mistrust as of confidence and hope, in the reciprocation of services
of any great magnitude. Of course, people will differ greatly in
their estimate of this fact; but on no reasonable and candid
calculation, is the association strong enough to account for the
intensity and diffusion of disinterested impulses as actually found
among mankind.--_B._]

{287} Pleasurable ideas, as effects, associated with acts of our own
as the cause, constitute the MOTIVE, as well as the AFFECTION. The
reason of this, we have just stated, and need not repeat.

We have now seen by what associations both AFFECTION, and MOTIVE are
created, in the case of our own acts of Prudence, Fortitude,
Justice, and Beneficence. The DISPOSITION, as in all other cases,
consists in a facility, from habit, of performing the associations;
in other words, a readiness of obeying the Motive.

In each of the cases, the Affection, the Motive, and the
Disposition, have the same name. Thus, Prudence is the name of the
Affection, and Motive, and also of the Disposition, to acts of
Prudence; so is Fortitude, Justice, and Beneficence, each in regard
to its own class of acts.

Beside the four specific names, Prudence, Fortitude, {288} Justice,
and Beneficence, we have a Generical Name, which includes them all.
VIRTUE is the name of Prudence, Fortitude, Justice, and Beneficence,
all taken together. It is also, like the name of each of the species
included under it, at once the name of the Affection, the Motive,
and the Disposition. The man who has the Disposition toward all the
four, Prudence, Fortitude, Justice, Beneficence, in full strength;
that is, who has acquired, from habit, the facility of {289}
associating with those acts the pleasures which result from them, in
other words, a habit of obeying the motives, is perfectly virtuous.

It requires the most perfect education to create those associations
adequately, in other words, to give the motives such power within
us, that, when counteracted by other motives, they may always
prevail. Under the present imperfect state of education, it is
rather by their constant action, than their force, that they produce
the very considerable effects, of which we see that they are the
causes. In few men, are they a {290} match for any of the more
potent motives; and, in most men, they give way, habitually,
whenever they are opposed by any other motive even of moderate
strength. There are so many occasions, however, in every part of our
lives, for acts of virtue, when other motives do not intervene, that
we may still ascribe to the motives of virtue, feeble as they
generally are, a large portion of the happiness which we observe in
the world.

2. Having considered the associations which each of us has with the
ideas of his own acts of Prudence, Fortitude, Justice, and
Beneficence, it remains that we consider the associations which each
of us has with other men's acts of Prudence, Fortitude, Justice, and
Beneficence.

We have already observed, that the Prudence of other men is
primarily useful to themselves, secondarily useful to others. A man
who is to a certain degree imprudent, deprives himself of the power
of being useful either to himself or to others. As we have agreeable
associations with acts which produce pleasure to others, so we have
agreeable associations with the cause of such acts, the power of
producing them; and, of course, disagreeable associations with the
acts which deprive a man of the means of doing good to others, and
warding off evil from himself. It is not necessary to enter into a
more minute analysis to show in what manner our Idea of another
man's Prudence becomes a Pleasurable Idea, in other words, an
AFFECTION.

We next proceed to the case of Fortitude, Courage. We have seen that
Fortitude is the name of that class of acts, in which a good is
aimed at by the risk of a {291} great evil. There is a grand class
of cases in which the good aimed at is not the peculiar good of the
Individual or Individuals by whom the act, or series of acts, is
performed, but a good common to others, to a whole People; as, for
example, when another hostile People is encountered and overcome. Of
course, in such a case, we have a strong association of our own
pleasures, or exemption from pains, with other men's courage,
whether we are sharing with them in the danger, or exempted from it
by their acts. This association is such as to constitute, and we
know by experience does constitute, a very strong AFFECTION. Even
when the good sought by the act of courage is only the good of the
individual, we have a sufficient association with it of pleasurable
ideas to constitute it an AFFECTION. We have, first of all, an
agreeable association with the balance of good which the act is
calculated to produce to the actor. And next we have a very powerful
association of pleasure with the state of mind in which the Idea of
a great evil is controlled by the Idea of a greater good. When the
motive exists to do us good in a man who has such a mind, he will
not be deterred by the prospect of an inadequate evil. When we
encounter danger in company with such a man, we shall not be exposed
to greater danger by his deserting us.

As other men's acts of Justice and Beneficence are directly
beneficial to them who are the objects of them, it is impossible
that every man should not have pleasurable associations, first with
the acts of Justice and Beneficence of the men, whose sphere of
action extends to himself, and then with the acts of Justice and
Beneficence of all men. And as the benefits which {292} spring from
such actions are very great, the AFFECTION, generated by association
of the Ideas of those Benefits, is proportionally strong.

Of all the MOTIVES, competent to our nature, those belonging to this
class are by far the most important. As there is nothing in which
I am so deeply interested, as that the acts of men, which regard
myself immediately, should be acts of Justice and Beneficence, and
those which regard themselves immediately, should be acts of
Prudence and Fortitude, it follows, that I have an interest,
proportionally deep, in all those acts of my own, which operate as
causes of those acts in other people.

Of acts of other men, which are useful to us, a great number can be
bought by wealth, or commanded by power, or elicited by dignity. The
mode of the operation of those causes has already been explained,
and the motives into the composition of which they enter, form a
different class. The acts of beneficence, of justice, of fortitude,
and of prudence, performed by other men in our behalf, are, to a
vast extent, such as can neither be bought, nor commanded. What
means have we of increasing to the utmost, the number of those acts;
diminishing to the utmost, the number of those of an opposite
tendency?

Those means are of two sorts: 1st, Similar actions on our part;
2dly, The manifestation on our part, of the disposition to perform
similar actions.

1. It is interesting here to observe, by what a potent call we are
summoned to Virtue. Of all that we enjoy, more is derived from those
acts of other men, on which we bestow the name VIRTUE, than from any
other cause. Our own virtue is the principal {293} cause why other
men reciprocate the acts of virtue towards us. With the idea of our
own acts of virtue, there are naturally associated the ideas of all
the immense advantages we derive from the virtuous acts of our
Fellow-creatures. When this association is formed in due strength,
which it is the main business of a good education to effect, the
motive of virtue becomes paramount in the human breast.

2. We strongly act upon other men, when we manifest on our parts, a
disposition to perform acts in their favour, in consequence of the
acts performed by them in favour of others. This disposition we
manifest, when we praise those acts; or, as we otherwise phrase it,
when we declare our approbation, or admiration, of them.

It is to be observed, that all our names for those acts;--Prudence,
Fortitude, Justice, Beneficence, Virtue; are names of Praise. They
are names, not merely of the acts, but of the acts associated with
the ideas of the benefits resulting from them; and further
associated with the idea of those acts of ours, which are the causes
of such acts; acts of similar utility on our part to the Authors of
the acts which are useful to us.

Praise, also, is extensive in its operation. The acts of any
individual can afford a retribution for the virtuous acts of a very
small number of men. His _Praise_ can extend to all men; and its
effects are most important. Not only does it indicate the affection
of him who is the author of it, toward him who is the object; but it
points out him who is the object of it, to all other men, as the
proper object of a similar affection in them. This indication has
some tendency {294} to propagate the favourable affection or
disposition towards the object of the applause; but it has a much
greater tendency to propagate the praise; and when praise is sounded
from many lips, that is, when a disposition is expressed by many
persons favourable to the man who has been the author of the
applauded acts, a number of acts in his favour are the natural
consequence.

That we have pleasurable associations of great potency, with this
manifestation of the favourable disposition of others towards us, is
matter of common and constant experience. It is called, in its more
remarkable states, the LOVE OF FAME, and is known to operate as one
of the most powerful motives in our nature. One of its cases is a
remarkable exemplification of that high degree of association, which
has been already explained, and to which we have frequently had
occasion to advert, in explaining other phenomena; the degree which
constitutes belief, and which gives to that belief, even when
momentary, and instantly overruled by other associations, a powerful
effect on our actions.

Not only that Praise of us, which is diffused in our lives, and from
which agreeable consequences may arise to us, is delightful, by the
associated ideas of the pleasures resulting from it; but that
Praise, which we are never to hear, which will be diffused only when
we are dead, and from which no actual effects can ever accrue to us,
is often an object of intense affection, and acts as one of the most
powerful motives in our nature.

The habit which we form, in the case of immediate praise, of
associating the idea of the praise with the {295} idea of
pleasurable consequences to ourselves, is so strong, that the idea
of pleasurable consequences to ourselves becomes altogether
inseparable from the idea of our Praise. It is one of those cases in
which the one Idea never can exist without the other. The belief,
thus engendered, is of course encountered immediately by other
belief, that we shall be incapable of profiting by any consequences,
which posthumous fame can produce: as the fear, that is, the belief
of ghosts, in a man passing through a churchyard at midnight, may be
immediately encountered by his settled, habitual belief that ghosts
have no existence; and yet his terror, not only remains for a time,
but is constantly renewed, as often as he is placed in circumstances
with which he has been accustomed to associate the existence of
ghosts.[54]

[Editor's footnote 54: The case here put, that of the desire of
posthumous fame, affords no real support to the author's doctrines,
that a high degree of association constitutes belief, and that
belief is always present when we are determined to action. The case
is merely one of many others, in which something not originally
pleasurable (the praise and admiration of our fellow-creatures) has
become so closely associated with pleasure as to be at last
pleasurable in itself. When it has become a pleasure in itself, it
is desired for itself, and not for its consequences; and the most
confirmed knowledge that it can produce no ulterior pleasurable
consequences to ourselves will not interfere with the pleasure given
by the mere consciousness of possessing it, nor hinder that pleasure
from becoming, by its association with the acts which produce it, a
powerful motive. It is a frequent mode of talking, to speak of the
desire of posthumous fame in a kind of pitying way, as grounded on a
delusion; as a desire which implies a certain infirmity of the
understanding. Those who thus speak must be prepared to apply the
same disparaging phrases to the interest taken in the welfare of
others after our own death; for in that case also, no beneficial
consequences to ourselves personally can ever follow from the
realization of the object of our desire. But there is nothing at
variance with reason in the associations which make us value for
themselves, things which we at first cared for only as means to
other ends; associations to which we are indebted for nearly the
whole both of our virtues, and of our enjoyments. That he who acts
with a view to posthumous fame has a belief, however momentary, that
this fame will produce to him some extraneous good, or that he shall
be conscious of it after he is dead, I shall not admit without
better evidence than I have ever seen or heard of.--_Ed._]

{296} The operation of Dispraise is similar, to prevent the
performance of acts contrary to Justice, Beneficence, Fortitude, and
Prudence. Dispraise is the manifestation of a Disposition,
unfavourable to the object of it, a disposition to abstain from acts
useful to him, not to abstain from acts hurtful to him. It is not
necessary to point out the associations formed in this case. It is a
matter of common and constant experience, that we have associations
of painful consequences, with the idea of the unfavourable
disposition of our fellow-creatures, associations which constitute
some of the most painful feelings of our nature. This it is, which
is commonly expressed by the terms loss of reputation, loss of
character, disgrace, infamy. In some instances, the Association
rises to that remarkable case, which we have had frequent occasions
of observing; when the means become a more important object than the
end, the cause, than the effect. It not unfrequently happens, that
the idea of the unfavourable sentiments of mankind, becomes more
intolerable than all the consequences which could result from {297}
them; and men make their escape from life, in order to escape from
the tormenting idea of certain consequences, which, at most, would
only diminish the advantages of living.[55] Nor is the Idea of
posthumous Disgrace, less operative than that of posthumous Fame,
and from the same species of association. In men, in whom the
associations which constitute the pain of disgrace are strong;
though not sufficiently strong to restrain them from deeds which
incur the execration of mankind, the thought of what they have done
is agonizing. Along with it, constantly rises up, before them, the
idea of the condemnatory countenance, the condemnatory sentiment,
the retributive acts, of every human being the idea of whom is
presented to them. They are never at rest. The Idea of the horrid
Deed or Deeds becomes associated with almost every point of their
consciousness. At every moment, it rises up in their minds, and
along with it the {298} overwhelming train of ideas, with which it
is connected. In its more awful cases, this state of mind is called
Remorse; and is generally regarded as the most perfect state of
suffering to which a human Being is exposed.

[Editor's footnote 55: They do not seek death to escape from the
idea of any consequences of the unfavourable sentiments of mankind.
The mere fact of having incurred those unfavourable sentiments has
become, by the adhesive force of association, so painful in itself,
that death is sometimes preferred to it. There is often no thought
of the consequences that may arise from the unfavourable sentiments;
and when consequences are thought of, they are usually rather those
which are mere demonstrations of feeling, and owe their painfulness
to the sentiment of which they are demonstrations, than those which
directly grate upon our senses or are injurious to our interests. It
is true that a vague conception of the many unpleasant consequences
liable to arise from the evil opinion of others, was the crude
matter out of which the horror of the thing itself was primitively
formed: but, once formed, it loses its connexion with its original
source.--_Ed._]

The same considerations account for that remarkable phenomenon of
our nature, eloquently described, but not explained, by Adam Smith,
that, in minds happily trained, the love of Praiseworthiness, the
dread of Blameworthiness, is a stronger feeling, than the love of
actual Praise, the Dread of actual Blame. It is one of those cases,
in which, by the power of the association, the secondary feeling
becomes more powerful than the primary. In all men, the idea of
praise, as consequent, is associated with the idea of certain acts
of theirs, as antecedent; the idea of blame, as consequent, with the
idea of certain acts of theirs, as antecedent. This association
constitutes what we call the feeling, or notion, or sentiment, or
idea (for it goes by all those names), of Praiseworthiness, and
Blameworthiness.[56] The anticipation, in the one case, is
delightful; in the other painful. The association {299} exists in
different men, in all possible degrees of strength. In some men it
exists in so great a degree of strength, that not only, the pleasure
of immediate praise, the pain of immediate blame, but every other
feeling of their nature, is subdued by it.

[Editor's footnote 56: This paragraph, unexplained, might give the
idea that the author regarded praiseworthiness and blameworthiness
as having the meaning not of deserving praise or blame, but merely
of being likely to obtain it. But what he meant is, that the idea of
deserving praise is but a more complex form of the association
between our own or another person's acts or character, and the idea
of praise. To deserve praise, is, in the great majority of the cases
which occur in life, the principal mode of obtaining it; though the
praise is seldom accurately proportioned to the desert. And the same
may be said of blame. A powerful association is thus, if
circumstances are favourable, generated between deserving praise and
obtaining it; and hence between deserving praise, and all the
pleasurable influences on our lives, of other people's good opinion.
And this association may become sufficiently strong to overcome the
direct motive of obtaining praise, where it is to be obtained by
other means than desert; the rather, as the desire of undeserved
praise is greatly counteracted by the thought that people would not
bestow the praise if they knew all. That what has now been stated
was really the author's meaning, is proved by his going on to say,
that praiseworthiness and blameworthiness, as motives to action,
have reference "not to what is, or to what shall be, but to what
ought to be, the sentiments of mankind."--_Ed._]

The case is perfectly analogous to that of the love of posthumous
praise, the dread of posthumous blame, and is a still more important
principle of action, as it has reference, not to what is, or to what
shall be, but to what ought to be, the sentiments of mankind.

Such, then, are the AFFECTIONS which we bear toward the just, the
beneficent, the courageous, the prudent acts of other men, and the
contrary; that is, such are the associations we have with them of
pleasurable or painful consequences. Such also are the MOTIVES; that
is, the feelings generated by the association of certain acts of
ours, as cause, with the virtuous acts of other men, as their
effects.

Of those MOTIVES, that which involves the acts of praising and
blaming, is in constant and strong {300} operation. It is from the
great use made of those acts in the Education of children, and even
in the rude management of them in the nursery, that praise and blame
acquire the influence in most cases, the ascendancy in some, which
they are seen to exercise over us. It is this sensibility to praise
and blame, in other words, the associations we have with them, which
gives its effect to what is called POPULAR OPINION, or the POPULAR
SANCTION, and, when the acts of Justice, Beneficence, Fortitude, and
Prudence of other men are the objects of it, the MORAL SANCTION;
_Popular Opinion_, being a phrase which expresses the Praise or
Blame which the people bestow; and the _Sanction_ being the good or
evil consequences which men are accustomed to associate with that
praise or blame.

In the present state of Education, the Praise and Blame of most men
are very erroneously bestowed, with great precipitation, commonly in
excess upon small occasions, with little regard to its justice;
blame being very often inflicted where applause is due, and applause
lavished where blame ought to be bestowed. When Education is good,
no point of morality will be reckoned of more importance than the
distribution of Praise and Blame; no act will be considered more
immoral than the misapplication of them. They are the great
instruments we possess for ensuring moral acts on the part of our
Fellow-creatures; and when we squander away, or prostitute those
great causes of virtue, and thereby deprive them of a great part of
their useful tendency, we do what in us lies to lessen the quantity
of Virtue, and thence of Felicity, in the world.

The MOTIVES, which are generated by the {301} association of our own
acts of Justice and Beneficence as cause with other men's acts of
Justice and Beneficence as effects, are subject, unhappily, to
strong counteraction; because it rarely happens that we can perform
acts of Justice and Beneficence without more or less sacrifice to
ourselves.  The association, at the same time, is strong, in all
men. All men have the daily experience, that their own acts of
Justice, and Beneficence, dispose other men to be Beneficent to
them; their own acts of injustice and malevolence, dispose other men
to bring evil (which in this case they call punishment) upon them;
and to abstain from doing them good. This experience is of course
followed by the usual association between cause and effect. The man
who does acts of Justice and Beneficence, anticipates the favourable
disposition of mankind, as their natural effect; and this
association is his belief, or conviction, or sense (he calls it by
all those names), of deserving the favourable sentiments of mankind.
The man, on the other hand, who performs acts which are unjust and
hurtful to others, anticipates the unfavourable and hostile
sentiments of mankind, as the natural consequents of his acts; in
other words, has the belief, or conviction, or sense (for the
association in this case also has these various names), of
deserving, not well, but ill, at the hands of other men.

There are no men, however vicious, in whom those associations do not
produce constant and numerous effects. When they have not been
happily cultivated, and when the counteracting associations, of
which we just now made mention, have been allowed to acquire a
mischievous strength; acts in opposition to them {302} are,
occasionally, but, even in the worst men, no more than occasionally,
produced.

This anticipation of the hostile, or benevolent sentiments of
mankind, as the natural effects of actions of a certain description
on our part, is the foundation of that remarkable association of
which we had very recently occasion to make mention, the association
which Dr. Smith has called the love of Praiseworthiness, and which
is sometimes found to be much more powerful than the love of actual
Praise.

The DISPOSITION which corresponds to those MOTIVES, or the facility
of forming the associations which constitute them, is the result of
habit in this as in all other cases.

The AFFECTION, in this case, has the name of _Moral approbation_ and
_Disapprobation_. The same is the only name we have for the  MOTIVE.
It is also the only name we have for the DISPOSITION. The terms
Moral Sense; Sense of Right and Wrong; Love of Virtue, and Hatred of
Vice, are sometimes used as synonymous terms; but they are not
equally appropriate. Virtue, as we have seen, is a name which is
given to each of the three, the Affection, the Motive, the
Disposition; Morality is a name which is applied with similar
latitude.[57] [58]

[Bain's footnote 57: The foregoing analysis of the Moral Sentiment
proceeds upon a number of unquestionable psychological data. That we
have a strong personal interest in the virtues of Prudence,
Fortitude, Justice and Beneficence, in the manner stated, is most
certain; and that this personal interest will incline us to practise
those virtues ourselves, and to encourage them in {303} others, is
also certain. The only doubt is, as to whether the motives to
rectitude of action are exhausted in this analysis.

The sufficiency of an analysis is less easily tested in mental
phenomena, than in physical phenomena. The chief reason is that, in
the mind, we cannot make exact numerical estimates; and, therefore,
cannot show, by castings up a sum, that the assigned constituents of
a compound exactly amount to the total. The several constituents put
down may be actually present, without our being sure whether they
are the whole. Hence the Deductive verification, so valuable in
physical science, does not carry with it the same precision, in
mental science.

To evade this source of uncertainty we are thrown back upon the
Experimental Canons, or the Four Methods. We know by these, that if
an analysis is good, there must be present in each instance of the
phenomenon the causes assigned, one or more; and should one exist in
a low degree, or be entirely wanting, the others must have a
compensating intensity. If, on the other hand, the whole of the
causes have not been assigned, there will, almost inevitably, occur
instances, either without the causes stated, or with these in an
obviously insufficient amount.

The following facts and considerations render doubtful the
completeness of the author's explanation of the Moral Sentiment.

The affirmation in the text is that not merely the self-regarding
virtue--Prudence, but also the two great social virtues--Justice and
Beneficence, are developed from associations with our own personal
interest. In other words, they grow up exactly by the same course as
the virtue of Prudence; they are strong as that happens to be
strong, and weak as that happens to be weak; the most prudent man
being the most just and beneficent man. This inference can be
avoided only by drawing some distinction between the interested
associations entering into prudence, and the interested associations
entering into justice and beneficence; but no such distinction {304}
is drawn in the foregoing chapter, at least in such a way as to meet
the difficulty thus suggested.

Now, on an appeal to the facts, we find that the virtue of prudence
is not uniformly concomitant with the virtues of justice and
beneficence; that, on the contrary, except in the more highly
cultivated moral natures, they are frequently manifested in the
inverse proportion. A human being, by cherishing interested
associations, does not as a matter of course attain to either
justice or beneficence. Even the most far-sighted prudence, as
regards self, would not develop the whole virtue of justice, nor the
whole virtue of beneficence. On the other hand, beneficence is often
abundant and pronounced in cases where interested associations with
self have been very slightly cultivated.

The illustration of this generic discrepancy, between the author's
theory and the more obvious facts, might be extended. There is,
however, another mode of proceeding, perhaps more decisive; that is,
to show that the mind contains sources of the moral sentiment
besides the associations with self-interest.

It does not appear easy, at first sight, to establish the existence
of purely disinterested impulses in our mental constitution; the
admixture of self being so seldom unequivocally absent from human
conduct. Still, if these impulses do exist, there will probably be
found instances where they are manifested in convincing isolation.

Perhaps the desired isolation is most readily afforded in some of
the familiar forms of Pity. There are instances, no doubt, where
pity may have a selfish motive, as when we compassionate the
sufferings of parents, friends, and benefactors. But, in other
instances, it arises not only without any selfish bearing, but in
opposition to powerful associations of interest. The pity that we
often extend to enemies and to criminals is a case in point. Even
when the punishment of wrong-doers is bound up with our strongest
interests, the spectacle of their sufferings often moves us to remit
the punishment necessary for our own protection. Now, with beings
made up of purely {305} interested considerations, the _argumentum
ad misericordiam_, under those circumstances, would be void of
effect.

Another example is furnished by those acts of lavish generosity and
charity that perhaps ruin the giver, and do harm to the recipient.
If one's moral education were exclusively conducted through the
building up of associations with self, by what class of associating
links is this impulse generated?

It is no less difficult to account for the actions of men wholly
devoted to philanthropy, like Howard. So very small is the result to
self from the labours and sacrifices of such men, that we are unable
to account for their motives without assuming an independent source
of disinterested affections. The difficulty is greatly increased in
the case of minds little cultivated, as in the heroic devotion of
the common soldier.

Observation of children reveals a specific power in the spectacle of
misery or suffering to awaken pity and generous sympathies. The
effective impulse to sympathy has little to do with a prudential
education, or with the following out of self-interest in its
associations with the welfare of others. The patriotic orator never
trusts wholly to interested motives; he does not omit these; but he
expects much from the lively description of suffering and misery to
people generally; and if the picture comes home to the experience of
his hearers, they will be moved by it, on account of each other, as
well as on account of their separate selves.

From such facts as these, it is admissible to lay down, as a general
law, that the sight of misery in others prompts us, irrespective of
our own interest, to enter into, and to relieve, that misery. This
is the essential fact of Sympathy.

The principle thus announced is not an ultimate law of the mind. It
may be brought under a still higher law, of which some notice will
be taken afterwards (see note on the Will, chap. XXIV.), namely, the
tendency of every idea to act itself out, to become an actuality,
not with a view to bring pleasure or to ward off pain--which is the
proper description of the will--but from an independent prompting of
the mind that often makes us throw away pleasure and embrace pain.
The full {306} exposition of this principle would add greatly to the
evidence for pure disinterested impulses, by showing that the fact
described operates in a much wider sphere than the moral sentiment.

On a survey of the different theories of the mental origin of
Benevolent impulses, we may reduce them under the following heads.

1. They have been ascribed to direct and immediate self-interest,
either from the return of benefits in kind, or from the pleasure of
praise and flattery. This is substantially the position of
Mandeville.

2. It is said we are so constituted that the sight of misery is a
pain to us; and that we work to rid ourselves of that pain, as we
should work to assuage thirst, to banish toothache, or to escape
reproach. This view was held by Hobbes. It is forcibly brought in in
the following anecdote recorded of him by Aubrey (Lives II. p. 623).

"One time, I remember, goeing in the Strand, a poor and infirme old
man begged his almes; he beholding him with eies of pitty and
compassion, putt his hand in his pocket, and gave him 6d.; Sayd a
divine [Dr. Jaspar Mayne] that stood by, 'Would you have done this,
if it had not been Christ's Command?' 'Yea,' sayd he: 'Why?' quoth
the other; 'Because,' sayd he, 'I was in paine to consider the
miserable condition of the old man; and now my almes, giving him
some relief, doth also ease me.'"

There is a certain amount of truth in this statement; and taking the
fact by itself, we might find some difficulty in drawing the line
between a volition moved by our own pain, and the acting out of the
idea of pain in favour of the sufferer. The best reply, perhaps, is
to compare the amount of pain incurred and of pleasure remitted or
sacrificed by the sympathiser, with the utmost value fairly
ascribable to his own mental pain. The pain of misery witnessed is
frequent and habitual, and although it has a certain depressing
effect upon the mind, yet we should generally bear it much more
easily than the pains of self-sacrifice it often incites us to.

{307} 3. We may be endowed with a positive susceptibility to
pleasure from acts of kindness to others; so that in doing good, we
are still moved in exact proportion to our own gratification. This
expresses very nearly Bentham's view of Disinterestedness; which,
however, equally with the foregoing, comes short of the facts.
Supposing some such pleasure to exist, no one could show that in
degree it fully corresponds to the effects prompted by benevolent
impulse.

4. _Habits_ of acting in favour of others may be formed to such an
extent, that our virtuous actions, begun under our own pleasures and
pains, may at last cease to have any reference to those pleasures
and pains. Here, also, the appeal is to an undeniable fact of our
mental constitution. Actions that begin as proper voluntary
actions--on the spur of pleasure and pain--often pass into a
mechanical routine, and are persisted in even when they thwart our
pleasures. Any one placed for a number of years in a position of
danger, and habituated to troublesome precautions, is almost sure to
keep up the same routine, after the occasion has ceased; mothers are
liable to this unreasonable continuance of solicitude about their
children. The application of the fact to moral education is of great
moment. If the young are initiated betimes into a regard to the
feelings and interests of others, they will grow up with a sort of
mechanical unquestioning tendency towards the same line of conduct.

These are the four different modes of stating the origin of
disinterested conduct, apart from the assumption of a source of
purely disinterested impulses in the constitution of the mind. Such
a source has been indicated above, in what may be called the power
of the "fixed idea," having its seat in the region of the intellect,
and operating to thwart the proper voluntary impulses, which are
instigated by our pleasures and pains.--_B._]

