I.

[Editor's footnote 58: It had been pointed out, in a preceding
chapter, that Wealth, Power, Dignity, and many other things which
are not {308} in their own nature pleasures, but only causes of
pleasures and of exemption from pains, become so closely associated
with the pleasures of which they are causes, and their absence or
loss becomes so closely associated with the pains to which it
exposes us, that the things become objects of love and desire, and
their absence an object of hatred and aversion, for their own sake,
without reference to their consequences. By virtue of the same law
of association, it is pointed out in the present chapter that human
actions, both our own and those of other people, standing so high as
they do among the causes both of pleasure and of pain to us
(sometimes by their direct operation, and sometimes through the
sentiments they give birth to in other persons towards ourselves)
tend naturally to become inclosed in a web of associated ideas of
pleasures or of pains at a very early period of life, in such sort
that the ideas of acts beneficial to ourselves and to others become
pleasurable in themselves, and the ideas of acts hurtful to
ourselves and to others become painful in themselves: and both kinds
of acts become objects of a feeling, the former of love, the latter
of aversion, which having, in our minds, become independent of any
pleasures or pains actually expected to result to ourselves from the
acts, may be truly said to be disinterested. It is no less obvious
that acts which are not really beneficial, or not really hurtful,
but which, through some false opinion prevailing among mankind, or
some extraneous agency operating on their sentiments, incur their
praise or blame, may and often do come to be objects of a quite
similar disinterested love or hatred, exactly as if they deserved
it. This disinterested love and hatred of actions, generated by the
association of praise or blame with them, constitute, in the
author's opinion, the feelings of moral approbation and
disapprobation, which the majority of psychologists have thought it
necessary to refer to an original and ultimate principle of our
nature. Mr. Bain, in the preceding note, makes in this theory a
correction, to which the author himself would probably not have
objected, namely, that the mere idea of a pain or pleasure, by
whomsoever felt, is intrinsically painful or pleasurable, and when
raised in {309} the mind with intensity is capable of becoming a
stimulus to action, independent, not merely of expected consequences
to ourselves, but of any reference whatever to Self; so that care
for others is, in an admissible sense, as much an ultimate fact of
our nature, as care for ourselves; though one which greatly needs
strengthening by the concurrent force of the manifold associations
insisted on in the author's text. Though this of Mr. Bain is rather
an account of disinterested Sympathy, than of the moral feeling, it
is undoubtedly true that the _foundation_ of the moral feeling is
the adoption of the pleasures and pains of others as our own:
whether this takes place by the natural force of sympathy, or by the
association which has grown up in our mind between our own good or
evil and theirs. The moral feeling rests upon this identification of
the feelings of others with our own, but is not the same thing with
it. To constitute the moral feeling, not only must the good of
others have become in itself a pleasure to us, and their suffering a
pain, but this pleasure or pain must be associated with our own acts
as producing it, and must in this manner have become a motive,
prompting us to the one sort of acts, and restraining us from the
other sort. And this is, in brief, the author's theory of the Moral
Sentiments.

The exhaustive treatment of this subject would require a length and
abundance of discussion disproportioned to the compass and purposes
of a treatise like the present, which was intended to expound what
the author believed to be the real mode of formation of our complex
states of consciousness, but not to say all that may and ought to be
said in refutation of other views of the subject. There are,
however, some important parts of the author's own theory, which are
not stated in this work, but in a subsequent one, of a highly
polemical character, the "Fragment on Mackintosh:" and it may be
both instructive and interesting to the reader to find the statement
here. I therefore subjoin the passages containing it.

"Nature makes no classes. Nature makes individuals. Classes are made
by men; and rarely with such marks as determine certainly what is to
be included in them.

{310} "Men make classifications, as they do everything else, for
some end. Now, for what end was it that men, out of their
innumerable acts, selected a class, to which they gave the name of
moral, and another class, to which they gave the name of immoral?
What was the motive of this act? What its final cause?

"Assuredly the answer to this question is the first step, though Sir
James saw it not, towards the solution of his two questions,
comprehending the whole of ethical science; first, what makes an act
to be moral? and secondly, what are the sentiments with which we
regard it?

"We may also be assured, that it was some very obvious interest
which recommended this classification; for it was performed, in a
certain rough way, in the very rudest states of society.

"Farther, we may easily see how, even in very rude states, men were
led to it, by little less than necessity. Every day of their lives
they had experience of acts, some of which were agreeable, or the
cause of what was agreeable, to them; others disagreeable, or the
cause of what was disagreeable to them, in all possible degrees.

"They had no stronger interest than to obtain the repetition of the
one sort, and to prevent the repetition of the other.

"The acts in which they were thus interested were of two sorts;
first, those to which the actor was led by a natural interest of his
own; secondly, those to which the actor was not led by any interest
of his own. About the first sort there was not occasion for any
particular concern. They were pretty sure to take place, without any
stimulus from without. The second sort, on the contrary, were not
likely to take place, unless an interest was artificially created,
sufficiently strong to induce the actor to perform them.

"And here we clearly perceive the origin of that important case of
classification . . . . the classification of acts as moral and
immoral. The acts, which it was important to other men that each
individual should perform, but in which the individual had not a
sufficient interest to secure the {311} performance of them, were
constituted one class. The acts, which it was important to other men
that each individual should abstain from, but in regard to which he
had not a personal interest sufficiently strong to secure his
abstaining from them, were constituted another class. The first
class were distinguished by the name moral acts; the second by the
name immoral.

"The interest which men had in securing the performance of the one
set of acts, the non-performance of the other, led them by a sort of
necessity to think of the means. They had to create an interest,
which the actor would not otherwise have, in the performance of the
one sort, the non-performance of the other. And in proceeding to
this end, they could not easily miss their way. They had two powers
applicable to the purpose. They had a certain quantity of good at
their disposal; and they had a certain quantity of evil. If they
could apply the good in such a manner as to afford a motive both for
the performance and non-performance which they desired, or the evil,
in such a manner as to afford a motive against the performance and
non-performance which they wished to prevent, their end was
attained.

"And this is the scheme which they adopted; and which, in every
situation, they have invariably pursued. The whole business of the
moral sentiments, moral approbation, and disapprobation, has this
for its object, the distribution of the good and evil we have at
command, for the production of acts of the useful sort, the
prevention of acts of the contrary sort. Can there be a nobler
object?

"But though men have been thus always right in their general aim,
their proceedings have been cruelly defective in the detail; witness
the consequence,--the paucity of good acts, the frequency of bad
acts, which there is in the world.

"A portion of acts having been thus classed into good and bad; and
the utility having been perceived of creating motives to incite to
the one, and restrain from the other, a sub-classification was
introduced. One portion of these acts was such, that the good and
evil available for their production {312} and prevention, could be
applied by the community in its conjunct capacity. Another portion
was such, that the good and evil available could be applied only by
individuals in their individual capacity. The first portion was
placed under the control of what is called law; the other remained
under the control of the moral sentiments; that is, the distribution
of good and evil, made by individuals in their individual capacity.

"No sooner was the class made, than the rule followed. Moral acts
are to be performed; immoral acts are to be abstained from.

"Beside this the general rule, there was needed, for more precise
direction, particular rules.

"We must remember the fundamental condition, that all rules of
action must be preceded by a corresponding classification of
actions. All moral rules, *comprehended in the great moral rule,
must relate to a class of actions comprehended within the grand
class, constituted and marked by the term moral. This is the case
with grand classes in general. They are subdivided into minor
classes, each of the minor classes being a portion of the larger.
Thus, the grand class of acts called moral has been divided into
certain convenient portions, or sub-classes, and marked by
particular names. Just, Beneficent, Brave, Prudent, Temperate; to
each of which classes belongs its appropriate rule that men should
be just, that they should be beneficent, and so on . . . . .

"In the performance of our duties two sets of cases may be
distinguished. There is one set in which a direct estimate of the
good of the particular act is inevitable; and the man acts immorally
who acts without making it. There are other cases in which it is not
necessary.

"The first are those, which have in them so much of singularity, as
to prevent their coming within the limits of any established class.
In such cases a man has but one guide; he must consider the
consequences, or act not as a moral, or rational agent at all.

{313} "The second are cases of such ordinary and frequent occurrence
as to be distinguished into classes. And everybody knows . . . that
when a class of acts are performed regularly and frequently, they
are at last performed by habit; in other words, the idea of the act
and the performance of it follow so easily and speedily that they
seem to cohere, and to be but one operation. It is only necessary to
recall some of the more familiar instances, to see the mode of this
formation. In playing on a musical instrument, every note, at first,
is found by an effort. Afterwards, the proper choice is made so
rapidly as to appear as if made by a mechanical process in which the
mind has no concern. The same is the case with moral acts. When they
have been performed with frequency and uniformity, for a sufficient
length of time, a habit is generated . . . . .

"When a man acts from habit, he does not act without reflection. He
only acts with a very rapid reflection. In no class of acts does a
man begin to act by habit. He begins without habit; and acquires the
habit by frequency of acting. The consideration, on which the act is
founded, and the act itself, form a sequence. And it is obvious from
the familiar cases of music and of speaking, that it is a sequence
at first not very easily performed. By every repetition, however, it
becomes easier. The consideration occurs with less effort; the
action follows with less effort; they take place with greater and
greater rapidity, till they seem blended. To say, that this is
acting without reflection, is only ignorance, for it is thus seen to
be a case of acting by reflection so easily and rapidly, that the
reflection and the act cannot be distinguished from one another . .
. . . .

"Since moral acts are not performed at first by habit, but each upon
the consideration which recommends it; upon what considerations, we
may be asked, do moral acts begin to be performed?

"The question has two meanings, and it is necessary to reply to
both. It may be asked, upon what consideration the men of our own
age and country, for example, at first {314} and before a habit is
formed, perform moral acts? Or, it may be asked, upon what
consideration did men originally perform moral acts?

"To the first of these questions every one can reply from his own
memory and observation. We perform moral acts at first, from
authority. Our parents tell us that we ought to do this, ought not
to do that. They are anxious that we should obey their precepts.
They have two sets of influences, with which to work upon us; praise
and blame; reward and punishment. All the acts which they say we
ought to do, are praised in the highest degree, all those which they
say we ought not to do, are blamed in the highest degree. In this
manner, the ideas of praise and blame become associated with certain
classes of acts, at a very early age, so closely, that they cannot
easily be disjoined, No sooner does the idea of the act occur than
the idea of praise springs up along with it, and clings to it. And
generally these associations exert a predominant influence during
the whole of life.

"Our parents not only praise certain kinds of acts, blame other
kinds; but they praise us when we perform those of the one sort,
blame us when we perform those of the other. In this manner other
associations are formed. The idea of ourselves performing certain
acts is associated with the idea of our being praised, performing
certain other acts with the idea of our being blamed, so closely
that the ideas become at last indissoluble. In this association
consist the very important complex ideas of praise-worthiness, and
blame-worthiness. An act which is praiseworthy, is an act with the
idea of which the idea of praise is indissolubly joined; an agent
who is praiseworthy is an agent with the idea of whom the idea of
praise is indissolubly joined. And in the converse case, that of
blame-worthiness, the formation of the idea is similar.

"Many powerful circumstances come in aid of these important
associations, at an early age. We find, that not only our parents
act in this manner, but all other parents. {315} We find that grown
people act in this manner, not only towards children, but towards
one another. The associations, therefore, are unbroken, general, and
all-comprehending.

"Our parents administer not only praise and blame, to induce us to
perform acts of one sort, abstain from acts of another sort, but
also rewards and punishments. They do so directly; and, further,
they forward all our inclinations in the one case, baulk them in the
other. So does everybody else. We find our comforts excessively
abridged by other people, when we act in one way, enlarged when we
act in another way. Hence another most important class of
associations; that of an increase of well-being from the good will
of our fellow-creatures, if we perform acts of one sort, of an
increase of misery from their ill-will, if we perform those of
another sort.

"In this manner it is that men, born in the social state, acquire
the habits of moral acting, and certain affections connected with
it, before they are capable of reflecting upon the grounds which
recommend the acts either to praise or blame. Nearly at this point
the greater part of them remain, continuing to perform moral acts
and to abstain from the contrary, chiefly from the habits they have
acquired, and the authority upon which they originally acted; though
it is not possible that any man should come to the years and
blessing of reason, without perceiving, at least in an indistinct
and general way, the advantage which mankind derive from their
acting towards one another in one way, rather than another.

"We come now to the second question, viz. what are the
considerations upon which men originally performed moral acts? The
answer to this question is substantially contained in the
explanation already given of the classification of acts as moral and
immoral.

"When men began to mark the distinction between acts, and were
prompted to praise one class, blame another, they did so, either
because the one sort benefited, the other hurt them; or for some
other reason. If for the first reason, the case is perfectly
intelligible. The men had a motive {316} which they understood, and
which was adequate to the end. If it was not on account of utility
that men classed some acts as moral, others as immoral, on what
other account was it?

"To this question, an answer, consisting of anything but words, has
never been returned.

"It has been said, that there is a beauty, and a deformity, in moral
and immoral acts, which recommended them to the distinctions they
have met with.

"It is obvious to reply to this hypothesis, that the mind of a
savage, that is, a mind in the state in which the minds of all men
were, when they began to classify their acts, was not likely to be
much affected by the ideal something called the beauty of acts. To
receive pain or pleasure from an act, to obtain, or be deprived of,
the means of enjoyment by an act; to like the acts and the actors,
whence the good proceeded, dislike those whence the evil proceeded;
all these were things which they understood.

"But we must endeavour to get a little nearer to the bottom of this
affair.

"In truth, the term beauty, as applied to acts, is just as
unintelligible to the philosopher, as to the savage. Is the beauty
of an act one thing; the morality of it another? Or are they two
names for the same thing? If they are two things, what is the
beauty, distinct from the morality? If they are the same thing, what
is the use of the name morality? It only tends to confusion.

"But this is not all. The beautiful is that which excites in us the
emotion of beauty, a state of mind with which we are acquainted by
experience. This state of mind has been successfully analysed, and
shewn to consist of a train of pleasurable ideas, awakened in us by
the beautiful object.

"But is it in this way only that we are concerned in moral acts? Do
we value them for nothing, but as we value a picture, or a piece of
music, for the pleasure of looking at them, or hearing them?
Everybody knows the contrary. Acts are objects of importance to us,
on account of their {317} consequences, and nothing else. This
constitutes a radical distinction between them and the things called
beautiful. Acts are hurtful or beneficial, moral or immoral,
virtuous or vicious. But it is only an abuse of language, to call
them beautiful or ugly.

"That it is jargon, the slightest reflection is sufficient to
evince; for what is the beauty of an act, detached from its
consequences? We shall be told, perhaps, that the beauty of an act
was never supposed to be detached from its consequences. The beauty
consists in the consequences. I am contented with the answer. But
observe to what it binds you. The consequences of acts are the good
or evil they do. According to you, therefore, the beauty of acts is
either the utility of them, or it is nothing at all;--a beautiful
ground on which to dispute with us, that acts are classed as moral,
not on account of their utility, but on account of their beauty.

"It will be easily seen, from what has been said, that they who
ascribe the classification of acts, as moral, and immoral, to a
certain taste, an agreeable or disagreeable sentiment which they
excite (among whom are included the Scottish professors Hutcheson,
and Brown, and David Hume himself, though on his part with wonderful
inconsistency)--hold the same theory with those who say, that beauty
is the source of the classification of moral acts. Things are
classed as beautiful, or deformed, on account of a certain taste, or
inward sentiment. If acts are classed in the same way, on account of
a certain taste or inward sentiment, they deserve to be classed
under the names beautiful, and deformed; otherwise not.

"I hope it is not necessary for me to go minutely into the exposure
of the other varieties of jargon, by which it has been endeavoured
to account for the classification of acts, as moral and immoral.
'Fitness' is one of them. Acts are approved on account of their
fitness. When fitness is hunted down, it is brought to bay exactly
at the place where beauty was. Fitness is either the goodness of the
consequences, or it is nothing at all.

{318} "The same is the case with 'Right Reason,' or 'Moral Reason.'
An act according to moral reason, is an act, the consequences of
which are good. Moral reason, therefore, is another name, and not a
bad name, for the principle of utility."[a]

[Editor's footnote a: Fragment on Mackintosh, pp. 247--265.]

The following passage from another part of the same work, is also
very much to the purpose.

"The terms moral and immoral were applied by men, primarily, not to
their own acts, but the acts of other men. Those acts, the effects
of which they observed to be beneficial, they desired should be
performed. To make them be performed, they, among other things they
did, affixed to them marks of their applause; they called them,
good, moral, well-deserving; and behaved accordingly.

"Such is the source of the moral approbation we bestow on the acts
of other men. The source of that which we bestow on our own is
twofold. First, every man's beneficial acts, like those of every
other man, form part of that system of beneficial acting, in which
he, in common with all other men, finds his account. Secondly, he
strongly associates with his own beneficial acts, both that
approbation of other men, which is of so much importance to him, and
that approbation which he bestows on other men's beneficial acts.

"It is also easy to shew what takes place in the mind of a man,
before he performs an act, which he morally approves or condemns.

"What is called the approbation of an act not yet performed, is only
the idea of future approbation: and it is not excited by the act
itself; it is excited by the idea of the act. The idea of
approbation or disapprobation is excited by the idea of an act,
because the approbation would be excited by the act itself. But what
excites moral approbation or disapprobation of an act, is neither
the act itself, nor the motive of the act; but the consequences of
the act, good or evil, and their being within the intention of the
agent.

{319} "Let us put a case. A man with a starving wife and family is
detected wiring a hare on my premises. What happens? I call up the
idea of sending him to prison. I call up the ideas of the
consequences of that act, the misery of the helpless creatures whom
his labour supported; their agonizing feelings, their corporal
wants, their hunger, cold, their destitution of hope, their despair:
I call up the ideas of the man himself in jail, the sinking of heart
which attends incarceration; the dreadful thought of his family
deprived of his support; his association with vicious characters;
the natural consequences,--his future profligacy, the consequent
profligacy of his ill-fated children, and hence the permanent
wretchedness and ruin of them all. I next have the idea of my own
intending all these consequences. And only then am I in a condition
to perform, as Sir James says, the 'operation of conscience.'
I perform it. But in this case, it is, to use another of his
expressions, 'defeated.' Notwithstanding the moral disapprobation,
which the idea of such intended consequences excites in me,
I perform the act.

"Here, at all events, any one may see, that conscience, and the
motive of the act, are not the same, but opposed to one another. The
motive of the act, is the pleasure of having hares; not in itself a
thing anywise bad. The only thing bad is the producing so much
misery to others, for securing that pleasure to myself.

"The state of the case, then, is manifest. The act of which I have
the idea, has two sets of consequences; one set pleasurable, another
hurtful. I feel an aversion to produce the hurtful consequences.
I feel a desire to produce the pleasurable. The one prevails over
the other. . . . .

". . . Nothing in an act is voluntary but the consequences that are
intended. The idea of good consequences intended, is the pleasurable
feeling of moral approbation; the idea of bad consequences intended
is the painful feeling of moral disapprobation. The very term
voluntary, therefore, applied to an act which produces good or evil
consequences, {320} expresses the antecedence of moral approbation
or disapprobation."[b]

[Editor's footnote b:  Fragment on Mackintosh, pp. 375--378.]

I will quote one short passage more, in correction of the very
vulgar error, that to analyse our disinterested affections and
resolve them into associations with the ideas of our own elementary
pleasures and pains, is to deny their reality.

"Sir James must mean, if he means anything, that to trace up the
motive affections of human nature to pain and pleasure, is to make
personal advantage the only motive. This is to affirm, that he who
analyses any of the complicated phenomena of human nature, and
points out the circumstances of their formation, puts an end to
them.

"Sir James was totally ignorant of this part of human nature.
Gratitude remains gratitude, resentment remains resentment,
generosity generosity in the mind of him who feels them, after
analysis, the same as before. The man who can trace them to their
elements does not cease to feel them, as much as the man who never
thought about the matter. And whatever effects they produce, as
motives, in the mind of the man who never thought about the matter,
they produce equally, in the minds of those who have analysed them
the most minutely.

"They are constituent parts of human nature. How we are actuated,
when we feel them, is matter of experience, which every one knows
within himself. Their action is what it is, whether they are simple
or compound. Does a complex motive cease to be a motive whenever it
is discovered to be complex? The analysis of the active principles
leaves the nature of them untouched. To be able to assert, that a
philosopher, who finds some of the active principles of human nature
to be compound and traces them to their origin, does on that account
exclude them from human nature, and deny their efficiency as
constituent parts of that nature, discovers a total incapacity of
thinking upon these subjects. When Newton discovered that a white
ray of {321} light is not simple but compound, did he for that
reason exclude it from the denomination of light, and deny that it
produced its effects, with respect to our perception, as if it were
of the same nature with the elementary rays of which it is
composed?"[c]

[Editor's footnote c: Fragment on Mackintosh, pp. 51, 52.]

