VIII.

All virtue, with Plotinus, rests on the superiority of the soul
to the body. So far, he follows the common doctrine of Plato and
Aristotle. But in working out the distinction, he is influenced by the
individualising and theoretic philosophy of the latter rather than by
the social and practical philosophy of the former. Or, again, we may
say that with him the intellectualism of Aristotle is heightened and
warmed by the religious aspirations of Plato, strengthened and purified
by the Stoic passionlessness, the Stoic independence of external
goods. In his ethical system, the virtues are arranged in an ascending
scale. Each grade reproduces the old quadripartite division into
Wisdom, Courage, Temperance and Justice, but in each their respective
significance receives a new interpretation. As civic virtues, they
continue to bear the meaning assigned to them in Plato’s _Republic_.
Wisdom belongs to reason, Courage to passionate spirit, Temperance
to desire, while Justice implies the fulfilment of its appropriate
function by each.[493] But all this only amounts to the restriction of
what would otherwise be unregulated impulse, the imposition of Form on
Matter, the supremacy of the soul over the body; whereas what we want
is to get rid of matter altogether. Here also, Plato sets us on the
right track when he calls the virtues purifications. From this point
of view, for the soul to energise alone without any interference, is
Wisdom; not to be moved by the passions of the body is Temperance; not
to dread separation from the body is Courage; and to obey the guidance
of reason is Justice.[494] Such a disposition of the soul is what Plato
means by flying from the world and becoming like God. Is this enough?
No, it is not. We have, so far, been dealing only with the negative
conditions of good, not with good itself. The essential thing is not
purification, but what remains behind when the work of purification
is accomplished. So we come to the third and highest grade of virtue,
the truly divine life, which is a complete conversion to reason. Our
philosopher endeavours to fit this also into the framework of the
cardinal virtues, but not without imposing a serious strain on the
ordinary meaning of words. Of Wisdom nothing need be said, for it
is the same as rationality. Justice is the self-possession of mind,
Temperance the inward direction towards reason, Courage the impassivity
arising from resemblance to that which is by nature impassive.[495]

Plotinus is careful to make us understand that his morality has neither
an ascetic nor a suicidal tendency. Pleasures are to be tolerated
under the form of a necessary relief and relaxation; pains are to be
removed, but if incurable, they are to be patiently borne; anger is,
if possible, to be suppressed, and, at any rate, not allowed to exceed
the limits of an involuntary movement; fear will not be felt except
as a salutary warning. The bodily appetites will be restricted to
natural wants, and will not be felt by the soul, except, perhaps, as a
transient excitement of the imagination.[496] Whatever abstinences our
philosopher may have practised on his own account, we find no trace of
a tendency towards self-mortification in his writings, nothing that is
not consistent with the healthiest traditions of Greek spiritualism as
originally constituted by the great Athenian school.

While not absolutely condemning suicide, Plotinus restricts the right
of leaving this world within much narrower limits than were assigned
to it by the Stoics. In violently separating herself from the body,
the soul, he tells us, is acting under the influence of some evil
passion, and he intimates that the mischievous effects of this passion
will prolong themselves into the new life on which she is destined
to enter.[497] Translated into more abstract language, his meaning
probably is that the feelings which ordinarily prompt to suicide, are
such as would not exist in a well-regulated mind. It is remarkable
that Schopenhauer, whose views of life were, on other points, the very
reverse of those held by Plotinus, should have used very much the same
argument against self-destruction. According to his theory, the will
to life, which it should be our principal business to conquer, asserts
itself strongly in the wish to escape from suffering, and only delays
the final moment of peaceful extinction by rushing from one phase of
existence to another. And in order to prove the possibility of such a
revival, Schopenhauer was obliged to graft on his philosophy a theory
of metempsychosis, which, but for this necessity, would certainly never
have found a place in it at all. In this, as in many other instances,
an ethical doctrine is apparently deduced from a metaphysical doctrine
which has, in reality, been manufactured for its support. All systems
do but present under different formulas a common fund of social
sentiment. A constantly growing body of public opinion teaches us that
we do not belong to ourselves, but to those about us, and that, in
ordinary circumstances, it is no less weak and selfish to run away from
life than to run away from death.

Plotinus follows up his essay on the Virtues by an essay on
Dialectic.[498] As a method for attaining perfection, he places
dialectic above ethics; and, granting that the apprehension of abstract
ideas ranks higher than the performance of social duties, he is quite
consistent in so doing. Not much, however, can be made of his few
remarks on the subject. They seem to be partly meant for a protest
against the Stoic idea that logic is an instrument for acquiring truth
rather than truth itself, and also against the Stoic use or abuse of
the syllogistic method. In modern phraseology, Plotinus seems to view
dialectic as the immanent and eternal process of life itself, rather
than as a collection of rules for drawing correct inferences from true
propositions, or from propositions assumed to be true. We have seen
how he regarded existence in the highest sense as identical with the
self-thinking of the absolute Nous, and how he attempted to evolve the
whole series of archetypal Ideas contained therein from the simple
fact of self-consciousness. Thus he would naturally identify dialectic
with the subjective reproduction of this objective evolution; and here
he would always have before his eyes the splendid programme sketched
in Plato’s _Republic_.[499] His preference of intuitive to discursive
reasoning has been quoted by Ritter as a symptom of mysticism. But
here, as in so many instances, he follows Aristotle, who also held that
simple abstraction is a higher operation, and represents a higher order
of real existence than complex ratiocination.[500]

The ultimate stage of perfection is, of course, the identification of
subject and object, the ascent from the Nous to the One. But, on this
point, Plotinus never added anything essential to what has already
been quoted from the analytical portion of his enquiry, and the essay
containing that passage is accordingly placed last in Porphyry’s
arrangement of his works.

Our account of Neo-Platonism has, with the exception of a few
illustrations, been derived exclusively from the earlier essays of
Plotinus. His subsequent writings are exceedingly obscure and tedious,
and they add little by way either of development or defence to the
outlines which he had sketched with a master’s hand. Whatever materials
they may supply for a better appreciation, whether of his philosophy or
of his general character as a thinker, will most profitably find their
place in the final survey of both which we shall now attempt to give.


