VIII.

From this grand synthesis, however, a single element was omitted; and,
like the uninvited guest of fairy tradition, it proved strong enough
singly to destroy what had been constructed by the united efforts of
all the rest. This was the sceptical principle, the critical analysis
of ideas, first exercised by Protagoras, made a new starting-point by
Socrates, carried to perfection by Plato, supplementing experience with
Aristotle, and finally proclaimed in its purity as the sole function of
philosophy by an entire school of Greek thought.

Notwithstanding the sterility commonly associated with mere negation,
it was this which, of all the later Greek schools, possessed the
greatest powers of growth. Besides passing through more than one
stage of development on its own account, Scepticism imposed serious
modifications on Stoicism, gave birth to Eclecticism, and contributed
to the establishment of Neo-Platonism. The explanation is not far to
seek. The more highly organised a system is, the more resistance does
it offer to change, the more does its transmission tend to assume
a rigidly scholastic form. To such dogmatism the Sceptics were, on
principle, opposed; and by keeping the problems of philosophy open,
they facilitated the task of all who had a new solution to offer;
while mind and its activities being, to some extent, safe from
the universal doubt, the sceptical principle spontaneously threw
back thought on a subjective instead of an objective synthesis of
knowledge—in other words, on that psychological idealism the pregnancy
and comprehensiveness of which are every day becoming more clearly
recognised. And we shall now see how the same fertilising power of
criticism has been manifested in modern times as well.

The sceptical philosophy, already advocated in the Middle Ages by John
of Salisbury, was, like every other form of ancient thought, revived
at the Renaissance, but only under the very superficial form which
infers from the co-existence of many divergent opinions that none
of them can be true. Even so, however, it led Montaigne to sounder
notions of toleration and humanity than were entertained by any of his
contemporaries. With Bacon, and still more with Descartes, it also
appears as the necessary preparation for a remodelling of all belief;
but the great dogmatic systems still exercised such a potent influence
on both those thinkers that their professed demand for a new method
merely leads up to an altered statement of the old unproved assumptions.

Meanwhile the old principle of universal doubt could no longer be
maintained in presence of the certainties already won by modern
science. Man, in the time of Newton, had, as Pope tersely puts it,
‘too much knowledge for the sceptic side.’ The problem was not how to
establish the reality, but how to ascertain the origin and possible
extent of that knowledge. The first to perceive this, the first to
evolve criticism out of scepticism, and therefore the real founder
of modern philosophy, was Locke. Nevertheless, even with him, the
advantage of studying the more recent in close connexion with the
earlier developments of thought does not cease; it only enters on a new
phase. If he cannot, like his predecessors, be directly affiliated to
one or more of the Greek schools, his position can be illustrated by a
parallel derived from the history of those schools. What Arcesilaus and
Carneades had been to Socrates and his successors, that Locke was, in a
large measure, to Bacon and the Cartesians. He went back to the initial
doubt which with them had been overborne by the dogmatic reaction,
and insisted on making it a reality. The spirit of the _Apologia_ is
absent from Plato’s later dialogues, only to reappear with even more
than its original power in the teaching of the New Academy. And, in
like manner, Descartes’ introspective method, with its demand for
clear ideas, becomes, in the _Essay concerning Human Understanding_,
an irresistible solvent for the psychologyy and physics of its first
propounder. The doctrine of innate ideas, the doctrine that extension
is the essence of matter, the doctrine that thought is the essence of
mind, the more general doctrine, held also by Bacon, that things have
a discoverable essence whence all their properties may be deduced by a
process analogous to mathematical reasoning,—all collapsed when brought
to the test of definite and concrete experience.

We have here, indeed, something comparable not only to the scepticism
of the New Academy, but also to the Aristotelian criticism of Plato’s
metaphysics; and, at first sight, it might seem as if the Peripatetic
philosophy was destined once more to regain the position taken from it
by the resuscitation of its ancient foe. But Locke was not inclined
to substitute one form of scholasticism for another. By applying the
analytical method of Atomism to knowledge itself, he created a weapon
equally fatal to the two competing systems. Under his dissection, the
concrete individual substance of the one vanished no less completely
than the universal ideas of the other. Nothing remained but a bundle of
qualities held together by a subjective bond.

Similarly, in political science, the analytical method of assuming
civil government to result from a concurrence of individual wills,
which with Hobbes had served only to destroy ecclesiastical authority,
while leaving intact and even strengthening the authority of secular
rulers, was reinterpreted by Locke as a negation of all absolutism
whatever.

It is interesting to observe how, here also, the positive science of
the age had a large share in determining its philosophic character.
Founded on the discovery of the earth’s true shape, Aristotle’s
metaphysics had been overthrown by the discovery of the earth’s
motion. And now the claims of Cartesianism to have furnished an exact
knowledge of matter and a definition of it whence all the facts of
observation could be deduced _à priori_, were summarily refuted by the
discovery of universal gravitation. The Cartesians complained that
Newton was bringing back the occult qualities of the Schoolmen; but
the tendency of bodies to move towards one another proved as certain
as it was inexplicably mysterious. For a time, the study of causes was
superseded by the study of laws; and the new method of physical science
moved in perfect harmony with the phenomenism of Locke. One most
important consequence of this revolution was to place the new Critical
philosophy on a footing quite different from that occupied by the
ancient sceptics. Both restricted certain knowledge to our own states
of consciousness; but it now appeared that this might be done without
impeaching the value of accepted scientific conclusions, which was
more than the Academic philosophy would have admitted. In other words,
granting that we were limited to phenomena, it was shown that science
consisted in ascertaining the relations of these phenomena to one
another, instead of to a problematic reality lying behind them; while,
that such relations existed and were, in fact, part of the phenomena
themselves, was what no sceptic could easily deny.

Nevertheless, in each case, subjective idealism had the effect of
concentrating speculation, properly so called, on ethical and practical
interests. Locke struck the keynote of eighteenth century philosophy
when he pronounced morality to be ‘the proper science and business
of mankind in general.’[574] And no sooner had morality come to the
front than the significance of ancient thought again made itself
apparent. Whether through conscious imitation, or because the same
causes brought about the same effects, ethical enquiries moved along
the lines originally laid down in the schools of Athens. When rules of
conduct were not directly referred to a divine revelation, they were
based either on a supposed law of Nature, or on the necessities of
human happiness, or on some combination of the two. Nothing is more
characteristic of the eighteenth century than its worship of Nature.
Even the theology of the age is deeply coloured by it; and with the
majority of those who rejected theology it became a new religion.
But this sentiment is demonstrably of Greek origin, and found its
most elaborate, though not its most absolute, expression in Stoicism.
The Stoics had inherited it from the Cynics, who held the faith in
greater purity; and these, again, so far as we can judge, from a
certain Sophistic school, some fragments of whose teaching have been
preserved by Xenophon and Plato; while the first who gave wide currency
to this famous abstraction was, in all probability, Heracleitus. To
the Stoics, however, is due that intimate association of naturalism
with teleology which meets us again in the philosophy of the last
century, and even now wherever the doctrine of evolution has not been
thoroughly accepted. It was assumed, in the teeth of all evidence, that
Nature bears the marks of a uniformly beneficent design, that evil is
exclusively of human origin, and that even human nature is essentially
good when unspoiled by artificial restrictions.

Yet if teleology was, in some respects, a falling-off from the rigid
mechanicism first taught by the pre-Socratic schools and then again by
the Cartesian school, in at least one respect it marked a comparative
progress. For the first attempts made both by ancient and modern
philosophy to explain vital phenomena on purely mechanical principles
were altogether premature; and the immense extension of biological
knowledge which took place subsequently to both, could not but bring
about an irresistible movement in the opposite direction. The first
to revive teleology was Leibniz, who furnished a transition from the
seventeenth to the eighteenth century by his monadology. In this,
Atomism is combined with Aristotelian ideas, just as it had previously
been combined with Platonic ideas by Descartes. The movement of the
atoms is explained by their aspiration after a more perfect state
instead of by mechanical pressure. But while Leibniz still relies on
the ontological argument of Descartes to prove the existence of God,
this was soon abandoned, along with the cosmological argument, for the
argument from design, which was also that used by the Stoics; while in
ethics the fitness of things was substituted for the more mechanical
law of self-preservation, as the rule of conduct; and the subjection of
all impulse to reason was replaced by the milder principle of a control
exercised by the benevolent over the malevolent instincts. This was a
very distinct departure from the Stoic method, yet those who made it
were more faithful to teleology than Stoicism had been; for to condemn
human feeling altogether was implicitly to condemn the work of Nature
or of God.

The other great ethical method of the eighteenth century, its hedonism,
was closely connected with the sceptical movement in speculative
philosophy, and, like that, received an entirely new significance by
becoming associated with the idea of law. Those who isolate man from
the universe are necessarily led to seek in his interests as such the
sole regulator of his actions, and their sole sanction in the opinion
of his fellows. Protagoras went already so far, notwithstanding his
unwillingness to recognise pleasure as the supreme end; and in the
system of his true successor, Aristippus, the most extreme hedonism
goes hand in hand with the most extreme idealism; while with Epicurus,
again, both are tempered by the influence of naturalism, imposing on
him its conceptions of objective law alike in science and in practice.
Still his system leaned heavily to the side of self-gratification
pure and simple; and it was reserved for modern thought to establish
a complete equilibrium between the two competing tendencies of Greek
ethics. This has been effected in Utilitarianism; and those critics
are entirely mistaken who, like M. Guyau, regard that system as a
mere reproduction of Epicureanism. It might with full as much reason
be called a modern version of Stoicism. The idea of humanity is
essentially Stoic; to work for the good of humanity was a Stoic
precept; and to sacrifice one’s own pleasure for that higher good is
a virtue which would have satisfied the most rigorous demands of a
Cleanthes, an Epictêtus, or an Aurelius.

Utilitarianism agrees with the ancient hedonism in holding pleasure to
be the sole good and pain the sole evil. Its adherents also, for the
most part, admit that the desire of the one and the dread of the other
are the sole motives to action; but, while making the end absolutely
universal and impersonal, they make the motive into a momentary
impulse, without any necessary relation to the future happiness of
the agent himself. The good man does his duty because doing it gives
him pleasure, or because the failure to do it would give him pain, at
the moment; although he knows that a contrary course would save him
from greater pain or win him greater pleasure hereafter. No accurate
thinker would call this acting from a selfish or interested motive; nor
does it agree with the teaching of Epicurus. Were all sensitive beings
to be united in a single organism, then, on utilitarian principles,
self-interest, interpreted in the sense of seeking its own preservation
and pleasure, would be the only law that the individualised aggregate
could rationally obey. But the good of each part would be rigorously
subordinated to the good of the whole; and utilitarian morality desires
that we should act as if this hypothesis were realised, at least in
reference to our own particular interests. Now, the idea of humanity
as forming such a consolidated whole is not Epicurean. It belongs to
the philosophy which always reprobated pleasure, precisely because its
pursuit is associated with the dereliction of public duty and with
bitter rivalry for the possession of what, by its very nature, exists
only in limited quantities, while the demand for it is unlimited or, at
any rate, far exceeds the supply. According to the Stoics, there was
only one way in which the individual could study his private interest
without abandoning his position as a social being, and this was to find
it exclusively in the practice of virtue.[575] But virtue and public
interest remained mere forms scantily supplemented by appeals to the
traditional morality, until the idea of generalised happiness, of
pleasure diffused through the whole community, came to fill them with
substance and life.

It has also to be observed that the idea of utility as a test of moral
goodness is quite distinct from hedonism. Plato proclaims, in the most
unequivocal terms, that actions must be estimated by their consequences
instead of by the feelings of sympathy or antipathy which they excite;
yet no one could object more strongly to making pleasure the end of
action. Thus, three distinct doctrines seem to converge in modern
English ethics, of which all are traceable to Greek philosophy, but
only one to Epicureanism in particular, and not ultimately to that but
to the older systems whence it sprang.

And here we unexpectedly find ourselves confronted by a new relation
between ancient and modern thought. Each acts as a powerful precipitant
on the other, dissolving what might otherwise have passed for
inseparable associations, and combining elements which a less complete
experience might have led us to regard as necessarily incompatible with
one another. The instance just analysed is highly significant; nor
does it stand alone. Modern spiritualists often talk as if morality
was impossible apart from their peculiar metaphysics. But the Stoics,
confessedly the purest moralists of antiquity, were uncompromising
materialists; while the spiritualist Aristotle taught what is not
easily distinguishable from a very refined sort of egoism. Again, the
doctrine of free-will is now commonly connected with a belief in the
separability of consciousness from matter, and, like that, is declared
to be an indispensable condition of morality. Among the Greeks,
however, it was held by the materialist Epicureans more distinctly
than by any other school; while the Stoics did not find necessarianism
inconsistent with self-sacrificing virtue. The partial derivation
of knowledge from an activity in our own minds is another supposed
concomitant of spiritualism; although Aristotle traces every idea to
an external source, while at the same time holding some cognitions to
be necessarily true—a theory repudiated by modern experientialists. To
Plato, the spirituality of the soul seemed to involve its pre-existence
no less than its immortality, a consequence not accepted by his modern
imitators. Teleology is now commonly opposed to pantheism; the two were
closely combined in Stoicism; while Aristotle, although he believed
in a personal God, attributed the marks of design in Nature to purely
unconscious agencies.


