VII.

So far our investigation has been analytical. We have seen Plotinus
acquire, one after another, the elements out of which his system has
still to be constructed. The first step was to separate spirit from
matter. They are respectively distinguished as principles of union and
of division. The bodies given to us in experience are a combination of
the two, a dispersion of form over an infinitely extended, infinitely
divisible, infinitely changeful substratum. Our own souls, which at
first seemed so absolutely self-identical, present, on examination,
a similarly composite character. A fresh analysis results in the
separation of Nous or Reason from the lower functions of conscious
life. And we infer by analogy that the soul in Nature bears the same
relation to a transcendent objective Nous. Nous is essentially pure
self-consciousness, and from this self-consciousness the world of
Ideas is developed. Properly speaking, Ideas are the sole reality:
sensible forms are an image of them impressed on matter through the
agency of the world-soul. But Nous, or the totality of Ideas, though
high, is not the highest. All that has hitherto occupied us, Nature,
Soul, and Reason, is pervaded by a fundamental unity, without which
nothing could exist. But Soul is not herself this unity, nor is Reason.
Self-consciousness, even in its purest expression, involves a duality
of object and subject. The notion of Being is distinct from the notion
of oneness. The principle represented by the latter, as the cause of
all things, must itself transcend existence. At the same time, it is
revealed to us by the fact of our own personal identity. To be united
with oneself is to be united with the One.

Thus we have, in all, five gradations: the One, Nous, Soul, the
sensible world, and, lastly, unformed Matter. Taken together, the
first three constitute a triad of spiritual principles, and, as such,
are associated in a single group by Plotinus.[467] Sometimes they are
spoken of as the Alexandrian Trinity. But the implied comparison with
the Trinity of Catholicism is misleading. With Neo-Platonism, the
supreme unity is, properly speaking, alone God and alone One. Nous
is vastly inferior to the first principle, and Soul, again, to Nous.
Possibly the second and third principles are personal; the first most
certainly is not, since self-consciousness is expressly denied to it
by Plotinus. Nor is it likely that the idea of a supernatural triad
was suggested to Neo-Platonism by Christianity. Each of the three
principles may be traced to its source in Greek philosophy. This
has been already shown in the case of the One and of the Nous. The
universal soul is to be found in Plato’s _Timaeus_; it is analogous,
at least in its lower, divided part, to Aristotle’s Nature; and it
is nearly identical with the informing spirit of Stoicism. As to the
number three, it was held in high esteem long before the Christian
era, and was likely to be independently employed for the construction
of different systems at a time when belief in the magical virtue of
particular numbers was more widely diffused than at any former period
of civilised history.

From another point of view, as we have already observed with Kirchner,
the fundamental triad assumed by Plotinus is body, soul, and spirit.
Under their objective aspect of the sensible universe, the world-soul,
and the Nous, these three principles constitute the sum of all reality.
Take away plurality from Nous and there remains the One. Take away
soul from body and there remains unformed matter. These are the two
transcendent principles between which the others extend, and by whose
combination in various proportions they are explained. It is true
that Plotinus himself does not allude to the possibility of such an
analysis, but it exhibits, better than any other, the natural order of
his dialectic.

Plotinus passes by an almost insensible transition from the more
elementary and analytical to the more constructive portion of his
philosophy. This naturally falls into two great divisions, the one
speculative and the other practical. It has to be shown by what
necessity and in what order the great cosmic principles are evolved
from their supreme source; and it has also to be shown in what way
this knowledge is connected with the supreme interests of the human
soul. The moral aspect of Neo-Platonism is not at first very clearly
distinguished from its metaphysical aspect; and both find their most
general solution in the same line of thought that has led us up to
a contemplation of the ultimate One. For the successive gradations
of our ascent represent, in an inverted order, the steps of creative
energy by which all things are evolved from their primal source; while
they directly correspond to the process of purification through which
every soul must pass in returning from the exile of her separate and
material existence to the happiness of identification with God. And
here we at once come on the fundamental contradiction of the system.
What we were so carefully taught to consider as one and nothing more,
must now be conceived as the first cause and the supreme good. Plotinus
does, indeed, try to evade the difficulty by saying that his absolute
is only a cause in relation to other things, that it is not so much
good as the giver of good, that it is only one in the sense of not
being many.[468] But after making these reservations, he continues to
use the old terms as confidently as if they stood for the ideas usually
associated with them. His fundamental error was to identify three
distinct methods of connecting phenomena, in thought, with each other
or with ourselves. We may view things in relation to their generating
antecedents, in relation to other things with which they are associated
by resemblance or juxtaposition, or in relation to the satisfaction of
our own wants. These three modes of reference correspond to Aristotle’s
efficient, formal, and final causes; but the word causation should be
applied only to the first. Whether their unfortunate confusion both by
Aristotle and by his successors was in any appreciable degree due to
their having been associated by him under a common denomination, may
reasonably be doubted. It is rather more probable that the same name
was given to these different conceptions in consequence of their having
first become partially identified in thought. Social arrangements,
which have a great deal to do with primitive speculation, would
naturally lead to such an identification. The king or other chief
magistrate stands at the head of the social hierarchy and forms the
bond of union among its members; he is the source of all authority; and
his position, or, failing that, his favour, is regarded as the supreme
good. Religion extends the same combination of attributes to her chief
God; and philosophy, following on the lines of religion, employs it to
unify the methods of science and morality.

All existence, according to Plotinus, proceeds from the One, which
he also calls God. But God does not create the world by a conscious
exercise of power; for, as we have seen, every form of consciousness
is excluded from his definition. Neither does it proceed from him by
emanation, for this would imply a diminution of his substance.[469] It
is produced by an overflow of his infinite power.[470] Our philosopher
tries to explain and defend this rather unintelligible mode of
derivation by the analogy of physical substances and their actions.
Light is constantly coming from the sun without any loss to the
luminary itself.[471] And all things are, in like manner, constantly
communicating their proper virtue to others while remaining unaltered
themselves. Here we have a good example of the close connexion between
science and abstract speculation. People often talk as if metaphysics
was something beyond the reach of verification. But some metaphysical
theories admit, at any rate, of disproof, in so far as they are founded
on false physical theories. Had Plotinus known that neither the sun nor
anything else in Nature can produce force out of nothing, he would,
very probably, have hesitated to credit the One with such a power.

In reasoning up from the world to its first cause, we were given to
understand that the two were related to one another as contradictory
opposites. The multiple must proceed from the simple, and existence
from that which does not exist. But the analogies of material
production now suggest a somewhat different view. What every power
calls into existence is an image of itself, but the effect is never
more than a weakened and imperfect copy of its original. Thus the
universe appears as a series of diminishing energies descending in
a graduated scale from the highest to the lowest. Here, again, bad
science makes bad philosophy. Effects are never inferior to their
causes, but always exactly equal, the effect being nothing else than
the cause in another place or under another form. This would be obvious
enough, did not superficial observation habitually confound the real
cause with the sum of its concomitants. What we are accustomed to think
of as a single cause is, in truth, a whole bundle of causes, which do
not always converge to a single point, and each of which, taken singly,
is, of course, inferior to the whole sum taken together. Thus when
we say that the sun heats the earth, this is only a conventional way
of speaking. What really does the work is a relatively infinitesimal
part of the solar heat separately transmitted to us through space.
Once neglect this truth, and there is no reason why effects should
not exceed as well as fall short of their causes in any assignable
proportion. Such an illusion is, in fact, produced when different
energies converge to a point. Here it is the consequent and not the
antecedent which is confounded with the sum of its concomitants, as
when an explosion is said to be the effect of a spark.

Of course we are speaking of causation as exercised under the
conditions of time, space, matter, and motion. It is then identical
with the transmission of energy and obeys the laws of energy. And
to talk about causation under any other conditions than these is
utter nonsense. But Plotinus and other philosophers exclude the most
essential of the conditions specified from their enquiries into the
ultimate origin of things. We are expressly informed that the genesis
of Nous from the One, and of Soul from Nous, must not be conceived as
taking place in time but in eternity.[472] Unfortunately those who
make such reservations are not consistent. They continue to talk about
power, causation, priority, and so forth, as if these conceptions
were separable from time. Hence they have to choose between making
statements which are absolutely unintelligible and making statements
which are absolutely untrue.

Perhaps the processes of logic and mathematics may be adduced as an
exception. It may be contended that the genus is prior to the species,
the premise to the conclusion, the unit to the multiple, the line
to the figure, in reason though not in time. And Plotinus avails
himself to the fullest extent of mathematical and logical analogies
in his transcendental constructions. His One is the starting-point
of numeration, the centre of a circle, the identity involved in
difference; and under each relation it claims an absolute priority, of
which causal power is only the most general expression. We have already
seen how a multitude of archetypal Ideas spring from the supreme Nous
as from their fountain-head. Their production is explained, on the
lines of Plato’s _Sophist_, as a process of dialectical derivation. By
logically analysing the conception of self-consciousness, we obtain,
first of all, Nous itself, or Reason, as the subject, and Existence
as the object of thought. Subject and object, considered as the same
with one another, give us Identity; considered as distinct, they
give us Difference. The passage from one to the other gives Motion;
the limitation of thought to itself gives Rest. The plurality of
determinations so obtained gives number and quantity, their specific
difference gives quality, and from these principles everything else
is derived.[473] It might seem as if, here at least, we had something
which could be called a process of eternal generation—a causal order
independent of time. But, in reality, the assumed sequence exists only
in our minds, and there it takes place under the form of time, not less
inevitably than do the external re-arrangements of matter and motion.
Thus in logic and mathematics, such terms as priority, antecedence, and
evolution can only be used to signify the order in which our knowledge
is acquired; they do not answer to causal relations existing among
things in themselves. And apart from these two orders—the objective
order of dynamical production in space and time, and the subjective
order of intelligibility in thought—there is no kind of succession that
we can conceive. Eternal relations, if they exist at all, must be
relations of co-existence, of resemblance, or of difference, continued
through infinite time. Wherever there is antecedence, the consequent
can only have existed for a finite time.

Some may think that we have pushed this point at unnecessary length.
But the Neo-Platonic method is not quite so obsolete as they, perhaps,
suppose. Whenever we repeat the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds, we are
expressing our religious belief in the language of the Alexandrian
schools, thus pledging ourselves to metaphysical dogmas which we can
neither explain nor defend. Such terms as sonship and procession have
no meaning except when applied to relations conceived under the form of
time; and to predicate eternity of them is to reduce them to so much
unintelligible jargon.

An energy continually advancing through successive gradations, and
diminishing as it advances—such, as we have seen, is the conception of
existence offered by Plotinus. We have seen, also, how to explain the
genesis of one principle from another without the aid of supernatural
volition or of mechanical causation, he is compelled to press into
the service every sort of relationship by which two objects can be
connected, and to invest it with a dynamical significance which
only the phenomena of matter and motion can possess. But what he
chiefly relies on for guidance in this tortuous labyrinth of timeless
evolution, is the old Greek principle that contraries are generated
from one another. And with him, as with the earlier thinkers, all
contraries reduce themselves, in the last analysis, to the four great
antitheses of the One and the Many, Being and not-Being, the Same
and the Other, Rest and Motion. It matters nothing that he should
have followed Plato to the extent of co-ordinating five of these
terms as supreme archetypal Ideas, immediately resulting from the
self-consciousness of Nous, and themselves producing all other forms
of existence. They are used, quite independently of that derivation,
to explain the connexion of the various creative principles with one
another. Nous is deduced from its first cause as Being from not-Being,
as the Many from the One, as Difference from Identity, and as Motion
from Rest.[474] To explain the generation of Soul from Nous is a
more difficult problem. The One had originally been defined as the
antithetical cause of Nous, and therefore the latter could easily be
accounted for by simply reversing the analytical process; whereas Nous
had not been defined as the cause of Soul, but as the model whence her
creative Ideas are derived. Soul, in fact, is not opposed to anything;
she is the connecting link between sense and spirit. In this strait,
Plotinus seems to think that the antithesis between Rest and Motion
is the best fitted to express the nature of her descent from the
higher principle; and on one occasion he illustrates the relation of
his three divine substances to one another by the famous figure of a
central point representing the One, a fixed circle round that point
representing the Nous, and outside that, again, a revolving circle
representing the Soul.[475] Still, the different parts of the system
are very awkwardly pieced together at this juncture; for the creative
energy of the Nous has already been invoked to account for the Ideas or
partial intelligences into which it spontaneously divides; and one does
not understand how it can be simultaneously applied to the production
of something that is not an Idea at all.

Fresh difficulties arise in explaining the activity which the Soul,
in her turn, exerts. As originally conceived, her function was
sufficiently clear. Mediating between two worlds, she transforms the
lower one into a likeness of the higher, stamping on material objects a
visible image of the eternal Ideas revealed to her by a contemplation
of the Nous. And, as a further elaboration of this scheme, we were
told that the primary soul generates an inferior soul, which, again,
subdivides itself into the multitude of partial souls required for the
animation of different bodily organisms. But now that our philosopher
has entered on a synthetic construction of the elements furnished by
his preliminary analysis, he finds himself confronted by an entirely
new problem. For his implied principle is that each hypostasis must
generate the grade which comes next after it in the descending series
of manifestations, until the possibilities of existence have been
exhausted. But in developing and applying the noetic Ideas, the Soul,
apparently, finds a pre-existing Matter ready to hand. Thus she has
to deal with something lower than herself, which she did not create,
and which is not created by the Forms combined with it in sensible
experience. We hear of a descent from thought to feeling, and from
feeling to simple vitality,[476] but in each instance the depth of the
Soul’s fall is measured by the extent to which she penetrates into the
recesses of a substance not clearly related to her nor to anything
above her.

Plotinus is driven by this perplexity to reconsider the whole theory
of Matter.[477] He takes Aristotle’s doctrine as the groundwork of
his investigation. According to this, all existence is divided into
Matter and Form. What we know of things—in other words, the sum of
their differential characteristics—is their Form. Take away this, and
the unknowable residuum is their Matter. Again, Matter is the vague
indeterminate something out of which particular Forms are developed.
The two are related as Possibility to Actuality, as the more generic
to the more specific substance through every grade of classification
and composition. Thus there are two Matters, the one sensible and
the other intelligible. The former constitutes the common substratum
of bodies, the other the common element of ideas.[478] The general
distinction between Matter and Form was originally suggested to
Aristotle by Plato’s remarks on the same subject; but he differs from
his master in two important particulars. Plato, in his _Timaeus_, seems
to identify Matter with space.[479] So far, it is a much more positive
conception than the ὕλη of the _Metaphysics_. On the other hand, he
constantly opposes it to reality as something non-existent; and he at
least implies that it is opposed to absolute good as a principle of
absolute evil.[480] Thus while the Aristotelian world is formed by the
development of Power into Actuality, the Platonic world is composed by
the union of Being and not-Being, of the Same and the Different, of the
One and the Many, of the Limit and the Unlimited, of Good and Evil, in
varying proportions with each other.

Plotinus, as we have said, starts with the Aristotelian account of
Matter; but by a process of dialectical manipulation, he gradually
brings it into almost complete agreement with Plato’s conception; thus,
as usual, mediating between and combining the views of his two great
authorities. In the first place, he takes advantage of Aristotle’s
distinction between intelligible and sensible Matter, to strip the
latter of that positive and vital significance with which it had been
clothed in the Peripatetic system. In the world of Ideas, there is an
element common to all specific forms, a fundamental unity in which they
meet and inhere, which may without impropriety be called their Matter.
But this Matter is an eternal and divine substance, inseparably united
with the fixed forms which it supports, and, therefore, something
which, equally with them, receives light and life and thought from
the central source of being. It is otherwise with sensible Matter,
the common substance of the corporeal elements. This is, to use the
energetic expression of our philosopher, a decorated corpse.[481]
It does not remain constantly combined with any form, but is for
ever passing from one to another, without manifesting a particular
preference for any. As such, it is the absolute negation of Form, and
can only be conceived, if at all, by thinking away every sensible
quality. Neither has it any quantity, for quantity means magnitude, and
magnitude implies definite figure. Aristotle opposed to each particular
form a corresponding privation, and placed Matter midway between
them. Plotinus, on the other hand, identifies Matter with the general
privation of all forms. It is at this point that he begins to work his
way back to the Platonic notion of Matter as simple extension. There
must, after all, be something about Matter which enables it to receive
every kind of quality and figure,—it must have some sort of mass or
bulk, not, indeed, in any definite sense, but with an equal capacity
for expansion and for contraction. Now, says Plotinus, the very
indeterminateness of Matter is precisely the capacity for extension in
all directions that we require. ‘Having no principle of stability, but
being borne towards every form, and easily led about in all directions,
it acquires the nature of a mass.’[482]

Henceforth, whatever our philosopher says about Matter will apply to
extension and to extension alone. It cannot be apprehended by sight,
nor by hearing, nor by smell, nor by taste, for it is neither colour,
nor sound, nor odour, nor juice. Neither can it be touched, for it is
not a body, but it becomes corporeal on being blended with sensible
qualities. And, in a later essay, he describes it as receiving all
things and letting them depart again without retaining the slightest
trace of their presence.[483] Why then, it may be asked, if Plotinus
meant extension, could he not say so at once, and save us all this
trouble in hunting out his meaning? There were very good reasons why he
should not. In the first place, he wished to express himself, so far as
possible, in Aristotelian phraseology, and this was incompatible with
the reduction of Matter to extension. In the next place, the idea of
an infinite void had been already appropriated by the Epicureans, to
whose system he was bitterly opposed. And, finally, the extension of
ordinary experience had not the absolute generality which was needed
in order to bring Matter into relation with that ultimate abstraction
whence, like everything else, it has now to be derived.

As a result of the preceding analysis, Plotinus at last identifies
Matter with the Infinite—not an infinite something, but the Infinite
pure and simple, apart from any subject of which it can be predicated.
We started with what seemed a broad distinction between intelligible
and sensible Matter. That distinction now disappears in a new and more
comprehensive conception; and, at the same time, Plotinus begins to see
his way towards a restatement of his whole system in clearer terms.
‘The Infinite is generated from the infinity or power or eternity of
the One; not that there is infinity in the One, but that it is created
by the One.’[484] With the first outrush of energy from the primal
fount of things, Matter begins to exist. But no sooner do movement and
difference start into life, than they are restrained and bent back
by the presence of the One; and this reflection of power or being on
itself constitutes the supreme self-consciousness of Nous.[485] Whether
the subsequent creation of Soul involves a fresh production of energy,
or whether a portion of the original stream, which was called into
existence by the One, escapes from the restraining self-consciousness
of Nous and continues its onward flow—this Plotinus does not say. What
he does say is that Soul stands to Nous in the relation of Matter to
Form, and is raised to perfection by gazing back on the Ideas contained
in Nous, just as Nous itself had been perfected by returning to the
One.[486] But while the two higher principles remain stationary,
the Soul, besides giving birth to a fresh stream of energy, turns
towards her own creation and away from the fountain of her life.
And, apparently, it is only by this condescension on her part that
the visible world could have been formed.[487] We can explain this
by supposing that as the stream of Matter departs more and more from
the One, its power of self-reflection continually diminishes, and at
length ceases altogether. It is thus that the substratum of sensible
objects must, as we have seen, be conceived under the aspect of a
passive recipient for the forms imposed on it by the Soul; and just as
those forms are a mere image of the noetic Ideas, so also, Plotinus
tells us, is their Matter an image of the intelligible Matter which
exists in the Nous itself; only the image realises the conception of
a material principle more completely than the archetype, because of
its more negative and indeterminate nature, a diminution of good being
equivalent to an increase of evil.[488]

Still Plotinus gives no clear answer to the question whence comes this
last and lowest Matter. He will not say that it is an emanation from
the Soul, nor yet will he say that it is a formless residue of the
element out of which she was shaped by a return to the Nous. In truth,
he could not make up his mind as to whether the Matter of sensible
objects was created at all. He oscillates between unwillingness to
admit that absolute evil can come from good, and unwillingness to admit
that the two are co-ordinate principles of existence. And, as usual,
where ideas fail him, he helps himself out of the difficulty with
metaphors. The Soul must advance, and in order to advance she must make
a place for herself, and that there may be a place there must be body.
Or, again, while remaining fixed in herself, she sends out a great
light, and by the light she sees that there is darkness beyond its
extreme verge, and moulds its formless substance into shape.[489]

The ambiguities and uncertainties which Plotinus exhibits in theorising
on the origin of Matter, are due not only to the conflicting influences
of Plato and Aristotle, but also to another influence quite distinct
from theirs. This is the Stoic cosmology. While utterly repudiating
the materialism of the Stoics, Plotinus evidently felt attracted by
their severe monism, and by the consistent manner in which they derived
every form of existence from the divine substance. They too recognised
a distinction between Form and Matter, the active and the passive
principle in Nature, but they supposed that the one, besides being
penetrated and moulded by the other, had also been originally produced
by it. Such a theory was well suited to the energetic and practical
character of Stoic morality, with its aversion from mere contemplation,
its immediate bearing on the concrete interests of life. Man was
conceived as an intelligent force, having for his proper function to
bring order out of chaos, ‘to make reason and the will of God prevail,’
and this ideal appeared to be reflected in the dynamic constitution of
Nature. With Plotinus, on the other hand, as with Aristotle, theory and
not practice was the end of life, or rather, as he himself expressed
it, practice was an inferior kind of theorising, an endeavour to set
before oneself in outward form what should properly be sought in the
noetic world where subject and object are one.[490] Accordingly, while
accepting the Stoic monism, he strove to bring it into close agreement
with Aristotle’s cosmology, by substituting contemplation for will as
the creative principle in all existence, no less than as the ideal of
happiness for man.

We have seen how, in accordance with this view, each principle is
perfected by looking back on its source.[491] Thus the activity of the
world-soul, so far as it is exercised for the benefit of what comes
after and falls beneath her, is an anomaly only to be accounted for
by her inferior place in the system of graduated descent; or else by
the utter impotence of Matter, which is incapable of raising itself
into Form by a spontaneous act of reflection, and can only passively
receive the images transmitted to it from above, without being able
to retain even these for any time. Nay, here also, what looks like
creative energy admits of being assimilated more or less closely to an
exercise of idealising thought. It is really for her own sake that the
Soul fills what lies beyond her with life and light, not, like Plato’s
Soul, from pure disinterested joy in the communication and diffusion of
good. It is because she recoils with horror from darkness and nonentity
that she shapes the formless substance into a residence for herself, on
the model of the imperial palace whence she came. Thus the functions of
sensation, nutrition, and reproduction are to be regarded as so many
modes of contemplation. In the first, the Soul dwells on the material
images which already exist; in the second and third, she strives to
perpetuate and multiply them still further. And the danger is that she
may become so enthralled by her own creation as to forget the divine
original after which it is formed.[492] Should she yield to the snare,
successive transmigrations will sink her lower and lower into the
depths of animalism and material darkness. To avoid this degradation,
to energise with the better part of our nature, is to be good. And with
the distinction between good and evil, we pass from the metaphysical to
the ethical portion of the system.


