II.

Of all testimonies to the restored supremacy of Aristotelianism, there
is none so remarkable as that afforded by the thinker who, more than
any other, has enjoyed the credit of its overthrow. To call Francis
Bacon an Aristotelian will seem to most readers a paradox. Such an
appellation would, however, be much nearer the truth than were the
titles formerly bestowed on the author of the _Novum Organum_. The
notion, indeed, that he was in any sense the father of modern science
is rapidly disappearing from the creed of educated persons. Its long
continuance was due to a coalition of literary men who knew nothing
about physics and of physicists who knew nothing about philosophy
or its history. It is certain that the great discoveries made both
before and during Bacon’s lifetime were the starting-point of all
future progress in the same direction. It is equally certain that
Bacon himself had either not heard of those discoveries or that he
persistently rejected them. But it might still be contended that he
divined and formulated the only method by which these and all other
great additions to human knowledge have been made, had not the delusion
been dispelled by recent investigations, more especially those of his
own editors, Messrs. Ellis and Spedding. Mr. Spedding has shown that
Bacon’s method never was applied to physical science at all. Mr. Ellis
has shown that it was incapable of application, being founded on a
complete misconception of the problem to be solved. The facts could in
truth, hardly have been other than what they are. Had Bacon succeeded
in laying down the lines of future investigation, it would have been
a telling argument against his own implied belief that all knowledge
is derived from experience. For, granting the validity of that belief,
a true theory of discovery can only be reached by an induction from
the observed facts of scientific practice, and such facts did not,
at that time, exist in sufficient numbers to warrant an induction.
It would have been still more extraordinary had he furnished a clue
to the labyrinth of Nature without ever having explored its mazes on
his own account. Even as it is, from Bacon’s own point of view the
contradiction remains. If ever any system was constructed _à priori_
the _Instauratio Magna_ was. But there is really no such thing as _à
priori_ speculation. Apart from observation, the keenest and boldest
intellect can do no more than rearrange the materials supplied by
tradition, or give a higher generalisation to the principles of
other philosophers. This was precisely what Bacon did. The wealth of
aphoristic wisdom and ingenious illustration scattered through his
writings belongs entirely to himself; but his dream of using science as
an instrument for acquiring unlimited power over Nature is inherited
from the astrologers, alchemists, and magicians of the Middle Ages;
and his philosophical system, with which alone we are here concerned,
is partly a modification, partly an extension, of Aristotle’s. An
examination of its leading features will at once make this clear.

Bacon begins by demanding that throughout the whole range of experience
new facts should be collected on the largest scale, in order to supply
materials for scientific generalisation. There can be no doubt that he
is here guided by the example of Aristotle, and of Aristotle alone.
Such a storehouse of materials is still extant in the _History of
Animals_, which evidently suggested the use of the word ‘History’ in
this sense to Bacon, and which, by the way, is immensely superior
to anything that he ever attempted in the same line. The facts on
which Aristotle’s _Politics_ is based were contained in another
vast descriptive work of the same kind, now unhappily lost. Even
the Stagirite’s more systematic treatises comprise a multitude of
observations, catalogued according to a certain order, but not reduced
to scientific principles. What Bacon did was to carry out, or to bid
others carry out, the plan so suggested in every department of enquiry.
But if we ask by what method he was guided in his survey of the whole
field to be explored, how he came by a complete enumeration of the
sciences, arranged according to their logical order,—the answer is
still that he borrowed it from the Peripatetic encyclopaedia.

One need only compare the catalogue of particular histories subjoined
to the _Parasceve_,[538] with a table of Aristotle’s works, to
understand how closely Bacon follows in the footsteps of his
predecessor. We do, indeed, find sundry subjects enumerated on which
the elder student had not touched; but they are only such as would
naturally suggest themselves to a man of comprehensive intelligence,
coming nearly two thousand years after his original; while they are
mostly of no philosophical value whatever. Bacon’s merit was to bring
the distinction between the descriptive sciences and the theoretical
sciences into clearer consciousness, and to give a view of the former
corresponding in completeness to that already obtained of the latter.

The methodical distinction between the materials for generalisation and
generalisation itself, is derived from the metaphysical distinction
between Matter and Form in Nature.[539] This distinction is the
next great feature of Bacon’s philosophy, and it is taken, still
more obviously than the first, from Aristotle, the most manifest
blots of the original being faithfully reproduced in the copy. The
Forms of simple substances were, according to the Stagirite, their
sensible qualities. The Forms of aggregates were the whole complex
of their differential characteristics. And although the formal cause
or idea of a thing was carefully discriminated from its efficient
and final causes, it was found impossible, in practice, to keep the
three from running into one. Again, the distinction between single
concepts and the judgments created by putting two concepts together,
although clearly conveyed by the logical distinction between terms and
propositions, was no sooner perceived than lost sight of, thanks to
the unfortunate theory of essential predication. For it was thought
that the import of universal propositions consisted either in stating
the total concept to which a given mark belonged, or in annexing a
new mark to a given concept. Hence, in Aristotle’s system, the study
of natural law means nothing but the definition and classification
of natural types; and, in harmony with this idea, the whole universe
is conceived as an arrangement of concentric spheres, each receiving
its impulse from that immediately above it. Precisely the same
confusion of Form, Cause, and Law reigns throughout Bacon’s theory
of Nature. We do, indeed, find mention made of _axiomata_ or general
propositions to a greater extent than in the _Organon_, but they are
never clearly distinguished from Forms, nor Forms from functions.[540]
And although efficient and material causes are assigned to physics,
while formal and final causes are reserved for metaphysics—an apparent
recognition of the wide difference between the forces which bring a
thing into existence and the actual conditions of its stability,—this
arrangement is a departure from the letter rather than from the spirit
of Aristotle’s philosophy. For the efficient causes of the _De
Augmentis_ answer roughly to the various kinds of motion discussed in
the _Physics_ and in the treatise _On Generation and Corruption_; while
its Forms are, as we have seen, identified with natural causes or laws
in the most general sense.

According to Bacon, the object of science is to analyse the complex of
Forms making up an individual aggregate into its separate constituents;
the object of art, to superinduce one or more such Forms on a given
material. Hence his manner of regarding them differs in one important
respect from Aristotle’s. The Greek naturalist was, before all things,
a biologist. His interest lay with the distinguishing characteristics
of animal species. These are easily discovered by the unassisted
eye; but while they are comparatively superficial, they are also
comparatively unalterable. The English experimenter, being primarily
concerned with inorganic bodies, whose properties he desired to utilise
for industrial purposes, was led to consider the attributes of an
object as at once penetrating its inmost texture, and yet capable
of being separated from it, like heat and colour for instance. But,
like every other thinker of the age, if he escapes from the control
of Aristotle it is only to fall under the dominion of another Greek
master—in this instance, Democritus. Bacon had a great admiration for
the Atomists, and although his inveterate Peripatetic proclivities
prevented him from embracing their theory as a whole, he went along
with it so far as to admit the dependence of the secondary on the
primary qualities of matter; and on the strength of this he concluded
that the way to alter the properties of an object was to alter the
arrangement of its component particles.

The next step was to create a method for determining the particular
configuration on which any given property of matter depends. If such
a problem could be solved at all, it would be by some new system of
practical analysis. Bacon did not see this because he was a Schoolman,
emancipated, indeed, from ecclesiastical authority, but retaining a
blind faith in the power of logic. Aristotle’s _Organon_ had been the
great storehouse of aids to verbal disputation; it should now be turned
into an instrument for the more successful prosecution of physical
researches. What definitions were to the one, that Forms should be to
the other; and both were to be determined by much the same process.
Now Aristotle himself had emphatically declared that the concepts out
of which propositions are constructed were discoverable by induction
and by induction alone. With him, induction meant comparing a number
of instances, and abstracting the one circumstance, if any, in which
they agreed. When the object is to establish a proposition inductively,
he has recourse to a method of elimination, and bids us search for
instances which, differing in everything else, agree in the association
of two particular marks.[541] In the _Topics_ he goes still further
and supplies us with a variety of tests for ascertaining the relation
between a given predicate and a given subject. Among these, Mill’s
Methods of Difference, Residues, and Concomitant Variations are very
clearly stated.[542] But he does not call such modes of reasoning
Induction. So far as he has any general name for them at all, it is
Dialectic, that is, Syllogism of which the premises are not absolutely
certain; and, as a matter of nomenclature, he seems to be right. There
is, undoubtedly, a process by which we arrive at general conclusions
from the comparison of particular instances; but this process in its
purity is nothing more nor less than induction by simple enumeration.
All other reasoning requires the aid of universal propositions, and
is therefore, to that extent, deductive. The methods of elimination
or, as they are now called, of experiment, involve at every step
the assumption of general principles duly specified in the chapter
of Mill’s _Logic_ where they are analysed. And wherever we can rise
immediately from, a single instance to a general law, it is because the
examination of that single instance has been preceded by a chain of
deductive reasoning.

The confusion of Induction, properly so called, and Elimination under a
single name, is largely due to the bad example set by Bacon. He found
it stated in the _Analytics_ that all concepts and general propositions
are established either by syllogism or by induction; and he found some
very useful rules laid down in the _Topics_, not answering to what he
understood by the former method; he therefore summarily dubbed them
with the name of Induction, which they have kept ever since, to the
incalculable confusion of thought.

In working out his theory of logic, the point on which Bacon lays
most stress is the use of negative instances. He seems to think that
their application to reasoning is an original discovery of his own.
But, on examination, no more seems to be meant by it than that,
before accepting any particular theory, we should consider what
other explanations of the same fact might conceivably be offered. In
other words, we should follow the example already set by Aristotle
and nearly every other Greek philosopher after Socrates. But this is
not induction; it is reasoning down from a disjunctive proposition,
generally assumed without any close scrutiny, with the help of sundry
conditional propositions, until we reach our conclusion by a sort of
exhaustive process. Either this, that, or the other is the explanation
of something. But if it were either that or the other, so and so would
follow, which is impossible; therefore it must be this. No other
logic is possible in the infancy of enquiry; but one great advantage
of experiment and mathematical analysis is to relieve us from the
necessity of employing it.

The value of experimentation as such had, however, scarcely dawned on
Bacon. His famous Prerogative Instances are, in the main, a guide
to simple observation, supplemented rather than replaced by direct
interference with the phenomena under examination, comparable to that
moderate use of the rack which he would have countenanced in criminal
procedure. There was, perhaps, a deeper meaning in Harvey’s remark
that Bacon wrote about Nature like a Lord Chancellor than the great
physiologist himself suspected. To Bacon the statesman, science was
something to be largely endowed out of the public treasury in the sure
hope that it would far more than repay the expenditure incurred, by
inventions of priceless advantage to human life. To Bacon the lawyer,
Nature was a person in possession of important secrets to be wrested
from her by employing every artifice of the spy, the detective, the
cross-examiner, and the inquisitorial judge; to Bacon the courtier,
she was a sovereign whose policy might be discovered, and, if need be,
controlled, by paying judicious attention to her humours and caprices.
And, for this very reason, he would feel drawn by a secret affinity
to the Aristotelian dialectic, derived as it was through Socrates and
Plato from the practice of the Athenian law-courts and the debates of
the Athenian assembly. No doubt the _Topics_ was intended primarily for
a manual of debate rather than of scientific enquiry; and the English
Chancellor showed true philosophic genius in his attempt to utilise it
for the latter purpose. Nevertheless the adaptation proved a mistake.
It was not without good grounds that the Socratic dialectic had been
reserved exclusively by its great founder, and almost exclusively
by his successors, for those human interests from the discussion of
which it was first derived. And the discoverers, who in Bacon’s own
lifetime were laying the foundations of physical science, employed a
method totally different from his, because they started with a totally
different conception of the universe. To them it was not a living
whole, a Form of Forms, but a sum of forces to be analysed, isolated,
and recombined, in fact or in idea, with a sublime disregard for the
conditions under which they were presented to ordinary experience. That
very extension of human power anticipated by Bacon came in a manner of
which he had never dreamed. It was gained by studying, not the Forms to
which he attached so much importance, but the modes of motion which he
had relegated to a subordinate place in his classification of natural
causes.[543]

It has been said that, whatever may be the value of his logic, Bacon
recalled men from the construction of baseless theories to the study
of facts. But, here also, he merely echoes Aristotle, who said the
same thing long before him, with much greater terseness, and with the
superior authority of one who teaches by example as well as by precept;
while the merit of reviving Aristotle’s advice when it had fallen into
oblivion belongs to another Bacon, the author of the _Opus Majus_; the
merit of acting on it, to the _savants_ of the Renaissance, to such men
as Vesalius, Cesalpino, and Tycho Brahe.

But, towards the close of the sixteenth century, the time for amassing
observations was past, no further progress being possible until the
observations already recorded were interpreted aright. The just
instinct of science perceived this; and for nearly a century after
Cesalpino no addition of any magnitude was made to what Bacon called
‘History,’ while men’s conceptions of natural law were undergoing a
radical transformation.[544] To choose such a time for developing the
Aristotelian philosophy was peculiarly unfortunate; for that philosophy
had become, both on its good and on its bad side, an obstacle to
progress, by encouraging studies which were not wanted, and by
fostering a spirit of opposition to the Copernican astronomy.

The mere fact that Aristotle himself had pronounced in favour of the
geocentric system did not count for much. The misfortune was that he
had constructed an entire physical philosophy in harmony with it; that
he had linked this to his metaphysics; and that the sensible experience
on whose authority he laid so much stress, seemed to testify in its
behalf. The consequence was that those thinkers who, without being
professed Aristotelian partisans, still remained profoundly affected
by the Peripatetic spirit, could not see their way to accepting a
theory with which all the hopes of intellectual progress were bound
up. These considerations will enable us to understand the attitude of
Bacon towards the new astronomy; while, conversely, his position in
this respect will serve to confirm the view of his character set forth
in the preceding pages. The theory, shared by him with Aristotle, that
Nature is throughout composed of Form and Matter reached its climax in
the supposition that the great elementary bodies are massed together in
a series of concentric spheres disposed according to some principle of
graduation, symmetry, or contrast; and this seemed incompatible with
any but a geocentric arrangement. It is true that Bacon quarrelled
with the particular system maintained by Aristotle, and, under the
guidance of Telesio, fell back on a much cruder form of cosmography;
but his mind still remained dominated by the fancied necessity of
conceiving the universe under the form of a stratified sphere; and
those who persist in looking on him as the apostle of experience will
be surprised to find that he treated the subject entirely from an _à
priori_ point of view. The truth is that Bacon exemplified, in his own
intellectual character, every one of the fundamental fallacies which he
has so picturesquely described. The unwillingness to analyse sensible
appearances into their ideal elements was his Idol of the Tribe; the
thirst for material utilities was his Idol of the Den: the uncritical
acceptance of Aristotle’s metaphysics, his Idol of the Theatre; and the
undefined notions associated with induction, his Idol of the Market.


