IX.

Every great system of philosophy may be considered from four distinct
points of view. We may ask what is its value as a theory of the world
and of human life, measured either by the number of new truths which
it contains, or by the stimulus to new thought which it affords. Or
we may consider it from the aesthetic side, as a monumental structure
interesting us not by its utility, but by its beauty and grandeur.
Under this aspect, a system may be admirable for its completeness,
coherence, and symmetry, or for the great intellectual qualities
exhibited by its architect, although it may be open to fatal objections
as a habitation for human beings, and may fail to reproduce the plan
on which we now know that the universe is built. Or, again, our
interest in the work may be purely historical and psychological; we
may look on it as the product of a particular age and a particular
mind, as summing up for us under their most abstract form the ideas and
aspirations which at any given moment had gained possession of educated
opinion. Or, finally, we may study it as a link in the evolution of
thought, as a result of earlier tendencies, and an antecedent of later
developments. We propose to make a few remarks on the philosophy of
Plotinus, or, what is the same thing, on Neo-Platonism in general, from
each of these four points of view.

In absolute value, Neo-Platonism stands lowest as well as last among
the ancient schools of thought. No reader who has followed us thus far
will need to be reminded how many valuable ideas were first brought to
light, or reinforced with new arguments and illustrations by the early
Greek thinkers, by the Sophists and Socrates, by Plato and Aristotle,
by the Stoics, Epicureans, and Sceptics, and by the moralists of the
Roman empire. On every subject of speculation that can be started, we
continue to ask, like Plotinus himself, what the ‘blessed ancients’
had to say about it;[501] not, of course, because they lived a long
time ago, but because they came first, because they said what they had
to say with the unique charm of original discovery, because they were
in more direct contact than we are, not, indeed, with the facts, but
with the phenomena of Nature and life and thought. It is true that we
have nothing more to learn from them, for whatever was sound in their
teaching has been entirely absorbed into modern thought, and combined
with ideas of which they did not dream. But until we come to Hume and
his successors, there is nothing in philosophical literature that can
be compared to their writings for emancipating and stimulating power;
and, perhaps, when the thinkers of the last and present centuries have
become as obsolete as Bacon and Descartes are now, those writings will
continue to be studied with unabating zeal. Neo-Platonism, on the other
hand, is dead, and every attempt made to galvanise it into new life has
proved a disastrous failure. The world, that is to say the world of
culture, will not read Plotinus and his successors, will not even read
the books that are written about them by scholars of brilliant literary
ability like MM. Vacherot and Jules Simon in France, Steinhart and
Kirchner in Germany.[502]

We have not far to seek for the cause of this fatal condemnation.
Neo-Platonism is nothing if not a system, and as a system it is false,
and not only false but out of relation to every accepted belief. In
combining the dialectic of Plato with the metaphysics of Aristotle and
the physics of Stoicism, Plotinus has contrived to rob each of whatever
plausibility it once possessed. The Platonic doctrine of Ideas was an
attempt to express something very real and important, the distinction
between laws and facts in Nature, between general principles and
particular observations in science, between ethical standards and
everyday practice in life. The eternal Nous of Aristotle represented
the upward struggle of Nature through mechanical, chemical, and vital
movements to self-conscious thought. The world-soul of Stoicism
represented a return to monism, a protest against the unphilosophical
antithesis between God and the world, spirit and matter, necessity and
free-will. Plotinus attempts to rationalise the Ideas by shutting them
up in the Aristotelian Nous, with the effect of severing them still
more hopelessly from the real world, and, at the same time, making
their subjective origin still more flagrantly apparent than before.
And along with the Stoic conception of a world-soul, he preserves all
those superstitious fancies about secret spiritual sympathies and
affinities connecting the different parts of Nature with one another
which the conception of a transcendent Nous, as originally understood
by Aristotle, had at least the merit of excluding. Finally, by a
tremendous wrench of abstraction, the unity of existence is torn away
from existence itself, and the most relative of all conceptions is put
out of relation to the thought which, in the very same breath, it is
declared to condition, and to the things which it is declared to create.

Again, on the practical side, by combining Plato with Aristotle and
both with Stoicism, Plotinus contrives to eliminate what is most
valuable in each. If, in the _Republic_, the Good was placed above all
existence, this was only that we might transform existence into its
image. If Aristotle placed the theoretical above the ethical virtues,
he assigned no limits but those of observation and reasoning to the
energising of theoretic power. If the Stoics rested morality on the
absolute isolation of the human will, they deduced from this principle
not only the inwardness of virtue, but also the individualisation of
duty, the obligation of beneficence, and the forgiveness of sin. But
with Plotinus, Reason has no true object of contemplation outside
its own abstract ideas, and the self-realisation of Stoicism means a
barren consciousness of personal identity, from which every variety of
interest and sympathy is excluded: it is not an expansion of our own
soul into coincidence with the absolute All, but a concentration of
both into a single point, a flight of the alone to the alone;[503] and
only in this utter solitude does he suppose that the Platonic Good is
finally and wholly possessed.

Nor, with a single exception, is the fundamental untruth of the system
redeemed by any just and original observations on points of detail such
as lie so thickly scattered over the pages of other metaphysicians,
both in ancient and modern literature. The single exception is the
refutation of materialism to which attention has been already directed.
Apart from this, the _Enneads_ do not contain one single felicitous or
suggestive idea, nothing that can enlarge the horizon of our thoughts,
nothing that can exalt the purpose of our lives.

If, however, we pass to the second point of view, and judge
Neo-Platonism according to the requirements, not of truth or of
usefulness, but of beauty, our first verdict of utter condemnation will
be succeeded by a much more favourable opinion. Plotinus has used the
materials inherited from his predecessors with unquestionable boldness
and skill; and the constructive power exhibited in the general plan of
his vast system is fully equalled by the close reasoning with which
every detail is elaborated and fitted into its proper place. Nothing
can be imagined more imposing than this wondrous procession of forms
defiling from the unknown to the unknown—from the self-developing
consciousness of Reason as it breaks and flames and multiplies into
a whole universe of being and life and thought, ever returning, by
the very law of their production, to the source whence they have
sprung—onward and outward on the wings of the cosmic Soul, through
this visible world, where they reappear as images of intellectual
beauty in the eternal revolutions of the starry spheres above, in the
everlasting reproduction of organic species below, in the loveliest
thoughts and actions of the loveliest human souls—till the utmost
limits of their propagation and dispersion have been reached, till
the last faint rays of existence die out in the dark and void region
that extends to infinity beyond. Nothing in the realm of abstractions
can be more moving than this Odyssey of the human soul, wakened by
visions of earthly loveliness to a consciousness of her true destiny, a
remembrance of her lost and forgotten home; then abandoning these for
the possession of a more spiritual beauty, ascending by the steps of
dialectic to a contemplation of the archetypal Ideas that lie folded
and mutually interpenetrated in the bosom of the eternal Reason where
thought and being are but the double aspect of a single absolute
reality; seeking farther and higher, beyond the limits of existence
itself, for a still purer unity, and finding in the awful solitude of
that supreme elevation that the central source of all things does not
lie without but within, that only in returning to self-identity does
she return to the One; or, again, descending to the last confines of
light and life that she may prolong their radiation into the formless
depths of matter, projecting on its darkness an image of the glory
whose remembrance still attends her in her fall.

Still more impressive, if we consider the writings of Plotinus on their
personal side, and as a revelation of their author’s mind, is the high
and sustained purity, the absolute detachment and disinterestedness by
which they are characterised throughout. No trace of angry passion,
no dallying with images of evil, interferes to mar their exalted
spirituality from first to last. While the western world was passing
through a period of horror and degradation such as had never been known
before, the philosopher took refuge in an ideal sphere, and looked
down on it all with no more disturbance to his serenity than if he had
been the spectator of a mimic performance on the stage.[504] This,
indeed, is one of the reasons why the _Enneads_ are so much less
interesting, from a literary point of view, than the works of the Roman
Stoics. It is not only that we fail to find in them any allusions even
of the faintest kind to contemporary events or to contemporary life
and manners, such as abound in Seneca and Epictêtus, but there is not
the slightest reference to the existence of such a thing as the Roman
empire at all. One or two political illustrations occur, but they
are drawn from old Greek city life, and were probably suggested by
Plato or Aristotle.[505] But this tremendous blank is so perfectly in
keeping with the whole spirit of Neo-Platonism as to heighten instead
of lowering its aesthetic effect. In studying the philosophy of the
preceding centuries, to whatever school it may belong, we have the
image of death always before our eyes; and to fortify us against its
terrors, we are continually called upon to remember the vanity of life.
This is the protest of thought against the world, just as in Lucian and
Sextus we hear the protest of the world against thought. At last the
whole bitter strife comes to an end, the vision of sense passes away,

  And leaves us with Plotinus and pure souls.

Here we need no deliverance from troubles and indignities which are
not felt; nor do we need to be prepared for death, knowing that we
can never die. The world will no longer look askance at us, for we
have ceased to concern ourselves about its reformation. No scepticism
can shake our convictions, for we have discovered the secret of all
knowledge through the consciousness of that which is eternal in
ourselves. Thus the world of outward experience has dropped out of our
thoughts, because thought has orbed into a world of its own.


