III.

We may consider it a fortunate circumstance that the philosophy of
Form,—that is to say, of description, definition, classification,
and sensuous perception, as distinguished from mathematical analysis
and deductive reasoning,—was associated with a demonstrably false
cosmology, as it thus became much more thoroughly discredited than
would otherwise have been possible. At this juncture, the first to
perceive and point out how profoundly an acceptance of the Copernican
theory must affect men’s beliefs about Nature and the whole universe,
was Giordano Bruno; and this alone would entitle him to a great place
in the history of philosophy. The conception of a single finite world
surrounded by a series of eternal and unchangeable crystal spheres
must, he said, be exchanged for the conception of infinite worlds
dispersed through illimitable space. Once grant that the earth has a
double movement round its own axis and round the sun, and Aristotle’s
whole system of finite existence collapses at once, leaving the ground
clear for an entirely different order of ideas.[545] But, in this
respect, whatever was established by the new science had already been
divined by a still older philosophy than Aristotle’s, as Bruno himself
gladly acknowledged,[546] and the immediate effect of his reasoning was
to revive the Atomic theory. The assumption of infinite space, formerly
considered an insuperable objection to that theory, now became one of
its chief recommendations; the arguments of Lucretius regained their
full force, while his fallacies were let drop; Atomism seemed not only
possible but necessary; and the materialism once associated with it was
equally revived. But Aristotelianism, as we have seen, was not alone
in the field, and on the first symptoms of a successful revolt, its
old rival stood in readiness to seize the vacant throne. The question
was how far its claim would be supported, and how far disputed by
the new invaders. It might be supposed that the older forms of Greek
philosophy, thus restored to light after an eclipse of more than a
thousand years, would be no less hostile to the poetic Platonism than
to the scientific Aristotelianism of the Renaissance. Such, however,
was not the case; and we have to show how an alliance was established
between these apparently opposite lines of thought, eventually giving
birth to the highest speculation of the following century.

Bruno himself acted as a mediator between the two philosophies. His
sympathies with Platonism were strongly pronounced, he looked with
admiration on its mediaeval supporters, especially David of Dinan;
and regretted the time when Oxford was a focus of realistic teaching,
instead of being what he found her, devoted to the pedantic humanism
of the Renaissance.[547] He fully accepted the pantheistic conclusions
towards which Platonism always tended; but in proclaiming an absolute
principle whence all specific differences are evolved, he is careful to
show that, while it is neither Form nor Matter in the ordinary sense,
it may be called Matter in the more refined signification attached to
that term by Plotinus and, indeed, by Aristotle himself. There is a
common substance underlying all abstract essences, just as there is a
common substance left behind when the sensible qualities of different
bodies are stripped off; and both are, at bottom, the same. Thus monism
became the banner round which the older forms of Greek speculation
rallied in their assault on Aristotle’s philosophy, though what monism
implied was as yet very imperfectly understood.

Meanwhile a new and powerful agency was about to interpose with
decisive effect in the doubtful struggle. This was the study of
mathematics. Revived by the Arabians and never wholly neglected
during the Middle Ages, it had profited by the general movement of
the Renaissance, and was finally applied to the cosmical problem by
Galileo. In this connexion, two points of profound philosophical
interest must be noted. The first is that, even in its fall, the
Aristotelian influence survived, to some extent, both for good and
for evil. To Aristotle belongs the merit of having been the first
to base astronomy on physics. He maintains the earth’s immobility
on experimental no less than on speculative grounds. A stone thrown
straight up in the air returns to its starting-point instead of falling
to the west of it; and the absence of stellar parallax seems to show
that there is no change in our position relatively to the heavenly
bodies. After satisfying himself, on empirical considerations, that the
popular astronomy is true, he proceeds to show that it must be true,
by considerations on the nature of matter and motion, which, although
mistaken, are conceived in a genuinely scientific spirit. Now Galileo
saw that, to establish the Copernican system, he must first grapple
with the Peripatetic physics, and replace it by a new dynamical theory.
This, which he could hardly have effected by the ordinary mathematical
methods, he did by borrowing the analytical method of Atomism and
applying it to the measurement of motion. The law of falling bodies
was ascertained by resolving their descent into a series of moments,
and determining its rate of velocity at successive intervals; and
curvilinear motions were similarly resolved into the combination of an
impulsive with an accelerating force, a method diametrically opposed
to that of Bacon, who would not even accept the rough analysis of the
apparent celestial motions proposed by Greek astronomers.

It seems strange that Galileo, having gone so far, did not go a step
further, and perceive that the planetary orbits, being curvilinear,
must result from the combination of a centripetal with a tangential
force. But the truth is that he never seems to have grasped his own
law of inertia in its full generality. He understood that the planets
could not have been set in motion without a rectilinear impulse; but
his idea was that this impulse continued only so long as was necessary
in order to give them their present velocity, instead of acting on
them for ever as a tangential force. The explanation of this strange
inconsequence must be sought in a survival of Aristotelian conceptions,
in the persistent belief that rectilinear motion was necessarily
limited and temporary, while circular motion was natural, perfect, and
eternal.[548] Now such conceptions as Nature, perfection, and eternity
always rebel against an analysis of the phenomena wherein they are
supposed to reside. The same prejudice will explain why Galileo should
have so persistently ignored Kepler’s Laws, for we can hardly imagine
that they were not brought under his notice.

The philosophical affinities of the new science were not exhausted
by the atomistic analysis of Democritus and the regulative method of
Aristotle. Platonism could hardly fail to benefit by the great impulse
given to mathematical studies in the latter half of the sixteenth
century. The passionate love of its founder for geometry must have
recommended him as much to the most advanced minds of the period as
his religious mysticism had recommended him to the theologians of the
earlier Renaissance. And the increasing ascendency of the heliocentric
astronomy, with its splendid defiance of sense and opinion, was
indirectly a triumph for the philosophy which, more than any other, had
asserted the claims of pure reason against both. We see this distinctly
in Galileo. In express adhesion to Platonism, he throws his teaching
into a conversational form, endeavouring to extract the truth from his
opponents rather than convey it into their minds from without; and the
theory of reminiscence as the source of demonstrative knowledge seems
to meet with his approval.[549] He is always ready with proofs drawn
from observation and experiment; but nothing can be more in Plato’s
spirit, nothing more unlike Aristotle and Bacon, than his encomium on
the sublime genius of Aristarchus and Copernicus for having maintained
a rational hypothesis against what seemed to be the evidence of their
senses.[550] And he elsewhere observes how much less would have been
the glory of Copernicus had he known the experimental verification of
his theory.[551]

The Platonic influence told even more efficaciously on Galileo’s
still greater contemporary, Kepler. With him as with the author of
the _Republic_, mysticism took the direction of seeking everywhere
for evidence of mathematical proportions. With what brilliant success
the search was attended, it is needless to relate. What interests us
here is the fact, vouched for by Arago, that the German astronomer was
guided by an idea of Plato’s, that the world must have been created on
geometrical principles.[552] Had Bacon known anything about the work on
which his adventurous contemporary was engaged, we may be sure that it
would have afforded him another illustration for his Idôla, the only
difficulty being whether it should be referred to the illusions of the
Tribe, the Den, or the Theatre.

Meanwhile Atomism continued to exercise a powerful influence on the
method even more than on the doctrines of science. The analytical
mode of treatment, applied by Galileo to dynamics, was applied, with
equal success, by other mathematicians, to the study of discrete and
continuous quantity. It is to the division of numbers and figures into
infinitesimal parts—a direct contravention of Aristotle’s teaching—that
we owe logarithms, algebraic geometry, and the differential calculus.
Thus was established a connexion between spiritualism and materialism,
the philosophy of Plato and the philosophy of Democritus. Out of these
elements, together with what still survived of Aristotelianism, was
constructed the system of Descartes.


