VI.

Whether Spinoza ever read Plato is doubtful. One hardly sees why he
should have neglected a writer whose works were easily accessible,
and at that time very popular with thinking minds. But whether he was
acquainted with the _Dialogues_ at first hand or not, Plato will help
us to understand Spinoza, for it was through the door of geometry that
he entered philosophy, and under the guidance of one who was saturated
with the Platonic spirit; so far as Christianity influenced him, it
was through elements derived from Plato; and his metaphysical method
was one which, more than any other, would have been welcomed with
delight by the author of the _Meno_ and the _Republic_, as an attempt
to realise his own dialectical ideal. For Spinozism is, on the face
of it, an application of geometrical reasoning to philosophy, and
especially to ethics. It is also an attempt to prove transcendentally
what geometricians only assume—the necessity of space. Now, Plato
looked on geometrical demonstration as the great type of certainty, the
scientific completion of what Socrates had begun by his interrogative
method, the one means of carrying irrefragable conviction into every
department of knowledge, and more particularly into the study of our
highest good. On the other hand, he saw that geometricians assume
what itself requires to be demonstrated; and he confidently expected
that the deficiency would be supplied by his own projected method of
transcendent dialectics. Such at least seems to be the drift of the
following passage:

 When I speak of the division of the intellectual, you will also
 understand me to speak of that knowledge which reason herself
 attains by the power of dialectic, using the hypotheses not as first
 principles, but only as hypotheses—that is to say as steps and points
 of departure into a region which is above hypotheses, in order that
 she may soar beyond them to the first principle of the whole; and
 clinging to this and then to that which depends on this, by successive
 steps she descends again without the aid of any sensible object,
 beginning and ending in ideas.[560]

The problem, then, which Spinoza set himself was, first, to account for
the fundamental assumptions of all science, and more particularly of
geometry, by deducing them from a single self-evident principle; and
then to use that principle for the solution of whatever problems seemed
to stand most in need of its application. And, as usually happens
in such adventurous enterprises, the supposed answer of pure reason
was obtained by combining or expanding conceptions borrowed without
criticism from pre-existing systems of philosophy.

Descartes had already accomplished a great simplification of the
speculative problem by summing up all existence under the two heads of
extension and thought. It remained to account for these, and to reduce
them to a single idea. As we have seen, they were derived from Greek
philosophy, and the bond which was to unite them must be sought for in
the same direction. It will be remembered that the systems of Plato
and Aristotle were bounded at either extremity by a determinate and
by an indeterminate principle. With the one, existence ranged between
the Idea of Good at the upper end of the scale and empty space at the
lower; with the other, between absolute Thought and First Matter.
It was by combining the two definite terms, space and thought, that
Descartes had constructed his system; and after subtracting these the
two indefinite terms remained. In one respect they were even more
opposed to each other than were the terms with which they had been
respectively associated. The Idea of Good represented unity, identity,
and constancy, as against plurality, difference, and change; while
Aristotle’s Matter was, by its very definition, multiform, fluctuating,
and indeterminate. Nevertheless, there were equally important analogies
traceable between them. No very clear account could be given of either,
and both were customarily described by negatives. If Matter fell short
of complete existence, the Good transcended all existence. If the one
was a universal capacity for assuming Forms, the other was the source
whence all Forms proceeded. When the distinctive characteristics of an
individual were thought away, the question might well be mooted into
which principle it would return. The ambiguous use of the word Power
contributed still further to their identification, for it was not less
applicable to the receptive than to the productive faculty. Now we have
just seen into what importance the idea of Power suddenly sprang at the
Renaissance: with Bruno it was the only abiding reality of Nature; with
Hobbes it was the only object of human desire.

Another term occupying a very large place in Aristotle’s philosophy
was well adapted to mediate between and eventually to unite the two
speculative extremes. This was Substance; in logic the subject of
predication, in metaphysics the substratum of qualities, the οὐσία or
Being of the Ten Categories. Now First Matter might fairly claim the
position of a universal subject or substance, since it was invested
with every sensible quality in turn, and even, as the common element of
all Forms, with every thinkable quality as well. Aristotle himself had
finally pronounced for the individual compound of Form and Matter as
the true substance. Yet he also speaks as if the essential definition
of a thing constituted the thing itself; in which case Form alone could
be the true subject; and a similar claim might be put forward on behalf
of the Plotinian One.[561]

Such were the _à priori_ elements which a historical synthesis had
prepared to satisfy the want of a metaphysical Absolute. Let us now
see what result would follow when the newly-recovered idea of space
was subjected to a metaphysical analysis. Extension is both one and
infinite. No particular area can be conceived apart from the whole
which both contains and explains it. Again, extension is absolutely
homogeneous; to whatever distance we may travel in imagination there
will still be the same repetition of similar parts. But space, with the
Cartesians, meant more than a simple juxtaposition of parts; having
been made the essence of matter, it was invested with mechanical as
well as with geometrical properties. The bodies into which it resolved
itself were conceived as moving, and as communicating their movement
to one another through an unbroken chain of causation in which each
constituted a single link, determining and determined by the rest; so
that, here also, each part was explained by reference to an infinite
whole, reproducing its essence, while exempt from the condition of
circumscribed existence. We can understand, then, that when the
necessity of accounting for extension itself once became felt, the
natural solution would be to conceive it as holding the same relation
to some greater whole which its own subdivisions held to their sum
total; in other words it should be at once a part, an emanation, and
an image of the ultimate reality. This is, in fact, very nearly the
relation which Matter holds to the One in the Neo-Platonic system.
And we know that with Plotinus Matter is almost the same as infinite
Extension.

Corresponding to the universal space which contains all particular
spaces, there was, in the Neo-Platonic system, a universal Thought
which contained all particular thoughts,—the Nous about which we heard
so much in studying Plotinus. Such a conception is utterly strange
to the modern mind, but it was familiar enough to Spinoza; and we can
see how it would be suggested by the common forms of reasoning. The
tendency of syllogism is either to subsume lower under higher notions
until a _summum genus_ is reached, or to resolve all subjects into a
single predicate, or to connect all predicates with a single subject.
The analogies of space, too, would tell in the same direction, bringing
nearer the idea of a vast thought-sea in which all particular thoughts,
or what to a Cartesian meant the same thing, all particular minds, were
contained. And Neo-Platonism showed how this universal Mind or Thought
could, like the space which it so much resembled, be interpreted as
the product of a still higher principle. To complete the parallelism,
it remained to show that Thought, which before had seemed essentially
finite, is, on the contrary, co-infinite with Extension. How this was
done will appear a little further on.

Spinoza gathered up all the threads of speculation thus made ready for
his grasp, when he defined God as a substance consisting of infinite
attributes, each of which expresses his infinite and eternal essence;
subsequently adding that the essence here spoken of is Power, and that
two of the infinite attributes are Extension and Thought, whereof the
particular things known to us are modes. Platonism had decomposed the
world into two ideal principles, and had re-created it by combining
them over again in various proportions, but they were not entirely
reabsorbed and worked up into the concrete reality which resulted from
their union; they were, so to speak, knotted together, but the ends
continued to hang loose. Above and below the finite sphere of existence
there remained as an unemployed surplus the infinite causal energy
of the One and the infinite passive potentiality of Matter. Spinoza
combined and identified the two opposing elements in the notion of a
single substance as infinite in actuality as they had been in power. He
thus gave its highest metaphysical expression to that common tendency
which we traced through the prospects opened out by the Copernican
astronomy, the revival of Atomism, the dynamical psychology of Hobbes,
and the illimitable passion of the Renaissance, while, at the same
time, preserving the unity of Plato’s idealism, and even making it more
concentrated than before.

It has been shown how universal space and universal thought at once
contain and explain each particular space and each particular concept.
In like manner, the infinite substance contains and explains space and
thought themselves. Contains them, yes, as attributes; but explains
them, how? As two among an infinity of attributes. In other words,
if we ask why there should be such an existence as space, the answer
is because existence, being infinite, must necessarily include every
conceivable thing. The argument is strikingly like a principle of
the Epicurean philosophy, and may well have been suggested by it.
According to Lucretius, the appearance of design in our world need not
be attributed to creative intelligence, because infinite atoms moving
in infinite manners through infinite time, must at length arrive,
after a comprehensive series of experiments, at the present frame of
things;[562] and the same principle is invoked on a smaller scale to
account for the origin of organised beings, of memory, and of civil
society.[563] In both systems, infinite space is the root-conception;
but what Lucretius had legitimately used to explain becoming, Spinoza
illegitimately applies to the elucidation of being. At one stroke all
empirical knowledge is placed on an _à priori_ foundation. By assuming
unlimited credit at the bank of the universe we entitle ourselves to
draw a cheque for any particular amount. Thus the idea of infinite
attributes is no mere collateral speculation, but forms an essential
element of Spinozism. The known varieties of existence are, so to
speak, surrounded, supported, and fixed in their places by the endless
multitude of the unknown. And this conception of being as absolutely
infinite, is another proof of Spinoza’s Platonic tendencies, for it
involves the realisation of an abstract idea, that is to say, of Being,
which the philosopher treats as something more comprehensive than the
facts of consciousness whence it is derived.

Or, again, we may say that two principles,—the Nominalistic as well
as the Realistic,—are here at work. By virtue of the one, Spinoza
makes Being something beyond and above the facts of experience.
By virtue of the other he reinvests it with concrete reality, but
a reality altogether transcending our powers of imagination. Very
much, also, that Plotinus says about his One might be applied to
Spinoza’s Substance, but with a new and positive meaning. The First
Cause is above existence, but only existence as restricted within the
very narrow limits of our experience, and only as infinite reality
transcends the parts which it includes.

It is well known that Spinoza draws a sharp line of demarcation
between the two attributes of Extension and Thought, which, with him,
correspond to what are usually called body and mind. Neither attribute
can act on the other. Mind receives no impressions from body, nor
does body receive any impulses from mind. This proposition follows by
rigorous logical necessity from the Platonic principle that mind is
independent of body, combined with the Stoic principle that nothing
but body can act on body, generalised into the wider principle that
interaction implies homogeneity of nature. According to some critics,
Spinoza’s teaching on this point constitutes a fatal flaw in his
philosophy. How, it is asked, can we know that there is any such thing
as body (or extension) if body cannot be perceived,—for perceived it
certainly cannot be without acting on our minds? The idea of infinite
substance suggests a way out of the difficulty. ‘I find in myself,’
Spinoza might say, ‘the idea of extension. In fact, my mind _is_
nothing but the idea of extension, or the idea of that idea, and so
on through as many self-reflections as you please. At the same time,
mind, or thought, is not itself extended. Descartes and the Platonists
before him have proved thus much. Consequently I can conceive extension
as existing independently of myself, and, more generally, of all
thought. But how can I be sure that it actually does so exist? In this
wise. An examination of thought leads me to the notion of something in
which it resides—a substance whose attribute it is. But having once
conceived such a substance, I cannot limit it to a single attribute,
nor to two, nor to any finite number. Limitation implies a boundary,
and there can be no boundary assigned to existence, for existence
by its very definition includes everything that is. Accordingly,
whatever can be conceived, in other words whatever can be thought
without involving a contradiction,—an important reservation which I
beg you to observe,—must necessarily exist. Now extension involves
no contradiction, therefore it exists,—exists, that is to say, as an
attribute of the infinite substance. And, by parity of reasoning,
there must be an idea of extension; for this also can exist without
involving a contradiction, as the simplest introspection suffices to
show. You ask me why then I do not believe in gorgons and chimaeras. I
answer that since, in point of fact, they do not exist, I presume that
their notion involves a contradiction, although my knowledge of natural
law is not sufficiently extended to show me where the contradiction
lies. But perhaps science will some day be able to point out in every
instance of a non-existing thing, where the contradiction lies, no
less surely than it can now be pointed out in the case of impossible
geometrical figures.’ In short, while other people travel straight from
their sensations to an external world, Spinoza travels round to it by
the idea of an infinite substance.[564]

The relation of Spinoza’s Substance to its attributes is ambiguous. It
is at once their cause, their totality, and their unity. The highly
elastic and indefinite term Power helped these various aspects to play
into and replace one another according to the requirements of the
system. It is associated with the subjective possibility of multiplying
imaginary existences to any amount; with the causal energy in which
existence originates; and with the expansiveness characteristic alike
of Extension and of Thought. For the two known attributes of the
universal substance are not simply related to it as co-predicates of
a common subject; they severally express its essential Power, and
are, to that extent, identical with one another. But when we ask,
How do they express Power? the same ambiguity recurs. Substance is
revealed through its attributes, as a cause through its effects; as an
aggregate through its constituents; and as an abstract notion through
its concrete embodiments. Thus Extension and Thought are identical
through their very differences, since these illustrate the versatility
of their common source, and at the same time jointly contribute to the
realisation of its perfection. But, for all practical purposes, Spinoza
deals only with the parallelism and resemblance of the attributes. We
have to see how he establishes it, and how far he was helped in so
doing by the traditions of Greek philosophy.


