NOTES ON REQUIRED READINGS IN “THE CHAUTAUQUAN.”


HOW ENGLISH DIFFERS FROM OTHER LANGUAGES.

1. Perhaps this absurdity, and the complications it involves, may be
better illustrated by the following few lines from one of DeBertrand’s
novels. (They might be found in a dozen others.)

“Madame,” dit il, “il y a là une [feminine] personne qui demand M. le
Baron.”

“Quelle [feminine] est cette [feminine] personne?”

“C’est un [masculine] monsieur,” etc.[I]

Thus, it will be seen, both feminine and masculine articles must be used
to designate the same object; and a person must be spoken of as feminine,
although the person is a man; the reason being that _personne_, the
_word_, is feminine.—_Richard Grant White._

[I] “Madame,” said he, “there is a person without who asks for
the Baron.”

“Who is this person?”

“It is a gentleman,” etc.

2. For contrary to apparently reasonable assumption, the history of
language shows that minute and highly wrought grammatical forms are the
signs, or at least the accompaniments, not of advanced civilization
and high culture, but of a rude and savage condition of society. The
further we penetrate the obscure of antiquity, the more grammar we find.
The oldest language known to us, the Sanskrit, is the most complex and
elaborate in its grammar; the youngest, English, is, to all intents and
purposes, grammarless; and Sanskrit grammar is at least four thousand
years old. My readers will now see why it was that I said the minute
forms and complicated grammatical relations of the Greek language are
not the signs of a high development of language, but were relics of
barbarism.—_Richard Grant White._

3. “Galore,” gā-loreˈ. Plenty, abundance.


SUNDAY READINGS.

1. “Fuller,” Thomas. (1608-1661.) An English author and divine. “The
style of all his writings is extremely quaint and idiomatic, in
short, simple sentences, and singularly free from the pedantry of his
times.”—_American Cyclopædia._

2. “Robert Hall.” (1764-1831.) An English writer and preacher of the
Baptist church. When he was eleven years of age his teacher said that he
could not keep up with the boy. No man in modern times ranked higher as
an orator.

3. “Goulburn.” (1818-⸺.) An English clergyman. He was in 1859 head
master of the Rugby School, in 1866 was made Dean of Norwich. He was a
voluminous and popular writer.

4. “Bascom,” Richard H. (1796-1850.) An American clergyman, bishop of the
Methodist Episcopal Church, South. His works comprise sermons, addresses
and lectures.


CHEMISTRY.

1. Transcriber’s Note: This note was omitted in the original. Wikipedia
has to say: “In general in ancient Greece, each state, city or village
possessed its own central hearth and sacred fire, representing the unity
and vitality of the community. The fire was kept alight continuously,
tended by the king or members of his family. The building in which this
fire was kept was the Prytaneum, and the chieftain (the king or prytanis)
probably made it his residence.”

2. “Lavoisier,” läˈvwäˈze-āˌ. See Appleton’s “Chemistry,” pages 19, 21
and 118. He was condemned to death by a revolutionary tribunal at Paris
on a frivolous charge brought against him as one of the farmers of the
taxes during the Reign of Terror.

3. “Phlogiston,” flo-jisˈton. Stahl supposed it to be pure fire, fixed
in combustible bodies in order to distinguish it from fire in a state of
liberty.

4. “Magnesium.” A shining, almost silver-white metal. When heated it may
be rolled out into very thin, long strips resembling ribbons, which will
burn with an intense light. In burning it produces magnesium oxide or
magnesia, which falls as a fine white powder.

5. “Dr. Priestly.” See “Chemistry,” page 118. (1733-1804.) An eminent
English divine and philosopher. His partiality to the French Revolution
excited the English against him, and in one of the riots his home,
library and manuscripts were destroyed by the fire kindled by an angry
mob. His later home was in Northumberland, Pa. He wrote between seventy
and eighty volumes on history, literature, theology and science.

6. In a few volcanic districts steam escapes from the earth, which
contains small quantities of boric acid. These vapors are condensed into
water, which is again evaporated and the acid crystallized out. When this
acid is mixed with alcohol and the solution set on fire it burns with a
green flame. See “Chemistry,” page 157.

7. “Corpuscles of the blood.” Minute particles, both red and white,
existing in the blood, which can be seen under a microscope. In the human
species the red corpuscles are thick and circular. They are so small that
Young says it would take 255,000 of them to cover a surface of a square
inch. They are elastic and pliant, so that they can pass through blood
vessels having a smaller diameter than themselves. The white corpuscles
are more globular than the red, and contain more fat, and have the power
of changing their form. These spontaneous changes have been thought by
some scientists a proof that they are microscopic animals. But this is
scarcely a sufficient reason for admitting that they are animalculæ, as
the muscles of a body, when separated from it, often manifest apparently
spontaneous movements.

8. Phosphoric acid is always produced by burning phosphorus in air
or oxygen. The experiment may be performed as follows, but before
undertaking it see page 167 of the “Chemistry,” and note with how much
care it must be handled: Place a fragment of carefully dried phosphorus
in a small cup on a stand in the middle of a large plate, ignite it by
a hot wire, and place over it a bell-glass. White fumes will fill the
glass and aggregate into small particles, which will fall to the plate,
presenting the appearance of a miniature snow storm.

9. Barium is a yellow, lustrous, malleable metal. It is used in
fireworks, for the green color it gives off in burning.

10. “Bayberries.” The plant, called also wax myrtle, is a low, crooked
shrub found throughout the United States, especially near the sea coast.
It grows to a height of from three to eight feet. The naked flowers
appear in April and May, in clusters, of which from four to nine ripen
into dry berries. Plantations of them have long been cultivated in
Europe, and they have been raised in Algeria. For many years they have
been an article of commerce. A bushel of the berries will yield from four
to five pounds of wax.

11. “Strontium.” It takes its name from Strontian, in Scotland, where it
was first observed as a carbonate. It is a pale yellow metal, harder than
lead. If strontium carbonate be dissolved in nitric acid and mixed with
combustible substances it will burn with a beautiful carmine red flame,
and for this purpose is much used in fireworks.

12. “Sodium.” See “Chemistry,” page 67. It is a lustrous, silver-white,
soft metal. When thrown upon water, if it be prevented from moving, or
if the water be warm, it ignites, burning with its characteristic yellow
flame.

13. Extinguishing flame by carbon di-oxide. See “Chemistry,” page 218.

14. “Lignite.” Also called brown coal. It is the most imperfectly
mineralized form of coal. In some instances plants are so little changed
that they can easily be classified by the structure of the leaves and the
fruit. The fiber has become so impregnated with bitumen that it burns
with its peculiar flame and smoke. The jet so much used in jewelry is
a black variety of lignite, very compact in texture, and taking a high
polish.

15. “Kohinoor,” kohˌ-i-noorˈ (mountain of light). This famous stone
is now in possession of Queen Victoria. It was obtained before the
Christian era in one of the mines of Golconda, and passed to successive
sovereigns of India until it was borne away by a Persian conqueror in the
early part of the eighteenth century. In 1813 it was bought back by the
ruler of Punjaub. When Punjaub was annexed to the East India Company’s
territory it was surrendered to the Queen of England. It is said to have
weighed about 900 carats originally, but by cutting to have been reduced
to a weight of nearly 279 carats. By recutting it was again reduced so
as to weigh 186 carats, and at this time was shown (1851) at the Great
Exhibition. Since that time it has been again recut, for the third time,
and now weighs 123 carats, and is estimated at $600,000. For the other
“Paragons” see “Chemistry,” page 204. It is questioned whether the
“Grand Mogul” is a pure diamond. The largest undoubted diamond is the
“Orloff,” in the scepter of the Emperor of Russia. It weighs 194¾ carats.
The “Regent” or “Pitt” is thought to be the purest and most perfect
brilliant in Europe. It weighs now 136¾ carats, but its original weight
was 410 carats, and the fragments split off when it was cut were valued
at some thousand pounds. It was placed in the hilt of the sword of state
by Napoleon I. The “Grand Duke” belongs to the Emperor of Austria, and
weighs 134 carats. The “Star of the South,” found in Brazil, weighs 124
carats. The “Sancy” weighs only 53½ carats. It belongs to the Emperor of
Russia.

16. “Golconda.” An ancient city and fortress of India, once the
metropolis of the kingdom of Golconda. It is renowned for its diamonds,
which are, in truth, only cut there.

17. “The Dark Continent.” Africa, so called because so little has been
known of it through all history; but through the zeal and enterprise of
modern explorers we are led to hope that “the day is not far distant when
the secret places of this land of mystery will be penetrated by the light
of science and civilization.”


TEMPERANCE TEACHINGS OF SCIENCE.

1. “Malice prepense.” Malice aforethought, deliberately and previously
planned.

2. “Professor Newman.” See C. L. S. C. Notes in THE CHAUTAUQUAN for
November 1884, page 115.

3. “Cardinal Manning.” (1808-⸺.) An English Roman Catholic cardinal,
the author of several works. He is the son of the late William Manning,
member of Parliament, and governor of the Bank of England. He was
educated at Oxford, as a member of the Church of England. In 1857 he
joined the Catholics, and was ordained priest. In 1865 he was nominated
by the pope Archbishop of Westminster, and in 1875 he was made cardinal,
an office next in rank to that of pope. He is one of the most prominent
men in London, and the leading representative of the Roman Catholic
Church in England.

4. “Thugs.” A set of robbers and assassins who lived in India, and
worshiped the goddess Kali. They roamed over the country in bands, and
put to death by strangulation any traveler whom they met. The British
government has exterminated them.

5. “Leibnitz.” See notes on the “Art of Speech” in THE CHAUTAUQUAN for
November, 1884.

6. “Lord Palmerston.” (1784-1865.) A British statesman. He succeeded Lord
Aberdeen as prime minister in 1855, and retired in 1858, on account of
the defeat of a bill introduced with reference to the attempted murder of
Napoleon III. by Orsini. In 1859 he was again made premier and held the
post until his death.

7. “Loch Fyne.” An inlet of the sea on the western coast of Scotland,
running into Argyle for about forty miles, with an average width of five
miles. The town of Inverary stands near its head.

8. “Homberg.” A town in Prussia, noted for the gambling which was
extensively carried on there formerly, but which was suppressed by the
Prussian government in 1870.

“Baden,” or “Baden-Baden.” A German watering place situated on the Oos,
at the foot of the Black Forest. It was formerly celebrated for the
gaming tables found in the _Conversationshaus_, which was the principal
resort for visitors. The licenses for gambling expired in 1872, and
have not since been renewed. Those who have read “Daniel Deronda” will
remember that it was at Baden that Deronda first saw Gwendolen Harleth,
when she was engaged in gambling. The description of the persons gathered
round the long tables is very interesting and vivid, and gives a good
insight into fashionable life at Baden in those days.

9. “Lord Brougham.” (1779-1868.) Lord Chancellor of England. He took
a strong stand on the side of the suppression of the slave trade, and
favored Roman Catholic emancipation, and labored earnestly in the cause
of popular education. As an orator he was second only to Canning.


KITCHEN SCIENCE AND ART.

1. “Alkaloid.” The name given to those extracts of vegetables which will
unite with acids to form salts.

2. “Caffeine,” caf-fēˈine. The alkaloid of coffee; the same extract of
tea is called théine. It is present in coffee to the extent of one per
cent.; in tea from two to six per cent. It can be extracted by using
acetate of lead. It has a bitter taste, and acts powerfully upon the
system when taken in doses of from two to ten grains, causing palpitation
of the heart, confusion of the senses, and sleeplessness.

3. “Theo-bromine.” The alkaloid of chocolate, extracted in the same
manner as from tea or coffee.

4. “Thea viridis,” theˈa virˈĭ-dis. (Green tea.) The name given to that
species of tea plant formerly supposed to yield green tea.

5. “Camilliaceæ,” cam-milˌli-āˈce-e. An order of plants comprising
trees or shrubs with alternate, simple, feather-veined leaves, and
regular flowers.

6. “Loblolly bay.” A tree found in the Southern States, growing to the
height of from thirty to eighty feet, having long, narrow leaves, and
large, white flowers, about two inches across, and resembling the single
camellia.

7. “Stuartia.” Catesby. A shrub having deciduous leaves, and large,
fragrant, white flowers.

8. “Tannin.” The astringent principle contained in a great variety of
plants, which renders them capable of combining with skins of animals to
form leather.

9. “Turmeric,” turˌmeˈric. A name given to the tuber-like root of
a plant found in Asia. As prepared for commerce the roots are of the
size of the little finger, and two or three inches long, of a yellowish
color. They have an odor like ginger, and an aromatic taste. They form an
orange-yellow powder, which is used in dyeing. Prussian blue is prepared
from prussic acid, potassium, and a solution of sulphate of iron. Gypsum
is a native sulphate of lime, that, when calcined, forms plaster of Paris.

10. “Caper.” The caper bush is a native of the south of Europe; it is
a climbing shrub which flowers all summer. The buds are gathered every
morning, and preserved in vinegar and salt. They have an agreeable
pungency of taste. “Pekoe.” The young leaf buds of a kind of tea known as
the pekoe, which is the choicest of black teas, are gathered as early as
April, and sometimes mixed with other teas, to flavor them.

11. “Caseine,” cāˈse-ine. An organic compound allied to albumen, found in
milk. It may be coagulated and separated from the milk by the application
of rennet.

12. “Cibber,” sibˈber. (1671-1757.) An English poet, appointed to be poet
laureate in 1730. He figures in the “Dunciad.” See THE CHAUTAUQUAN, vol.
v, page 213.

13. “Waller.” (1605-1687.) An English poet.

14. “Coffea Arabica,” cof-feˈa A-raˈbi-ca.

15. “Rubiaceæ,” ru-bi-aˈse-ē. An order of herbaceous plants of which
there are three or four hundred species; abounding chiefly in the
northern hemisphere and upon the mountains in the tropics.

16. “Bouvardias.” A class of autumn and winter blooming house plants in
the northern climates. Leaves regular; flowers appear in clusters, and
are something like the honeysuckle in form. They vary in color from a
pure white to a deep scarlet.

17. “Koran.” The sacred book of the Mohammedans, and their chief
authority, also, in political, military, and ethical matters.

18. “Caffeone.” A fragrant, volatile oil contained in coffee.

19. “Sterculiaceæ,” sterˌcu-li-aˈse-ē. Large trees or shrubs, with
simple or compound leaves, and flowers like those of the mallow, except
that the anthers turn outward.

20. “Mahernia,” usually called _Mahernia odorata_, is an exotic flowering
shrub cultivated in conservatories, mostly for its rich fragrance.


HOUSEHOLD BEVERAGES.

1. “Made-over tea.” In Chinese tea houses, large jars are kept, into
which the dregs of all the tea that has been used are thrown. These
exhausted leaves are dried, carefully rolled again, and thrown upon
the market for a second sale. It is said this tea is easily detected
if coloring matter has been used, but when re-rolled without, only a
chemical analysis can disclose the fraud.

2. “Reliable.” Much fault has been found by critics with this word. It
is claimed that it has no right to a place in our language. _Able_ or
_ible_ is a suffix which, added to the stem of a transitive verb, gives
an adjective which may be defined by placing the word _able_ before the
passive infinitive of the verb whose stem has been used; for example:
tolerable, able to be tolerated; admissable, able to be admitted;
deniable, able to be denied, etc. But reliable means able to be relied
_upon_. The preposition has to be supplied. The proper form of the
adjective would be the awkward word, “relionable,” or “reliuponable.” The
word is favored in the dictionaries, but trustworthy is preferable.

3. “Cosey.” A wadded cap made to fit the tea-pot closely, and thus hold
in the aroma and the heat.

4. “Café au lait,” cä-fā ō lā.


HUXLEY ON SCIENCE.

1. “Aliases.” The plural of alias (āˈle-as). Meaning another name, an
assumed name.


THE CIRCLE OF THE SCIENCES.

1. “Napier,” naˈpe-er, John. (1550-1617.) An English mathematician.
“Logarithms” are numbers so related to natural numbers that the
multiplication and division of the latter may be performed by addition
and subtraction, and the raising to powers and the extraction of roots
by the multiplication and division of the former. They are arranged in
tables which can be readily understood and used, and they save enormous
calculations and labor.

2. “Kepler,” Johann. A German astronomer.

3. “Mercator’s Chart.” In all the charts in use before Mercator’s, curved
lines were drawn representing the meridians and parallels. A vessel which
followed these lines always receded too far from the equator, and, if
land did not intervene, would describe a spiral course and finally reach
the pole. Mercator constructed a map as follows: A line, AB, was drawn
representing the equator, and was divided into 36, 24 or 18 equal parts
for meridians at 10°, 15°, or 20° apart, and the meridians were then
drawn through them perpendicular to AB. The distance of the parallels and
the tropics, and the arctic circles were marked from the equator on the
sides, and these points joined by straight lines. The map does not give a
natural representation, as the polar regions are immensely exaggerated.
The distortions in the form of the countries and the relative distances
of places are rectified by making the degrees of latitude increase
proportionably to those of longitude.

4. “Quadrant.” Quadrants were used for surveying, making astronomical
observations, and, in navigation, for determining the meridian altitude
of the sun, and from that the latitude of the observer. They were made of
a great variety of form and size to suit their several uses. The interest
attaching to them at the present time is chiefly historical, as they have
been superseded by the sextant and the full circle.

“Davis.” An eminent English navigator of the latter part of the sixteenth
century.

“Hadley,” John. An English mathematician of the early part of the
eighteenth century. An intimate friend of Newton.




TALK ABOUT BOOKS.


That most remarkable poem of the Orient, the “Rubáiyát”[J] of Omar
Khayyám, has recently had the rare fortune of receiving from translator,
artist and publisher an almost perfect treatment. Its translation places
it among English classic poems, its illustration and make-up among
American classic art books. This poem, very imperfectly known among us,
is the work of a Persian astronomer and poet, Omar Khayyám, or Omar the
Tent-Maker, a native of Naishapúr, in Khorassan. He was born in the
latter half of the eleventh century, and became a favorite of the rulers
of the realm. His life was, so goes the chronicle, “busied in winning
knowledge of every kind, and especially in astronomy, wherein he attained
to a very high preēminence. Under the Sultanate of Malik Shah, he came to
Merv and obtained great praise for his proficiency in science, and the
Sultan showered favors upon him.” Omar was an honest thinker; he refused
the hollow mysticism of the times, and framed a system which approaches
Epicureanism. His views of life, his fruitless search for Providence, his
sad conclusion,

    “I came like water, and like wind I go,”

together with his final refuge in the wine cup, with the command

    “Drink, for you know not whence you came nor why,
     Drink, for you know not why you go, nor where,”

are the subjects of his “Rubáiyát,” or quatrains. In the original these
verses have no connection. The translator, Mr. Edward Fitzgerald,
selected those which seemed to him most suitable, and arranged them
into a sort of eclogue. This translation met with a hearty reception.
Mr. Fitzgerald had been fortunate enough to make Omar Khayyám much more
lucid and entertaining than Omar had made himself. An interpretation
of the poem was undertaken in May 1883, by Elihu Vedder. The interest
in the elegant volume just issued by Messrs. Houghton, Mifflin & Co.,
centers, of course, about these illustrations. There is not a line of
the poem but what takes a new and powerful meaning under his treatment.
Indeed, it seems as if in many cases the verses were but a key-note, the
drawing the completed strain. The artist seems to have been inspired
by the same sense of mystery, sadness, and final devotion to pleasure
which influenced the author. His idea of Omar’s philosophy is most
beautifully represented in the picture called “Omar’s Emblem.” In it life
is represented by a whirling stream, upon which the mortal, under the
form of a rose, has floated in. Along the stream the leaves are scattered
here and there, while crushed and half petalless the rose floats into
oblivion. This whirl of life surrounds what we may suppose to be the
emblem which incessantly confronted Omar’s mind—a human skull; upon this
is perched a singing nightingale—a sign of the music which in spite of
the mockery of existence the poet always heard, and in which he found
the sole relief for living. The pictures include a wealth of suggestion
which only diligent and sympathetic study discloses. They show surprising
fancy and versatility, while at the same time the finish of each is most
perfect.

Among the handsome books of the year must be classed Cassell’s new
edition of “Atala,”[K] Chauteaubriand’s charming romance of Indian life
and love. Though the story is far from filling our modern ideas of a
novel, it is one of those rare, pure love tales which never loses its
hold upon us. It will always keep its place with “Undine” and “Paul and
Virginia.” The present edition contains illustrations by Gustave Doré,
which, though inferior in some respects to later works by him, are still
very beautiful pictures. Only a few of the illustrations of the “Atala”
show that weird power and strong imagination for which Doré is so famous,
but what we miss there is quite made up by the interest we feel in his
conceptions of American scenery, of which he knew nothing except from
description. These conceptions, if sometimes very incorrect, are still
full of exuberant fancy. The binding and letter-press of the volume are
superior, making a most charming gift book.

The “Prose Writings of William Cullen Bryant,”[L] edited by Parke Godwin
will meet with a cordial welcome from all readers of good literature.
They appear in two volumes, and properly belong to a set called “The
Life and Works of William Cullen Bryant,” forming the fifth and sixth
volumes of the set. It was the thought of the editor at first to publish
entire the orations, addresses, and various letters of Mr. Bryant,
but careful consideration led him to think that this would extend the
work beyond desirable limits; so it was confined to a few selections
from the various departments in which the author displayed his power.
Volume V of the set, or I of the “Prose Writings,” contains several
“Literary Essays,” “Narratives,” and “Commemorative Discourses” on
Cooper, Irving, Halleck, and Verplanck. Volume II contains “Sketches of
Travel,” “Occasional Addresses,” comprising those on Shakspere, Scott,
Burns, Goethe, Schiller, and many others; and “Editorial Comments and
Criticisms.” The selections are all timely and well adapted to catch the
reader’s fancy and interest. There can scarcely fail to come to one,
however, who is the possessor of these books, a feeling of regret that
the editor did not follow his original intention and give more of the
writings of the author. The wish to have at hand the complete works of
the great American, and to have them in as attractive a form as that in
which Mr. Godwin has arranged them is strong enough to far outweigh his
unjustifiable fear of making too voluminous a collection.


FOOTNOTES

[J] Rubáiyát of Omar Khayyám, the Astronomer-Poet of Persia.
Rendered into English verse by Edward Fitzgerald, with an accompaniment
of drawings by Elihu Vedder. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co. 1884. Price,
$25.

[K] Atala. By Chauteaubriand. Translated by James Spence Harry.
Illustrated by Gustave Doré. Introduction by Edward J. Harding. Extra
cloth, full gilt, $5.00: full Morocco, extra, $10. New York: Cassell &
Co. 1884.

[L] Prose Writings of William Cullen Bryant. Edited by Parke
Godwin. New York: D. Appleton & Co. 1884.


BOOKS RECEIVED.

Euphrasia and Alberta. Poetic Romances. By John Ap Thomas Jones.
Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott & Co. 1884.

French Conversation. By J. D. Gaillard. New York: D. Appleton & Co. 1885.

Journal of the General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, held
in Philadelphia, May, 1884. Edited by the Rev. David S. Monroe, D.D. New
York: Phillips & Hunt. Cincinnati: Cranston & Stowe.

The Life of John Howard Payne. Author of Home, Sweet Home. With
illustrations. By Gabriel Harrison. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott & Co.
1885.

Elements of Geometry. By Eli T. Tappan, LL.D. New York: D. Appleton & Co.
1885.

Elements of English Speech. By Isaac Bassett Choate. New York: D.
Appleton & Co. 1884.

The Life of the Rev. Philip William Otterbein. By the Rev. A. W. Dewey,
A. M. With an introduction by Bishop J. Weaver, D.D. Dayton, Ohio: United
Brethren Publishing House. 1884.

The Children of the Bible. By Fannie L. Armstrong. With an introduction
by Frances E. Willard. New York: Fowler & Wells Co., Publishers. Price,
$1.

Outlines of Metaphysics. By Herman Lotze. Translated and edited by George
T. Ladd. Boston: Ginn, Heath & Co. 1884.

Appleton’s Chart Primer. By Rebecca D. Rickoff. New York: D. Appleton &
Co. 1885.

The A B C Reader. By Sarah F. Buckalew and Margaret W. Wells. New York:
A. Lovell & Co.

The Philosophy of Ralph Cudworth. By Charles E. Lowry, A. M. New York:
Phillips & Hunt. Cincinnati: Cranston & Stowe. 1884.

Elements of Calculus. By James M. Taylor. Boston: Ginn, Heath & Co. 1884.

