BOOK III.

OFFICIAL PAPERS


     PART I.--REPORTS AND OPINIONS WHILE SECRETARY
                OF STATE.

     "   II.--INAUGURAL ADDRESSES AND MESSAGES.

     "  III.--REPLIES TO PUBLIC ADDRESSES.

     "   IV.--INDIAN ADDRESSES.




INTRODUCTORY TO BOOK III.


This division of the work embraces all the important official papers of
Thomas Jefferson, from the time at which he entered upon the duties of
the Secretaryship of State to the end of his Presidential term, with
the exception of his official letters, a part of which will be found
printed in Book II., devoted to his general correspondence, both official
and private. It being the wish of the Library committee, under whose
supervision this work has been prepared, that it should be compressed
within as few volumes as was consistent with justice to the reputation
of the author, and the great body of Mr. Jefferson's official letters
having been already published among the American State Papers and Sparks'
Diplomatic Correspondence, the most interesting and valuable only have
been selected for re-publication in this work, as specimens of the
author's manner in the preparation of such papers. All omitted here will
be found in the publications just referred to.

The official papers embraced in this division of the work, have been
classified, for the purposes of easy reference, under the following heads:

PART I.--_Reports and Opinions while Secretary of State._--Under this head
are included Jefferson's Reports to Congress, which have been published
before; also, his Reports to the President, and his Cabinet Opinions,
both of which were private, and are now for the first time given to the
public. It seems to have been the practice of Washington, to take the
written opinions of his Secretaries upon important points arising during
his administration, and the opinions of Jefferson, here published, were
given in reply to questions propounded and points submitted to him by
the President, in conformity with this practice. They relate to a great
variety of matters connected with the early history of our government,
and the principles of interpretation to be applied to the Federal
Constitution, and will be found interesting and valuable.

PART II.--_Inaugural Address and Messages._--During the administration
of Washington and Adams, it was the custom of the President, at the
opening of each session of Congress, to meet both Houses in person, and
deliver a written speech, to which, in the course of a few days, each
House would return an answer through a committee appointed to wait upon
him, he, at the same time, returning a brief reply. Mr. Jefferson, at
the beginning of his Presidential term, changed this system. Instead
of meeting the Houses of Congress in person, and addressing to them a
speech, he sent them a written message, thus substituting messages for
speeches. His reasons for this change were the greater convenience of
messages over speeches, the economy of time, and the relief of Congress
from the necessity of answering on subjects in regard to which they were
often very imperfectly informed. The general opinion of the country at
the time seems to have approved the change; and the mode of communicating
with Congress by messages in preference to speeches, has been invariably
adopted by the Presidents ever since.

This division of the work contains Jefferson's Inaugural Address and
regular and special messages.

PART III.--_Replies to Public Addresses._--The public addresses received
by Mr. Jefferson, and answered by him, were very numerous. This was
particularly the case at the time of the Embargo, the attack on the
Chesapeake, and the termination of his Presidential service. The plan of
this work does not admit the publication of the whole of these Addresses
and Replies; nor, indeed, is there any necessity for it. It is only
necessary that a few of the Replies should be published, as specimens of
the rest. This has been done, selecting such as have the highest claim,
and omitting none which possess any historical value.

PART IV.--_Indian Addresses._--There is a number of these Addresses.
They possess a certain interest as exhibiting the humane policy of our
government towards the Indians, our efforts to civilize them, to make
them agriculturists, to keep them at peace with ourselves and with each
other, and the manner in which their lands were acquired from them, always
by purchase, with their own free consent. Some of the most important
have, therefore, been incorporated in the work.




PART I.

REPORTS AND OPINIONS WHILE SECRETARY OF STATE.


I.--_Report on the methods for obtaining Fresh Water from Salt._

The Secretary of State, to whom was referred by the House of
Representatives of the United States, the petition of Jacob Isaacs of
Newport in Rhode Island, has examined into the truth and importance of
the allegations therein set forth, and makes thereon the following report:

The petitioner sets forth, that by various experiments, with considerable
labor and expense, he has discovered a method of converting salt-water
into fresh, in the proportion of 8 parts out of 10, by a process so
simple that it may be performed on board of vessels at sea by the common
iron caboose, with small alterations, by the same fire, and in the same
time, which is used for cooking the ship's provisions, and offers to
convey to the government of the United States a faithful account of
his art or secret, to be used by, or within the United States, on their
giving to him a reward suitable to the importance of the discovery, and
in the opinion of government, adequate to his expenses and the time he
has devoted to the bringing it into effect.

In order to ascertain the merit of the petitioner's discovery, it becomes
necessary to examine the advances already made in the art of converting
salt-water into fresh.

Lord Bacon, to whom the world is indebted for the first germs of so
many branches of science, had observed, that with a heat sufficient for
distillation, salt will not rise in vapor, and that salt-water distilled
is fresh; and it would seem, that all mankind might have observed that
the earth is supplied with fresh water chiefly by exhalation from the
sea, which is, in fact, an insensible distillation effected by the heat
of the sun; yet this, although the most obvious, was not the first idea
in the essays for converting salt-water into fresh; filtration was tried
in vain, and congelation could be resorted to only in the coldest regions
and seasons. In all the earlier trials by distillation, some mixture was
thought necessary to aid the operation by a partial precipitation of the
salt, and other foreign matters contained in sea-water. Of this kind,
were the methods of Sir Richard Hawkins in the sixteenth century, of
Glauber, Hauton, and Lister, in the seventeenth, and of Hales, Appleby,
Butler, Chapman, Hoffman, and Dore, in the eighteenth; nor was there
anything in these methods worthy noting on the present occasion, except
the very simple still contrived extempore by Captain Chapman, and made
from such materials as are to be found on board every ship, great or
small; this was a common pot, with a wooded lid of the usual form; in
the centre of which a hole was bored to receive perpendicularly, a short
wooden tube made with an inch-and-a-half auger, which perpendicular
tube received at its top, and at an acute angle, another tube of wood
also, which descended until it joined a third of pewter made by rolling
up a dish and passing it obliquely through a cask of cold water; with
this simple machine he obtained two quarts of fresh water an hour, and
observed that the expense of fuel would be very trifling, if the still
was contrived to stand on the fire along with the ship's boiler.

In 1762, Doctor Lind, proposing to make experiment of several different
mixtures, first distilled rain-water, which he supposed would be the
purest, and then sea-water, without any mixture, which he expected
would be the least pure, in order to arrange between these two supposed
extremes, the degree of merit of the several ingredients he meant to
try; "to his great surprise," as he confesses, the sea-water distilled
without any mixture, was as pure as the rain-water; he pursued the
discovery and established the fact, that a pure and potable fresh water
may be obtained from salt-water by simple distillation, without the
aid of any mixture for fining or precipitating its foreign contents.
In 1767, he proposed an extempore still, which, in fact, was Chapman's,
only substituting a gun-barrel instead of Chapman's pewter tube, and the
hand-pump of the ship to be cut in two obliquely and joined again at an
acute angle, instead of Chapman's wooden tubes bored expressly; or instead
of the wooden lid and upright tube, he proposed a tea-kettle (without
its lid or handle) to be turned bottom upwards over the mouth of the
pot by way of still-head, and a wooden tube leading from the spout to a
gun-barrel passing through a cask of water, the whole luted with equal
parts of chalk and meal moistened with salt-water. With this apparatus
of a pot, tea-kettle, and gun-barrel, the Dolphin, a twenty-gun ship,
in her voyage around the world in 1768, from 56 gallons of sea-water
and with 9 lbs. of wood and 69 lbs. of pit-coal made 42 gallons of good
fresh water, at the rate of 8 gallons an hour. The Dorsetshire, in her
passage from Gibraltar to Mahon in 1769, made 19 quarts of pure water in
four hours with 10 lbs. of wood, and the Slambal in 1773, between Bombay
and Bengal, with the hand-pump, gun-barrel, and a pot of 6 gallons of
sea-water, made ten quarts of fresh water in three hours.

In 1771, Dr. Irvin putting together Lind's idea of distilling without
a mixture, Chapman's still, and Dr. Franklin's method of cooling by
evaporation, obtained a premium of five thousand pounds from the British
parliament. He wet his tube constantly with a mop instead of passing
it through a cask of water; he enlarged its bore also, in order to
give a free passage to the vapor, and thereby increase its quantity by
lessening the resistance or pressure on the evaporating surface. This
last improvement was his own; it doubtless contributed to the success
of his process; and we may suppose the enlargement of the tube to be
useful to that point at which the central parts of the vapor passing
through it would begin to escape condensation. Lord Mulgrave used his
method in his voyage towards the north pole in 1773, making from 34 to
40 gallons of fresh water a day, without any great addition of fuel, as
he says.

M. de Bougainville, in his voyage round the world, used very successfully
a still which had been contrived in 1763 by Poyssonier to guard against
the water being thrown over from the boiler into the pipe, by the
agitation of the ship. In this, one singularity was, that the furnace or
fire-box was in the middle of the boiler, so that the water surrounded
it in contact. This still, however, was expensive, and occupied much room.

Such was the advances already made in the art of obtaining fresh from
salt-water, when Mr. Isaacs, the petitioner, suggested his discovery. As
the merit of this could be ascertained by experiment only, the Secretary
of State asked the favor of Mr. Rittenhouse, President of the American
Philosophical Society, of Dr. Wistar, professor of chemistry in the
college at Philadelphia, and Dr. Hutchinson, professor of chemistry in
the University of Pennsylvania, to be present at the experiments. Mr.
Isaacs fixed the pot, a small caboose, with a tin cap and straight tube
of tin passing obliquely through a cask of cold water; he made use of a
mixture, the composition of which he did not explain, and from 24 pints
of sea-water, taken up about three miles out of the Capes of Delaware,
at flood-tide, he distilled 22 pints of fresh water in four hours with
20 lbs. of seasoned pine, which was a little wetted by having lain in
the rain.

In a second experiment of the 21st of March, performed in a furnace,
and five-gallon still at the college, from 32 pints of sea-water he
drew 31 pints of fresh water in 7 hours and 24 minutes, with 51 lbs. of
hickory, which had been cut about six months. In order to decide whether
Mr. Isaacs' mixture contributed in any and what degree to the success
of the operation, it was thought proper to repeat his experiment under
the same circumstances exactly, except the omission of the mixture.
Accordingly, on the next day, the same quantity of sea-water was put
into the same still, the same furnace was used, and fuel from the same
parcel; it yielded, as his had done, 31 pints fresh water in 11 minutes
more of time, and with 10 lbs. less of wood.

On the 24th of March, Mr. Isaacs performed a third experiment. For this,
a common iron pot of three and a half gallons was fixed in brick work,
and the fine from the hearth wound once around this pot spirally, and
then passed off up a chimney.

The cap was of tin, and a straight tin tube of about two inches diameter
passing obliquely through a barrel of water, served instead of a worm.
From sixteen pints of sea-water he drew off fifteen pints of fresh water,
in two hours fifty-five minutes, with 3 lbs. of dry hickory and 8 lbs. of
seasoned pine. This experiment was also repeated the next day, with the
same apparatus, and fuel from the same parcel; but without the mixture,
sixteen pints of sea-water yielded in like manner fifteen pints of fresh
in one minute more of time, and with ½ lb. less of wood. On the whole,
it was evident that Mr. Isaacs' mixture produced no advantage either in
the process or result of the distillation.

The distilled water in all these instances, was found on experiment to be
as pure as the best pump water of the city; its taste, indeed, was not
as agreeable, but it was not such as to produce any disgust. In fact,
we drink, in common life, in many places, and under many circumstances,
and almost always at sea, a worse tasted and probably a less wholesome
water.

The obtaining fresh from salt-water was for ages considered as an
important desideratum for the use of navigators. The process for doing
this by simple distillation is so efficacious, the erecting an extempore
still with such utensils as are found on board of every ship, is so
practicable, as to authorize the assertion that this desideratum is
satisfied to a very useful degree. But though this has been done for
upwards of thirty years, though its reality has been established by the
actual experience of several vessels which have had recourse to it,
yet neither the fact nor the process is known to the mass of seamen,
to whom it would be the most useful, and for whom it was principally
wanted. The Secretary of State is therefore of opinion that since the
subject has now been brought under observation, it should be made the
occasion of disseminating its knowledge generally and effectually among
the seafaring citizens of the United States. The following is one of the
many methods which might be proposed for doing this: Let the clearance
for every vessel sailing from the ports of the United States be printed
on a paper, in the back whereof shall be a printed account of the essays
which have been made for obtaining fresh from salt-water, mentioning
shortly those which have been unsuccessful, and more fully those which
have succeeded, describing the methods which have been found to answer
for constructing extempore stills of such implements as are generally
on board of every vessel, with a recommendation in all cases where they
shall have occasion to resort to this expedient for obtaining water,
to publish the result of their trial in some gazette on their return to
the United States, or to communicate it for publication to the office of
the Secretary of State, in order that others may, by their success, be
encouraged to make similar trials, and be benefited by any improvements
or new ideas which may occur to them in practice.


II. _Opinion on the proposition for establishing a Woollen Manufactory
in Virginia._

The House of Delegates of Virginia seemed disposed to adventure £2,500
for the encouragement of this undertaking, but the Senate did not concur.
By their returning to the subject, however, at a subsequent session, and
wishing more specific propositions, it is probable they might be induced
to concur, if they saw a certain provision that their money would not
be paid for nothing. Some unsuccessful experiments heretofore may have
suggested this caution.

Suppose the propositions brought into some such shape as this: The
undertaker is to contribute £1,000, the State £2,500, viz.: the undertaker
having laid out his £1,000 in the necessary implements to be brought
from Europe, and these being landed in Virginia as a security that he
will proceed, let the State pay for

     the first necessary purposes then to occur                  £1,000

     Let it pay him a stipend of £100 a year for the first three
     years                                                          300

     Let it give him a bounty (suppose one-third) on every
     yard of woollen cloth equal to good plains, which he
     shall weave for five years, not exceeding £250 a year
     (20,000 yards) the four first years, and £200 the fifth      1,200
                                                                 ------
                                                                 £2,500

To every workman whom he shall import, let them give, after he shall
have worked in the manufactory five years, warrants for ---- acres of
land, and pay the expenses of survey, patents, &c. [This last article
is to meet the proposition of the undertaker. I do not like it, because
it tends to draw off the manufacturer from his trade. I should better
like a premium to him on his continuance in it; as, for instance, that
he should be free from State taxes as long as he should carry on his
trade.]

The President's intervention seems necessary till the contracts shall be
concluded. It is presumed he would not like to be embarrassed afterwards
with the details of superintendence. Suppose, in his answer to the
Governor of Virginia, he should say that the undertaker being in Europe,
more specific propositions cannot be obtained from him in time to be laid
before this assembly; that in order to secure to the State the benefits
of the establishment, and yet guard them against an unproductive grant
of money, he thinks some plan like the preceding one might be proposed
to the undertaker.

That as it is not known whether he would accept it exactly in that form,
it might disappoint the views of the State were they to prescribe that
or any other form rigorously, consequently that a discretionary power
must be given to a certain extent.

That he would willingly coöperate with their executive in effecting the
contract, and certainly would not conclude it on any terms worse for
the State than those before explained, and that the contracts being once
concluded, his distance and other occupations would oblige him to leave
the execution open to the Executive of the State.


III. _The Report on Copper Coinage, communicated to the House of
Representatives, April 15th, 1790._

                                                       April 14, 1790.

     The Secretary of State, to whom was referred, by the House
     of Representatives, the letter of John H. Mitchell, reciting
     certain proposals for supplying the United States with copper
     coinage, has had the same under consideration, according to
     instructions, and begs leave to report thereon as follows:

The person who wishes to undertake the supply of a copper coinage, sets
forth, that the superiority of his apparatus and process for coining,
enables him to furnish a coinage better and cheaper than can be done by
any country or person whatever; that his dies are engraved by the first
artist in that line in Europe; that his apparatus for striking the edge
at the same blow with the faces, is new, and singularly ingenious; that
he coins by a press on a new principle, and worked by a fire-engine, more
regularly than can be done by hand; that he will deliver any quantity
of coin, of any size and device, of pure, unalloyed copper, wrapped
in paper and packed in casks, ready for shipping, for fourteen pence
sterling the pound.

The Secretary of State has before been apprized, from other sources
of information, of the great improvements made by this undertaker, in
sundry arts; he is acquainted with the artist who invented the method of
striking the edge, and both faces of the coin at one blow; he has seen
his process and coins, and sent to the former Congress some specimens of
them, with certain offers from him, before he entered into the service
of the present undertaker, (which specimens he takes the liberty of now
submitting to the inspection of the House, as proofs of the superiority
of this method of coinage, in gold and silver as well as copper.)

He is, therefore, of opinion, that the undertaker, aided by that artist,
and by his own excellent machines, is truly in a condition to furnish
coin in a state of higher perfection than has ever yet been issued
by any nation; that perfection in the engraving is among the greatest
safeguards against counterfeits, because engravers of the first class
are few, and elevated by their rank in their art, far above the base
and dangerous business of counterfeiting. That the perfection of coins
will indeed disappear, after they are for some time worn among other
pieces, and especially where the figures are rather faintly relieved,
as on those of this artist; yet, their high finishing, while new, is
not the less a guard against counterfeits, because these, if carried to
any extent, may be ushered into circulation new, also, and consequently,
may be compared with genuine coins in the same state; that, therefore,
whenever the United States shall be disposed to have a coin of their
own, it will be desirable to aim at this kind of perfection. That this
cannot be better effected, than by availing themselves, if possible,
of the services of the undertaker, and of this artist, whose excellent
methods and machines are said to have abridged, as well as perfected,
the operations of coinage. These operations, however, and their expense,
being new, and unknown here, he is unable to say whether the price
proposed be reasonable or not. He is also uncertain whether, instead of
the larger copper coin, the Legislature might not prefer a lighter one
of billon, or mixed metal, as is practised, with convenience, by several
other nations--a specimen of which kind of coinage is submitted to their
inspection.

But the propositions under consideration suppose that the work is to be
carried on in a foreign country, and that the implements are to remain
the property of the undertaker; which conditions, in his opinion, render
them inadmissible, for these reasons:

Coinage is peculiarly an attribute of sovereignty. To transfer its
exercise into another country, is to submit it to another sovereign.

Its transportation across the ocean, besides the ordinary dangers of the
sea, would expose it to acts of piracy, by the crews to whom it would
be confided, as well as by others apprized of its passage.

In time of war, it would offer to the enterprises of an enemy, what have
been emphatically called the sinews of war.

If the war were with the nation within whose territory the coinage is,
the first act of war, or reprisal, might be to arrest this operation,
with the implements and materials coined and uncoined, to be used at
their discretion.

The reputation and principles of the present undertaker are safeguards
against the abuses of a coinage, carried on in a foreign country, where
no checks could be provided by the proper sovereign, no regulations
established, no police, no guard exercised; in short, none of the numerous
cautions hitherto thought essential at every mint; but in hands less
entitled to confidence, these will become dangers. We may be secured,
indeed, by proper experiments as to the purity of the coin delivered
us according to contract, but we cannot be secured against that which,
though less pure, shall be struck in the genuine die, and protected
against the vigilance of Government, till it shall have entered into
circulation.

We lose the opportunity of calling in and re-coining the clipped money
in circulation, or we double our risk by a double transportation.

We lose, in like manner, the resource of coining up our household plate
in the instant of great distress.

We lose the means of forming artists to continue the works, when the
common accidents of mortality shall have deprived us of those who began
them.

In fine, the carrying on a coinage in a foreign country, as far as the
Secretary knows, is without example; and general example is weighty
authority.

He is, therefore, of opinion, on the whole, that a mint, whenever
established, should be established at home; that the superiority, the
merit, and means of the undertaker, will suggest him as the proper person
to be engaged in the establishment and conduct of a mint, on a scale
which, relinquishing nothing in the perfection of the coin, shall be
duly proportioned to our purposes.

And, in the meanwhile, he is of opinion the present proposals should be
declined.


IV.--_Opinion on the question whether the Senate has the right to negative
the grade of persons appointed by the Executive to fill Foreign Missions._

                                             NEW YORK, April 24, 1790.

The constitution having declared that the President shall _nominate_
and, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall _appoint_
ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls, the President desired
my opinion whether the Senate has a right to negative the _grade_ he may
think it expedient to use in a foreign mission as well as the _person_
to be appointed.

I think the Senate has no right to negative the _grade_.

The constitution has divided the powers of government into three branches,
Legislative, Executive and Judiciary, lodging each with a distinct
magistracy. The Legislative it has given completely to the Senate and
House of Representatives. It has declared that the Executive powers
shall be vested in the President, submitting special articles of it to
a negative by the Senate, and it has vested the Judiciary power in the
courts of justice, with certain exceptions also in favor of the Senate.

The transaction of business with foreign nations is Executive altogether.
It belongs, then, to the head of that department, except as to such
portions of it as are specially submitted to the Senate. Exceptions are
to be construed strictly.

The constitution itself indeed has taken care to circumscribe this one
within very strict limits; for it gives the _nomination_ of the foreign
agents to the President, the _appointments_ to him and the Senate jointly,
and the _commissioning_ to the President.

This analysis calls our attention the strict import of each term. To
_nominate_ must be to _propose_. _Appointment_ seems that act of the will
which constitutes or makes the agent, and the _commission_ is the public
evidence of it. But there are still other acts previous to these not
specially enumerated in the constitution, to wit: 1st. The destination
of a mission to the particular country where the public service calls
for it, and second the character or grade to be employed in it. The
natural order of all these is first, destination; second, grade; third,
nomination; fourth, appointment; fifth, commission. If _appointment_ does
not comprehend the neighboring acts of _nomination_ or _commission_,
(and the constitution says it shall not, by giving them exclusively to
the President,) still less can it pretend to comprehend those previous
and more remote, of _destination_ and _grade_.

The constitution, analyzing the three last, shows they do not comprehend
the two first. The fourth is the only one it submits to the Senate,
shaping it into a right to say that "A or B is unfit to be appointed."
Now, this cannot comprehend a right to say that "A or B is indeed fit
to be appointed," but the grade fixed on is not the fit one to employ,
or, "our connections with the country of his destination are not such
as to call for any mission."

The Senate is not supposed by the constitution to be acquainted with
the concerns of the Executive department. It was not intended that these
should be communicated to them, nor can they therefore be qualified to
judge of the necessity which calls for a mission to any particular place,
or of the particular grade, more or less marked, which special and secret
circumstances may call for. All this is left to the President. They are
only to see that no unfit person be employed.

It may be objected that the Senate may by continual negatives on
the _person_, do what amounts to a negative on the _grade_, and so,
indirectly, defeat this right of the President. But this would be a
breach of trust; an abuse of power confided to the Senate, of which that
body cannot be supposed capable. So the President has a power to convoke
the Legislature, and the Senate might defeat that power by refusing
to come. This equally amounts to a negative on the power of convoking.
Yet nobody will say they possess such a negative, or would be capable
of usurping it by such oblique means. If the constitution had meant to
give the Senate a negative on the grade or destination, as well as the
person, it would have said so in direct terms, and not left it to be
effected by a sidewind. It could never mean to give them the use of one
power through the abuse of another.


V.--_Opinion upon the validity of a grant made by the State of Georgia
to certain companies of individuals, of a tract of country whereof the
Indian right had never been extinguished, with power to such individuals
to extinguish the Indian right._

                                                         May 3d, 1790.

The State of Georgia, having granted to certain individuals a tract of
country, within their chartered limits, whereof the Indian right has
never yet been acquired; with a proviso in the grants, which implies
that those individuals may take measures for extinguishing the Indian
rights under the authority of that Government, it becomes a question
how far this grant is good?

A society, taking possession of a vacant country, and declaring they mean
to occupy it, does thereby appropriate to themselves as prime occupants
what was before common. A practice introduced since the discovery of
America, authorizes them to go further, and to fix the limits which they
assume to themselves; and it seems, for the common good, to admit this
right to a moderate and reasonable extent.

If the country, instead of being altogether vacant, is thinly occupied
by another nation, the right of the native forms an exception to that of
the new comers; that is to say, these will only have a right against all
other nations except the natives. Consequently, they have the exclusive
privilege of acquiring the native right by purchase or other just means.
This is called the right of preëmption, and is become a principle of
the law of nations, fundamental with respect to America. There are but
two means of acquiring the native title. First, war; for even war may,
sometimes, give a just title. Second, contracts or treaty.

The States of America before their present union possessed completely,
each within its own limits, the exclusive right to use these two means
of acquiring the native title, and, by their act of union, they have as
completely ceded both to the general government. Art. 2d, Section 1st.
"The President shall have power, by and with the advice of the Senate,
to make treaties, provided two thirds of the Senators present concur."
Art. 1st, Section 8th, "The Congress shall have power to declare war, to
raise and support armies." Section 10th, "No State shall enter into any
treaty, alliance or confederation. No State shall, without the consent
of Congress, keep troops or ships of war in time of peace, enter into
any agreement or compact with another State or with a foreign power,
or engage in war, unless actually invaded or in such imminent danger as
will not admit of delay."

These paragraphs of the constitution, declaring that the general
government shall have, and that the particular ones shall not have, the
right of war and treaty, are so explicit that no commentary can explain
them further, nor can any explain them away. Consequently, Georgia,
_possessing the exclusive right to acquire the native title_, but having
relinquished the _means_ of doing it to the general government, can only
have put her grantee into her own condition. She could convey to them
the exclusive right to acquire; but she could not convey what she had
not herself, that is, the means of acquiring.

For these they must come to the general government, in whose hands they
have been wisely deposited for the purposes both of peace and justice.

What is to be done? The right of the general government is, in my
opinion, to be maintained. The case is sound, and the means of doing it
as practicable as can ever occur. But respect and friendship should, I
think, mark the conduct of the general towards the particular government,
and explanations should be asked and time and color given them to tread
back their steps before coercion is held up to their view. I am told
there is already a strong party in Georgia opposed to the act of their
government.

I should think it better then that the first measures, while firm, be
yet so temperate as to secure their alliance and aid to the general
government.

Might not the eclat of a proclamation revolt their pride and passion,
and throw them hastily into the opposite scale? It will be proper indeed
to require from the government of Georgia, in the first moment, that
while the general government shall be expecting and considering her
explanations, things shall remain in _statu quo_, and not a move be made
towards carrying what they have begun into execution.

Perhaps it might not be superfluous to send some person to the Indians
interested, to explain to them the views of government and to watch with
their aid the territory in question.


VI.--_Opinion in favor of the resolutions of May 21st, 1790 directing
that, in all cases where payment had not been already made, the debts
due to the soldiers of Virginia and North Carolina, should be paid to
the original claimants or their attorneys, and not to their assignees._

                                                        June 3d, 1790.

The accounts of the soldiers of Virginia and North Carolina, having
been examined by the proper officer of government, the balances due
to each individual ascertained, and a list of these balances made out,
this list became known to certain persons before the soldiers themselves
had information of it, and those persons, by unfair means, as is said,
and for very inadequate considerations, obtained assignments from many
of the soldiers of whatever sum should be due to them from the public,
without specifying the amount.

The legislature, to defeat this fraud, passed resolutions on the 21st
of May, 1796, directing that where payment had not been made to the
original claimant in person or his representatives, it shall be made
to him or them personally, or to their attorney, producing a power for
that purpose, attested by two justices of the county where he resides,
and specifying the certain sum he is to receive.

It has been objected to these resolutions that they annul transfers of
property which were good by the laws under which they were made; that
they take from the assignees their lawful property; are contrary to the
principles of the constitution, which condemn retrospective laws; and
are, therefore, not worthy of the President's approbation.

I agree in an almost unlimited condemnation of retrospective laws. The
few instances of wrong which they redress are so overweighed by the
insecurity they draw over all property and even over life itself, and
by the atrocious violations of both to which they lead that it is better
to live under the evil than the remedy.

The only question I shall make is, whether these resolutions annul acts
which were valid when they were done?

This question respects the laws of Virginia and North Carolina only.
On the latter I am not qualified to decide, and therefore beg leave to
confine myself to the former.

By the common law of England (adopted in Virginia) the conveyance of a
right to a debt or other thing whereof the party is not in possession,
is not only void, but severely punishable under the names of Maintenance
and Champerty. The Law-merchants, however, which is permitted to have
course between merchants, allows the assignment of a _bill of exchange_
for the convenience of commerce. This, therefore, forms one exception to
the general rule, that a mere right or thing in action is not assignable.
A second exception has been formed by an English statute (copied into the
laws of Virginia) permitting _promissory notes_ to be assigned. The laws
of Virginia have gone yet further than the statute, and have allowed,
as a third exception, that a _bond_ should be assigned, which cannot
be done even at this day in England. So that, in Virginia, when a debt
has been settled between the parties and put into the form of a bill of
exchange, promissory note or bond, the law admits it to be transferred
by assignment. In all other cases the assignment of a debt is void.

The debts from the United States to the soldiers of Virginia, not having
been put into either of these forms, the assignments of them were void
in law.

A creditor may give an order on his debtor in favor of another, but if
the debtor does not accept it, he must be sued in the creditor's name;
which shows that the _order_ does not transfer the property of the
debts. The creditor may appoint another to be his attorney to receive
and recover his debt, and he may covenant that when received the attorney
may apply it to his own use. But he must sue as attorney to the original
proprietor, and not in his own right.

This proves that a _power of attorney_, with such a _covenant_, does
not transfer the property of the debt. A further proof in both cases is,
that the original creditor may at any time before payment or acceptance
revoke either his order or his power of attorney.

In that event the person in whose favor they were given has recourse to
a court of equity. When there, the judge examines whether he has done
equity. If he finds his transaction has been a fair one, he gives him
aid. If he finds it has been otherwise, not permitting his court to be
made a handmaid to fraud, he leaves him without remedy in equity as he
was in law. The assignments in the present case, therefore, if unfairly
obtained, as seems to be admitted, are void in equity as they are in law.
And they derive their nullity from the laws under which they were made,
not from the new resolutions of Congress. These are not retrospective.
They only direct their treasurer not to give validity to an assignment
which had it not before, by payments to the assignee until he in whom
the legal property still is, shall order it in such a form as to show
he is apprized of the sum he is to part with, and its readiness to be
paid into his or any other hands, and that he chooses, notwithstanding,
to acquiesce under the fraud which has been practised on him. In that
case he has only to execute before two justices a power of attorney to
the same person, expressing the specific sum of his demand, and it is to
be complied with. Actual payment, in this case, is an important act. If
made to the assignee, it would put the burthen of proof and process on
the original owner. If made to that owner, it puts it on the assignee,
who must then come forward and show that his transaction has been that
of an honest man.

Government seems to be doing in this what every individual, I think,
would feel himself bound to do in the case of his own debt. For, being
free in the law, to pay to the one or the other, he would certainly give
the advantage to the party who has suffered wrong rather than to him
who has committed it.

It is not honorable to take a mere legal advantage, when it happens to
be contrary to justice.

But it is honorable to embrace a salutary principle of law when a
relinquishment of it is solicited only to support a fraud.

I think the resolutions, therefore, merit approbation. I have before
professed my incompetence to say what are the laws of North Carolina
on this subject. They, like Virginia, adopted the English laws in the
gross. These laws forbid in general the buying and selling of debts, and
their policy in this is so wise that I presume they had not changed it
till the contrary be shown.


VII.--_Plan for establishing uniformity in the Coinage, Weights,
and Measures of the United States. Communicated to the House of
Representatives, July 13, 1790._

                                               NEW YORK, July 4, 1790.

SIR:--In obedience to the order of the House of Representatives of
January 15th, I have now the honor to enclose you a report on the subject
of measures, weights, and coins. The length of time which intervened
between the date of the order and my arrival in this city, prevented my
receiving it till the 15th of April; and an illness which followed soon
after added, unavoidably, some weeks to the delay; so that it was not
till about the 20th May that I was able to finish the report. A desire
to lessen the number of its imperfections induced me still to withhold
it awhile, till, on the 15th of June, came to my hands, from Paris, a
printed copy of a proposition made by the Bishop of Autun, to the National
Assembly of France, on the subject of weights and measures; and three
days afterwards I received, through the channel of the public papers,
the speech of Sir John Riggs Miller, of April 13th, in the British House
of Commons, on the same subject. In the report which I had prepared, and
was then about to give in, I had proposed the latitude of 38°, as that
which should fix our standard, because it was the medium latitude of
the United States; but the proposition before the National Assembly of
France, to take that of 45° as being a middle term between the equator
and both poles, and a term which consequently might unite the nations of
both hemispheres, appeared to me so well chosen, and so just, that I did
not hesitate a moment to prefer it to that of 38°. It became necessary,
of course, to conform all my calculations to that standard--an operation
which has been retarded by my other occupations.

These circumstances will, I hope, apologize for the delay which has
attended the execution of the order of the House; and, perhaps, a
disposition on their part to have due regard for the proceedings of other
nations, engaged on the same subject, may induce them still to defer
deciding ultimately on it till their next session. Should this be the
case, and should any new matter occur in the meantime, I shall think it
my duty to communicate it to the House, as supplemental to the present
report.

I have the honor to be, with sentiments of the most profound respect,

                      Sir, your most obedient and most humble servant.

The Secretary of State, to whom was referred, by the House of
Representatives, to prepare and report a proper plan or plans for
establishing uniformity in the currency, weights, and measures of the
United States, in obedience thereto, makes the following report:--

To obtain uniformity in measures, weights, and coins, it is necessary
to find some measure of invariable length, with which, as a standard,
they may be compared.

There exists not in nature, as far as has been hitherto observed, a
single subject or species of subject, accessible to man, which presents
one constant and uniform dimension.

The globe of the earth itself, indeed, might be considered as invariable
in all its dimensions, and that its circumference would furnish an
invariable measure; but no one of its circles, great or small, is
accessible to admeasurement through all its parts, and the various trials
to measure definite portions of them, have been of such various result
as to show there is no dependence on that operation for certainty.

Matter, then, by its mere extension, furnishing nothing invariable, its
motion is the only remaining resource.

The motion of the earth round its axis, though not absolutely uniform
and invariable, may be considered as such for every human purpose. It is
measured obviously, but unequally, by the departure of a given meridian
from the sun, and its return to it, constituting a solar day. Throwing
together the inequalities of solar days, a mean interval, or day, has
been found, and divided, by very general consent, into 86,400 equal parts.

A pendulum, vibrating freely, in small and equal arcs, may be so adjusted
in its length, as, by its vibrations, to make this division of the
earth's motion into 86,400 equal parts, called seconds of mean time.

Such a pendulum, then, becomes itself a measure of determinate length,
to which all others may be referred to as to a standard.

But even a pendulum is not without its uncertainties.

1. The difficulty of ascertaining, in practice, its centre of oscillation,
as depending on the form of the bob, and its distance from the point
of suspension; the effect of the weight of the suspending wire towards
displacing the centre of oscillation; that centre being seated within
the body of the bob, and therefore inaccessible to the measure, are
sources of considerable uncertainty.

2. Both theory and experience prove that, to preserve its isochronism,
it must be shorter towards the equator, and longer towards the poles.

3. The height of the situation above the common level, as being an
increment to the radius of the earth, diminishes the length of the
pendulum.

4. The pendulum being made of metal, as is best, it varies its length
with the variations in the temperature of the atmosphere.

5. To continue small and equal vibrations, through a sufficient length
of time, and to count these vibrations, machinery and a power are
necessary, which may exert a small but constant effort to renew the
waste of motion; and the difficulty is so to apply these, as that they
shall neither retard or accelerate the vibrations.

1. In order to avoid the uncertainties which respect the centre of
oscillation, it has been proposed by Mr. Leslie, an ingenious artist
of Philadelphia, to substitute, for the pendulum, a uniform cylindrical
rod, without a bob.

Could the diameter of such a rod be infinitely small, the centre of
oscillation would be exactly at two-thirds of the whole length, measured
from the point of suspension. Giving it a diameter which shall render it
sufficiently inflexible, the centre will be displaced, indeed; but, in
a second rod not the (1) six hundred thousandth part of its length, and
not the hundredth part as much as in a second pendulum with a spherical
bob of proper diameter. This displacement is so infinitely minute,
then, that we may consider the centre of oscillation, for all practical
purposes, as residing at two-thirds of the length from the centre of
suspension. The distance between these two centres might be easily and
accurately ascertained in practice. But the whole rod is better for a
standard than any portion of it, because sensibly defined at both its
extremities.

2. The uncertainty arising from the difference of length requisite for
the second pendulum, or the second rod, in different latitudes, may
be avoided by fixing on some one latitude, to which our standard shall
refer. That of 38°, as being the middle latitude of the United States,
might seem the most convenient, were we to consider ourselves alone; but
connected with other nations by commerce and science, it is better to
fix on that parallel which bids fairest to be adopted by them also. The
45th, as being the middle term between the equator and pole, has been
heretofore proposed in Europe, and the proposition has been lately renewed
there under circumstances which may very possibly give it some effect.
This parallel is distinguished with us also as forming our principal
northern boundary. Let the completion of the 45th degree, then, give
the standard for our union, with the hope that it may become a line of
union with the rest of the world.

The difference between the second rod for 45° of latitude, and that for
31°, our other extreme, is to be examined.

The second _pendulum_ for 45° of latitude, according to Sir Isaac Newton's
computation, must be of (2) 39.14912 inches English measure; and a
_rod_, to vibrate in the same time, must be of the same length between
the centres of suspension and oscillation; and, consequently, its whole
length 58.7 (or, more exactly, 58.72368) inches. This is longer than
the rod which shall vibrate seconds in the 31° of latitude, by about
1/679 part of its whole length; a difference so minute, that it might
be neglected, as insensible, for the common purposes of life, but, in
cases requiring perfect exactness, the second rod, found by trial of
its vibrations in any part of the United States, may be corrected by
computation for the (3) latitude of the place, and so brought exactly
to the standard of 45°.

3. By making the experiment in the level of the ocean, the difference
will be avoided, which a higher position might occasion.

4. The expansion and contraction of the rod with the change of
temperature, is the fourth source of uncertainty before mentioned.
According to the high authority so often quoted, an iron rod, of given
length, may vary, between summer and winter, in temperate latitudes,
and in the common exposure of house clocks, from 1/1728 to 1/2592 of
its whole length, which, in a rod of 58.7 inches, will be from about
two to three hundredths of an inch. This may be avoided by adjusting and
preserving the standard in a cellar, or other place, the temperature of
which never varies. Iron is named for this purpose, because the least
expansible of the metals.

5. The practical difficulty resulting from the effect of the machinery
and moving power is very inconsiderable in the present state of the arts;
and, in their progress towards perfection, will become less and less.
To estimate and obviate this, will be the artist's province. It is as
nothing when compared with the sources of inaccuracy hitherto attending
measures.

Before quitting the subject of the inconveniences, some of which attend
the pendulum alone, others both the pendulum and rod, it must be added
that the rod would have an accidental but very precious advantage over
the pendulum in this country, in the event of our fixing the foot at the
nearest aliquot part of either; for the difference between the common
foot, and those so to be deduced, would be three times greater in the
case of the pendulum than in that of the rod.

Let the standard of measure, then, be a uniform cylindrical rod of iron,
of such length as, in latitude 45°, in the level of the ocean, and in a
cellar, or other place, the temperature of which does not vary through
the year, shall perform its vibrations in small and equal arcs, in one
second of mean time.

A standard of invariable length being thus obtained, we may proceed
to identify, by that, the measures, weights and coins of the United
States; but here a doubt presents itself as to the extent of the
reformation meditated by the House of Representatives. The experiment
made by Congress in the year one thousand seven hundred and eighty-six,
by declaring that there should be one money of account and payment
through the United States, and that its parts and multiples should be
in a decimal ratio,[23] has obtained such general approbation, both at
home and abroad, that nothing seems wanting but the actual coinage, to
banish the discordant pounds, shillings, pence, and farthings of the
different States, and to establish in their stead the new denominations.
Is it in contemplation with the House of Representatives to extend a
like improvement to our measures and weights, and to arrange them also
in a decimal ratio? The facility which this would introduce into the
vulgar arithmetic would, unquestionably, be soon and sensibly felt by
the whole mass of the people, who would thereby be enabled to compute
for themselves whatever they should have occasion to buy, to sell, or
to measure, which the present complicated and difficult ratios place
beyond their computation for the most part. Or, is it the opinion of the
Representatives that the difficulty of changing the established habits
of a whole nation opposes an insuperable bar to this improvement? Under
this uncertainty, the Secretary of State thinks it his duty to submit
alternative plans, that the House may, at their will, adopt either the
one or the other, exclusively, or the one for the present and the other
for a future time, when the public mind may be supposed to have become
familiarized to it.

I. And first, on the supposition that the present measures and weights
are to be retained but to be rendered uniform and invariable, by bringing
them to the same invariable standard.

The first settlers of these States, having come chiefly from England,
brought with them the measures and weights of that country. These alone
are generally established among us, either by law or usage; and these,
therefore, are alone to be retained and fixed. We must resort to that
country for information of what they are, or ought to be.

This rests, principally, on the evidence of certain standard measures and
weights, which have been preserved, of long time, in different deposits.
But differences among these having been known to exist, the House of
Commons, in the years 1757 and 1758, appointed committees to inquire into
the original standards of their weights and measures. These committees,
assisted by able mathematicians and artists, examined and compared with
each other the several standard measures and weights, and made reports
on them in the years 1758 and 1759. The circumstances under which these
reports were made entitle them to be considered, as far as they go, as
the best written testimony existing of the standard measures and weights
of England; and as such, they will be relied on in the progress of this
report.

MEASURES OF LENGTH.

     The measures of length in use among us are:

     The league of 3 miles,                 The fathom of 2 yards,
     The mile of 8 furlongs,                The ell of a yard and quarter,
     The furlong of 40 poles or perches,    The yard of 3 feet,
                                            The foot of 12 inches, and
     The pole or perch of 5½ yards,         The inch of 10 lines.

On this branch of their subject, the committee of 1757-1758, says that
the standard measures of length at the receipt of the exchequer, are
a yard, supposed to be of the time of Henry VII., and a yard and ell
supposed to have been made about the year 1601; that they are brass
rods, very coarsely made, their divisions not exact, and the rods bent;
and that in the year 1742, some members of the Royal Society had been
at great pains in taking an exact measure of these standards, by very
curious instruments, prepared by the ingenious Mr. Graham; that the
Royal Society had had a brass rod made pursuant to their experiments,
which was made so accurately, and by persons so skilful and exact, that
it was thought not easy to obtain a more exact one; and the committee,
in fact, found it to agree with the standards at the exchequer, as near
as it was possible. They furnish no means, to persons at a distance, of
knowing what this standard is. This, however, is supplied by the evidence
of the second pendulum, which, according to the authority before quoted,
is, at London, 39.1682 English inches, and, consequently, the second
rod there is of 58.7523 of the same inches. When we shall have found,
then, by actual trial, the second rod for 45° by adding the difference
of their computed length, to wit: 287/10000 of an inch, or rather 3/10
of a line (which in practice will endanger less error than an attempt
at so minute a fraction as the ten thousandth parts of an inch) we shall
have the second rod of London, or a true measure of 58¾ English inches.
Or, to shorten the operation, without varying the result,

Let the standard rod of 45° be divided into 587⅕ equal parts, and
let each of these parts be declared a line.

     10 lines an inch,                        5½ yards a perch or pole,
     12 inches a foot,                       40 poles or perches a furlong,
      3 feet a yard,                          8 furlongs a mile,
      3 feet 9 inches an ell,                 3 miles a league.
      6 feet a fathom,

SUPERFICIAL MEASURES

Our measures of surface are, the acre of 4 roods and the rood of 40
square poles; so established by a statute of 33 Edw. 1. Let them remain
the same.

MEASURES OF CAPACITY.

The measures of capacity in use among us are of the following names and
proportions:

The gill, four of which make a pint.

Two pints make a quart.

Two quarts a pottle.

Two pottles a gallon.

Two gallons a peck, dry measure.

Eight gallons make a measure called a firkin, in liquid substances, and
a bushel, dry.

Two firkins, or bushels, make a measure called a rundlet or kilderkin,
liquid, and a strike, dry.

Two kilderkins, or strikes, make a measure called a barrel, liquid, and
a coomb, dry; this last term being ancient and little used.

Two barrels, or coombs, make a measure called a hogshead, liquid, or a
quarter, dry; each being the quarter of a ton.

A hogshead and a third make a tierce, or third of a ton.

Two hogsheads make a pipe, butt, or puncheon; and

Two pipes make a ton.

But no one of these measures is of a determinate capacity. The report
of the committee of 1757-8, shows that the gallon is of very various
content; and that being the unit, all the others must vary with it.

The gallon and bushel contain--

     224 and 1792 cubic inches, according to the standard wine
     gallon preserved at Guildhall.

     231 and 1848, according to the statute of 5th of Anne. 264.8
     and 2118.4, according to the ancient Rumford quart, of 1228,
     examined by the committee.

     265.5 and 2124, according to three standard bushels preserved
     in the Exchequer, to wit: one of Henry VII., without a rim;
     one dated 1091, supposed for 1591, or 1601, and one dated 1601.

     266.25 and 2130, according to the ancient Rumford gallon of
     1228, examined by the committee.

     268.75 and 2150, according to the Winchester bushel, as declared
     by statute 13, 14, William III., which has been the model for
     some of the grain States.

     271, less 2 spoonfuls, and 2168, less 16 spoonfuls, according
     to a standard gallon of Henry VII., and another dated 1601,
     marked E. E., both in the Exchequer.

     271 and 2168, according to a standard gallon in the Exchequer,
     dated 1601, marked E., and called the corn gallon.

     272 and 2176, according to the three standard corn gallons
     last mentioned, as measured in 1688, by an artist for the
     Commissioners of the Excise, generally used in the seaport
     towns, and by mercantile people, and thence introduced into
     some of the grain States.

     277.18 and 2217.44, as established for the measure of coal by
     the statute 12 Anne.

     278 and 2224, according to the standard bushel of Henry VII.,
     with a copper rim, in the Exchequer.

     278.4 and 2227.2 according to two standard pints of 1601 and
     1602, in the Exchequer.

     280 and 2240, according to the standard quart of 1601, in the
     Exchequer.

     282 and 2256, according to the standard gallon for beer and
     ale in the Treasury.

There are, moreover, varieties on these varieties, from the barrel to
the ton, inclusive; for, if the barrel be of herrings, it must contain
28 gallons by the statute 13 Eliz. c. 11. If of wine, it must contain
31½ gallons by the statute 2 Henry VI. c. 11, and 1 Rich. III. c. 15.
If of beer or ale, it must contain 34 gallons by the statute 1 William
and Mary, c. 24, and the higher measures in proportion.

In those of the United States which have not adopted the statutes of
William and Mary, and of Anne before cited, nor their substance, the wine
gallon of 231 cubic inches rests on the authority of very long usage,
before the 5th of Anne, the origin and foundation of which are unknown;
the bushel is the Winchester bushel, by the 11 Henry VII. undefined; and
the barrel of ale 32 gallons, and of beer 36 gallons, by the statute 23
Henry VIII c. 4.

The Secretary of State is not informed whether there have been any, and
what, alterations of these measures by the laws of the particular States.

It is proposed to retain this series of measures, but to fix the gallon
to one determinate capacity, as the unit of measure, both wet and dry;
for convenience is in favor of abolishing the distinction between wet
and dry measures.

The wine gallon, whether of 224 or 231 cubic inches, may be altogether
disregarded, as concerning, principally, the mercantile and the wealthy,
the least numerous part of the society, and the most capable of reducing
one measure to another by calculation. This gallon is little used among
the mass of farmers, whose chief habits and interests are in the size
of the corn bushel.

Of the standard measures before stated, two are principally distinguished
in authority and practice. The statute bushel of 2150 cubic inches, which
gives a gallon of 268.75 cubic inches, and the standard gallon of 1601,
called the corn gallon of 271 or 272 cubic inches, which has introduced
the mercantile bushel of 2276 inches. The former of these is most used
in some of the grain States, the latter in others. The middle term of
270 cubic inches may be taken as a mutual compromise of convenience,
and as offering this general advantage: that the bushel being of 2160
cubic inches, is exactly a cubic foot and a quarter, and so facilitates
the conversion of wet and dry measures into solid contents and tonnage,
and simplifies the connection of measures and weights, as will be shown
hereafter. It may be added, in favor of this, as a medium measure, that
eight of the standard, or statute measures before enumerated, are below
this term, and nine above it.

     The measures to be made for use, being four sided, with
     rectangular sides and bottom.

     The pint will be 3 inches square, and 3¾ inches deep;

     The quart 3 inches square, and 7½ inches deep;

     The pottle 3 inches square, and 15 inches deep, or 4½, 5, and
     6 inches;

     The gallon 6 inches square, and 7½ inches deep, or 5, 6, and
     9 inches;

     The peck 6, 9, and 10 inches;

     The half bushel 12 inches square, and 7½ inches deep; and

     The bushel 12 inches square, and 15 inches deep, or 9, 15,
     and 16 inches.

Cylindrical measures have the advantage of superior strength, but square
ones have the greater advantage of enabling every one who has a rule
in his pocket, to verify their contents by measuring them. Moreover,
till the circle can be squared, the cylinder cannot be cubed, nor its
contents exactly expressed in figures.

     Let the measures of capacity, then, for the United States be--

     A gallon of 270 cubic inches;

     The gallon to contain 2 pottles;

     The pottle 2 quarts;

     The quart 2 pints;

     The pint 4 gills;

     Two gallons to make a peck;

     Eight gallons a bushel or firkin;

     Two bushels, or firkin, a strike or kilderkin;

     Two strikes, or kilderkins, a coomb or barrel;

     Two coombs, or barrels, a quarter or hogshead;

     A hogshead and a third one tierce;

     Two hogsheads a pipe, butt, or puncheon; and

     Two pipes a ton.

     And let all measures of capacity of dry subjects be stricken
     with a straight strike.

WEIGHTS.

There are two series of weights in use among us; the one called
avoirdupois, the other troy.

_In the Avoirdupois series_:

     The pound is divided into 16 ounces;
     The ounce into 16 drachms;
     The drachm into 4 quarters.

_In the Troy series_:

     The pound is divided into 12 ounces;
     The ounce (according to the subdivision of the apothecaries)
     into 8 drachms;
     The drachm into 3 scruples;
     The scruple into 20 grains.

According to the subdivision for gold and silver, the ounce is divided
into twenty pennyweights, and the pennyweight into twenty-four grains.

So that the pound troy contains 5760 grains, of which 7000 are requisite
to make the pound avoirdupois; of course the weight of the pound troy
is to that of the 7000, or as 144 to 175.

It is remarkable that this is exactly the proportion of the ancient
liquid gallon of Guildhall of 224 cubic inches, to the corn gallon of
272; for 224 are to 272 as 144 to 175. (4.)

It is further remarkable still, that this is also the exact proportion
between the specific weight of any measure of wheat, and of the same
measure of water: for the statute bushel is of 64 pounds of wheat. Now
as 144 to 175, so are 64 pounds to 77.7 pounds; but 77.7 pounds is known
to be the weight of (5.) 2150.4 cubic inches of pure water, which is
exactly the content of the Winchester bushel, as declared by the statute
13, 14, Will. 3. That statute determined the bushel to be a cylinder of
18½ inches diameter, and 8 inches depth. Such a cylinder, as nearly as it
can be cubed, and expressed in figures, contains 2150.425 cubic inches;
a result which reflects authority on the declaration of Parliament, and
induces a favorable opinion of the care with which they investigated
the contents of the ancient bushel, and also a belief that there might
exist evidence of it at that day, unknown to the committees of 1758 and
1759.

We find, then, in a continued proportion 64 to 77.7 as 224 to 272, and as
144 to 175, that is to say, the specific weight of a measure of wheat,
to that of the same measure of water, as the cubic contents of the wet
gallon, to those of the dry; and as the weight of a pound troy to that
of a pound avoirdupois.

This seems to have been so combined as to render it indifferent whether
a thing were dealt out by weight or measure; for the dry gallon of wheat,
and the liquid one of wine, were of the same weight; and the avoirdupois
pound of wheat, and the troy pound of wine, were of the same measure.
Water and the vinous liquors, which enter most into commerce, are so
nearly of a weight, that the difference, in moderate quantities, would
be neglected by both buyer and seller; some of the wines being a little
heavier, and some a little lighter, than water.

Another remarkable correspondence is that between weights and measures.
For 1000 ounces avoirdupois of pure water fill a cubic foot, with
mathematical exactness.

What circumstances of the times, or purposes of barter or commerce, called
for this combination of weights and measures, with the subjects to be
exchanged or purchased, are not now to be ascertained. But a triple set
of exact proportionals representing weights, measures, and the things
to be weighed and measured, and a relation so integral between weights
and solid measures, must have been the result of design and scientific
calculation, and not a mere coincidence of hazard. It proves that the dry
and wet measures, the heavy and light weights, must have been original
parts of the system they compose--contrary to the opinion of the committee
of 1757, 1758, who thought that the avoirdupois weight was not an ancient
weight of the kingdom, nor ever even a legal weight, but during a single
year of the reign of Henry VIII.; and, therefore, concluded, otherwise
than will be here proposed, to suppress it altogether. Their opinion was
founded chiefly on the silence of the laws as to this weight. But the
harmony here developed in the system of weights and measures, of which
the avoirdupois makes an essential member, corroborated by a general
use, from very high antiquity, of that, or of a nearly similar weight
under another (6.) name, seem stronger proofs that this is legal weight,
than the mere silence of the written laws is of the contrary.

Be this as it may, it is in such general use with us, that, on the
principle of popular convenience, its higher denominations, at least, must
be preserved. It is by the avoirdupois pound and ounce that our citizens
have been used to buy and sell. But the smaller subdivisions of drachms
and quarters are not in use with them. On the other hand, they have been
used to weigh their money and medicine with the pennyweights and grains
troy weight, and are not in the habit of using the pounds and ounces
of that series. It would be for their convenience, then, to suppress
the pound and ounce troy, and the drachm and quarter avoirdupois; and
to form into one series the avoirdupois pound and ounce, and the troy
pennyweight and grain. The avoirdupois ounce contains 18 pennyweights
5½ grains troy weight. Divide it, then, into 18 pennyweights, and the
pennyweight, as heretofore, into 24 grains, and the new pennyweight will
contain between a third and a quarter of a grain more than the present
troy pennyweight; or, more accurately, it will be to that as 875 to
864--a difference not to be noticed, either in money or medicine, below
the denomination of an ounce.

But it will be necessary to refer these weights to a determinate mass of
some substance, the specific gravity of which is invariable. Rain water
is such a substance, and may be referred to everywhere, and through
all time. It has been found by accurate experiments that a cubic foot
of rain water weighs 1000 ounces avoirdupois, standard weights of the
exchequer. It is true that among these standard weights the committee
report small variations; but this experiment must decide in favor of
those particular weights, between which, and an integral mass of water,
so remarkable a coincidence has been found. To render this standard more
exact, the water should be weighed always in the same temperature of
air; as heat, by increasing its volume, lessens its specific gravity.
The cellar of uniform temperature is best for this also.

Let it, then, be established that an ounce is of the weight of a cube
of rain water, of one-tenth of a foot; or, rather, that it is the
thousandth part of the weight of a cubic foot of rain water, weighed
in the standard temperature; that the series of weights of the United
States shall consist of pounds, ounces, pennyweights, and grains; whereof

     24 grains shall be one pennyweight;
     18 pennyweights one ounce;
     16 ounces one pound.

COINS.

Congress, in 1786, established the money unit at 375.64 troy grains
of pure silver. It is proposed to enlarge this by about the third of a
grain in weight, or a mill in value; that is to say, to establish it at
376 (or, more exactly, 375.989343) instead of 375.64 grains; because it
will be shown that this, as the unit of coin, will link in system with
the units of length, surface, capacity, and weight, whenever it shall be
thought proper to extend the decimal ratio through all these branches.
It is to preserve the possibility of doing this, that this very minute
alteration is proposed.

We have this proportion, then, 875 to 864, as 375.989343 grains troy to
371.2626277; the expression of the unit in the new grains.

Let it be declared, therefore, that the money unit, or dollar of the
United States, shall contain 371.262 American grains of pure silver.

If nothing more, then, is proposed, than to render uniform and stable
the system we already possess, this may be effected on the plan herein
detailed; the sum of which is: 1st. That the present measures of length
be retained, and fixed by an invariable standard. 2d. That the measures
of surface remain as they are, and be invariable also as the measures of
length to which they are to refer. 3d. That the unit of capacity, now so
equivocal, be settled at a medium and convenient term, and defined by
the same invariable measures of length. 4th. That the more known terms
in the two kinds of weights be retained, and reduced to one series, and
that they be referred to a definite mass of some substance, the specific
gravity of which never changes. And 5th. That the quantity of pure silver
in the money unit be expressed in parts of the weights so defined.

In the whole of this no change is proposed, except an insensible one in
the troy grain and pennyweight, and the very minute one in the money unit.

II. But if it be thought that, either now, or at any future time, the
citizens of the United States may be induced to undertake a thorough
reformation of their whole system of measures, weights and coins,
reducing every branch to the same decimal ratio already established in
their coins, and thus bringing the calculation of the principal affairs
of life within the arithmetic of every man who can multiply and divide
plain numbers, greater changes will be necessary.

The unit of measure is still that which must give law through the whole
system; and from whatever unit we set out, the coincidences between the
old and new ratios will be rare. All that can be done, will be to choose
such a unit as will produce the most of these. In this respect the second
rod has been found, on trial, to be far preferable to the second pendulum.

MEASURES OF LENGTH.

Let the second rod, then, as before described, be the standard of measure;
and let it be divided into five equal parts, each of which shall be
called a foot; for, perhaps, it may be better generally to retain the
name of the nearest present measure, where there is one tolerably near.
It will be about one quarter of an inch shorter than the present foot.

     Let the foot be divided into 10 inches;
     The inch into 10 lines;
     The line into 10 points;
     Let 10 feet make a decad;
     10 decads one rood;
     10 roods a furlong;
     10 furlongs a mile.

SUPERFICIAL MEASURES.

Superficial measures have been estimated, and so may continue to be, in
squares of the measures of length, except in the case of lands, which
have been estimated by squares, called roods and acres. Let the rood be
equal to a square, every side of which is 100 feet. This will be 6.483
English feet less than the English (7.) rood every way, and 1311 square
feet less in its whole contents; that is to say, about one-eighth; in
which proportion, also, 4 roods will be less than the present acre.

MEASURES OF CAPACITY.

Let the unit of capacity be the cubic foot, to be called a bushel. It
will contain 1620.05506862 cubic inches, English; be about one-fourth
less than that before proposed to be adopted as a medium; one-tenth less
than the bushel made from 8 of the Guildhall gallons; and one-fourteenth
less than the bushel made from 8 Irish gallons of 217.6 cubic inches.

     Let the bushel be divided into 10 pottles;
     Each pottle into 10 demi-pints;
     Each demi-pint into 10 metres, which will be of a cubic inch each.
     Let 10 bushels be a quarter, and
     10 quarters a last, or double ton.

The measures for use being four-sided, and the sides and bottoms
rectangular, the bushel will be a foot cube.

     The pottle 5 inches square and four inches deep;
     The demi-pint 2 inches square, and 2½ inches deep;
     The metre, an inch cube.

WEIGHTS.

Let the weight of a cubic inch of rain water, or the thousandth part of
a cubic foot, be called an ounce; and let the ounce be divided into 10
double scruples:

     The double scruple into 10 carats;
     The carat into 10 minims or demi-grains;
     The minim into 10 mites.
     Let 10 ounces make a pound;
     10 pounds a stone;
     16 stones a kental;
     10 kentals a hogshead.

COINS.

Let the money unit, or dollar, contain eleventh-twelfths of an ounce of
pure silver. This will be 376 troy grains, (or more exactly, 375.959343
troy grains,) which will be about a third of a grain, (or more exactly,
.349343 of a grain,) more than the present unit. This, with the twelfth
of alloy already established, will make the dollar or unit, of the weight
of an ounce, or of a cubic inch of rain water, exactly. The series of
mills, cents, dimes, dollars, and eagles, to remain as already established
(8.)

The second rod, or the second pendulum, expressed in the measures of
other countries, will give the proportion between their measures and
those of the United States.

Measures, weights and coins, thus referred to standards unchangeable
in their nature, (as is the length of a rod vibrating seconds, and the
weight of a definite mass of rain water,) will themselves be unchangeable.
These standards, too, are such as to be accessible to all persons, in all
times and places. The measures and weights derived from them fall in so
nearly with some of those now in use, as to facilitate their introduction;
and being arranged in decimal ratio, they are within the calculation of
every one who possesses the first elements of arithmetic, and of easy
comparison, both for foreigners and citizens, with the measures, weights,
and coins of other countries.

A gradual introduction would lessen the inconveniences which might attend
too sudden a substitution, even of an easier for a more difficult system.
After a given term, for instance, it might begin in the custom-houses,
where the merchants would become familiarized to it. After a further
term, it might be introduced into all legal proceedings, and merchants
and traders in foreign commodities might be required to use it in
their dealings with one another. After a still further term, all other
descriptions of people might receive it into common use. Too long a
postponement, on the other hand, would increase the difficulties of its
reception with the increase of our population.


_Appendix, containing illustrations and developments of some passages
of the preceding report._

(1.) In the second pendulum with a spherical bob, call the distance
between the centres of suspension and of the bob, 2x19.575, or 2d, and
the radius of the bob = _r_; then 2d:r::r: rr/2d and ⅖ of this last
proportional expresses the displacement of the centre of oscillation, to
wit: 2rr/5x2d=rr/5d. Two inches have been proposed as a proper diameter
for such a bob. In that case r will be = 1. inch, and _rr_/5d = 1/9787
inches.

In the cylindrical second rod, call the length of the rod, 3 x 19.575.
or 3d, and its radius = _r_ and _rr_/2x3d=_rr_/6d will express the
displacement of the centre of oscillation. It is thought the rod will
be sufficiently inflexible if it be ⅕ of an inch in diameter. Then _r_
will be = .1 inch, and _rr_/6d = 1/11745 inches, which is but the 120th
part of the displacement in the case of the pendulum with a spherical
bob, and but the 689,710th part of the whole length of the rod. If the
rod be even of half an inch diameter, the displacement will be but 1/1879
of an inch, or 1/110356 of the length of the rod.

(2.) Sir Isaac Newton computes the pendulum for 45° to be 36 pouces
8.428 lignes. Picard made the English foot 11 pouces 2.6 lignes, and
Dr. Maskelyne 11 pouces 3.11 lignes. D'Alembert states it at 11 pouces
3 lignes, which has been used in these calculations as a middle term,
and gives us 36 pouces 8.428 lignes = 39.1491 inches. This length for
the pendulum of 45° had been adopted in this report before the Bishop
of Autun's proposition was known here. He relies on Mairan's ratio for
the length of the pendulum in the latitude of Paris, to wit: 504:257::72
pouces to a 4th proportional, which will be 36.71428 pouces=39.1619
inches, the length of the pendulum for latitude 48° 50'. The difference
between this and the pendulum for 45° is .0113 of an inch; so that
the pendulum for 45° would be estimated, according to Mairan, at
39.1619--.0113 = 39.1506 inches, almost precisely the same with Newton's
computation herein adopted.

(3.) Sir Isaac Newton's computations for the different degrees of
latitude, from 30° to 45°, are as follows:

           Pieds.   Lignes.
     30°     3       7.948
     35      3       8.099
     40      3       8.261
     41      3       8.294
     42      3       8.327
     43      3       8.361
     44      3       8.394
     45      3       8.428

(4.) Or, more exactly, 144:175::224:272.2.

(5.) Or, more exactly, 62.5:1728::77.7:2150.39.

(6.) The merchant's weight.

(7.) The Eng. rood contains 10,890 sq. feet = 104.355 feet sq.

(8.) _The Measures, Weights, and Coins of the Decimal System, estimated
in those of England, now used in the United States_.


1. MEASURES OF LENGTH.

                     Feet.    Equivalent in English measure.
     The point,      .001      .011 inch.

     The line,       .01       .117

     The inch,       .1       1.174, about 1/7 more than the Eng. inch.

     The foot,       1.     } 11.744736     } about 1/48 less than the
                            } .978728 feet, } English foot.

     The decad,      10.      9.787, about 1/48 less than the 10 feet
                                     rod of the carpenters.

     The rood,       100.     97.872, about 1/16 less than the side of
                                      an English square rood.

     The furlong,    1000.    978.728, about ⅓ more than the Eng. fur.

     The mile,       10000.   9787.28, about 1-6/7 English mile, nearly
                                       the Scotch and Irish mile, and ½
                                       the German mile.


2. SUPERFICIAL MEASURE.

                           Roods.
     The hundredth,         .01      95.69 square feet English.
     The tenth,             .1       957.9
     The rood,              1.       9579.085
     The double acre,       10.      2.199, or say 2.2 acres English.
     The square furlong,    100.     22.


3. MEASURE OF CAPACITY.

                     Bushels.   Cub. Inches
     The metre,        .001     1.62

     The demi-pint,    .01      16.2, about 1/24 less than the English
                                  half-pint.

     The pottle,       .1       162.005, about ⅙ more than the English
                                  pottle.

     The bushel,       1.     { 1620.05506862                 }
                              { .937531868414884352 cub feet. }
                                  about ¼ less than the middle sized
                                  English bushel.

     The quarter,      10.      9.375, about ⅕ less than the Eng. qr.

     The last,         100.     93.753, about 1/7 more than the Eng. last.


4. WEIGHTS.

                    Pounds.      Avoirdupois.    Troy.
     Mite,          .00001                       .041 grains, about ⅕
                                                   less than the English
                                                   mite.

     Minim, or   }   .0001                       .4101, about ⅕ less
     demi-grain, }                                 than half-grain troy.

     Carat,           .001                       .4101, about 1/40 more
                                                   than the carat troy.

     Double      }     .01                       41.017, about 1/40
     scruple,    }                                 more than 2 scruples
                                                   troy.

     Ounce,             .1 { 9375318684148     } { 410.170192431
                           { 84352 oz.         } { .85452 oz.
                             about 1/16 less than the ounce avoirdupois.

     Pound,             1. { 9.375             } .712101 lb., about ¼
                           { .585957417759 lb. } less than the pound troy.

     Stone,            10. { 93.753 oz.        } 7.121 about ¼ less
                           {  5.8595 lb.       }   than the English stone
                                                   of 8 lbs. avoirdupois.

     Kental,          100. { 937.531 oz.       } 71.21 about 4/10 less
                           { 58.5957 lb.       }   than the English kental
                                                   of 100 lbs. avoirdupois.

     Hogshead,       1000. { 9375.318 oz.      } 712.101
                           { 585.9574 lb.      }


5. COINS.

              Dollars.

     The mill,   .001
     The cent,    .01
     The dime,     .1

                       Troy grains.

     Dollar,       1. {375.98934306 pure silver.
                      { 34.18084937 alloy.
                       ------------
     Eagle,       10.  410.17019243

_Postscript._

                                                     January 10, 1791.

It is scarcely necessary to observe that the measures, weights, and
coins, proposed in the preceding report, will be derived altogether from
mechanical operations, viz.: A rod, vibrating seconds, divided into five
equal parts, one of these subdivided, and multiplied decimally, for every
measure of length, surface, and capacity, and these last filled with
water, to determine the weights and coins. The arithmetical estimates in
the report were intended only to give an idea of what the new measures,
weights, and coins, would be nearly, when compared with the old. The
length of the standard or second rod, therefore, was assumed from that of
the pendulum; and as there has been small differences in the estimates
of the pendulum by different persons, that of Sir Isaac Newton was
taken, the highest authority the world has yet known. But, if even he
has erred, the measures, weights, and coins proposed, will not be an atom
the more or less. In cubing the new foot, which was estimated at .978728
of an English foot, or 11.744736 English inches, an arithmetical error
of an unit happened in the fourth column of decimals, and was repeated
in another line in the sixth column, so as to make the result one ten
thousandth and one millionth of a foot too much. The thousandth part of
this error (about one ten millionth of a foot) consequently fell on the
metre of measure, the ounce weight, and the unit of money. In the last
it made a difference of about the twenty-fifth part of a grain Troy, in
weight, or the ninety-third of a cent in value. As it happened, this error
was on the favorable side, so that the detection of it approximates our
estimate of the new unit exactly that much nearer to the old, and reduces
the difference between them to 34, instead of 38 hundredths of a grain
Troy; that is to say, the money unit instead of 375.64 Troy grains of
pure silver, as established heretofore, will now be 375.98934306 grains,
as far as our knowledge of the length of the second pendulum enables us
to judge; and the current of authorities since Sir Isaac Newton's time,
gives reason to believe that his estimate is more probably above than
below the truth, consequently future corrections of it will bring the
estimate of the new unit still nearer to the old.

The numbers in which the arithmetical error before mentioned showed
itself in the table, at the end of the report, have been rectified, and
the table re-printed.

The head of superficial measures in the last part of the report, is
thought to be not sufficiently developed. It is proposed that the rood
of land, being 100 feet square, (and nearly a quarter of the present
acre,) shall be the unit of land measure. This will naturally be divided
into tenths and hundredths, the latter of which will be a square decad.
Its multiples will also, of course, be tens, which may be called double
acres, and hundreds, which will be equal to a square furlong each. The
surveyor's chain should be composed of 100 links of one foot each.

FOOTNOTE:

     [23] See Vol. I. p. 162.


VIII.--_Opinion upon the question whether the President should veto the
Bill, declaring that the seat of government shall be transferred to the
Potomac, in the year 1790._

                                                        July 15, 1790.

A bill having passed both houses of Congress, and being now before the
President, declaring that the seat of the federal government shall be
transferred to the Potomac in the year 1790, that the session of Congress
next ensuing the present shall be held in Philadelphia, to which place
the offices shall be transferred before the 1st of December next, a
writer in a public paper of July 13, has urged on the consideration
of the President, that the constitution has given to the two houses
of Congress the exclusive right to adjourn themselves; that the will
of the President mixed with theirs in a decision of this kind, would
be an inoperative ingredient, repugnant to the constitution, and that
he ought not to permit them to part, in a single instance, with their
constitutional rights; consequently, that he ought to negative the bill.

That is now to be considered.

Every man, and every body of men on earth, possesses the right of
self-government. They receive it with their being from the hand of nature.
Individuals exercise it by their single will; collections of men by that
of their majority; for the law of the _majority_ is the natural law of
every society of men. When a certain description of men are to transact
together a particular business, the times and places of their meeting and
separating, depend on their own will; they make a part of the natural
right of self-government. This, like all other natural rights, may be
abridged or modified in its exercise by their own consent, or by the
law of those who depute them, if they meet in the right of others; but
as far as it is not abridged or modified, they retain it as a natural
right, and may exercise them in what form they please, either exclusively
by themselves, or in association with others, or by others altogether,
as they shall agree.

Each house of Congress possesses this natural right of governing itself,
and, consequently, of fixing its own times and places of meeting, so
far as it has not been abridged by the law of those who employ them,
that is to say, by the Constitution. This act manifestly considers them
as possessing this right of course, and therefore has nowhere given it
to them. In the several different passages where it touches this right,
it treats it as an existing thing, not as one called into existence by
them. To evince this, every passage of the constitution shall be quoted,
where the right of adjournment is touched; and it will be seen that no
one of them pretends to give that right; that, on the contrary, every
one is evidently introduced either to enlarge the right where it would
be too narrow, to restrain it where, in its natural and full exercise,
it might be too large, and lead to inconvenience, to defend it from the
latitude of its own phrases, where these were not meant to comprehend
it, or to provide for its exercise by others, when they cannot exercise
it themselves.

"A majority of each house shall constitute a quorum to do business; but
a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and may be authorized to
compel the attendance of absent members." Art. 1. Sec. 5. A majority
of every collection of men being naturally necessary to constitute its
will, and it being frequently to happen that a majority is not assembled,
it was necessary to enlarge the natural right by giving to "a smaller
number than a majority" a right to compel the attendance of the absent
members, and, in the meantime, to adjourn from day to day. This clause,
then, does not pretend to give to a majority a right which it knew that
majority would have of themselves, but to a number _less than a majority_,
a right to which it knew that lesser number could not have of themselves.

"Neither house, during the session of Congress, shall, without the
consent of the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other
place than that in which the two houses shall be sitting." Ibid. Each
house exercising separately its natural right to meet when and where it
should think best, it might happen that the two houses would separate
either in time or place, which would be inconvenient. It was necessary,
therefore, to keep them together by restraining their natural right of
deciding on separate times and places, and by requiring a concurrence
of will.

But, as it might happen that obstinacy, or a difference of object, might
prevent this concurrence, it goes on to take from them, in that instance,
the right of adjournment altogether, and to transfer it to another, by
declaring, Art. 2, Sec. 3, that "in case of disagreement between the
two houses, with respect to the time of adjournment, the President may
adjourn them to such time as he shall think proper."

These clauses, then, do not import a gift, to the two houses, of a general
right of adjournment, which it was known they would have without that
gift, but to restrain or abrogate the right it was known they would have,
in an instance where, exercised in its full extent, it might lead to
inconvenience, and to give that right to another who would not naturally
have had it. It also gives to the President a right, which he otherwise
would not have had, "to convene both houses, or either of them, on
extraordinary occasions." Thus substituting the will of another, where
they are not in a situation to exercise their own.

"Every order, resolution, or vote, to which the concurrence of the Senate
and House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a question of
adjournment), shall be presented to the President for his approbation,
&c." Art. 1, Sec. 7. The latitude of the general words here used would
have subjected the natural right of adjournment of the two houses to the
will of the President, which was not intended. They therefore expressly
"except questions of adjournment" out of their operation. They do not
here give a right of adjournment, which it was known would exist without
their gift, but they defend the existing right against the latitude of
their own phrases, in a case where there was no good reason to abridge
it. The exception admits they will have the right of adjournment, without
pointing out the source from which they will derive it.

These are all the passages of the constitution (one only excepted, which
shall be presently cited) where the right of adjournment is touched;
and it is evident that none of these are introduced to give that right;
but every one supposes it to be existing, and provides some specific
modification for cases where either a defeat in the natural right, or
a too full use of it, would occasion inconvenience.

The right of adjournment, then, is not given by the constitution, and
consequently it may be modified by law without interfering with that
instrument. It is a natural right, and, like all other natural rights,
may be abridged or regulated in its exercise by law; and the concurrence
of the third branch in any law regulating its exercise is so efficient
an ingredient in that law, that the right cannot be otherwise exercised
but after a repeal by a new law. The express terms of the constitution
itself show that this right may be modified _by law_, when, in Art. 1,
Sec. 4. (the only remaining passage on the subject not yet quoted) it
says, "The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, and such
meeting shall be the first Monday in December, unless they shall, _by
law_, appoint a different day." Then another day may be appointed _by
law_; and the President's assent is an efficient ingredient in that law.
Nay further, they cannot adjourn over the first Monday of December but
by _a law_. This is another constitutional abridgment of their natural
right of adjournment; and completing our review of all the clauses in
the constitution which touch that right, authorizes us to say no part
of that instrument gives it; and that the houses hold it, not from the
constitution, but from nature.

A consequence of this is, that the houses may, by a joint resolution,
remove themselves from place to place, because it is a part of their
right of self-government; but that as the right of self-government does
not comprehend the government of others, the two houses cannot, by a
joint resolution of their majorities only, remove the executive and
judiciary from place to place. These branches possessing also the rights
of self-government from nature, cannot be controlled in the exercise of
them but by a law, passed in the forms of the constitution. The clause
of the bill in question, therefore, was necessary to be put into the form
of a law, and to be submitted to the President, so far as it proposes to
effect the removal of the Executive and Judiciary to Philadelphia. So far
as respects the removal of the present houses of legislation thither, it
was not necessary to be submitted to the President; but such a submission
is not repugnant to the constitution. On the contrary, if he concurs,
it will so far fix the next session of Congress at Philadelphia that it
cannot be changed but by a regular law.

The sense of Congress itself is always respectable authority. It has been
given very remarkably on the present subject. The address to the President
in the paper of the 13th is a complete digest of all the arguments urged
on the floor of the Representatives against the constitutionality of the
bill now before the President; and they were overruled by a majority of
that house, comprehending the delegation of all the States south of the
Hudson, except South Carolina. At the last session of Congress, when
the bill for remaining a certain term at New York, and then removing
to Susquehanna or Germantown was objected to on the same ground, the
objection was overruled by a majority comprehending the delegations of
the northern half of the union with that of South Carolina. So that the
sense of every State in the union has been expressed, by its delegation,
against this objection South Carolina excepted, and excepting also Rhode
Island, which has never yet had a delegation in place to vote on the
question. In both these instances, the Senate concurred with the majority
of the Representatives. The sense of the two houses is stronger authority
in this case, as it is given against their own supposed privilege.

It would be as tedious, as it is unnecessary, to take up and discuss one
by one, the objections proposed in the paper of July 13. Every one of
them is founded on the supposition that the two houses hold their right
of adjournment from the constitution. This error being corrected, the
objections founded on it fall of themselves.

It would also be work of mere supererogation to show that, granting
what this writer takes for granted (that the President's assent would
be an inoperative ingredient, because excluded by the constitution, as
he says), yet the particular views of the writer would be frustrated,
for on every hypothesis of what the President may do, Congress must go
to Philadelphia. 1. If he assents to the bill, that assent makes good
law of the part relative to the Patomac; and the part for holding the
next session at Philadelphia is good, either as an ordinance, or a vote
of the two houses, containing a complete declaration of their will in
a case where it is competent to the object; so that they must go to
Philadelphia in that case. 2. If he dissents from the bill it annuls
the part relative to the Patomac; but as to the clause for adjourning
to Philadelphia, his dissent being as inefficient as his assent, it
remains a good ordinance or vote, of the two houses for going thither,
and consequently they must go in this case also. 3. If the President
withholds his will out of the bill altogether, by a ten days' silence,
then the part relative to the Potomac becomes a good law without his
will, and that relative to Philadelphia is good also, either as a law,
or an ordinance, or a vote of the two houses; and consequently in this
case also they go to Philadelphia.


IX.--_Opinion respecting the expenses and salaries of foreign Ministers._

                                                        July 17, 1790.

The bill on the intercourse with foreign nations restrains the President
from allowing to Ministers Plenipotentiary, or to Congress, more than
$9,000, and $4,500 for their "personal services, and other expenses."
This definition of the objects for which the allowance is provided
appearing vague, the Secretary of State thought it his duty to confer
with the gentlemen heretofore employed as ministers in Europe, to
obtain from them, in aid of his own information, an enumeration of the
expenses incident to these offices, and their opinion which of them
would be included within the fixed salary, and which would be entitled
to be charged separately. He, therefore, asked a conference with the
Vice-President, who was acquainted with the residences of London and the
Hague, and the Chief Justice, who was acquainted with that of Madrid,
which took place yesterday.

The Vice-President, Chief Justice, and Secretary of State, concurred in
the opinion that the salaries named by the act are much below those of
the same grade at the courts of Europe, and less than the public good
requires they should be. Consequently, that the expenses not included
within the definition of the law, should be allowed as an additional
charge.

1. _Couriers, Gazettes, Translating necessary papers, Printing necessary
papers, Aids to poor Americans._--All three agreed that these ought to
be allowed as additional charges, not included within the meaning of
the phrase, "his personal services, and other expenses."

2. _Postage, Stationary, Court-fees._--One of the gentlemen being of
opinion that the phrase "personal services, and other expenses," was
meant to comprehend all the _ordinary expenses_ of the office, considered
this second class of expenses as _ordinary_, and therefore included in
the fixed salary. The first class before mentioned, he had viewed as
_extraordinary_. The other two gentlemen were of opinion this second
class was also out of the definition, and might be allowed in addition to
the salary. One of them, particularly, considered the phrase as meaning
"personal services and personal expenses," that is, expenses for his
personal accommodation, comforts, and maintenance. This second class of
expenses is not within that description.

3. _Ceremonies;_ such as diplomatic and public dinners, galas, and
illuminations. One gentleman only was of opinion these might be allowed.

The expenses of the first class may probably amount to about fifty dollars
a year. Those of the second, to about four or five hundred dollars. Those
of the third are so different at different courts, and so indefinite in
all of them, that no general estimate can be proposed.

The Secretary of State thought it his duty to lay this information before
the President, supposing it might be satisfactory to himself, as well
as to the diplomatic gentlemen, to leave nothing uncertain as to their
allowances; and because, too, a previous determination is in some degree
necessary to the forming an estimate which may not exceed the whole sum
appropriated.

The Secretary of State has also consulted on the subject of the Morocco
consulship, with Mr. Barclay, who furnished him with the note, of which
a copy accompanies this. Considering all circumstances, Mr. Barclay is
of opinion, we had better have only a consul there, and that he should be
the one now residing at Morocco, because, as secretary to the Emperor, he
sees him every day, and possesses his ear. He is of opinion six hundred
dollars a year might suffice for him, and that it should be proposed to
him not as a salary, but as a sum in gross intended to cover his expenses,
and to save the trouble of keeping accounts. That this consul should be
authorized to appoint agents in the seaports, who would be sufficiently
paid by the consignments of vessels. He thinks the consul at Morocco
would most conveniently receive his allowance through the channel of
our Chargé at Madrid, on whom, also, this consulate had better be made
dependent for instructions, information, and correspondence, because of
the daily intercourse between Morocco and Cadiz.

The Secretary of State, on a view of Mr. Barclay's note, very much
doubts the sufficiency of the sum of six hundred dollars; he supposes a
little money there may save a great deal; but he is unable to propose any
specific augmentation till a view of the whole diplomatic establishments
and its expenses, may furnish better grounds for it.

[Appended to this note, were the following estimate of the expenses
of foreign ministers, and of the probable calls on our foreign fund,
from July 1, 1790, to July 1, 1791.--ED.]


_Estimate of the Expenses of a Minister Plenipotentiary._

                                                        July 19, 1790.

     Minister Plenipotentiary, his salary                         $9,000
     His outfit, suppose it to happen once in seven years,
     will average                                                  1,285
     His return at a quarter's salary will average                   321
     Extras, viz.: Gazettes, Translating, Printing, Aids to poor
     American sailors, Couriers, and Postage, about                  350
     His Secretary                                                 1,350
                                                                 -------
                                                                 $12,396


_Estimate for a Chargé des Affaires._

     Chargé des Affaires, his salary                              $4,500
     His outfit, once in seven years, equal to an annual sum of      643
     His return at a quarter's salary, do                            161
     Extras, as above                                                350
                                                                  ------
                                                                  $5,654

     The Agent at the Hague, his salary                           $1,300
     Extras                                                          100
                                                                   -----
                                                                  $1,400


_Estimate of the Annual Expenses of the Establishment proposed._

     France, a Minister Plenipotentiary                          $12,306
     London,      do.         do.                                 12,306
     Madrid, a Chargé des Affaires                                 5,654
     Lisbon,     do.  do.    do.                                   5,654
     Hague, an agent                                               1,400
     Morocco, a consul                                             1,800
     Presents to foreign ministers on taking leave, at $1,000
     each, more or less, according to their favor and time.
     There will be five of them. If exchanged once in seven
     years, it will be annually                                      715
                                                                   -----

                                                                 $39,835


_Estimate of the probable calls on our foreign fund from July 1, 1790,
when the act for foreign intercourse passed, to July 1, 1791._

     France, a Minister Plenipotentiary, his outfit               $9,000
     His salary, suppose it to commence August 1st                 8,250
     Extras                                                          320
     Secretary                                       1,237.5 - $18,807.5
     Chargé, suppose him to remain till November 1st. Salary       1,500
     Extras                                                          117
     His return, a quarter's salary                        1,125 - 2,742
     Madrid, a Chargé, his salary                                  4,500
     Extras                                                  350 - 4,850
     Lisbon, a Chargé, (or Resident,) his outfit                   4,500
     His salary, suppose it to commence January 1, 1791            2,250
     Extras                                                  175 - 6,925
     London, an Agent, suppose to commence October 1st, at
     $1,350 salary                                                 1,012.5
     Extras, (at $100 a year)                                 75 - 1,087.5
     Hague, an Agent                                               1,400
     Morocco, Consul                                       1,800 - 3,200
     Presents to foreign Ministers. The dye about                    500
     Two medals and chains                                 2,000 - 2,500
                                                               ---------
                                                                 $40,112


X.--_Opinion in regard to the continuance of the monopoly of the commerce
of the Creek nation, enjoyed by Col. McGillivray_:

                                                      July 29th, 1790.

Colonel McGillivray, with a company of British merchants, having hitherto
enjoyed a monopoly of the commerce of the Creek nation, with a right
of importing their goods duty free, and considering these privileges
as the principal sources of his power over that nation, is unwilling to
enter into treaty with us, unless they can be continued to him. And the
question is how this may be done consistently with our laws, and so as
to avoid just complaints from those of our citizens who would wish to
participate of the trade?

Our citizens, at this time, are not permitted to trade in that nation.
The nation has a right to give us their peace, and to withhold their
commerce, to place it under whatever monopolies or regulations they
please. If they insist that only Colonel McGillivray and his company
shall be permitted to trade among them, we have no right to say the
contrary. We shall even gain some advantage in substituting citizens of
the United States instead of British subjects, as associates of Colonel
McGillivray, and excluding both British and Spaniards from the country.

Suppose, then, it be expressly stipulated by treaty, that no person
be permitted to trade in the Creek country, without a license from the
President, that but a fixed number shall be permitted to trade there at
all, and that the goods imported for and sent to the Creek nation, shall
be duty free. It may further be either expressed that the person licensed
shall be approved by the leader or leaders of the nation, or without
this, it may be understood between the President and McGillivray that the
stipulated number of licenses shall be sent to him blank, to fill up. A
treaty made by the President, with the concurrence of two-thirds of the
Senate, is a law of the land, and a law of superior order, because it not
only repeals past laws, but cannot itself be repealed by future ones.[24]
The treaty, then, will legally control the duty acts, and the acts for
licensing traders, in this particular instance. When a citizen applies
for a license, who is not of McGillivray's partnership, he will be told
that but a given number could be licensed by the treaty, and that the
number is full. It seems that in this way no law will be violated, and
no just cause of complaint will be given; on the contrary, the treaty
will have bettered our situation, though not in the full degree which
might have been wished.

FOOTNOTE:

     [24] [At a later period, upon reviewing this opinion, the
     following note was appended by Mr. Jefferson.--Ed.--viz.]
     "Unless with the consent or default of the other
     contracting party. It may well be doubted, too, and perhaps
     denied, that the treaty power can control a law. The
     question here proposed was then of the first impression.
     Subsequent investigations have proved that the contrary
     position is the more general truth."


XI.--_Opinion respecting our foreign debt._

                                                      August 26, 1790.

On consideration of the letter of our banker, of January 25th, 1790, the
Secretary of the Treasury's answer to it, and the draught of powers and
instructions to him, I am of opinion, as I always have been, that the
purchase of our debt to France by private speculators, would have been
an operation extremely injurious to our credit; and that the consequence
foreseen by our banker, that the purchasers would have been obliged, in
order to make good their payments, to deluge the markets of Amsterdam
with American paper of all sorts, and to sell it at any price, was a
probable one. And the more so, as we know that the particular individuals
who were engaged in that speculation, possess no means of their own
adequate to the payments they would have had to make. While we must
not doubt that these motives, together with a proper regard for the
credit of the United States, had real and full weight with our bankers,
towards inducing them to counterwork these private speculations; yet, to
ascribe their industry in this business wholly to these motives, might
lead to a too great and dangerous confidence in them. It was obviously
their interest to defeat all such speculations, because they tended to
take out of their hands, or at least to divide with them, the profits
of the great operation of transferring the French debt to Amsterdam, an
object of first rate magnitude to them, and on the undivided enjoyments
of which they might count, if private speculators could be baffled. It
has been a contest of dexterity and cunning, in which our champions have
obtained the victory. The manœuvre of opening a loan of three millions
of florins, has, on the whole, been useful to the United States, and
though unauthorized, I think should be confirmed. The measure proposed
by the Secretary of the Treasury, of sending a superintendent of their
future operations, will effectually prevent their doing the like again,
and the funding laws leave no danger that such an expedient might at
any future time be useful to us.

The report of the Secretary of the Treasury, and the draught of
instructions, present this plan to view: First, to borrow on the best
terms we can, not exceeding those limited by the law, such a sum as may
answer all demands of principal or interest of the foreign debts, due,
or to become due before the end of 1791. [This I think he supposes will
be about three and a half millions of dollars.] Second, to consider two
of the three millions of florins already borrowed by our bankers as,
so far, an execution of this operation; consequently, that there will
remain but about two and a half millions of dollars to be borrowed on
the old terms. Third, to borrow no more as yet, towards completing the
transfer of the French debt to Amsterdam, unless we can do it on more
advantageous terms. Fourth, to consider the third millions of florins
already borrowed by our bankers, as, so far, an execution of the powers
given the President to borrow two millions of dollars, by the act of the
12th of August. The whole of this appears to me to be wise. If the third
million be employed in buying up our _foreign paper_, on the exchange
of Amsterdam, by creating a demand for that species of paper, it will
excite a cupidity in the monied men to obtain more of it by new loans,
and consequently enable us to borrow more and on lower terms. The saving
of interest, too, on the sum so to be bought, may be applied in buying
up more principal, and thereby keep this salutary operation going.

I would only take the liberty of suggesting the insertion of some
such clause as the following, into the instructions: "The agents to be
employed shall never open a loan for more than one million of dollars at
a time, nor open a new loan till the preceding one has been filled, and
expressly approved by the President of the United States." A new man,
alighting on the exchange of Amsterdam, with powers to borrow twelve
millions of dollars, will be immediately beset with bankers and brokers,
who will pour into his ear, from the most unsuspected quarters, such
informations and suspicions as may lead him exactly into their snares.
So wonderfully dexterous are they in wrapping up and complicating their
propositions, they will make it evident, even to a clear-headed man, (not
in the habit of this business,) that two and two make five. The agent,
therefore, should be guarded, even against himself, by putting it out
of his power to extend the effect of any erroneous calculation beyond
one million of dollars. Were he able, under a delusive calculation, to
commit such a sum as twelve millions of dollars, what would be said of the
government? Our bankers told me themselves that they would not choose,
in the conduct of this great loan, to open for more than two or three
millions of florins at a time, and certainly never for more than five.
By contracting for only one million of dollars at a time, the agent will
have frequent occasions of trying to better the terms. I dare say that
this caution, though not expressed in the instructions, is intended by
the Secretary of the Treasury to be carried into their execution. But,
perhaps, it will be desirable for the President, that his sense of it
also should be expressed in writing.


XII.--_Opinion upon the question what the answer of the President
should be in case Lord Dorchester should apply for permission to march
troops through the territory of the United States, from Detroit to the
Mississippi._

GEORGE WASHINGTON TO THOMAS JEFFERSON.

                                       UNITED STATES, August 27, 1790.

Provided the dispute between Great Britain and Spain should come to
the decision of arms, from a variety of circumstances (individually
unimportant and inconclusive, but very much the reverse when compared
and combined,) there is no doubt in my mind, that New Orleans, and
the Spanish posts above it on the Mississippi, will be among the first
attempts of the former; and that the reduction of them will be undertaken
by a combined operation from Detroit.

The _consequences_ of having so formidable and enterprizing a people
as the British on both our flanks and rear, with their navy in front,
as they respect our western settlements which may be seduced thereby,
as they regard the security of the Union and its commerce with the West
Indies, are too obvious to need enumeration.

What then should be the answer of the Executive of the United States to
Lord Dorchester, in case he should apply for permission to march troops
through the territory of the said States from Detroit to the Mississippi?

What notice ought be taken of the measure, if it should be undertaken
without leave, which is the most probable proceeding of the two?

The opinion of the Secretary of State is requested in writing upon the
above statements.


_Opinion on the questions stated in the President's note of August 27th,
1790._

                                                      August 28, 1790.

I am so deeply impressed with the magnitude of the dangers which will
attend our government, if Louisiana and the Floridas be added to the
British empire, that, in my opinion, we ought to make ourselves parties
in the _general war_ expected to take place, should this be the only
means of preventing the calamity.

But I think we should defer this step as long as possible; because war is
full of chances, which may relieve us from the necessity of interfering;
and if necessary, still the later we interfere, the better we shall be
prepared.

It is often indeed more easy to prevent the capture of a place, than
to retake it. Should it be so in the case in question, the difference
between the two operations of preventing and retaking, will not be so
costly as two, three, or four years more of war.

So that I am for preserving neutrality as long, and entering into the
war as late, as possible.

If this be the best course, it decides, in a good degree, what should
be our conduct, if the British ask leave to march troops through our
territory, or march them without leave.

It is well enough agreed, in the laws of nations, that for a neutral power
to give or refuse permission to the troops of either belligerent party
to pass through their territory, is no breach of neutrality, provided
the same refusal or permission be extended to the other party.

If we give leave of passage then to the British troops, Spain will have
no just cause of complaint against us, provided we extend the same leave
to her when demanded.

If we refuse, (as indeed we have a right to do,) and the troops should
pass notwithstanding, of which there can be little doubt, we shall stand
committed. For either we must enter immediately into the war, or pocket
an acknowledged insult in the face of the world; and one insult pocketed
soon produces another.

There is indeed a middle course, which I should be inclined to prefer;
that is, to avoid giving any answer. They will proceed notwithstanding,
but to do this under our silence, will admit of palliation, and produce
apologies, from military necessity; and will leave us free to pass it
over without dishonor, or to make it a handle of quarrel hereafter, if
we should have use for it as such. But, if we are obliged to give an
answer, I think the occasion not such as should induce us to hazard that
answer which might commit us to the war at so early a stage of it; and
therefore that the passage should be permitted.

If they should pass without having asked leave, I should be for expressing
our dissatisfaction to the British court, and keeping alive an altercation
on the subject, till events should decide whether it is most expedient
to accept their apologies, or profit of the aggression as a cause of war.


XIII.--_Opinion on the question whether it will be expedient to notify to
Lord Dorchester the real object of the expedition preparing by Governor
St. Clair._

                                                      August 29, 1790.

On considering more fully the question whether it will be expedient to
notify to Lord Dorchester the real object of the expedition preparing
by Governor St. Clair, I still think it will not be expedient. For,
if the notification be early, he will get the Indians out of the way,
and defeat our object. If it be so late as not to leave him time to
withdraw them before our stroke be struck, it will then be so late also
as not to leave him time to withdraw any secret aids he may have sent
them. And the notification will betray to him that he may go on without
fear in his expedition against the Spaniards, and for which he may yet
have sufficient time after our expedition is over. On the other hand,
if he should suspect our preparations are to prevent his passing our
territory, these suspicions may induce him to decline his expedition,
as, even should he think he could either force or steal a passage, he
would not divide his troops, leaving (as he would suppose) an enemy
between them able to take those he should leave, and cut off the return
of those he should carry. These suspicions, too, would mislead both him
and the Indians, and so enable us to take the latter more completely by
surprise, and prevent him from sending secret aid to those whom he would
not suppose the objects of the enterprise; thus effecting a double purpose
of preventing his enterprise, and securing our own. Might it not even
be expedient, with a view to deter his enterprise, to instruct Governor
St. Clair either to continue his pursuit of the Indians till the season
be too far advanced for Lord Dorchester to move; or, on disbanding his
militia, to give them general orders (which might reach the ears of Lord
Dorchester) to be ready to assemble at a moment's warning, though no
such assembly be really intended?

Always taking care neither to say nor do, against their passage, what
might directly commit either our peace or honor.


XIV.--_Opinion on proceedings to be had under the Residence act._

                                                    November 29, 1790.

A territory not exceeding ten miles square (or, I presume, one hundred
square miles in any form) to be located by metes and bounds.

Three commissioners to be appointed. I suppose them not entitled to any
salary.

[If they live near the place they may, in some instances, be influenced
by self interest, and partialities; but they will push the work with
zeal. If they are from a distance, and northwardly, they will be more
impartial, but may affect delays.]

The commissioners to purchase or accept "such quantity of land on the
east side of the river as the President shall deem _proper for the United
States_," viz., for the federal Capitol, the offices, the President's
house and gardens, the town house, market house, public walks and
hospital. For the President's house, offices and gardens, I should think
two squares should be consolidated. For the Capitol and offices, one
square. For the market, one square. For the public walks, nine squares
consolidated.

The expression "such quantity of land as the President shall deem _proper
for the United States_," is vague. It may therefore be extended to the
acceptance or purchase of land enough for the town; and I have no doubt
it is the wish, and perhaps expectation. In that case, it will be to
be laid out in lots and streets. I should propose these to be at right
angles, as in Philadelphia, and that no street be narrower than one
hundred feet, with foot ways of fifteen feet. Where a street is long and
level, it might be one hundred and twenty feet wide. I should prefer
squares of at least two hundred yards every way, which will be about
eight acres each.

The commissioners should have some taste in architecture, because they
may have to decide between different plans.

They will, however, be subject to the President's direction in every point.

When the President shall have made up his mind as to the spot for the
town, would there be any impropriety in his saying to the neighboring
land holders, "I will fix the town here if you will join and purchase
and give the lands." They may well afford it by the increase of value
it will give to their own circumjacent lands.

The lots to be sold out in breadths of fifty feet; their depths to extend
to the diagonal of the square.

I doubt much whether the obligation to build the houses at a given
distance from the street, contributes to its beauty. It produces a
disgusting monotony; all persons make this complaint against Philadelphia.
The contrary practice varies the appearance, and is much more convenient
to the inhabitants.

In Paris it is forbidden to build a house beyond a given height; and it
is admitted to be a good restriction. It keeps down the price of ground,
keeps the houses low and convenient, and the streets light and airy.
Fires are much more manageable where houses are low.


XV.--_Report by the Secretary of State to the President of the United
States on the Report of the Secretary of the Government north-west of
the Ohio._

                                                    December 14, 1790.

The Secretary of State having had under his consideration the report
made by the Secretary of the Government north-west of the Ohio, of his
proceedings for carrying into effect the resolution of Congress of August
29th, 1788, respecting the lands of the inhabitants of Port Vincennes,
makes the following report thereon to the President of the United States:

The resolution of Congress of August 29th, 1788, had confirmed in their
possessions and titles the French and Canadian inhabitants and other
settlers at that post, who, in or before the year 1783, had settled
there, and had professed themselves citizens of the United States or
any of them, and had made a donation to every head of a family, of the
same description of four hundred acres of land, part of a square to be
laid off adjoining the improvements at the post.

The Secretary of the north-western government, in the absence of the
Governor, has carried this resolution into effect, as to all the claims
to which he thought it could be clearly applied: there remain, however,
the following description of cases, on which he asks further instructions:

1. Certain cases within the letter of the resolution, but rendered
doubtful by the condition annexed, to the grants of lands in the Illinois
country. The cases of these claimants, fifteen in number, are specially
stated in the papers hereto annexed, number 2, and the lands are laid
off for them but remain ungranted till further orders.

2. Certain persons who, by removals from one part of the territory to
another, are not of the letter of the resolutions, but within its equity,
as they conceive.

3. Certain heads of families, who became such soon after the year 1783,
who petition for a participation of the donation, and urge extraordinary
militia service to which they are exposed.

4. One hundred and fifty acres of land within the village granted under
the former government of that country, to the Piankeshaw Indians, and
on their removal sold by them in parcels to individual inhabitants, who
in some instances have highly improved them both before and since the
year 1783.

5. Lands granted both before and after 1783, by authority from the
commandant of the post, who, according to the usage under the French
and British governments, thinking himself authorized to grant lands,
delegated that authority to a court of civil and criminal jurisdiction,
whose grants before 1783, amount to twenty-six thousand acres, and between
that and 1787, (when the practice was stopped,) to twenty-two thousand
acres. They are generally in parcels from four hundred acres down to
the size of house lots; and some of them under considerable improvement.
Some of the tenants urge that they were induced by the court itself to
come and settle these lands under assurance of their authority to grant
them, and that a loss of the lands and improvements will involve them in
ruin. Besides these small grants, there are some much larger, sometimes
of many leagues square, which a sense of their impropriety has prevented
the grantees from bringing forward. Many pretended grants, too, of this
class are believed to be forgeries, and are, therefore, to be guarded
against.

6. Two thousand four hundred acres of good land, and three thousand acres
of sunken land, held under the French, British, and American governments,
as commons for the use of the inhabitants of the village generally, and
for thirty years past kept under inclosure for these purposes.

The legislature alone being competent to authorize the grant of lands
in cases as yet unprovided for by the laws. The Secretary of State is of
opinion that the report of the Secretary of the north-western government,
with the papers therein referred to, should be laid before Congress for
their determination. Authentic copies of them are herewith enclosed to
the President of the United States.


XVI.--_Opinion on certain proceedings of the Executive in the
North-western Territory._

                                                    December 14, 1790.

The Secretary of State having had under his consideration, the journal
of the proceedings of the Executive in the North-western Territory,
thinks it his duty to extract therefrom, for the notice of the President
of the United States, the articles of April 25th, June 6th, 28th, and
29th. Some of which are hereto annexed.

Conceiving that the regulations, purported in these articles, are
beyond the competence of the executive of the said government, that they
amount, in fact, to laws, and as such, could only flow from its regular
legislature. That it is the duty of the general government to guard its
subordinate members from the encroachments of each other, even when they
are made through error or inadvertence, and to cover its citizens from
the exercise of powers not authorized by the law. The Secretary of State
is of opinion that the said articles be laid before the Attorney General
for consideration, and if he finds them to be against law, that his
opinion be communicated to the Governor of the North-western Territory,
for his future conduct.

[The following are the extracts alluded to above.]

_Extracts from the Journal of the Proceedings in the Executive
Department of government in the Territory of the United States, north-west
of the Ohio, reported to the President of the United States, by Winthrop
Sargent, Secretary._

April 25, 1790.--The governor was pleased to issue the following order,
viz.: All the inhabitants are forbidden to entertain any strangers, white,
Indian, or negro, let them come from whatsoever place, without acquainting
the officer commanding the troops, of the names of such strangers, and
the place from whence they came. And every stranger arriving at Cahokia,
is ordered to present himself to said officer within two hours after
his arrival, on pain of imprisonment.

June 6, 1790.--The Governor at Kaskaskias, was pleased to make the
following proclamation:

The practice of selling spirituous liquors to the Indians in the villages
being attended with very ill consequences, it is expressly prohibited;
and all and every person transgressing this order, will be liable to
be tried and fined at the pleasure of the court of quarter sessions of
the peace. And as it may be necessary that spirituous liquors should be
vended in small quantities to white travellers and others; to prevent
all danger of imposition and extortion, no person whosoever shall sell
in any of the villages or their environs, spirituous liquors to any
white person, traveller, or inhabitant, in any quantity less than one
quart at one time, without obtaining a license from the governor, which
license shall not be granted but upon the recommendation of the Justices
of the Peace in their court of quarter sessions, and on his or their
giving security in the sum of two hundred dollars, to abide by all the
regulations made by law respecting retailers of spirituous liquors,
and the orders of the said court of quarter sessions in the premises
in the meantime. And for every offence, he or they shall be liable to
prosecution by indictment and fine at the pleasure of the court, and to
the forfeiture of their bonds.

Nor shall any person undertake or exercise the calling or occupation of
an Inn-holder or Tavern-keeper, without obtaining in the same manner,
and under the same restrictions and penalties, a license for so doing.

PROCLAMATION.--Whereas, his Excellency, Arthur St. Clair, Esq., governor
and commander-in-chief of this Territory, did by proclamation given
at the Kaskaskias the 10th instant, strictly prohibit all persons, not
citizens of the United States or the Territory, from hunting or killing
any kind of game within the same, either for the flesh or skins, upon
penalty _not only_ of forfeiting the flesh and skins which they might
acquire, but also prosecution and punishment as trespassers.

And it appearing to me to be particularly essential to the interests
of this country, that an observance of the order and prohibition should
be obtained, I do hereby call upon all civil and military officers, who
now are, or hereafter may be appointed, to use their best endeavors for
detecting and bringing to justice every person who shall violate the
same. And, whereas, it appears to me to be expedient that government
should receive information of all characters, foreigners and others,
coming into the Territory, I do hereby order and direct that any person
arriving at this, or any of the military posts of the United States
within the same, should present himself to the commanding officer of
the troops in two hours next after his arrival; and the inhabitants are
hereby forbidden to entertain such characters, whether whites, Indians,
or negroes, without immediate information thereof to the said commanding
officers.

Given under my hand and seal at the town of Post Vincennes, and county
of Knox, this 28th day of June, A. D. 1790, and of the Independence of
the United States, the fourteenth.

                                                             (Signed,)
                                                     WINTHROP SARGENT.

June 29, 1790.--It is to be considered as a standing order hereafter,
that no person enrolled in the militia shall leave the village or
stations, for a longer absence than twenty-four hours, without informing
him (Mayor Hamtramck) or the commanding officer for the time being, of
their intention. And all intelligence or discoveries of Indians, to be
immediately reported.

                                                             (Signed,)
                                                     WINTHROP SARGENT.



XVII.--_Report on certain letters from the President to Mr. Gouverneur
Morris, and from Mr. Morris to the President, relative to our difficulties
with England_--1790.

                                                    December 15, 1790.

The Secretary of State having had under consideration the two letters
of October 13th, 1789, from the President of the United States, to Mr.
Gouverneur Morris; and those of Mr. Morris to the President, of January
22d, April 7th, 13th, May 1st, 29th, July 3d, August 16th, and September
18th, referred to him by the President, makes the following report
thereon:

The President's letter of January 22d, authorized Mr. Morris to enter
into conference with the British ministers in order to discover their
sentiments on the following subjects:

1. Their retention of the western posts contrary to the treaty of peace.

2. Indemnification for the negroes carried off against the stipulations
of the same treaty.

3. A treaty for the regulation of the commerce between the two countries.

4. The exchange of a minister.

The letters of Mr. Morris before mentioned, state the communications,
oral and written, which have passed between him and the ministers; and
from these the Secretary of State draws the following inferences:

1. That the British court is decided not to surrender the posts in any
event; and that they will urge as a pretext that though our courts of
justice are now open to British subjects, they were so long shut after
the peace as to have defeated irremedially the recovery of debts in many
cases. They suggest, indeed, the idea of an indemnification on our part.
But probably were we disposed to admit their right to indemnification,
they would take care to set it so high as to insure a disagreement.

2. That as to indemnification for the negroes, their measures for
concealing them were in the first instance so efficacious, as to reduce
our demand for them, so far as we can support it by direct proof, to be
very small indeed. Its smallness seems to have kept it out of discussion.
Were other difficulties removed, they would probably make none of this
article.

3. That they equivocate on every proposal of a treaty of commerce, and
authorize in their communications with Mr. Morris the same conclusions
which have been drawn from those they had had from time to time with
Mr. Adams, and those through Mayor Beckwith; to wit, that they do not
mean to submit their present advantages in commerce to the risk which
might attend a discussion of them, whereon some reciprocity could not
fail to be demanded. Unless, indeed, we would agree to make it a treaty
of _alliance_ as well as _commerce_, so as to undermine our obligations
with France. This method of stripping that rival nation of its alliances,
they tried successfully with Holland, endeavored at it with Spain, and
have plainly and repeatedly suggested to us. For this they would probably
relax some of the rigors they exercise against our commerce.

4. That as to a minister, their Secretary for foreign affairs is disposed
to exchange one, but meets with opposition in his cabinet, so as to
render the issue uncertain.

From the whole of which, the Secretary of State is of opinion that Mr.
Morris' letters remove any doubts which might have been entertained as
to the intentions and dispositions of the British cabinet.

That it would be dishonorable to the United States, useless and even
injurious, to renew the propositions for a treaty of commerce, or for
the exchange of a minister; and that these subjects should now remain
dormant, till they shall be brought forward earnestly by them.

That the demands of the posts, and of indemnification for the negroes,
should not be again made till we are in readiness to do ourselves the
justice which may be refused.

That Mr. Morris should be informed that he has fulfilled the object of his
agency to the satisfaction of the President, inasmuch as he has enabled
him to judge of the real views of the British cabinet, and that it is
his pleasure that the matters committed to him be left in the situation
in which the letter shall find them.

That a proper compensation be given to Mr. Morris for his services herein,
which having been begun on the 22d of January, and ended the 18th of
September, comprehend a space of near eight months; that the allowance
to an agent may be properly fixed anywhere between the half and the
whole of what is allowed to a Chargé d'affaires; which, according to the
establishment of the United States at the time of this appointment, was
at the rate of $3,000 a year; consequently, that such a sum of between
one and two thousand dollars be allowed him as the President shall deem
proper, on a view of the interference which this agency may have had
with Mr. Morris' private pursuits in Europe.


XVIII.--_Report relative to the Mediterranean trade._

                                                    December 28, 1790.

The Secretary of State, to whom was referred by the House of
Representatives so much of the speech of the President of the United
States to both Houses of Congress, as relates to the trade of the United
States in the Mediterranean, with instructions to report thereupon to
the House, has had the same under consideration, and thereupon makes
the following report:

The loss of the records of the custom houses in several of the States,
which took place about the commencement and during the course of the
late war, has deprived us of official information, as to the extent of
our commerce and navigation in the Mediterranean sea. According to the
best which may be obtained from other sources meriting respect, it may be
concluded that about one-sixth of the wheat and flour exported from the
United States, and about one-fourth in value of their dried and pickled
fish, and some rice, found their best markets in the Mediterranean ports;
that these articles constituted the principal part of what we sent into
that sea; that that commerce loaded outwards from eighty to one hundred
ships, annually, of twenty thousand tons, navigated by about twelve
hundred seamen. It was abandoned early in the war. And after the peace
which ensued, it was obvious to our merchants, that their adventures
into that sea would be exposed to the depredations of the piratical
States on the coast of Barbary. Congress, too, was very early attentive
to this danger, and by a commission of the 12th of May, 1784, authorized
certain persons, named ministers plenipotentiary for that purpose, to
conclude treaties of peace and amity with the Barbary powers. And it
being afterwards found more expedient that the negotiations should be
carried on at the residences of those powers. Congress, by a farther
commission, bearing date the 11th of March, 1785, empowered the same
ministers plenipotentiary to appoint agents to repair to the said powers
at their proper residences, and there to negotiate such treaties. The
whole expenses were limited to eighty thousand dollars. Agents were
accordingly sent to Morocco and Algiers.

Before the appointment of the one to Morocco, it was known that a
cruiser of that State had taken a vessel of the United States; and that
the emperor, on the friendly interposition of the court of Madrid had
liberated the crew, and made restitution of the vessel and cargo, as
far as their condition admitted. This was a happy presage of the liberal
treaty he afterwards concluded with our agent, still under the friendly
mediation of Spain, and at an expense of between nine and ten thousand
dollars only. On his death, which has taken place not long since, it
becomes necessary, according to their usage, to obtain immediately a
recognition of the treaty by his successor, and consequently, to make
provision for the expenses which may attend it. The amount of the former
furnishes one ground of estimate; but the character and dispositions of
the successor, which are unknown here, may influence it materially. The
friendship of this power is important, because our Atlantic as well as
Mediterranean trade is open to his annoyance, and because we carry on
a useful commerce with his nation.

The Algerines had also taken two vessels of the United States, with
twenty-one persons on board, whom they retained as slaves. On the arrival
of the agent sent to that regency, the dey refused utterly to treat of
peace on any terms, and demanded 59,496 dollars for the ransom of our
captives. This mission therefore proved ineffectual.

While these negotiations were on foot at Morocco and Algiers, an
ambassador from Tripoli arrived in London. The ministers plenipotentiary
of the United States met him in person. He demanded for the peace of that
State, thirty thousand guineas; and undertook to engage that of Tunis
for a like sum. These demands were beyond the limits of Congress, and
of reason, and nothing was done. Nor was it of importance, as, Algiers
remaining hostile, the peace of Tunis and Tripoli was of no value, and
when that of the former should be obtained, theirs would soon follow.

Our navigation, then, into the Mediterranean, has not been resumed at
all since the peace. The sole obstacle has been the unprovoked war of
Algiers; and the sole remedy must be to bring that war to an end, or to
palliate its effects. Its effects may, perhaps, be palliated by insuring
our ships and cargoes destined for that sea, and by forming a convention
with the regency, for the ransom of our seamen, according to a fixed
tariff. That tariff will, probably, be high, and the rate of insurance
so settled, in the long run, as to pay for the vessels and cargoes
captured, and something more. What proportion will be captured nothing
but experience can determine. Our commerce differs from that of most of
the nations with whom the predatory States are in habits of war. Theirs
is spread all over the face of the Mediterranean, and therefore must
be sought for all over its face. Ours must all enter at a strait only
five leagues wide; so that their cruisers, taking a safe and commanding
position near the strait's mouth, may very effectually inspect whatever
enters it. So safe a station, with a certainty of receiving for their
prisoners a good and stated price, may tempt their cupidity to seek our
vessels particularly. Nor is it certain that our seamen could be induced
to engage in that navigation, though with the security of Algerine faith
that they would be liberated on the payment of a fixed sum. The temporary
deprivation of liberty, perhaps chains, the danger of the pest, the perils
of the engagement preceding their surrender, and possible delays of the
ransom, might turn elsewhere the choice of men, to whom all the rest of
the world is open. In every case, these would be embarrassments which
would enter into the merchants' estimate, and endanger the preference of
foreign bottoms not exposed to them. And upon the whole, this expedient
does not fulfil our wish of a complete re-establishment of our commerce
in that sea.

A second plan might be to obtain peace by purchasing it. For this we
have the example of rich and powerful nations, in this instance counting
their interest more than their honor. If, conforming to their example,
we determine to purchase a peace, it is proper to inquire what a peace
may cost. This being merely a matter of conjecture, we can only compare
together such opinions as have been obtained, and from them form one
for ourselves.

Mr. Wolf, a respectable Irishman, who had resided very long at Algiers,
thought a peace might be obtained from that regency, and the redemption of
our captives included, for sixty or seventy thousand pounds sterling.[25]
His character and opinion both merited respect. Yet his estimate being the
lowest of all who have hazarded an opinion on this subject, one is apt
to fear his judgment might have been biassed by the hope he entertained
that the United States would charge him with this negotiation.

Captain O'Brien, one of our captives, who had been in Algiers four years
and a half at the date of his last letter, a very sensible man, and to
whom we are indebted for very minute information, supposes that peace
alone, might be bought for that sum, that is to say, for three hundred
and twenty-two thousand dollars.

The Tripoline ambassador, before mentioned, thought that peace could be
made with the three smaller powers for ninety thousand pounds sterling, to
which were to be added the expenses of the mission and other incidental
expenses. But he could not answer for Algiers; they would demand more.
The ministers plenipotentiary, who conferred with him, had judged that
as much must be paid to Algiers as to the other three powers together;
and consequently, that according to this measure, the peace of Algiers
would cost from an hundred to an hundred and twenty-five thousand pounds
sterling; or from four hundred and sixty to five hundred and seventy-five
thousand dollars.

The latter sum seemed to meet the ideas of the Count de Vergennes, who,
from a very long residence at Constantinople, was a good judge of what
related to the porte, or its dependencies.

A person whose name is not free to be mentioned here, a native of the
continent of Europe, who had long lived, and still lives at Algiers,
with whom the minister plenipotentiary of the United States, at Paris,
had many and long conversations, and found his information full, clear,
and consistent, was of opinion the peace of Algiers could not be bought
by the United States for less than one million of dollars. And when that
is paid, all is not done. On the death of a dey, (and the present one is
between seventy and eighty years of age,) respectable presents must be
made to the successor, that he may recognize the treaty and very often
he takes the liberty of altering it. When a consul is sent or changed,
new presents must be made. If these events leave a considerable interval,
occasion must be made of renewing presents. And with all this they must
see that we are in condition to chastise an infraction of the treaty;
consequently some marine force must be exhibited in their harbor from
time to time.

The late peace of Spain with Algiers is said to have cost from three
to five millions of dollars. Having received the money, they take the
vessels of that nation on the most groundless pretexts; counting, that
the same force which bound Spain to so hard a treaty, may break it with
impunity.

Their treaty with France, which had expired, was about two years ago
renewed for fifty years. The sum given at the time of renewal is not
known. But presents are to be repeated every ten years, and a tribute
of one hundred thousand dollars to be annually paid. Yet perceiving that
France, embarrassed at home with her domestic affairs, was less capable
of acting abroad, they took six vessels of that nation in the course of
the last year, and retain the captives, forty-four in number, in slavery.

It is the opinion of Captain O'Brien, that those nations are best treated
who pay a smaller sum in the beginning, and an annual tribute afterwards.
In this way he informs us that the Dutch, Danes, Swedes, and Venetians
pay to Algiers, from twenty-four to thirty thousand dollars a year,
each; the two first in naval stores, the two last chiefly in money. It
is supposed, that the peace of the Barbary States costs Great Britain
about sixty thousand guineas, or two hundred and eighty thousand dollars
a year. But it must be noted that these facts cannot be authentically
advanced; as from a principle of self-condemnation, the governments keep
them from the public eye as much as possible.

Nor must we omit finally to recollect, that the Algerines, attentive
to reserve always a sufficient aliment for their piracies, will never
extend their peace beyond certain limits, and consequently, that we may
find ourselves in the case of those nations to whom they refuse peace
at any price.

The third expedient is to repel force by force. Several statements are
hereto annexed of the naval force of Algiers, taken in 1785, 1786, 1787,
1788, and 1789, differing in small degrees, but concurring in the main.
From these it results that they have usually had about nine chebecs,
from ten to thirty-six guns, and four galleys, which have been reduced
by losses to six chebecs and four galleys. They have a forty-gun frigate
on the stocks, and expect two cruisers from the grand seignior. The
character of their vessels is, that they are sharp built and swift, but
so light as not to stand the broadside of a good frigate. Their guns are
of different calibres, unskilfully pointed and worked. The vessels illy
manœuvred, but crowded with men, one third Turks, the rest Moors, of
determined bravery, and resting their sole hopes on boarding. But two of
these vessels belong to the government, the rest being private property.
If they come out of the harbor together, they separate immediately in
quest of prey; and it is said they were never known to act together
in any instance. Nor do they come out at all, when they know there are
vessels cruising for them. They perform three cruises a year, between
the middle of April and November, when they unrig and lay up for the
winter. When not confined within the straits, they rove northwardly to
the channel, and westwardly to the westward islands.

They are at peace at present, with France, Spain, England, Venice, the
United Netherlands, Sweden, and Denmark; and at war with Russia, Austria,
Portugal, Naples, Sardinia, Genoa, and Malta.

Should the United States propose to vindicate their commerce by arms,
they would, perhaps, think it prudent to possess a force equal to the
whole of that which may be opposed to them. What that equal force would
be, will belong to another department to say.

At the same time it might never be necessary to draw out the whole at
once, nor perhaps any proportion of it, but for a small part of the
year; as it is reasonable to presume that a concert of operation might
be arranged among the powers at war with the Barbary States, so as that,
each performing a tour of given duration, and in given order, a constant
cruise during the eight temperate months of every year, may be kept
up before the harbor of Algiers, till the object of such operations be
completely obtained. Portugal has singly, for several years past, kept
up such a cruise before the straits of Gibraltar, and by that means has
confined the Algerines closely within. But two of their vessels have
been out of the straits in the last five years. Should Portugal effect a
peace with them, as has been apprehended for some time, the Atlantic will
immediately become the principal scene of their piracies; their peace
with Spain having reduced the profits of their Mediterranean cruises
below the expenses of equipment.

Upon the whole, it rests with Congress to decide between war, tribute,
and ransom, as the means of re-establishing our Mediterranean commerce.
If war, they will consider how far our own resources shall be called
forth, and how far they will enable the Executive to engage, in the
forms of the constitution, the co-operation of other powers. If tribute
or ransom, it will rest with them to limit and provide the amount; and
with the Executive, observing the same constitutional forms, to take
arrangements for employing it to the best advantage.


No. 1.--_Extract of a letter from Richard O'Brien, one of the American
captives at Algiers, to Congress. Algiers, December 26, 1789._

"It was the opinion of Mr. John Wolf, who resided many years in this
city, that the United States of America may obtain a peace for one hundred
years with this regency, for the sum of sixty or seventy thousand pounds
sterling, and the redemption of fifteen Americans included. Mr. Wolf was
the British _chargé des affaires_ in Algiers, and was much the friend
of America, but he is no more.

"I have now been four years and a half in captivity, and I have much
reason to think, that America may obtain a peace with Algiers for the sum
of sixty-five or seventy thousand pounds, considering the present state
of Algiers. That this regency would find it their interest to take two
or three American cruisers in part payment for making a peace; and also
would take masts, yards, plank, scantling, tar, pitch, and turpentine,
and Philadelphia iron, as a part payment; all to be regulated at a
certain fixed price by treaty."


No. 2.--_Extract of a letter from the Honorable John Adams, Minister
Plenipotentiary for the United States at London, to the Honorable John
Jay, Secretary for Foreign Affairs. London, February 22, 1786_

"On Monday evening another conference was held with the Tripolitan
ambassador. When he began to explain himself concerning his demands, he
said they would be different according to the duration of the treaty.
If that were perpetual, they would be greater; if for a term of years,
less; his advice was that it should be perpetual. Once signed by the
bashaw, dey, and other officers, it would be indissoluble and binding
forever upon all their successors. But if a temporary treaty were made,
it might be difficult and expensive to revive it. For a perpetual treaty,
such as they now had with Spain, a sum of thirty thousand guineas must
be paid upon the delivery of the articles signed by the dey and other
officers. If it were agreed to, he would send his secretary by land to
Marseilles, and from thence, by water, to Tripoli, who should bring it
back by the same route, signed by the dey, &c. He had proposed so small
a sum in consideration of the circumstances, but declared it was not
half of what had been lately paid them by Spain. If we chose to treat
upon a different plan, he would make a treaty perpetual upon the payment
of twelve thousand five hundred guineas for the first year, and three
thousand guineas annually, until the thirty thousand guineas were paid. It
was observed that these were large sums, and vastly beyond expectation;
but his excellency answered, that they never made a treaty for less.
Upon the arrival of a prize, the dey and other officers are entitled,
by their laws, to large shares, by which they might make greater profits
than those sums amounted to, and they never would give up this advantage
for less.

"He was told, that although there was full power to treat, the American
ministers were limited to a much smaller sum; so that it would be
impossible to do anything until we wrote to Congress and know their
pleasure. Colonel Smith was present at this, as he had been at the
last conference, and agreed to go to Paris, to communicate all to Mr.
Jefferson, and persuade him to come here, that we may join in farther
conferences, and transmit the result to Congress.

"The ambassador believed that Tunis and Morocco would treat upon the
same terms, but could not answer for Algiers. They would demand more.
When Mr. Jefferson arrives, we shall insist upon knowing the ultimatum,
and transmit it to Congress.

"Congress will perceive that one hundred and twenty thousand guineas will
be indispensable to conclude with the four powers at this rate, besides
a present to the ambassadors, and their incidental charges. Besides
this, a present of five hundred guineas is made, upon the arrival of
a consul in each State. No man wishes more fervently that the expense
could be less, but the fact cannot be altered, and the truth ought not
to be concealed.

"It may be reasonably concluded that this great affair cannot be finished
for much less than two hundred thousand pounds sterling."


No. 3.--_Extract of a Letter from the Honorable Thomas Jefferson, Minister
Plenipotentiary for the United States at Paris, to the Honorable John
Jay, Secretary for foreign Affairs. Paris, May 23, 1786._

"Letters received both from Madrid and Algiers, while I was in London,
having suggested that treaties with the States of Barbary would be much
facilitated by a previous one with the Ottoman Porte, it was agreed
between Mr. Adams and myself, that on my return I should consult, on this
subject, the Count De Vergennes, whose long residence at Constantinople
rendered him the best judge of its expediency. Various circumstances
have put it out of my power to consult him till to-day. I stated to him
the difficulties we were likely to meet with at Algiers, and asked his
opinion, what would be the probable expense of a diplomatic mission
to Constantinople, and what its effects at Algiers. He said that the
expense would be very great; for that presents must be made at that
court, and every one would be gaping after them; and that it would not
procure us a peace at Algiers one penny the cheaper. He observed that
the Barbary States acknowledged a sort of vassalage to the Porte, and
availed themselves of that relation when anything was to be gained by
it; but that whenever it subjected them to the demand from the Porte,
they totally disregarded it; that money was the sole agent. He cited the
present example of Spain, which, though having a treaty with the Porte,
would probably be obliged to buy a peace at Algiers, at the expense of
upwards of six millions of livres. I told him we had calculated, from
the demands and information of the Tripoline ambassador at London, that
to make peace with the four Barbary States would cost us between two
and three hundred thousand guineas, if bought with money.

"The sum did not seem to exceed his expectations. I mentioned to him, that
considering the uncertainty of a peace, when bought, perhaps Congress
might think it more eligible to establish a cruise of frigates in the
Mediterranean, and even blockade Algiers. He supposed it would require
ten vessels, great and small. I observed to him that M. De Massiac had
formerly done it with five; he said it was true, but that vessels of
relief would be necessary. I hinted to him that I thought the English
capable of administering aid to the Algerines. He seemed to think it
impossible, on account of the scandal it would bring on them. I asked him
what had occasioned the blockade by M. De Massiac, he said an infraction
of their treaty by the Algerines."


No. 4.--_Extract of a Letter from Richard O'Brien to the Hon. Thomas
Jefferson. Algiers, April 28, 1787._

"It seems the Neapolitan ambassador had obtained a truce with this
regency for three months; and the ambassador wrote his court of his
success; but about the 1st of April, when the cruisers were fitting out,
the ambassador went to the dey, and hoped the dey would give the necessary
orders to the captains of his cruisers not to take the Neapolitan vessels.
The dey said the meaning of the truce was not to take the Neapolitan
cruisers, but if his chebecks should meet the Neapolitan merchantmen to
take them and send them for Algiers. The ambassador said, the Neapolitan
cruisers would not want a pass on those terms. The dey said, if his
chebecks should meet either men of war or merchant vessels, to take them;
so gave orders accordingly. The Algerines sailed the 9th instant, and
are gone, I believe, off the coast of Italy. This shows there is very
little confidence to be put in the royal word. No principle of national
honor will bind those people; and I believe not much confidence to be
put in them in treaties. The Algerines are not inclinable to a peace
with the Neapolitans. I hear of no negotiation. When the two frigates
arrive with the money for the ransom of the slaves, I believe they are
done with the Neapolitans."


_Extract of a Letter from Richard O'Brien to the Hon. Thomas Jefferson.
Algiers, June 13, 1789._

"The cruisers had orders to take the Danes; but I believe Denmark,
suspecting that on account of their alliance with Russia, that the grand
seignior would order the regency of Algiers to make war against the
Danes; accordingly, the Danes have evacuated the Mediterranean seas,
until the affairs of Europe are more settled. The Danish ship with
the tribute is shortly expected. She is worth fifty thousand dollars;
so that the Algerines will not make known publicly their intention of
breaking with Denmark, until this ship arrives with the tribute. I am
very sure that Mr. Robindar is very sensible of the intention of those
sea-robbers, the terror and scourge of the Christians. The reason the
Algerines have not committed any depredations on the English, is, that
the cruisers have not met with any of them richly loaded; for if they
had met a rich ship from London for Livorna, they would certainly have
brought her into port, and said that such ship was loaded for the enemy
of Algiers at Livorna; but if that was not a sufficient excuse, hove
overboard or clipt the pass.

"Consul Logie has been treated with much contempt by the Algerine
ministry; and you may depend, that when the dey goes to his long home,
that his successor will not renew the peace with Great Britain, without
a large sum of money is paid, and very valuable presents. This I well
know; the whole ministry says, that the peace with the English is very
old, and that the English must conform to the custom of other nations,
in giving the government here money and presents. In fact, the Algerines
are trying their endeavors to find some nation to break the peace with
them. I think, if they had treated the English in such a manner as they
have the French, that the English would resent it."


_Extract of a Letter from Richard O'Brien to the Hon. Thomas Jefferson.
Algiers, June 13, 1789._

"What dependence or faith could be given to a peace with the Algerines,
considering their present haughtiness, and with what contempt and
derision do they treat all nations; so that, in my opinion, until the
Algerines more strictly adhere to the treaties they have already made,
it would be impolitic in any nation to try to make a peace here; for I
see they take more from the nations they are at peace with, than from
those they are at declared war with. The Portuguese, I hope, will keep
the Algerines inside the straits; for only consider the bad consequence
of the Algerines going into the mar Grandi. Should the Portuguese make
a sudden peace with this regency, the Algerines would immediately go
out of the straits, and of course, take many an American."


No. 5.--_Extract of a Letter from the Hon. John Adams, Esq., Minister
Plenipotentiary of the United States at the Court of Great Britain, to
the Hon. John Jay, Esq., Secretary for Foreign Affairs. February 16,
1786._

"The American commerce can be protected from these Africans only
by negotiation, or by war. If presents should be exacted from us, as
ample as those which are given by England, the expense may amount to
sixty thousand pounds sterling a year, an enormous sum to be sure; but
infinitely less than the expense of fighting. Two frigates of 30 guns
each would cost as much to fit them for the sea, besides the accumulating
charges of stores, provisions, pay, and clothing. The powers of Europe
generally send a squadron of men of war with their ministers, and offer
battle at the same time that they propose treaties and promise presents."


No. 6.--_Several statements of the Marine force of Algiers.--Public and
private_

May 20, 1786.--Mr. Lamb says it consists of

     9 Chebecs     } from 36 to 8 guns; manned, the largest with 400 men,
     10 Row Galleys} and so in proportion.

May 27, 1787.--Mr. Randall furnishes two statements, viz.:

     A more general one--1 Setye of 34 guns.
                         2  "     " 32  "
                         1  "     " 26  "
                         1  "     " 24  "
                         1 Chebec   20  "
                         1  "     " 18  "
                         1  "     " 10  "
                        ---
                         8

         4 half-galleys, carrying from 120 to 130 Moors.
         3 galliots of 70, 60, and 50 Moors.

A more particular one as follows:

      1 of 32 guns, viz. 2 eighteens, 24 nines, 6 fours, and 450 men.
      1 of 28  "     "   2 twelves,   24   "    2 sixes,  "  400  "
      1 of 24  "     "                20 fours,           "  350  "
      1 of 20  "     "                20 sixes,           "  300  "
      2 of 18  "     "                18   "              "  260  "
      1 of 16  "     "                16   "              "  250  "
      2 small craft.
     ---
      9

     55 gun-boats, carrying 1 twelve pounder each, for defence of the
     harbor.

June 8, 1786.--A letter from the three American captains, O'Brien,
Coffin, and Stephens, state them

     as 1 of 32
        1 of 30
        3 of 24
        3 of 18
        1 of 12
       ---
        9 and 55 gun-boats.

September 25, 1787.--Captain O'Brien furnishes the following statement

             1 of 30 guns, 400 men, 106 feet length, straight keel.
             1 of 26  "    320  "    96  "     "        "      "
             2 of 22  "    240  "    80  "     "        "      "
             1 of 22  "    240  "    75  "     "        "      "
             1 of 22  "    240  "    70  "     "        "      "
             1 of 18  "    200  "    70  "     "        "      "
             1 of 16  "    180  "    64  "     "        "      "
             1 of 12  "    150  "    50  "     "        "      "
            ---
             9
     Galleys 1 of 4   "     70  "    40  "     "        "      "
             2 of 2   "     46  "    32  "     "        "      "
             1 of 2   "     40  "    32  "     "        "      "

February 5, 1788.--Statement by the inhabitants of Algiers, spoken of
in the report.

     9 vessels from 36 down to 20 guns.
     4 or 5 smaller.

About this date the Algerines lost two or three vessels, stranded or taken.

December, 1789.--Captain O'Brien furnishes the latest statement.

      1 ship of 24 guns, received lately from France.
      5 large cruisers.
     ---
      6       3 galleys, and 60 gun-boats.

In the fall of 1789, they laid the keel of a 40 gun frigate, and they
expect two cruisers from the grand seignior.


No. 7.--_Translation of a Letter from Count D'Estaing to the Hon. Thomas
Jefferson, Esq. Paris, May 17, 1784._

SIR,--In giving you an account of an opinion of Mr. Massiac, and
which absolutely corresponds with my own, I cannot too much observe how
great a difference may take place in the course of forty years between
the means which he required and those which political circumstances,
that I cannot ascertain, may exact.

This Secretary of State, afterwards vice-Admiral, had the modesty, when a
captain, to propose a means for the reduction of Algiers, less brilliant
to himself, but more sure and economical than the one government was
about to adopt. They wanted him to undertake a bombardment; he proposed
a simple blockade. All the force he requested was a single man-of-war,
two strong frigates, and two sloops-of-war.

I am convinced, that by blocking up Algiers by cross-anchoring, and with
a long tow, that is to say, with several cables spliced to each other,
and with iron chains, one might, if necessary, always remain there, and
there is no Barbarian power thus confined, which would not sue for peace.

During the war before last the English remained, even in winter, at
anchor before Morbian, on the coast of Brittany, which is a much more
dangerous coast. Expeditious preparation for sailing of the vessels
which form the blockade, which should be of a sufficient number to
prevent anything from entering or going out, while the rest remain at
their stations, the choice of these stations, skilful manœuvres, strict
watch during the night, every precaution against the element which every
seaman ought to be acquainted with; also, against the enemy to prevent
the sudden attack of boats, and to repel them in case they should make
an attack by boats prepared for the purpose, frequent refreshments for
the crews, relieving the men, an unshaken constancy and exactness in
service, are the means, which in my opinion, would render the event
indubitable. Bombardments are but transitory. It is, if I may so express
myself, like breaking glass windows with guineas. None have produced
effect against the barbarians. Even an imperfect blockade, were one
to have the patience and courage to persist therein, would occasion a
perpetual evil, it would be insupportable in the long run. To obtain the
end proposed no advantage ought to be lost. If several powers would come
to a good understanding, and pursue a plan formed on the principles of
humanity; if they were not counteracted by others, it would require but
a few years to compel the barbarians to cease being pirates; they would
become merchants in spite of themselves. It is needless to observe, that
the unsuccessful attempts of Spain, and those under which the republic
of Venice, perhaps, hides other views, have increased the strength as
well as the self-love of all the barbarians. We are assured that the
Algerines have fitted out merchantmen with heavy cannon. This would
render it necessary to block the place with two ships, so that one of
the two might remain moored near the bar, while the other might prepare
to support such of the frigates as should give chase. But their chebecs,
even their frigates, and all their vessels, although overcharged with
men, are moreover so badly armed and manœuvred that assistance from
without would be most to be feared.

Your excellency has told me the only true means of bringing to terms the
only people who can take a pleasure in disturbing our commerce. You see,
I speak as an American citizen; this title, dear to my heart, the value
of which I justly prize, affords me the happy opportunity of offering,
still more particularly, the homage, the sincere attachment, and the
respect with which I have the honor to be, &c.

                                                              ESTAING.

FOOTNOTE:

     [25] See No. 1 accompanying this report.


XIX.--_Report on the Algerine Prisoners._

                                                    December 28, 1790.

The Secretary of State, having had under consideration the situation
of the citizens of the United States in captivity at Algiers, makes the
following report thereupon to the President of the United States:

When the House of Representatives, at their late session, were pleased to
refer to the Secretary of State, the petition of our citizens in captivity
at Algiers, there still existed some expectation that certain measures,
which had been employed to effect their redemption, the success of which
depended on their secrecy, might prove effectual. Information received
during the recess of Congress has so far weakened those expectations, as
to make it now a duty to lay before the President of the United States,
a full statement of what has been attempted for the relief of these our
suffering citizens, as well before, as since he came into office, that
he may be enabled to decide what further is to be done.

On the 25th of July, 1785, the schooner Maria, Captain Stevens, belonging
to a Mr. Foster, of Boston, was taken off Cape St. Vincents, by an
Algerine corsair; and, five days afterwards, the ship Dauphin, Captain
O'Brien, belonging to Messieurs Irvins of Philadelphia, was taken by
another Algerine, about fifty leagues westward of Lisbon. These vessels,
with their cargoes and crews, twenty-one persons in number, were carried
into Algiers.

Congress had some time before commissioned ministers plenipotentiary for
entering into treaties of amity and commerce with the Barbary Powers, and
to send to them proper agents for preparing such treaties. An agent was
accordingly appointed for Algiers, and his instructions prepared, when
the Ministers Plenipotentiary received information of these captures.
Though the ransom of captives was not among the objects expressed in
their commissions, because at their dates the case did not exist, yet
they thought it their duty to undertake that ransom, fearing that the
captives might be sold and dispersed through the interior and distant
countries of Africa, if the previous orders of Congress should be waited
for. They therefore added a supplementary instruction to the agent to
negotiate their ransom. But, while acting thus without authority, they
thought themselves bound to offer a price so moderate as not to be
disapproved. They therefore restrained him to two hundred dollars a man;
which was something less than had been just before paid for about three
hundred French captives, by the Mathurins, a religious order of France,
instituted in ancient times for the redemption of Christian captives
from the infidel Powers. On the arrival of the agent at Algiers, the dey
demanded fifty-nine thousand four hundred and ninety-six dollars for the
twenty-one captives, and could be brought to abate but little from that
demand. The agent, therefore, returned in 1786, without having effected
either peace or ransom.

In the beginning of the next year, 1787, the Minister Plenipotentiary of
the United States at Paris procured an interview with the general of the
religious order of Mathurins, before mentioned, to engage him to lend
his agency, at the expense of the United States, for the redemption of
their captive citizens. He proffered at once all the services he could
render, with the liberality and the zeal which distinguish his character.
He observed, that he had agents on the spot, constantly employed in
seeking out and redeeming the captives of their own country; that these
should act for us, as for themselves; that nothing could be accepted for
their agency; and that he would only expect that the price of redemption
should be ready on our part, so as to cover the engagement into which he
should enter. He added, that, by the time all expenses were paid, their
last redemption had amounted to near two thousand five hundred livres
a man, and that he could by no means flatter us that they could redeem
our captives as cheap as their own. The pirates would take advantage of
its being out of their ordinary line. Still he was in hopes they would
not be much higher.

The proposition was then submitted to Congress, that is to say, in
February, 1787, and on the 19th of September, in the same year, their
Minister Plenipotentiary at Paris received their orders to embrace the
offers of the Mathurins. This he immediately notified to the general,
observing, however, that he did not desire him to enter into any
engagements till a sufficient sum to cover them should be actually
deposited in Paris. The general wished that the whole might be kept
rigorously secret, as, should the barbarians suspect him to be acting for
the United States, they would demand such sums as he could never agree to
give, even with our consent, because it would injure his future purchases
from them. He said he had information from his agent at Algiers, that our
captives received so liberal a daily allowance as to evince that it came
from a public source. He recommended that this should be discontinued;
engaging that he would have an allowance administered to them, much
short indeed of what they had hitherto received, but such as was given
to his own countrymen, quite sufficient for physical necessities, and
more likely to prepare the opinion, that as they were subsisted by his
charity, they were to be redeemed by it also. These ideas, suggested to
him by the danger of raising his market, were approved by the Minister
Plenipotentiary; because, this being the first instance of a redemption
by the United States, it would form a precedent, because a high price
given by us might induce these pirates to abandon all other nations in
pursuit of Americans; whereas, the contrary would take place, could our
price of redemption be fixed at the lowest point.

To destroy, therefore, every expectation of a redemption by the United
States, the bills of the Spanish consul at Algiers, who had made the kind
advances before spoken of for the sustenance of our captives, were not
answered. On the contrary, a hint was given that these advances had better
be discontinued, as it was not known that they would be reimbursed. It
was necessary even to go further, and to suffer the captives themselves
and their friends to believe for awhile, that no attention was paid
to them, no notice taken of their letters. They are still under this
impression. It would have been unsafe to trust them with a secret, the
disclosure of which might forever prevent their redemption, by raising
the demands of the captors to sums which a due regard for our seamen,
still in freedom, would forbid us to give. This was the most trying of
all circumstances, and drew from them the most afflicting reproaches.

It was a twelvemonth afterwards before the money could be deposited in
Paris, and the negotiation be actually put into train. In the meantime
the general had received information from Algiers of a very considerable
change of prices there. Within the last two or three years the Spaniards,
the Neapolitans, and the Russians, had redeemed at exorbitant sums.
Slaves were become scarce, and would hardly be sold at any price. Still
he entered on the business with an assurance of doing the best in his
power; and he was authorized to offer as far as three thousand livres,
or five hundred and fifty-five dollars a man. He wrote immediately to
consult a confidential agent at Marseilles, on the best mode of carrying
this business into effect; from whom he received the answer No. 2, hereto
annexed.

Nothing further was known of his progress or prospects, when the House
of Representatives were pleased, at their last session, to refer the
petition of our captives at Algiers to the Secretary of State. The
preceding narrative shows that no report could have then been made without
risking the object, of which some hopes were still entertained. Later
advices, however, from the chargé des affaires of the United States, at
Paris, informs us, that these measures, though not yet desperate, are
not to be counted on. Besides the exorbitance of price, before feared,
the late transfer of the lands and revenues of the clergy in France
to the public, by withdrawing the means, seems to have suspended the
proceedings of the Mathurins in the purposes of their institution.

It is time, therefore, to look about for something more promising,
without relinquishing, in the meanwhile, the chance of success through
them. Endeavors to collect information, which have been continued a
considerable time, as to the ransoms which would probably be demanded
from us, and those actually paid by other nations, enable the Secretary
of State to lay before the President the following short view, collected
from original papers now in his possession, or from information delivered
to him personally. Passing over the ransoms of the Mathurins, which are
kept far below the common level by special circumstances:

In 1786, the dey of Algiers demanded from our agent $59,496 for twenty-one
captives, which was $2,833 a man. The agent flattered himself they could
be ransomed for $1,200 apiece. His secretary informed us, at the same
time, that Spain had paid $1,600.

In 1787, the Russians redeemed at $1,546 a man.

In 1788, a well-informed inhabitant of Algiers assured the Minister
Plenipotentiary of the United States at Paris, that no nation had
redeemed, since the Spanish treaty, at less than from £250 to £300
sterling, the medium of which is $1,237. Captain O'Brien, at the same
date, thinks we must pay $1,800, and mentions a Savoy captain, just
redeemed at $4,074.

In 1789, Mr. Logie, the English consul at Algiers, informed a person who
wished to ransom one of our common sailors, that he would cost from £450
to £500 sterling, the mean of which is $2,137. In December of the same
year, Captain O'Brien thinks our men will now cost $2,290 each, though
a Jew merchant believes he could get them for $2,264.

In 1790, July 9th, a Mr. Simpson, of Gibraltar, who, at some particular
request, had taken pains to find for what sum our captives could be
redeemed, finds that the fourteen will cost $34,79,228, which is $2,485
a man. At the same date, one of them, a Scotch boy, a common mariner,
was actually redeemed at 8,000 livres, equal to $1,481, which is within
nineteen dollars of the price Simpson states for common men; and the
chargé des affaires of the United States at Paris is informed that
the whole may be redeemed at that rate, adding fifty per cent. on the
captains, which would bring it to $1,571 a man.

It is found then that the prices are 1,200, 1,237, 1,481, 1,546, 1,571,
1,600, 1,800, 2,137, 2,264, 2,485, 2,833, and 2,920 dollars a man, not
noticing that of $4,074, because it was for a captain.

In 1786, there were 2,200 captives in Algiers, which, in 1789, had been
reduced by death or ransom to 655. Of ours six have died, and one has
been ransomed by his friends.

From these facts and opinions, some conjecture may be formed of the
terms on which the liberty of our citizens may be obtained.

But should it be thought better to repress force by force, another
expedient for their liberation may perhaps offer. Captures made on the
enemy may perhaps put us into possession of some of their mariners, and
exchange be substituted for ransom. It is not indeed a fixed usage with
them to exchange prisoners. It is rather their custom to refuse it.
However, such exchanges are sometimes effected, by allowing them more
or less of advantage. They have sometimes accepted of two Moors for a
Christian, at others they have refused five or six for one. Perhaps
Turkish captives may be objects of greater partiality with them, as
their government is entirely in the hands of Turks, who are treated in
every instance as a superior order of beings. Exchange, too, will be more
practicable in our case, as our captives have not been sold to private
individuals, but are retained in the hands of the Government.

The liberation of our citizens has an intimate connection with
the liberation of our commerce in the Mediterranean, now under the
consideration of Congress. The distresses of both proceed from the same
cause, and the measures which shall be adopted for the relief of the
one, may, very probably, involve the relief of the other.


XX.--_The Secretary of State, to whom was referred by the House of
Representatives, the representation from the General Court of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, on the subjects of the cod and whale
fisheries, together with the several papers accompanying it, has had
the same under consideration, and thereupon makes the following report_:

                                                     February 1, 1791.

The representation sets forth that, before the late war, about four
thousand seamen, and about twenty-four thousand tons of shipping, were
annually employed from that State, in the whale fishery, the produce
whereof was about three hundred and fifty thousand pounds lawful money
a year.

That, previous to the same period, the cod fishery of that State employed
four thousand men, and twenty-eight thousand tons of shipping, and
produced about two hundred and fifty thousand pounds a year.

That these branches of business, annihilated during the war, have been,
in some degree, recovered since; but that they labor under many and
heavy embarrassments, which, if not removed, or lessened, will render
the fisheries every year less extensive and important.

That these embarrassments are, heavy duties on their produce abroad,
and bounties on that of their competitors; and duties at home on several
articles, particularly used in the fisheries.

And it asks that the duties be taken off; that bounties be given to
the fishermen; and the national influence be used abroad, for obtaining
better markets for their produce.

The cod and whale fisheries, carried on by different persons, from
different ports, in different vessels, in different seas, and seeking
different markets, agree in one circumstance, in being as unprofitable
to the adventurer, as important to the public. A succinct view of their
rise, progress, and present state, with different nations, may enable
us to note the circumstances which have attended their prosperity, and
their decline; to judge of the embarrassments which are said to oppress
ours; to see whether they depend on our own will, and may, therefore,
be remedied immediately by ourselves, or, whether depending on the will
of others, they are without the reach of remedy from us, either directly
or indirectly.

Their history being as unconnected as their practice, they shall be
separately considered.

Within twenty years after the supposed discovery of Newfoundland, by
the Cabots, we find that the abundance of fish on its banks, had already
drawn the attention of the people of Europe. For, as early as 1517, or
1519, we are told of fifty ships being seen there at one time. The first
adventurers in that fishery were the Biscayans, of Spain, the Basques
and Bas-Bretons, of France, all united anciently in language, and still
in habits, and in extreme poverty. The last circumstance enabled them
long to retain a considerable share of the fishery. In 1577, the French
had one hundred and fifty vessels there; the Spaniards had still one
hundred, and the Portuguese fifty, when the English had only fifteen.
The Spaniards and Portuguese seem at length to have retired silently, the
French and English claiming the fishery exclusively, as an appurtenance
to their adjacent colonies, and the profits being too small for nations
surcharged with the precious metals proceeding from their mines.

Without materials to trace the intermediate progress, we only know that,
so late as 1744, the French employed there five hundred and sixty-four
ships, and twenty-seven thousand five hundred seamen, and took one million
two hundred and forty-six thousand quintals of fish, which was three
times the extent to which England and her colonies together, carried
this fishery at that time.

The English, in the beginning of the seventeenth century, had employed,
generally, about one hundred and fifty vessels in the Newfoundland
fishery. About 1670 we find them reduced to eighty, and one hundred,
the inhabitants of New England beginning now to supplant them. A little
before this, the British Parliament perceiving that their citizens were
unable to subsist on the scanty profits which sufficed for their poorer
competitors, endeavored to give them some advantage by prohibiting the
importation of foreign fish; and, at the close of the century, they
formed some regulations for their government and protection, and remitted
to them some duties. A successful war enabled them, in 1713, to force
from the French a cession of the Island of Newfoundland; under these
encouragements, the English and American fisheries began to thrive. In
1731 we find the English take two hundred thousand quintals of fish,
and the Americans two hundred and thirty thousand, besides the refuse
fish, not fit for European markets. They continue to gain ground, and
the French to lose it, insomuch that, about 1755, they are said to
have been on a par; and, in 1768, the French have only two hundred and
fifty-nine vessels, of twenty-four thousand four hundred and twenty tons,
nine thousand seven hundred and twenty-two seamen, taking two hundred
thousand quintals, while America alone, for some three or four years
before that, and so on, to the commencement of the late war, employed
six hundred and sixty-five vessels, of twenty-five thousand six hundred
and fifty tons, and four thousand four hundred and five seamen, and
took from three hundred and fifty thousand to upwards of four hundred
thousand quintals of fish, and England a still greater quantity, five
hundred and twenty-six thousand quintals, as is said.

Spain had formally relinquished her pretensions to a participation in
these fisheries, at the close of the preceding war; and, at the end
of this, the adjacent continent and islands being divided between the
United States, the English and French, (for the last retained two small
islands merely for this object,) the right of fishing was appropriated
to them also.

France, sensible of the necessity of balancing the power of England on the
water, and, therefore, of improving every resource for raising seamen, and
seeing that her fishermen could not maintain their competition without
some public patronage, adopted the experiment of bounties on her own
fish, and duties on that of foreign nations brought into her markets.
But, notwithstanding this, her fisheries dwindle, from a change taken
place, insensibly, in the character of her navigation, which, from being
the most economical, is now become the most expensive. In 1786, she is
said to have employed but seven thousand men in this fishery, and to have
taken four hundred and twenty-six thousand quintals; and, in 1787, but
six thousand men, and one hundred and twenty-eight thousand quintals.
She seems not yet sensible that the unthriftiness of her fisheries
proceeds from the want of economy, and not the want of markets; and that
the encouragement of our fishery abridges that of a rival nation, whose
power on the ocean has long threatened the loss of all balance on that
element.

The plan of the English Government, since the peace, has been to prohibit
all foreign fish in their markets, and they have given from eighteen to
fifty thousand pounds sterling on every fishing vessel complying with
certain conditions. This policy is said to have been so far successful,
as to have raised the number of seamen employed in that business, in
1786, to fourteen thousand, and the quantity of fish taken, to 732,000
quintals.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fisheries of the United States, annihilated during the war; their
vessels, utensils, and fishermen destroyed; their markets in the
Mediterranean and British America lost, and their produce dutied in those
of France; their competitors enabled by bounties to meet and undersell
them at the few markets remaining open, without any public aid, and,
indeed, paying aids to the public;--such were the hopeless auspices under
which this important business was to be resumed. Yet it was resumed, and,
aided by the mere force of natural advantages, they employed, during
the years 1786, 1787, 1788, and 1789, on an average, five hundred and
thirty-nine vessels, of nineteen thousand one hundred and eighty-five
tons, three thousand two hundred and eighty-seven seamen, and took
two hundred and fifty thousand six hundred and fifty quintals of fish.
* * * * * And an official paper * * * * * shows that, in the last of
those years, our exportation amounted to three hundred and seventy-five
thousand and twenty quintals, and thirty thousand four hundred and
sixty-one barrels; deduction made of three thousand seven hundred and
one quintals, and six thousand three hundred and forty-three barrels of
foreign fish, received and re-exported. * * * * * Still, however, the
calculations * * * * * which accompany the representation, show that
the profits of the sales in the years 1787 and 1788, were too small to
afford a living to the fishermen, and on those of 1789, there was such
a loss as to withdraw thirty-three vessels, of the town of Marblehead
alone, from the further pursuit of this business; and the apprehension
is, that, without some public aid, those still remaining will continue
to withdraw, and this whole commerce be engrossed by a single nation.

This rapid view of the cod fishery enables us to discern under what
policy it has nourished or declined in the hands of other nations, and
to mark the fact, that it is too poor a business to be left to itself,
even with the nation most advantageously situated.

It will now be proper to count the advantages which aid, and the
disadvantages which oppose us, in this conflict.

Our advantages are--

1. The neighborhood of the great fisheries, which permits our fishermen
to bring home their fish to be salted by their wives and children.

2. The shore fisheries, so near at hand, as to enable the vessels to run
into port in a storm, and so lessen the risk, for which distant nations
must pay insurance.

3. The winter fisheries, which, like household manufactures employ
portions of time, which would otherwise be useless.

4. The smallness of the vessels, which the shortness of the voyage enables
us to employ, and which, consequently, require but a small capital.

5. The cheapness of our vessels, which do not cost above the half of
the Baltic fir vessels, computing price and duration.

6. Their excellence as sea boats, which decreases the risk and quickens
the return.

7. The superiority of our mariners in skill, activity, enterprise,
sobriety, and order.

8. The cheapness of provisions.

9. The cheapness of casks, which, of itself, is said to be equal to an
extra profit of fifteen per cent.

These advantages are of such force, that, while experience has proved
that no other nation can make a mercantile profit on the Newfoundland
fishery, nor can support it without national aid, we can make a living
profit, if vent for our fish can be procured.

Of the disadvantages opposed to us, those which depend on ourselves, are--

Tonnage and naval duties on the vessels employed in the fishery.

Impost duties on salt.

On tea, rum, sugar, molasses, hooks, lines, and leads, duck, cordage, and
cables, iron, hemp, and twine, used in the fishery; coarse woollens, worn
by the fishermen, and the poll tax levied by the State on their persons.
The statement No. 6, shows the amount of these, exclusive of the State
tax and drawback on the fish exported, to be $5 25 per man, or $57 75
per vessel of sixty-five tons. When a business is so nearly in equilibrio
that one can hardly discern whether the profit be sufficient to continue
it or not, smaller sums than these suffice to turn the scale against
it. To these disadvantages, add ineffectual duties on the importation
of foreign fish. In justification of these last, it is urged that the
foreign fish received, is in exchange for the produce of agriculture.
To which it may be answered, that the thing given, is more merchantable
than that received in exchange, and agriculture has too many markets to
be allowed to take away those of the fisheries. It will rest, therefore,
with the wisdom of the Legislature to decide, whether prohibition should
not be opposed to prohibition, and high duty to high duty, on the fish
of other nations; whether any, and which, of the naval and other duties
may be remitted, or an equivalent given to the fisherman, in the form of
a drawback, or bounty; and whether the loss of markets abroad, may not,
in some degree, be compensated, by creating markets at home; to which
might contribute the constituting fish a part of the military ration,
in stations not too distant from navigation, a part of the necessary
sea stores of vessels, and the encouraging private individuals to let
the fishermen share with the cultivator, in furnishing the supplies of
the table. A habit introduced from motives of patriotism, would soon be
followed from motives of taste; and who will undertake to fix the limits
to this demand, if it can be once excited, with a nation which doubles,
and will continue to double, at very short periods?

Of the disadvantages which depend on others, are--

1. The loss of the Mediterranean markets.

2. Exclusions from the markets of some of our neighbors.

3. High duties in those of others; and,

4. Bounties to the individuals in competition with us.

The consideration of these will find its place more aptly, after a
review of the condition of our whale fishery shall have led us to the
same point. To this branch of the subject, therefore, we will now proceed.

The whale fishery was first brought into notice of the southern nations of
Europe, in the fifteenth century, by the same Biscayans and Basques who
led the way to the fishery of Newfoundland. They began it on their own
coasts, but soon found that the principal residence of the whale was in
the Northern seas, into which, therefore, they pursued him. In 1578 they
employed twenty-five ships in that business. The Dutch and Hamburghers
took it up after this, and about the middle of the seventeenth century
the former employed about two hundred ships, and the latter about three
hundred and fifty.

The English endeavored also to participate of it. In 1672, they offered
to their own fishermen a bounty of six shillings a ton, on the oil
they should bring home, and instituted, at different times, different
exclusive companies, all of which failed of success. They raised their
bounty, in 1733, to twenty shillings a ton, on the admeasurement of the
vessel. In 1740, to thirty shillings, with a privilege to the fishermen
against being impressed. The Basque fishery, supported by poverty alone,
had maintained but a feeble existence, before competitors aided by the
bounties of their nation, and was, in fine, annihilated by the war of
1745, at the close of which the English bounty was raised to forty
shillings. From this epoch, their whale fishery went on between the
limits of twenty-eight and sixty-seven vessels, till the commencement
of the last war.

The Dutch, in the meantime, had declined gradually to about one hundred
and thirty ships, and have, since that, fallen down to less than half that
number. So that their fishery, notwithstanding a bounty of thirty florins
a man, as well as that of Hamburg, is now nearly out of competition.

In 1715, the Americans began their whale fishery. They were led to it
at first by the whales which presented themselves on their coasts. They
attacked them there in small vessels of forty tons. As the whale, being
infested, retired from the coast, they followed him farther and farther
into the ocean, still enlarging their vessels with their adventures, to
sixty, one hundred, and two hundred tons. Having extended their pursuit
to the Western Islands, they fell in, accidentally, with the spermaceti
whale, of a different species from that of Greenland, which alone had
hitherto been known in commerce: more fierce and active, and whose oil
and head matter was found to be more valuable, as it might be used in
the interior of houses without offending the smell. The distinction now
first arose between the Northern and Southern fisheries: the object of
the former being the Greenland whale, which frequents the Northern coasts
and seas of Europe and America; that of the latter being the spermaceti
whale, which was found in the Southern seas, from the Western Islands
and coast of Africa, to that of Brazil, and still on to the Falkland
Islands. Here, again, within soundings, on the coast of Brazil, they
found a third species of whale, which they called the black or Brazil
whale, smaller than the Greenland, yielding a still less valuable
oil, fit only for summer use, as it becomes opaque at 50 degrees of
Fahrenheit's termometer, while that of the spermaceti whale is limpid
to 41, and of the Greenland whale to 36, of the same thermometer. It is
only worth taking, therefore, when it falls in the way of the fishermen,
but not worth seeking, except when they have failed of success against
the spermaceti whale, in which case, this kind, easily found and taken,
serves to moderate their loss.

In 1771 the Americans had one hundred and eighty-three vessels, of
thirteen thousand eight hundred and twenty tons, in the Northern fishery,
and one hundred and twenty-one vessels, of fourteen thousand and twenty
tons, in the Southern, navigated by four thousand and fifty-nine men.
At the beginning of the late war, they had one hundred and seventy-seven
vessels in the Northern, and one hundred and thirty-two in the Southern
fishery. At that period, our fishery being suspended, the English
seized the opportunity of pushing theirs. They gave additional bounties
of £500, £400, £300, £200, £100 sterling, annually, to the five ships
which should take the greatest quantities of oil. The effect of which
was such, as, by the year 1786, to double the quantity of common oil
necessary for their own consumption. Finding, on a review of the subject,
at that time, that their bounties had cost the Government £13 10_s._
sterling a man, annually, or sixty per cent. on the cargoes, a part of
which went consequently to ease the purchases of this article made by
foreign nations, they reduced the northern bounty from forty to thirty
shillings the ton of admeasurement.

They had, some little time before, turned their attention to the Southern
fishery, and given very great bounties in it, and had invited the
fishermen of the United States to conduct their enterprises. Under their
guidance, and with such encouragement, this fishery, which had only begun
with them in 1784 or 1785, was rising into value. In 1788 they increased
their bounties, and the temptations to our fishermen, under the general
description of _foreigners who had been employed in the whale fishery_,
to pass over with their families and vessels to the British dominions,
either in America or Europe, but preferably to the latter. The effect of
these measures had been prepared, by our whale oils becoming subject,
in their market, to the foreign duty of £18 5_s._ sterling the ton,
which, being more than equal to the price of the common oil, operated
as a prohibition on that, and gave to their spermaceti oil a preference
over ours to that amount.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fishermen of the United States, left without resource, by the loss
of their market, began to think of accepting the British invitation,
and of removing, some to Nova Scotia, preferring smaller advantages in
the neighborhood of their ancient country and friends, others to Great
Britain, postponing country and friends to high premiums.

The Government of France could not be inattentive to these proceedings.
They saw the danger of letting four or five thousand seamen, of the
best in the world, be transferred to the marine strength of another
nation, and carry over with them an art, which they possessed almost
exclusively. To give time for a counterplan, the Marquis de Lafayette,
the valuable friend and citizen of this, as well as that country, wrote
to a gentleman in Boston, to dissuade the fishermen from accepting
the British proposals, and to assure them that their friends in France
would endeavor to do something for them. A vessel was then arrived from
Halifax at Nantucket, to take off those who had proposed to remove. Two
families had gone abroad, and others were going. In this moment, the
letter arriving, suspended their designs. Not another went abroad, and
the vessel returned to Halifax with only the two families.

The plan adopted by the French ministry, very different from that of
the first mover, was to give a counter invitation to the Nantucket men
to remove and settle in Dunkirk, offering them a bounty of fifty livres
(between nine and ten dollars) a ton on the admeasurement of the vessels
they should equip for the whale fishery, with some other advantages.
Nine families only, of thirty-three persons, accepted the invitation.
This was in 1785. In 1786, the ministry were led to see that their
invitation would produce but little effect, and that the true means
of preventing the emigration of our fishermen to the British dominions
would be to enable them still to follow their calling from their native
country, by giving them a new market for their oils, instead of the old
one they had lost. The duties were, therefore, abated on American whale
oil immediately, and a further abatement promised by the letter No. 8,
and, in December, 1787, the arrêt No. 9 was passed.

The rival fishermen immediately endeavored to turn this measure to
their own advantage, by pouring their whale oils into the markets of
France, where they were enabled, by the great premiums received from
their Government, perhaps, too, by extraordinary indemnifications, to
undersell both the French and American fishermen. To repel this measure,
France shut her ports to all foreign fish oils whatever, by the arrêt
No. 10. The British whale fishery fell, in consequence, the ensuing year
from two hundred and twenty-two to one hundred and seventy-eight ships.
But this general exclusion has palsied our fishery also. On the 7th of
December, 1788, therefore, by the arrêt No. 11, the ports of France still
remaining shut to all other nations, were again opened to the produce
of the whale fisheries of the United States, continuing, however, their
endeavors to recover a share in this fishery themselves, by the aid of
our fishermen. In 1784, 1785, 1786, they had had four ships. In 1787,
three. In 1788, seventeen in the two fisheries of four thousand five
hundred tons. These cost them in bounty 225,000 livres, which divided
on one thousand five hundred and fifty tons of oil, the quantity they
took, amounted to 145 livres (near twenty-seven dollars) the ton, and,
on about one hundred natives on board the seventeen ships, (for there
were one hundred and fifty Americans engaged by the voyage) came to
2,225 livres, or about 416⅔ dollars a man.

We have had, during the years 1787, 1788 and 1789, on an average,
ninety-one vessels, of five thousand eight hundred and twenty tons, in
the northern, and thirty-one of four thousand three hundred and ninety
tons in the southern fishery. * * * * *

These details will enable Congress to see with what a competition we
have to struggle for the continuance of this fishery, not to say its
increase. Against prohibitory duties in one country, and bounties to
the adventurers in both of those which are contending with each other
for the same object, ours have no auxiliaries, but poverty and rigorous
economy. The business, unaided, is a wretched one. The Dutch have
peculiar advantages for the northern fishery, as being within six or
eight days' sail of the grounds, as navigating with more economy than any
other nation in Europe, their seamen content with lower wages, and their
merchants with lower profit. Yet the memorial No. 13, from a committee of
the whale merchants to the States General of Holland, in the year 1775,
states that fourteen millions of guilders, equal to five million six
hundred thousand dollars, has been lost in that fishery in forty-seven
years, being about one hundred and twenty thousand dollars a year. The
States General, thereupon, gave a bounty of thirty guilders a man to
the fishermen. A person immediately acquainted with the British whale
fishery, and whose information merits confidence, has given assurance
that the ships employed in their northern fishery, in 1788, sunk £800
each, on an average, more than the amount of the produce and bounties.
An English ship of three hundred tons and forty-two seamen, in this
fishery, generally brings home, after a four months' voyage, twenty-five
tons of oil, worth £437 10_s._ sterling; but the wages of the officers
and seamen will be £400; there remain but £37 10_s._, not worth taking
into account, towards the outfit and merchants' profit. These, then,
must be paid by the Government; and it is on this idea that the British
bounty is calculated.

Our vessels for the northern fishery average sixty-four tons, and cost,
when built, fitted out, and victualled for the first voyage, about
three thousand dollars. They have taken, on an average, the three last
years, according to the statement No. 12, eighteen tons of oil, worth,
at our market, nine hundred dollars, which are to pay all expenses, and
subsist the fishermen and merchant. Our vessels for the southern fishery
average one hundred and forty tons, and cost, when built, fitted out,
and victualled, for their first voyage, about six thousand five hundred
dollars. They have taken on an average, the three last years, according
to the same statement, thirty-two tons of oil each, worth at our market
three thousand two hundred dollars, which are, in like manner, to pay
all expenses, and subsist the owners and navigators. These expenses
are great, as the voyages are generally of twelve months' duration. No
hope can arise of their condition being bettered by an augmentation of
the price of oil. This is kept down by the competition of the vegetable
oils, which answer the same purposes, not quite so well, but well enough
to become preferable, were the price to be raised, and so well, indeed,
as to be more generally used than the fish oils for lighting houses and
cities.

The American whale fishery is principally followed by the inhabitants
of the island of Nantucket--a sand bar of about fifteen miles long, and
three broad, capable of maintaining, by its agriculture, about twenty
families; but it employed in these fisheries, before the war, between
five or six thousand men and boys; and, in the only harbor it possesses,
it had one hundred and forty vessels, one hundred and thirty-two of which
were of the larger kind, as being employed in the southern fishery. In
agriculture, then, they have no resource; and, if that of their fishery
cannot be pursued from their own habitations, it is natural they should
seek others from which it can be followed, and preferably those where
they will find a sameness of language, religion, laws, habits, and
kindred. A foreign emissary has lately been among them, for the purpose
of renewing the invitations to a change of situation. But, attached to
their native country, they prefer continuing in it, if their continuance
there can be made supportable.

This brings us to the question, what relief does the condition of this
fishery require?

1. A remission of duties on the articles used for their calling.

2. A retaliating duty on foreign oils, coming to seek a competition with
them in or from our ports.

3. Free markets abroad.

1. The remission of duties will stand on nearly the same ground with
that to the cod fishermen.

2. The only nation whose oil is brought hither for competition with our
own, makes ours pay a duty of about eighty-two dollars the ton, in their
ports. Theirs is brought here, too, to be reshipped fraudulently, under
our flag, into ports where it could not be received under theirs, and
ought not to be covered by ours, if we mean to preserve our own admission
into them.

The 3d and principal object is to find markets for the vent of oil.

Portugal, England, Holland, Sweden, Denmark, Prussia, Russia, the Hanse
towns, supply themselves and something more. Spain and Italy receive
supplies from England, and need the less, as their skies are clearer.
France is the only country which can take our surplus, and they take
principally of the common oil; as the habit is but commencing with
them of ascribing a just value to spermaceti whale. Some of this,
however, finds its vent there. There was, indeed, a particular interest
perpetually soliciting the exclusion of our oils from their markets. The
late government there saw well that what we should lose thereby would be
gained by others, not by themselves. And we are to hope that the present
government, as wise and friendly, will also view us, not as rivals,
but as co-operators against a common rival. Friendly arrangements with
them, and accommodation to mutual interest, rendered easier by friendly
dispositions existing on both sides, may long secure to us this important
resource for our seamen. Nor is it the interest of the fisherman alone,
which calls for the cultivation of friendly arrangements with that
nation; besides five-eights of our whale oil, and two-thirds of our salted
fish, they take from us one-fourth of our tobacco, three-fourths of our
live stock * * * * * a considerable and growing portion of our rice,
great supplies, occasionally, of other grain; in 1789, which, indeed,
was extraordinary, four millions of bushels of wheat, and upwards of
a million of bushels of rye and barley * * * * * and nearly the whole
carried in our own vessels. * * * * * They are a free market now, and
will, in time, be a valuable one for ships and ship timber, potash, and
peltry.

England is the market for the greatest part of our spermaceti oil. They
impose on all our oils a duty of eighteen pounds five shillings sterling
the ton, which, as to the common kind, is a prohibition, as has been
before observed, and, as to the spermaceti, gives a preference of theirs
over ours to that amount, so as to leave, in the end, but a scanty benefit
to the fishermen; and, not long since, by a change of construction,
without any change of law, it was made to exclude our oils from their
ports, when carried in our vessels. On some change of circumstance,
it was construed back again to the reception of our oils, on paying
always, however, the same duty of eighteen pounds five shillings. This
serves to show that the tenure by which we hold the admission of this
commodity in their markets, is as precarious as it is hard. Nor can it
be announced that there is any disposition on their part to arrange this
or any other commercial matter, to mutual convenience. The _ex parte_
regulations which they have begun for mounting their navigation on the
ruins of ours, can only be opposed by counter regulations on our part.
And the loss of seamen, the natural consequence of lost and obstructed
markets for our fish and oil, calls, in the first place, for serious and
timely attention. It will be too late when the seaman shall have changed
his vocation, or gone over to another interest. If we cannot recover and
secure for him these important branches of employment, it behooves us to
replace them by others equivalent. We have three nurseries for forming
seamen:

1. Our coasting trade, already on a safe footing.

2. Our fisheries, which, in spite of natural advantages, give just cause
of anxiety.

3. Our carrying trade, our only resource of indemnification for what we
lose in the other. The produce of the United States, which is carried
to foreign markets, is extremely bulky. That part of it which is now
in the hands of foreigners, and which we may resume into our own,
without touching the rights of those nations who have met us in fair
arrangements by treaty, or the interests of those who, by their voluntary
regulations, have paid so just and liberal a respect to our interests,
as being measured back to them again, places both parties on as good
ground, perhaps, as treaties could place them--the proportion, I say,
of our carrying trade, which may be resumed without affecting either of
these descriptions of nations, will find constant employment for ten
thousand seamen, be worth two millions of dollars, annually, will go
on augmenting with the population of the United States, secure to us a
full indemnification for the seamen we lose, and be taken wholly from
those who force us to this act of self protection in navigation.

Hence, too, would follow, that their Newfoundland ships, not receiving
provisions from us in their bottoms, nor permitted (by a law of their
own) to receive in ours, must draw their subsistence from Europe, which
would increase that part of their expenses in the proportion of four to
seven, and so far operate as a duty towards restoring the level between
them and us. The tables No. 2 and 12, will show the quantity of tonnage,
and, consequently, the mass of seamen whose interests are in distress;
and No. 17, the materials for indemnification.

If regulations exactly the counterpart of those established against
us, would be ineffectual, from a difference of circumstances, other
regulations equivalent can give no reasonable ground of complaint to any
nation. Admitting their right of keeping their markets to themselves,
ours cannot be denied of keeping our carrying trade to ourselves. And
if there be anything unfriendly in this, it was in the first example.

The loss of seamen, unnoticed, would be followed by other losses in a long
train. If we have no seamen, our ships will be useless, consequently our
ship timber, iron, and hemp; our ship building will be at an end, ship
carpenters go over to other nations, our young men have no call to the
sea, our produce, carried in foreign bottoms, be saddled with war-freight
and insurance in times of war; and the history of the last hundred years
shows, that the nation which is our carrier has three years of war for
every four years of peace. (No. 18.) We lose, during the same periods,
the carriage for belligerent powers, which the neutrality of our flag
would render an incalculable source of profit; we lose at this moment
the carriage of our own produce to the annual amount of two millions
of dollars, which, in the possible progress of the encroachment, may
extend to five or six millions, the worth of the whole, with an increase
in the proportion of the increase of our numbers. It is easier, as well
as better, to stop this train at its entrance, than when it shall have
ruined or banished whole classes of useful and industrious citizens.

It will doubtless be thought expedient that the resumption suggested
should take effect so gradually, as not to endanger the loss of
produce for the want of transportation; but that, in order to create
transportation, the whole plan should be developed, and made known at
once, that the individuals who may be disposed to lay themselves out
for the carrying business, may make their calculations on a full view
of all circumstances.

On the whole, the historical view we have taken of these fisheries,
proves they are so poor in themselves, as to come to nothing with distant
nations, who do not support them from their treasury. We have seen that
the advantages of our position place our fisheries on a ground somewhat
higher, such as to relieve our treasury from giving them support; but not
to permit it to draw support from them, nor to dispense the government
from the obligation of effectuating free markets for them; that, for
the great proportion of our salted fish, for our common oil, and a part
of our spermaceti oil, markets may perhaps be preserved, by friendly
arrangements towards those nations whose arrangements are friendly to
us, and the residue be compensated by giving to the seamen thrown out
of business the certainty of employment in another branch, of which we
have the sole disposal.


XXI.--_Opinion against the constitutionality of a National Bank._

                                                    February 15, 1791.

The bill for establishing a National Bank undertakes among other things:--

1. To form the subscribers into a corporation.

2. To enable them in their corporate capacities to receive grants of
land; and so far is against the laws of _Mortmain_.[26]

3. To make alien subscribers capable of holding lands; and so far is
against the laws of _alienage_.

4. To transmit these lands, on the death of a proprietor, to a certain
line of successors; and so far changes the course of _Descents_.

5. To put the lands out of the reach of forfeiture or escheat; and so
far is against the laws of _Forfeiture and Escheat_.

6. To transmit personal chattels to successors in a certain line; and
so far is against the laws of _Distribution_.

7. To give them the sole and exclusive right of banking under the national
authority; and so far is against the laws of Monopoly.

8. To communicate to them a power to make laws paramount to the laws of
the States; for so they must be construed, to protect the institution
from the control of the State legislatures; and so, probably, they will
be construed.

I consider the foundation of the Constitution as laid on this ground:
That "all powers not delegated to the United States, by the Constitution,
nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States or to the
people." [XIIth amendment.] To take a single step beyond the boundaries
thus specially drawn around the powers of Congress, is to take possession
of a boundless field of power, no longer susceptible of any definition.

The incorporation of a bank, and the powers assumed by this bill,
have not, in my opinion, been delegated to the United States, by the
Constitution.

1. They are not among the powers specially enumerated: for these are:
1st. A power to lay taxes for the purpose of paying the debts of the
United States; but no debt is paid by this bill, nor any tax laid. Were
it a bill to raise money, its origination in the Senate would condemn
it by the Constitution.

2d. "To borrow money." But this bill neither borrows money nor ensures
the borrowing it. The proprietors of the bank will be just as free as any
other money holders, to lend or not to lend their money to the public.
The operation proposed in the bill, first, to lend them two millions,
and then to borrow them back again, cannot change the nature of the
latter act, which will still be a payment, and not a loan, call it by
what name you please.

3. To "regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the States,
and with the Indian tribes." To erect a bank, and to regulate commerce,
are very different acts. He who erects a bank, creates a subject of
commerce in its bills; so does he who makes a bushel of wheat, or digs a
dollar out of the mines; yet neither of these persons regulates commerce
thereby. To make a thing which may be bought and sold, is not to prescribe
regulations for buying and selling. Besides, if this was an exercise
of the power of regulating commerce, it would be void, as extending as
much to the internal commerce of every State, as to its external. For
the power given to Congress by the Constitution does not extend to the
internal regulation of the commerce of a State, (that is to say of the
commerce between citizen and citizen,) which remain exclusively with
its own legislature; but to its external commerce only, that is to say,
its commerce with another State, or with foreign nations, or with the
Indian tribes. Accordingly the bill does not propose the measure as a
regulation of trade, but as "productive of considerable advantages to
trade." Still less are these powers covered by any other of the special
enumerations.

II. Nor are they within either of the general phrases, which are the
two following:--

1. To lay taxes to provide for the general welfare of the United States,
that is to say, "to lay taxes for _the purpose_ of providing for the
general welfare." For the laying of taxes is the _power_, and the general
welfare the _purpose_ for which the power is to be exercised. They are
not to lay taxes _ad libitum for any purpose they please_; but only
to _pay the debts or provide for the welfare of the Union_. In like
manner, they are not _to do anything they please_ to provide for the
general welfare, but only to _lay taxes_ for that purpose. To consider
the latter phrase, not as describing the purpose of the first, but as
giving a distinct and independent power to do any act they please, which
might be for the good of the Union, would render all the preceding and
subsequent enumerations of power completely useless.

It would reduce the whole instrument to a single phrase, that of
instituting a Congress with power to do whatever would be for the good
of the United States; and, as they would be the sole judges of the good
or evil, it would be also a power to do whatever evil they please.

It is an established rule of construction where a phrase will bear either
of two meanings, to give it that which will allow some meaning to the
other parts of the instrument, and not that which would render all the
others useless. Certainly no such universal power was meant to be given
them. It was intended to lace them up straitly within the enumerated
powers, and those without which, as means, these powers could not be
carried into effect. It is known that the very power now proposed _as
a means_ was rejected as _an end_ by the Convention which formed the
Constitution. A proposition was made to them to authorize Congress to
open canals, and an amendatory one to empower them to incorporate. But
the whole was rejected, and one of the reasons for rejection urged in
debate was, that then they would have a power to erect a bank, which
would render the great cities, where there were prejudices and jealousies
on the subject, adverse to the reception of the Constitution.

2. The second general phrase is, "to make all laws _necessary_ and
proper for carrying into execution the enumerated powers." But they can
all be carried into execution without a bank. A bank therefore is not
_necessary_, and consequently not authorized by this phrase.

It has been urged that a bank will give great facility or convenience
in the collection of taxes. Suppose this were true: yet the Constitution
allows only the means which are "_necessary_," not those which are merely
"convenient" for effecting the enumerated powers. If such a latitude of
construction be allowed to this phrase as to give any non-enumerated
power, it will go to every one, for there is not one which ingenuity
may not torture into a _convenience_ in some instance _or other_, to
_some one_ of so long a list of enumerated powers. It would swallow up
all the delegated powers, and reduce the whole to one power, as before
observed. Therefore it was that the Constitution restrained them to
the _necessary_ means, that is to say, to those means without which the
grant of power would be nugatory.

But let us examine this convenience and see what it is. The report on
this subject, page 3, states the only _general_ convenience to be, the
preventing the transportation and re-transportation of money between the
States and the treasury, (for I pass over the increase of circulating
medium, ascribed to it as a want, and which, according to my ideas of
paper money, is clearly a demerit.) Every State will have to pay a sum
of tax money into the treasury; and the treasury will have to pay, in
every State, a part of the interest on the public debt, and salaries
to the officers of government resident in that State. In most of the
States there will still be a surplus of tax money to come up to the
seat of government for the officers residing there. The payments of
interest and salary in each State may be made by treasury orders on the
State collector. This will take up the great export of the money he has
collected in his State, and consequently prevent the great mass of it
from being drawn out of the State. If there be a balance of commerce
in favor of that State against the one in which the government resides,
the surplus of taxes will be remitted by the bills of exchange drawn for
that commercial balance. And so it must be if there was a bank. But if
there be no balance of commerce, either direct or circuitous, all the
banks in the world could not bring up the surplus of taxes, but in the
form of money. Treasury orders then, and bills of exchange may prevent
the displacement of the main mass of the money collected, without the
aid of any bank; and where these fail, it cannot be prevented even with
that aid.

Perhaps, indeed, bank bills may be a more _convenient_ vehicle than
treasury orders. But a little _difference_ in the degree of _convenience_,
cannot constitute the necessity which the constitution makes the ground
for assuming any non-enumerated power.

Besides; the existing banks will, without a doubt, enter into arrangements
for lending their agency, and the more favorable, as there will be a
competition among them for it; whereas the bill delivers us up bound
to the national bank, who are free to refuse all arrangement, but on
their own terms, and the public not free, on such refusal, to employ any
other bank. That of Philadelphia, I believe, now does this business, by
their post-notes, which, by an arrangement with the treasury, are paid
by any State collector to whom they are presented. This expedient alone
suffices to prevent the existence of that _necessity_ which may justify
the assumption of a non-enumerated power as a means for carrying into
effect an enumerated one. The thing may be done, and has been done, and
well done, without this assumption; therefore, it does not stand on that
degree of _necessity_ which can honestly justify it.

It may be said that a bank whose bills would have a currency all over the
States, would be more convenient than one whose currency is limited to
a single State. So it would be still more convenient that there should
be a bank, whose bills should have a currency all over the world. But
it does not follow from this superior conveniency, that there exists
anywhere a power to establish such a bank; or that the world may not go
on very well without it.

Can it be thought that the Constitution intended that for a shade or two
of _convenience_, more or less, Congress should be authorized to break
down the most ancient and fundamental laws of the several States; such
as those against Mortmain, the laws of Alienage, the rules of descent,
the acts of distribution, the laws of escheat and forfeiture, the laws
of monopoly? Nothing but a necessity invincible by any other means, can
justify such a prostitution of laws, which constitute the pillars of our
whole system of jurisprudence. Will Congress be too straight-laced to
carry the constitution into honest effect, unless they may pass over the
foundation-laws of the State government for the slightest convenience
of theirs?

The negative of the President is the shield provided by the constitution
to protect against the invasions of the legislature: 1. The right of the
Executive. 2. Of the Judiciary. 3. Of the States and State legislatures.
The present is the case of a right remaining exclusively with the States,
and consequently one of those intended by the Constitution to be placed
under its protection.

It must be added, however, that unless the President's mind on a view of
everything which is urged for and against this bill, is tolerably clear
that it is unauthorised by the Constitution; if the pro and the con
hang so even as to balance his judgment, a just respect for the wisdom
of the legislature would naturally decide the balance in favor of their
opinion. It is chiefly for cases where they are clearly misled by error,
ambition, or interest, that the Constitution has placed a check in the
negative of the President.

FOOTNOTE:

     [26] Though the Constitution controls the laws of Mortmain
     so far as to permit Congress itself to hold land for
     certain purposes, yet not so far as to permit them to
     communicate a similar right to other corporate bodies.


XXII.--_Opinion relative to locating the Ten Mile Square for the Federal
Government, and building the Federal city._

                                                       March 11, 1791.

Objects which may merit the attention of the President, at Georgetown.

The commissioners to be called into action.

Deeds of cession to be taken from the land-holders.

Site of the capitol and President's house to be determined on.

Proclamation completing the location of the territory, and fixing the
site of the capitol.

Town to be laid off. Squares of reserve are to be decided on for the
capitol, President's house, offices of government, townhouse, prison,
market, and public walks.

Other squares for present sale designated.

Terms of sale to be settled. As there is not as yet a town legislature,
and things may be done before there is one to prevent them, which yet it
would be desirable to prevent, it would seem justifiable and expedient
that the President should form a capitulary of such regulations as he may
think necessary to be observed, until there shall be a town legislature
to undertake this office; such capitulary to be indented, signed, sealed,
and recorded, according to the laws of conveyance in Maryland. And to
be referred to in every deed for conveyance of the lots to purchasers,
so as to make a part thereof. The same thing might be effected, by
inserting special covenants for every regulation in every deed; but the
former method is the shortest. I cannot help again suggesting here one
regulation formerly suggested, to wit: To provide for the extinguishment
of fires, and the openness and convenience of the town, by prohibiting
houses of excessive height. And making it unlawful to build on any one's
purchase any house with more than two floors between the common level
of the earth and the eaves, nor with any other floor in the roof than
one at the eaves. To consider in what way the contracts for the public
buildings shall be made, and whether as many bricks should not be made
this summer as may employ brick-layers in the beginning of the season
of 1792, till more can be made in that season.

With respect to the amendment of the location so as to include
Bladensburgh. I am of opinion it may be done with the consent of the
legislature of Maryland, and that that consent may be so far counted
on, as to render it expedient to declare the location at once.

  [Illustration]

The location A B C D A having been once made, I consider as obligatory
and unalterable, but by consent of parties, except so far as was
necessary to render it practicable by a correction of the beginning.
That correction might be lawfully made either by stopping at the river,
or at the spring of Hunting creek, or by lengthening the course from the
court-house so that the second course should strike the mouth of Hunting
creek. I am of opinion, therefore, that the beginning at the mouth of
Hunting creek, is legally justifiable. But I would advise the location
E F G H E to be hazarded so as to include Bladensburgh, because it is
a better location, and I think will certainly be confirmed by Maryland.
That State will necessarily have to pass another act confirming whatever
location shall be made, because her former act authorized the delegates
_then_ in office, to convey the lands. But as they were not located, no
conveyance has been made, and those persons are now out of office, and
dispersed. Suppose the non-concurrence of Maryland should defeat the
location E F G H E, it can only be done on this principle, that the first
location A B C D A was valid, and unalterable, but by mutual consent.
Then their non-concurrence will re-establish the first location A B C D
A, and the second location will be good for the part E I D K E without
their concurrence, and this will place us where we should be were we
now to complete the location E B C K E. Consequently, the experiment of
an amendment proposed can lose nothing, and may gain, and probably will
gain, the better location.

When I say it can lose nothing, I count as nothing, the triangle A I E,
which would be in neither of the locations. Perhaps this might be taken
in afterwards, either with or without the consent of Virginia.


XXIII.--_Report on the policy of securing particular marks to
Manufacturers, by law._

                                                     December 9, 1791.

The Secretary of State, to whom was referred by the House of
Representatives the petition of Samuel Breck and others, proprietors of a
sail-cloth manufactory in Boston, praying that they may have the exclusive
privilege of using particular marks for designating the sail-cloth of
their manufactory, has had the same under consideration, and thereupon

Reports, That it would, in his opinion, contribute to fidelity in the
execution of manufacturers, to secure to every manufactory an exclusive
right to some mark on its wares, proper to itself.

That this should be done by general laws, extending equal right to every
case to which the authority of the Legislature should be competent.

That these cases are of divided jurisdiction: Manufactures made and
consumed within a State being subject to State legislation, while those
which are exported to foreign nations, or to another State, or into
the Indian Territory, are alone within the legislation of the General
Government.

That it will, therefore, be reasonable for the General Government to
provide in this behalf by law for those cases of manufacture generally,
and those only which relate to commerce with foreign nations, and among
the several States, and with the Indian Tribes.

And that this may be done by permitting the owner of every manufactory, to
enter in the records of the court of the district wherein his manufactory
is, the name with which he chooses to mark or designate his wares, and
rendering it penal in others to put the same mark to any other wares.


XXIV.--_Opinion relative to the demolition of Mr. Carroll's house by
Major L'Enfant, in laying out the Federal City._

                                                    December 11, 1791.

Observations on Major L'Enfant's letter of December 7th, 1791, to the
President, justifying his demolition of the house of Mr. Carroll, of
Duddington.

He says that "Mr. Carroll erected his house partly on a main street,
and altogether on ground to which the public had a more immediate title
than himself could claim." When blaming Mr. Carroll, then, he considers
this as a street; but when justifying himself, he considers it not yet
as a street, for to account for his not having pointed out to Carroll
a situation where he might build, he says, "The President had not yet
sanctioned the plan for the distribution of the city, nor determined
if he would approve the situation of the several areas proposed to him
in that plan for public use, and that I would have been highly to be
blamed to have anticipated his opinion thereon." This latter exculpation
is solid; the first is without foundation. The plan of the city has not
yet been definitely determined by the President. Sale to individuals, or
partition decide the plan as far as these sales or partitions go. A deed
with the whole plan annexed, executed by the President, and recorded, will
ultimately fix it. But till a sale, or partition, or deed, it is open
to alteration. Consequently, there is as yet no such thing as a street,
except adjacent to the lots actually sold or divided; the erection of
a house in any part of the ground cannot as yet be a nuisance in law.
Mr. Carroll is tenant in common of the soil with the public, and the
erection of a house by a tenant in common on the common property, is no
nuisance. Mr. Carroll has acted imprudently, intemperately, foolishly;
but he has not acted illegally. There must be an establishment of the
streets, before his house can become a nuisance in the eye of the law.
Therefore, till that establishment, neither Major L'Enfant, nor the
commissioners, would have had a right to demolish his house, without
his consent.

The Major says he had as much right to pull down a house, as to cut down
a tree.

This is true, if he has received no authority to do either, but still
there will be this difference: To cut down a tree or to demolish a house
in the soil of another, is a trespass; but the cutting a tree, in this
country, is so slight a trespass, that a man would be thought litigious
who should prosecute it; if he prosecuted civilly, a jury would give
small damages; if criminally, the judge would not inflict imprisonment,
nor impose but a small fine. But the demolition of a house is so gross
a trespass, that any man would prosecute it; if civilly, a jury would
give great damages; if criminally, the judge would punish heavily by
fine and imprisonment. In the present case, if Carroll was to bring a
civil action, the jury would probably punish his folly by small damages;
but if he were to prosecute criminally, the judge would as probably
vindicate the insult on the laws, and the breach of the peace, by heavy
fines and imprisonment. So that if Major L'Enfant is right in saying he
had as much authority to pull down a house as to cut down a tree, still
he would feel a difference in the punishment of the law.

But is he right in saying he had as much authority to pull down a house
as to cut down a tree? I do not know what have been the authorities
given him expressly or by _implication_, but I can very readily conceive
that the authorities which he has received, whether from the President
or from the commissioners, whether verbal or written, may have gone to
the demolition of trees, and not houses. I am sure he has received no
authority, either from the President or commissioners, either expressly
or by implication, to pull down houses. An order to him to mark on the
ground the lines of the streets and lots, might imply an order to remove
trees or _small_ obstructions, _where they insuperably prevented his
operations_; but a person must know little of geometry who could not,
in an open field, designate streets and lots, even where a line passed
through a house, without pulling the house down.

In truth, the blame on Major L'Enfant, is for having pulled down the
house, of his own authority, and when he had reason to believe he was
in opposition, to the sentiments of the President; and his fault is
aggravated by its having been done to gratify private resentment against
Mr. Carroll, and most probably not because it was necessary; and the
style in which he writes the justification of his act, shows that a
continuation of the same resentment renders him still unable to acquiesce
under the authority from which he has been reproved.

He desires a line of demarcation between his office, and that of the
commissioners.

What should be this line? and who is to draw it? If we consider the
matter under the _act of Congress_ only, the President has authority
only to name the commissioners, and to approve or disapprove certain
proceedings of theirs. They have the whole executive power, and stand
between the President and the subordinate agents. In this view, they may
employ or dismiss, order and countermand, take on themselves such parts
of the execution as they please, and assign other parts to subordinate
agents. Consequently, under the _act of Congress_, their will is the
line of demarcation between subordinate agents, while no such line
can exist between themselves and their agents. Under the deed from the
proprietors to the President, his powers are much more ample. I do not
accurately recollect the tenor of the deed; but I am pretty sure it was
such as to put much more ample power into the hands of the President,
and to commit to him the whole execution of whatever is to be done under
the deed; and this goes particularly to the laying out the town: so
that as to this, the President is certainly authorized to draw the line
of demarcation between L'Enfant and the commissioners. But I believe
there is no necessity for it, as far as I have been able to judge, from
conversations and consultations with the commissioners. I think they
are disposed to follow implicitly the will of the President, whenever
they can find it out; but L'Enfant's letters do not breathe the same
moderation or acquiescence; and I think it would be much safer to say
to him, "the orders of the commissioners are your line of demarcation,"
than by attempting to define his powers, to give him a line where he
may meet with the commissioners foot to foot, and chicane and raise
opposition to their orders whenever he thinks they pass his line. I
confess, that on a view of L'Enfant's proceedings and letters latterly,
I am thoroughly persuaded that, to render him useful, his temper must
be subdued; and that the only means of preventing his giving constant
trouble to the President, is to submit him to the unlimited control of
the commissioners; we know the discretion and forbearance with which
they will exercise it.


XXV.--_Opinion relative to certain lands on Lake Erie, sold by the United
States to Pennsylvania._

                                                    December 19, 1791.

The Secretary of State, to whom was referred, by the President of the
United States, a letter from the Governor of Pennsylvania, with the
documents therein mentioned, on the subject of certain lands on Lake
Erie, having had the same under consideration, thereupon Reports:--

That Congress, by their resolution of June 6th, 1788, directed the
Geographer General of the United States to ascertain the quantity of
land belonging to the United States between Pennsylvania and Lake Erie,
and authorized a sale thereof.

That a sale was accordingly made to the commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

That Congress, by their resolution of September 4th, 1788, relinquished to
the said commonwealth all their right to the government and jurisdiction
of the said tract of land; but the right of soil was not transferred by
the resolution.

That a survey of the said tract has been since made, and the amount of
the purchase money been settled between the comptrollers of the United
States and of the said commonwealth, and that the Governor of Pennsylvania
declares in the said letter, to the President of the United States, that
he is ready to close the transaction on behalf of the said commonwealth.
That there is no person at present authorized, by law, to convey to the
said commonwealth the right of soil, in the said tract of land.

And the Secretary of State is therefore of opinion that the said letter
and documents should be laid before the legislature of the United States
to make such provision by law for conveying the said right of soil, as
they in their wisdom shall think fit.


XXVI.--_Report relative to negotiations with Spain to secure the free
navigation of the Mississippi, and a port on the same._

                                                    December 22, 1791.

The Secretary of State reports to the President of the United States,
that one of the commissioners of Spain, in the name of both, has lately
communicated to him verbally, by order of his court, that his Catholic
Majesty, apprized of our solicitude to have some arrangement made
respecting our free navigation of the river Mississippi, and the use of
a port thereon, is ready to enter into treaty thereon at Madrid.

The Secretary of State is of opinion that this overture should be attended
to without delay, and that the proposal of treating at Madrid, though not
what might have been desired, should yet be accepted, and a commission
plenipotentiary made out for the purpose.

That Mr. Carmichael, the present chargé de affaires of the United States
at Madrid, from the local acquaintance which he must have acquired with
persons and circumstances, would be an useful and proper member of the
commission; but that it would be useful also to join with him some person
more particularly acquainted with the circumstances of the navigation
to be treated of.

That the fund appropriated by the act providing the means of intercourse
between the United States and foreign nations, will insufficiently furnish
the ordinary and regular demands on it, and is consequently inadequate
to the mission of an additional commissioner express from hence.

That, therefore, it will be advisable, on this account, as well as for
the sake of despatch, to constitute some one of the ministers of the
United States in Europe, jointly with Mr. Carmichael, commissioners
plenipotentiary for the special purpose of negotiating and concluding,
with any person or persons duly authorized by his Catholic Majesty, a
convention or treaty for the free navigation of the river Mississippi by
the citizens of the United States, under such accommodations with respect
to a port, and other circumstances, as may render the said navigation
practicable, useful, and free from dispute; saving to the President and
Senate their respective rights as to their ratification of the same; and
that the said negotiation be at Madrid, or such other place in Spain,
as shall be desired by his Catholic Majesty.


                                                       March 18, 1792.

The appointment of Mr. Carmichael and Mr. Short, as commissioners to
negotiate, with the court of Spain, a treaty or convention relative to
the navigation of the Mississippi, and which perhaps may be extended to
other interests, rendering it necessary that the subjects to be treated
of should be developed, and the conditions of arrangement explained:

The Secretary of State reports to the President of the United States
the following observations on the subjects of negotiation between the
United States of America and the court of Spain, to be communicated by
way of instruction to the commissioners of the United States, appointed
as before mentioned, to manage that negotiation.

These subjects are,

I. Boundary.

II. The navigation of the Mississippi.

III. Commerce.

I. As to boundary, that between Georgia and Florida is the only one which
will need any explanation. Spain sets up a claim to possessions within
the State of Georgia, founded on her having rescued them by force from
the British during the late war. The following view of the subject seems
to admit no reply:

The several States now comprising the United States of America, were, from
their first establishment, separate and distinct societies, dependent on
no other society of men whatever. They continued at the head of their
respective governments the executive magistrate who presided over the
one they had left, and thereby secured, in effect, a constant amity with
the nation. In this stage of their government their several boundaries
were fixed; and particularly the southern boundary of Georgia, the only
one now in question, was established at the 31st degree of latitude
from the Apalachicola westwardly; and the western boundary, originally
the Pacific ocean, was, by the treaty of Paris, reduced to the middle
of the Mississippi. The part which our chief magistrate took in a war,
waged against us by the nation among whom he resided, obliged us to
discontinue him, and to name one within every State. In the course of
this war we were joined by France as an ally, and by Spain and Holland
as associates; having a common enemy, each sought that common enemy
wherever they could find him. France, on our invitation, landed a large
army within our territories, continued it with us two years, and aided
us in recovering sundry places from the possession of the enemy. But she
did not pretend to keep possession of the places rescued. Spain entered
into the remote western part of our territory, dislodged the common
enemy from several of the posts they held therein, to the annoyance
of Spain; and perhaps thought it necessary to remain in some of them,
as the only means of preventing their return. We, in like manner,
dislodged them from several posts in the same western territory, to wit:
Vincennes, Cahokia, Kaskaskia, &c., rescued the inhabitants, and retained
constantly afterwards both them and the territory under our possession
and government. At the conclusion of the war, Great Britain, on the
30th of November, 1782, by treaty acknowledged our independence, and
our boundary, to wit: the Mississippi to the west, and the completion of
the 31st degree, &c. to the south. In her treaty with Spain, concluded
seven weeks afterwards, to wit, January 20th, 1783, she ceded to her
the two Floridas, which had been defined in the proclamation of 1763,
and Minorca; and by the eighth article of the treaty, Spain agreed
to restore, _without compensation_, all the territories conquered by
her, and not included in the treaty, either under the head of cessions
or restitutions, that is to say, all except Minorca and the Floridas.
According to this stipulation, Spain was expressly bound to have delivered
up the possessions she had taken within the limits of Georgia, to Great
Britain, if they were conquests on Great Britain, who was to deliver
them over to the United States; or rather, she should have delivered
them to the United States themselves, as standing _quoad hoc_ in the
place of Great Britain. And she was bound by natural rights to deliver
them to the same United States on a much stronger ground, as the real
and only proprietors of those places which she had taken possession
of in a moment of danger, without having had any cause of war with the
United States, to whom they belonged, and without having declared any;
but, on the contrary, conducting herself in other respects as a friend
and associate. _Vattel_, 1. 3, 122.

It is an established principle, that conquest gives only an inchoate
treaty of peace, which does not become perfect till confirmed by the
treaty of peace, and by a renunciation or abandonment by the former
proprietor. Had Great Britain been that former proprietor, she was so far
from confirming to Spain the right to the territory of Georgia, invaded
by Spain, that she expressly relinquished to the United States any right
that might remain in her; and afterwards completed that relinquishment,
by procuring and consolidating with it the agreement of Spain herself to
restore such territory without compensation. It is still more palpable,
that a war existing between two nations, as Spain and Great Britain,
could give to neither the right to seize and appropriate the territory
of a third, which is even neutral, much less which is an associate in
the war, as the United States were with Spain. See, on this subject,
_Grotius_, 1. 3, c. 6, § 26. _Puffendorf_, 1. 8, c. 17, § 23. _Vattel_,
1. 3, § 197, 198.

On the conclusion of the general peace, the United States lost no time
in requiring from Spain an evacuation of their territory This has been
hitherto delayed by means which we need not explain to that court, but
which have been equally contrary to our right and to our consent.

Should Spain pretend, as has been intimated, that there was a secret
article of treaty between the United States and Great Britain, agreeing,
if at the close of the war the latter should retain the Floridas, that
then the southern boundary of Georgia should be the completion of the
32d degree of latitude, the commissioners may safely deny all knowledge
of the fact, and refuse conference on any such postulatum. Or, should
they find it necessary to enter into any argument on the subject, they
will of course do it hypothetically; and in that way may justly say, on
the part of the United States; suppose that the United States, exhausted
by a bloody and expensive war with Great Britain, might have been
willing to have purchased peace by relinquishing, under a particular
contingency, a small part of their territory, it does not follow that
the same United States, recruited and better organized, must relinquish
the same territory to Spain without striking a blow. The United States,
too, have irrevocably put it out of their power to do it, by a new
constitution, which guarantees every State against the invasion of its
territory. A disastrous war, indeed, might, by necessity, supersede this
stipulation, (as necessity is above all law,) and oblige them to abandon
a part of a State; but nothing short of this can justify or obtain such
an abandonment.

The southern limits of Georgia depend chiefly on,

1. The charter of Carolina to the lords proprietors, in 1663, extending
southwardly to the river Matheo, now called St. John, supposed in the
charter to be in latitude 31, and so west in a direct line as far as
the South Sea. See the charter in 4th[27] Memoires de l'Amerique, 554.

2. On the proclamation of the British King, in 1763, establishing the
boundary between Georgia and the two Floridas to begin on the Mississippi,
in thirty-one degrees of latitude north of the equator, and running
eastwardly to the Appalachicola; thence, along the said river to the
mouth of the Flint; thence, in a direct line, to the source of St. Mary's
river, and down the same to the ocean. This proclamation will be found
in Postlethwayte voce "British America."

3. On the treaties between the United States and Great Britain, of
November 30, 1782, and September 3, 1783, repeating and confirming these
ancient boundaries,--

There was an intermediate transaction, to wit: a convention concluded at
the Pardo, in 1739, whereby it was agreed that Ministers Plenipotentiary
should be immediately appointed by Spain and Great Britain for settling
the limits of Florida and Carolina. The convention is to be found in the
collections of treaties. But the proceedings of the Plenipotentiaries
are unknown here. _Qu._ If it was on that occasion that the southern
boundary of Carolina was transferred from the latitude of Matheo or St.
John's river further north to the St. Mary's? Or was it the proclamation
of 1763, which first removed this boundary? [If the commissioners can
procure in Spain a copy of whatever was agreed on in consequence of the
convention of the Pardo, it is a desirable State paper here.]

To this demonstration of our rights may be added the explicit declaration
of the court of Spain, that she would accede to them. This took place
in conversations and correspondence thereon between Mr. Jay, Minister
Plenipotentiary for the United States at the court at Madrid, the Marquis
de La Fayette, and the Count de Florida Blanca. Monsieur de La Fayette,
in his letter of February 19, 1783, to the Count de Florida Blanca,
states the result of their conversations on limits in these words:
"With respect to limits, his Catholic Majesty has adopted those that
are determined by the preliminaries of the 30th of November, between the
United States and the court of London." The Count de Florida Blanca, in
his answer of February 22d, to M. de La Fayette, says, "although it is his
Majesty's intention to abide for the present by the limits established
by the treaty of the 30th of November, 1782, between the English and
the Americans, the King intends to inform himself particularly whether
it can be in any ways inconvenient or prejudicial to settle that affair
amicably with the United States;" and M. de La Fayette, in his letter of
the same day to Mr. Jay, wherein he had inserted the preceding, says,
"on receiving the answer of the Count de Florida Blanca, (to wit: his
answer, before mentioned, to M. de La Fayette,) I desired an explanation
respecting the addition that relates to the limits. I was answered, that
it was a fixed principle to abide by the limits established by the treaty
between the English and the Americans; that his remark related only to
mere unimportant details, which he wished to receive from the Spanish
commandants, which would be amicably regulated, and _would by no means
oppose the general principle_. I asked him, before the Ambassador of
France, [M. de Montmorin,] whether he would give me his word of honor
for it; he assured me he would, and that I might engage it to the United
States." See the report sent herewith.

II.--The navigation of the Mississippi.

Our right to navigate that river, from its source to where our southern
boundary strikes it, is not questioned. It is from that point downwards,
only, that the exclusive navigation is claimed by Spain; that is to
say, where she holds the country on both sides, to wit: Louisiana on
the west, and Florida on the east.

Our right to participate in the navigation of that part of the river,
also, is to be considered, under

1. The Treaty of Paris of 1763,

2. The Revolution Treaty of 1782-3.

3. The law of nature and nations.

1. The war of 1755-1763, was carried on jointly by Great Britain and
the thirteen colonies, now the United States of America, against France
and Spain. At the peace which was negotiated by our common magistrate, a
right was secured to the subjects of Great Britain (the common designation
of all those under his government) to navigate the Mississippi in its
whole breadth and length, from its source to the sea, and expressly
that part which is between the island of New Orleans and the right bank
of the river, as well as the passage both in and out of its mouth;
and that the vessels should not be stopped, visited, or subjected to
the payment of any duty whatsoever. These are the words of the treaty,
article VII. Florida was at the same time ceded by Spain, and its extent
westwardly was fixed to the lakes Pontchartrain and Maurepas, and the
river Mississippi; and Spain received soon after from France a cession
of the island of New Orleans, and all the country she held westward of
the Mississippi, subject of course to our right of navigating between
that country and the island previously granted to us by France. This
right was not parcelled out to us in severalty, that is to say, to each
the exclusive navigation of so much of the river as was adjacent to our
several shores--in which way it would have been useless to all--but it
was placed on that footing on which alone it could be worth anything,
to wit: as a right to all to navigate the whole length of the river in
common. The import of the terms and the reason of the thing prove it
was a right of common in the whole, and not a several right to each of a
particular part. To which may be added the evidence of the stipulation
itself, that we should navigate between New Orleans and the western
bank, which, being adjacent to none of our States, could be held by us
only as a right of common. Such was the nature of our right to navigate
the Mississippi, as far as established by the treaty of Paris.

2. In the course of the Revolutionary war, in which the thirteen colonies,
Spain, and France, were opposed to Great Britain, Spain took possession
of several posts held by the British in Florida. It is unnecessary to
inquire whether the possession of half a dozen posts scattered through
a country of seven or eight hundred miles extent, could be considered
as the possession and conquest of that country. If it was, it gave
still but an inchoate right, as was before explained, which could not
be perfected but by the relinquishment of the former possession at the
close of the war; but certainly it could not be considered as a conquest
_of the river_, even against Great Britain, since the possession of
the shores, to wit, of the island of New Orleans on the one side, and
Louisiana on the other, having undergone no change, the right in the water
would remain the same, if considered only in its relation to them; and
if considered as a distinct right, independent of the shores, then no
naval victories obtained by Spain over Great Britain, in the course of
the war, gave her the color of conquest over any water which the British
fleet could enter. Still less can she be considered as having conquered
the river, as against the United States, with whom she was not at war.
We had a common right of navigation in the part of the river between
Florida, the island of New Orleans, and the western bank, and nothing
which passed between Spain and Great Britain, either during the war, or
at its conclusion, could lessen that right. Accordingly, at the treaty
of November, 1782, Great Britain confirmed the rights of the United
States to the navigation of the river, from its source to its mouth,
and in January, 1783, completed the right of Spain to the territory of
Florida, by an absolute relinquishment of all her rights in it. This
relinquishment could not include the navigation held by the United States
in their own right, because this right existed in themselves only, and
was not in Great Britain. If it added anything to the rights of Spain
respecting the river between the eastern and western banks, it could only
be that portion of right which Great Britain had retained to herself in
the treaty with the United States, held seven weeks before, to wit, a
right of using it in common with the United States.

So that as by the treaty of 1763, the United States had obtained a common
right of navigating the whole river from its source to its mouth, so
by the treaty of 1782, that common right was confirmed to them by the
only power who could pretend claims against them, founded on the state
of war; nor has that common right been transferred to Spain by either
conquest or cession.

But our right is built on ground still broader and more unquestionable,
to wit:

3. On the law of nature and nations.

If we appeal to this, as we feel it written on the heart of man, what
sentiment is written in deeper characters than that the ocean is free
to all men, and their rivers to all their inhabitants? Is there a man,
savage or civilized, unbiased by habit, who does not feel and attest
this truth? Accordingly, in all tracts of country united under the same
political society, we find this natural right universally acknowledged and
protected by laying the navigable rivers open to all their inhabitants.
When their rivers enter the limits of another society, if the right of
the upper inhabitants to descend the stream is in any case obstructed,
it is an act of force by a stronger society against a weaker, condemned
by the judgment of mankind. The late case of Antwerp and the Scheldt
was a striking proof a general union of sentiment on this point; as it
is believed that Amsterdam had scarcely an advocate out of Holland, and
even there its pretensions were advocated on the ground of treaties,
and not of natural right. (The commissioners would do well to examine
thoroughly what was written on this occasion.) The commissioners will
be able perhaps to find, either in the practice or the pretensions of
Spain, as to the Dauro, Tagus, and Guadiana, some acknowledgments of
this principle on the part of that nation. This sentiment of right in
favor of the upper inhabitants must become stronger in the proportion
which their extent of country bears to the lower. The United States
hold 600,000 square miles of habitable territory on the Mississippi and
its branches, and this river and its branches afford many thousands of
miles of navigable waters penetrating this territory in all its parts.
The inhabitable grounds of Spain below our boundary and bordering on
the river, which alone can pretend any fear of being incommoded by our
use of the river, are not the thousandth part of that extent. This vast
portion of the territory of the United States has no other outlet for
its productions, and these productions are of the bulkiest kind. And in
truth, their passage down the river may not only be innocent, as to the
Spanish subjects on the river, but cannot fail to enrich them far beyond
their present condition. The real interests then of all the inhabitants,
upper and lower, concur in fact with their rights.

If we appeal to the law of nature and nations, as expressed by writers
on the subject, it is agreed by them, that, were the river, where it
passes between Florida and Louisiana, the exclusive right of Spain, still
an innocent passage along it is a natural right in those inhabiting its
borders above. It would indeed be what those writers call an imperfect
right, because the modification of its exercise depends in a considerable
degree on the conveniency of the nation through which they are to pass.
But it is still a right as real as any other right, however well-defined;
and were it to be refused, or to be so shackled by regulations, not
necessary for the peace or safety of its inhabitants, as to render its
use impracticable to us, it would then be an injury, of which we should
bee entitled to demand redress. The right of the upper inhabitants to
use this navigation is the counterpart to that of those possessing the
shore below, and founded in the same natural relations with the soil
and water. And the line at which their rights meet is to be advanced
or withdrawn, so as to equalize the inconveniences resulting to each
party from the exercise of the right by the other. This estimate is to
be fairly made with a mutual disposition to make equal sacrifices, and
the numbers on each side are to have their due weight in the estimate.
Spain holds so very small a tract of habitable land on either side below
our boundary, that it may in fact be considered as a strait of the sea;
for though it is eighty leagues from our boundary to the mouth of the
river, yet it is only here and there in spots and slips that the land
rises above the level of the water in times of inundation. There are,
then, and ever must be, so few inhabitants on her part of the river,
that the freest use of its navigation may be admitted to us without
their annoyance. For authorities on this subject, see Grot. 1. 2. c. 2
§ 11, 12, 13, c. 3. § 7, 8, 12. Puffendorf, 1. 3. c. 3. § 3, 4, 5, 6.
Wolff's Inst. § 310, 311, 312. Vattel, 1. 1. § 292. 1. 2. § 123 to 139.

  [Illustration]

It is essential to the interests of both parties that the navigation
of the river be free to both, on the footing on which it was defined by
the treaty of Paris, viz.: through its whole breadth. The channel of the
Mississippi is remarkably winding, crossing and recrossing perpetually
from one side to the other of the general bed of the river. Within the
elbows thus made by the channel, there is generally an eddy setting
upwards, and it is by taking advantage of these eddies, and constantly
crossing from one to another of them, that boats are enabled to ascend
the river. Without this right the whole river would be impracticable
both to the Americans and Spaniards.

It is a principle that the right to a thing gives a right to the means,
without which it could not be used, that is to say, that the means follow
their end. Thus, a right to navigate a river, draws to it a right to
moor vessels to its shores, to land on them in cases of distress, or
for other necessary purposes, &c. This principle is founded in natural
reason, is evidenced by the common sense of mankind, and declared by
the writers before quoted. See Grot. 1. 2. c. 2. § 15. Puffend. 1. 3.
c. 3. § 8. Vattel, 1. 2. § 129.

The Roman law, which, like other municipal laws, placed the navigation
of their rivers on the footing of nature, as to their own citizens,
by declaring them public,[28] (flumina publica sunt, hoc est populi
Romani, Inst. 2. t. 1. § 2,) declared also that the right to the use
of the shores was incident to that of the water. Ibid, § 1, 3, 4, 5.
The laws of every country probably do the same. This must have been so
understood between France and Great Britain, at the treaty of Paris, when
a right was ceded to British subjects to navigate the whole river, and
expressly that part between the island of New Orleans and the western
bank, without stipulating a word about the use of the shores, though
both of them belonged then to France, and were to belong immediately
to Spain. Had not the use of the shores been considered as incident to
that of the water, it would have been expressly stipulated; since its
necessity was too obvious to have escaped either party. Accordingly, all
British subjects used the shores habitually for the purposes necessary
to the navigation of the river; and when a Spanish Governor undertook
at one time to forbid this, and even cut loose the vessels fastening
to their shores, a British frigate went immediately, moored itself to
the shore opposite to the town of New Orleans, and set out guards with
orders to fire on such as might attempt to disturb her moorings. The
Governor acquiesced, the right was constantly exercised afterwards, and
no interruption ever offered.

This incidental right extends even beyond the shores, where circumstances
render it necessary to the exercise of the principal right; as, in the
case of a vessel damaged, where the mere shore could not be a safe deposit
for her cargo till she could be repaired, she may remove it into safe
ground off the river. The Roman law shall be quoted here too, because it
gives a good idea both of the extent and the limitations of this right.
Ins. 1. 2. t. 1. § 4. [29]Riparum quoque usus publicus est, ut volunt
jura gentium, sicut et ipsius fluminis usus publicus est. Itaque et
navigium ad ripes appellere, et funes de arboribus ibi natis religare,
et navis onera in his locis reponere, liberum quique est sicuti nec per
flumen ipsum navigare quisquam prohibetur. And again, §5, [30]littorum
quoque usus publicus, sive juri gentium est, ut et ipsius maris et
ob id data est facultas volentibus, casas ibi sibi componere, in quas
se recipere possint, &c. Again, § 1. [31]Nemo igitur ad littora maris
accedere prohibitur; veluti deambulare aut navem appellere, sic tamen ut
a villis, id est domiciliis monumentisque ibi positis, et ab edificiis
abstineat, nec iis damnum inferat.

Among incidental rights are those of having pilots, buoys, beacons,
landmarks, light-houses, &c., to guide the navigators. The establishment
of these at joint expense, and under joint regulations, may be the
subject of a future convention. In the meantime, both should be free to
have their own, and refuse those of the other, both as to use and expense.

Very peculiar circumstances attending the river Mississippi, require
that the incidental right of accommodation on the shore, which needs only
occasional exercise on other rivers, should be habitual and constant on
this. Sea vessels cannot navigate that river, nor the river vessels go
to sea. The navigation would be useless then without an entrepôt where
these vessels might safely deposit their own cargoes, and take those
left by the others; and where warehouses and keepers might be constantly
established for the safeguard of the cargoes. It is admitted, indeed, that
the incidental right thus extended into the territory of the bordering
inhabitants, is liable to stricter modifications in proportion as it
interferes with their territorial right. But the inconveniences of both
parties are still to have their weight, and reason and moderation on
both sides are to draw the line between them. As to this, we count much
on the liberality of Spain, on her concurrence in opinion with us, that
it is for the interest of both parties to remove completely this germ of
discord from between us, and draw our friendship as close as circumstances
proclaim that it should be, and on the considerations which make it
palpable that a convenient spot placed under our exclusive occupation,
and exempted from the jurisdiction and police of their government, is
far more likely to preserve peace than a mere free port, where eternal
altercations would keep us in eternal ill humor with each other. The
policy of this measure, and indeed of a much larger concession, having
been formerly sketched in a paper of July 12th, 1790, sent to the
commissioners severally, they are now referred to that.

If this be agreed to, the manner of fixing on that extra territorial
spot becomes highly interesting. The most desirable to us, would be a
permission to send commissioners to choose such spot, below the town of
New Orleans, as they should find most convenient.

If this be refused, it would be better now to fix on the spot. Our
information is, that the whole country below the town, and for sixty
miles above it, on the western shore, is low, marshy, and subject to
such deep inundation for many miles from the river, that if capable
of being reclaimed at all by banking, it would still never afford an
entrepôt sufficiently safe; that on the eastern side the only lands below
the town, not subject to inundation, are at the Detour aux Anglais, or
English Turn, the highest part of which, is that whereon the fort St.
Marie formerly stood. Even this is said to have been raised by art, and
to be very little above the level of the inundations. This spot then
is what we would fix on, if obliged now to decide, with from one to
as many square miles of the circumjacent lands as can be obtained, and
comprehending expressly the shores above and below the site of the fort as
far as possible. But as to the spot itself, the limits, and even whether
it shall be extra territorial, or only a free port, and what regulations
it shall be laid under, the convenience of that Government is entitled
to so much respect and attention on our part, that the arrangement must
be left to the management of the commissioners, who will doubtless use
their best efforts to obtain all they can for us.

The worst footing on which the determination of the ground could be
placed, would be a reference to joint commissioners; because their
disagreement, a very probable, nay, a certain event, would undo the
whole convention, and leave us exactly where we now are. Unless indeed
they will engage to us, in case of such disagreement, the highest ground
at the Detour aux Anglais, of convenient extent, including the landings
and harbor thereto adjacent. This would ensure us that ground, unless
better could be found and mutually preferred, and close the delay of
right under which we have so long labored for peace-sake.

It will probably be urged, because it was urged on a former occasion,
that, if Spain _grants_ to us the right of navigating the Mississippi,
other nations will become entitled to it by virtue of treaties giving
them the rights of the _most favored nation_.

Two answers may be given to this:

1. When those treaties were made, no nations could be under contemplation
but those then existing, or those at most who might exist under
similar circumstances. America did not then exist as a nation; and the
circumstances of her position and commerce, are so totally dissimilar to
everything then known, that the treaties of that day were not adapted
to any such being. They would better fit even China than America;
because, as a manufacturing nation, China resembles Europe more. When
we solicited France to admit our whale oils into her ports, though she
had excluded all foreign whale oils, her minister made the objection
now under consideration, and the foregoing answer was given. It was
found to be solid; and the whale oils of the United States are in
consequence admitted, though those of Portugal and the Hanse towns, and
of all other nations, are excluded. Again, when France and England were
negotiating their late treaty of commerce, the great dissimilitude of
our commerce (which furnishes raw materials to employ the industry of
others, in exchange for articles whereon industry has been exhausted)
from the commerce of the European nations (which furnishes things ready
wrought only) was suggested to the attention of both negotiators, and
that they should keep their nations free to make particular arrangements
with ours, by communicating to each other only the rights of the most
favored European nation. Each was separately sensible of the importance
of the distinction; and as soon as it was proposed by the one, it was
acceded to by the other, and the word _European_ was inserted in their
treaty. It may fairly be considered then as the rational and received
interpretation of the diplomatic term, "gentis amicissimæ"[32] that it
has not in view a nation unknown in many cases at the time of using the
term, and so dissimilar in all cases as to furnish no ground of just
reclamation to any nation.

But the decisive answer is, that Spain does not grant us the navigation
of the river. We have an inherent right to it; and she may repel the
demand of any other nation by candidly stating her act to have been,
what in truth it is, a recognition only, and not a grant.

If Spain apprehends that other nations may claim access to our ports in
the Mississippi, under their treaties with us, giving them a right to
come and trade in all our ports, though we would not choose to insert an
express stipulation against them, yet we shall think ourselves justified
to acquiesce in fact, under any regulations Spain may from time to time
establish against their admission.

Should Spain renew another objection, which she relied much on before
that the English at the Revolution treaty could not cede to us what
Spain had taken from them by conquest, and what of course they did not
possess themselves, the preceding observations furnish sufficient matter
for refutation.

To conclude the subjects of boundary and navigation, each of the following
conditions is to be considered by the commissioners as a _sine quâ non_.

1. That our southern boundary remain established at the completion of
thirty-one degrees of latitude on the Mississippi, and so on to the
ocean, as has been before described, and our western one along the middle
of the channel of the Mississippi, however that channel may vary, as
it is constantly varying, and that Spain cease to occupy or to exercise
jurisdiction in any part northward or eastward of these boundaries.

2. That our right be acknowledged of navigating the Mississippi, in its
whole breadth and length, from its source to the sea, as established by
the treaty of 1763.

3. That neither the vessels, cargoes, or the persons on board, be stopped,
visited, or subjected to the payment of any duty whatsoever; or, if a
visit must be permitted, that it be under such restrictions as to produce
the least possible inconvenience. But it should be altogether avoided,
if possible, as the parent of perpetual broils.

4. That such conveniences be allowed us ashore, as may render our right
of navigation practicable and under such regulations as may _bonâ fide_
respect the preservation of peace and order alone, and may not have in
object to embarrass our navigation, or raise a revenue on it. While the
substance of this article is made a _sine quâ non_, the modifications
of it are left altogether to the discretion and management of the
commissioners.

We might add, as a fifth _sine quâ non_, that no phrase should be admitted
in the treaty which could express or imply that we take the navigation
of the Mississippi as a _grant_ from Spain. But, however disagreeable it
would be to subscribe to such a sentiment, yet, were the conclusion of a
treaty to hang on that single objection, it would be expedient to waive
it, and to meet, at a future day, the consequences of any resumption
they may pretend to make, rather than at present, those of a separation
without coming to any agreement.

We know not whether Spain has it in idea to ask a compensation for the
ascertainment of our right.

1. In the first place, she cannot in reason ask a compensation for
yielding what we have a right to, that is to say, the navigation of the
river, and the conveniences incident to it of natural right.

2. In the second place, we have a claim on Spain for indemnification
for nine years' exclusion from that navigation, and a reimbursement
of the heavy duties (not less for the most part than 15 per cent. on
extravagant valuations) levied on the commodities she has permitted
to pass to New Orleans. The relinquishment of this will be no unworthy
equivalent for any accommodations she may indulge us with, beyond the
line of our strict right. And this claim is to be brought into view
in proper time and manner, merely to be abandoned in consideration of
such accommodations. We have nothing else to give in exchange. For as
to territory, we have neither the right nor the disposition to alienate
an inch of what belongs to any member of our Union. Such a proposition,
therefore, is totally inadmissible, and not to be treated of for a moment.

3. On the former conferences on the navigation of the Mississippi,
Spain chose to blend with it the subject of commerce; and, accordingly,
specific propositions thereon passed between the negotiators. Her object,
then, was to obtain our renunciation of the navigation, and to hold out
commercial arrangements, perhaps as a lure to us; perhaps, however, she
might then, and may now, really set a value on commercial arrangements
with us, and may receive them as a consideration for accommodating us in
the navigation; or, may wish for them, to have the appearance of receiving
a consideration. Commercial arrangements, if acceptable in themselves,
will not be the less so if coupled with those relating to navigation and
boundary. We have only to take care that they be acceptable in themselves.

There are two principles which may be proposed as the basis of a
commercial treaty: 1. That of exchanging the privileges of _native
citizens_; or,

2. Those of _the most favored nation_.

1. With the nations holding important possessions in America, we are ready
to exchange the rights of native citizens, provided they be extended
through the whole possessions of both parties, but the propositions of
Spain, made on the former occasion, (a copy of which accompanies this,)
were, that we should give their merchants, vessels, and productions,
the privilege of native merchants, vessels, and productions, through
the whole of our possessions, and they give the same to ours only in
Spain and the Canaries. This is inadmissible, because unequal; and, as
we believe that Spain is not ripe for an equal exchange on this basis,
we avoid proposing it.

2. Though treaties, which merely exchange the rights of the most
favored nations, are not without all inconvenience, yet they have
their conveniences also. It is an important one, that they leave each
party free to make what internal regulations they please, and to give
what preferences they find expedient to native merchants, vessels, and
productions. And as we already have treaties on this basis, with France,
Holland, Sweden, and Prussia, the two former of which are perpetual, it
will be but small additional embarrassment to extend it to Spain. On the
contrary, we are sensible it is right to place that nation on the most
favored footing, whether we have a treaty with them or not, and it can
do us no harm to secure by treaty a reciprocation of the right.

Of the four treaties before mentioned, either the French or the Prussian
might be taken as a model. But it would be useless to propose the
Prussian; because we have already supposed that Spain would never consent
to those articles which give to each party access to all the dominions
of the other; and, without this equivalent, we would not agree to tie
our own hands so materially in war, as would be done by the 23d article,
which renounces the right of fitting out privateers, or of capturing
merchant vessels. The French treaty, therefore, is proposed as the model.
In this, however, the following changes are to be made.

We should be admitted to all the dominions of Spain, to which any other
foreign nation is, or may be admitted.

Article 5 being an exemption from a particular duty in France, will of
course be omitted, as inapplicable to Spain.

Article 8 to be omitted, as unnecessary with Morocco, and inefficacious,
and little honorable with any of the Barbary powers. But it may furnish
occasion to sound Spain on the project of a convention of the powers
at war with the Barbary States, to keep up, by rotation, a constant
cruise of a given force on their coasts, till they shall be compelled
to renounce forever, and against all nations, their predatory practices.
Perhaps the infidelities of the Algerines to their treaty of peace with
Spain, though the latter does not choose to break openly, may induce
her to subsidize _us_ to cruise against them with a given force.

Article 9 and 10, concerning fisheries, to be omitted, as inapplicable.

Article 11. The first paragraph of this article, respecting the _droit
d'aubaine_, to be omitted; that law being supposed peculiar to France.

Article 17, giving asylum in the ports of either to the armed vessels
of the other, with the prizes taken from the enemies of that other,
must be qualified as it is in the 19th article of the Prussian treaty;
as the stipulation in the latter part of the article, "that no shelter
or refuge shall be given in the ports of the one to such as shall have
made prize on the subjects of the other of the parties," would forbid us
in case of a war between France and Spain, to give shelter in our ports
to prizes made by the latter on the former, while the first part of
the article would oblige us to shelter those made by the former on the
latter--a very dangerous covenant, and which ought never to be repeated
in any other instance.

Article 29. Consuls should be received in all the ports at which the
vessels of either party may be received.

Article 30, concerning free ports in Europe and America. Free ports in
the Spanish possessions in America, and particularly at the Havana, San
Domingo, in the island of that name, and St. John of Porto Rico, are
more to be desired than expected. It can, therefore, only be recommended
to the best endeavors of the commissioners to obtain them. It will be
something to obtain for our vessels, flour, &c., admission to those ports
during their pleasure. In like manner, if they could be prevailed on
to re-establish our right of cutting log-wood in the bay of Campeachy,
on the footing on which it stood before the treaty of 1763, it would be
desirable, and not endanger, to us, any contest with the English, who,
by the Revolution treaty, are restrained to the south-eastern parts of
Yucatan.

Article 31. The _act_ of ratification, on our part, may require a
twelvemonth from the date of the treaty, as the Senate meets regularly
but once a year; and to return it to Madrid, for exchange, may require
four months more. It would be better, indeed, if Spain would send her
ratification to be exchanged by her representative here.

The treaty must not exceed twelve or fifteen years' duration, except
the clauses relating to boundary, and the navigation of the Mississippi,
which must be perpetual and final. Indeed, these two subjects had better
be in a separate instrument.

There might have been mentioned a third species of arrangement, that
of making special agreements on every special subject of commerce,
and of setting a tariff of duty to be paid on each side, on every
particular article; but this would require in our commissioners a very
minute knowledge of our commerce, as it is impossible to foresee every
proposition of this kind which might be brought into discussion, and
to prepare them for it by information and instruction from hence. Our
commerce, too, is, as yet, rather in a course of experiment, and the
channels in which it will ultimately flow, are not sufficiently known to
enable us to provide for it by special agreement. Nor have the exigencies
of our new government, as yet, so far developed themselves, as that we
can know to what degree we may or must have recourse to commerce for
the purposes of revenue. No common consideration, therefore, ought to
induce us, as yet, to arrangements of this kind. Perhaps nothing should
do it with any nation, short of the privileges of natives in all their
possessions, foreign and domestic.

It were to be wished, indeed, that some positively favorable stipulations
respecting our grain, flour, and fish, could be obtained, even on our
giving reciprocal advantages to some other commodities of Spain, say
her wines and brandies.

But, 1st. If we quit the ground of the _most favored nation_, as to
certain articles for our convenience, Spain may insist on doing the same
for other articles for her convenience, and thus our commissioners will
get themselves on the ground of a treaty of _detail_, for which they
will not be prepared.

2d. If we grant favor to the wines and brandies of Spain, then Portugal
and Spain will demand the same; and in order to create an equivalent,
Portugal may lay a duty on our fish and grain, and France, a prohibition
on our whale oils, the removal of which will be proposed as an equivalent.

This much, however, as to grain and flour, may be attempted. There has,
not long since, been a considerable duty laid on them in Spain. This
was while a treaty on the subject of commerce was pending between us and
Spain, as that court considers the matter. It is not generally thought
right to change the state of things pending a treaty concerning them.
On this consideration, and on the motive of cultivating our friendship,
perhaps the commissioners may induce them to restore this commodity
to the footing on which it was, on opening the conferences with Mr.
Gardoqui, on the 26th day of July, 1785. If Spain says, "do the same by
your tonnage on our vessels," the answer may be, that our foreign tonnage
affects Spain very little, and other nations very much; whereas the duty
on flour in Spain affects us very much, and other nations very little.
Consequently, there would be no equality in reciprocal relinquishment,
as there had been none in the reciprocal innovation; and Spain, by
insisting on this, would, in fact, only be aiding the interests of her
rival nations, to whom we should be forced to extend the same indulgence.
At the time of opening the conferences, too, we had, as yet, not erected
any system; our government itself being not yet erected. Innovation then
was unavoidable on our part, if it be innovation to establish a system.
We did it on fair and general ground; on ground favorable to Spain. But
they had a system, and, therefore, innovation was avoidable on their part.

It is known to the commissioners that we found it expedient to ask
the interposition of France, lately, to bring on this settlement of
our boundary, and the navigation of the Mississippi. How far that
interposition has contributed to produce it, is uncertain. But we have
reason to believe that her further interference would not produce an
agreeable effect on Spain. The commissioners, therefore, are to avoid
all further communications on the subject with the ministers of France,
giving them such explanations as may preserve their good dispositions.
But if, ultimately, they shall find themselves unable to bring Spain to
agreement on the subject of the navigation and boundary, the interposition
of France, as a mutual friend, and the guarantee of our limits, is then
to be asked, in whatever light Spain may choose to consider it.

Should the negotiations on the subject of navigation and boundary
assume, at any time, an unhopeful aspect, it may be proper that Spain
should be given to understand, that, if they are discontinued without
coming to any agreement, the Government of the United States cannot be
responsible for the longer forbearance of their western inhabitants. At
the same time the abandonment of the negotiation should be so managed
as that, without engaging us to a further suspension of the exercise of
our rights, we may not be committed to resume them on the instant. The
present turbid situation of Europe cannot leave us long without a safe
occasion of resuming our territory and navigation, and of carving for
ourselves those conveniences, on the shores, which may facilitate and
protect the latter effectually and permanently.

We had a right to expect that, pending a negotiation, all things would
have remained in _statu quo_, and that Spain would not have proceeded
to possess herself of other parts of our territory. But she has lately
taken and fortified a new post on the Walnut hills, above the mouth
of the Yazoo river, and far above the 31st degree. This garrison ought
to have been instantly dislodged; but for our wish to be in friendship
with Spain, and our confidence in her assurances "to bide by the limits
established in our treaty with England," complaints of this unfriendly
and uncandid procedure may be brought forward or not, as the commissioners
shall see expedient.

FOOTNOTES:

     [27] Mr. Short is desired to purchase this book at
     Amsterdam, or Paris, as he may not find it at Madrid, and
     when it shall have answered the purposes of this mission,
     let it be sent here for the use of the Secretary of State's
     office.

     [28] Rivers belong to the public, that is to say to the
     Roman people.

     [29] "The use of the banks belong also to the public by
     the laws of nations, as the use of the river itself does.
     Therefore, every one is free to moor his vessel to the
     bank, to fasten his cables to the trees growing on it, to
     deposit the cargo of his vessel in those places in like
     manner as every one is free to navigate the river itself."

     [30] "The use of the shores also belongs to the public, or
     is under the law of nations, as is that of the sea itself.
     Therefore it is, that those who choose, have a right to
     build huts there, into which they may betake themselves."

     [31] "Nobody, therefore, is prohibited from landing on the
     sea shore, walking there, or mooring their vessel there,
     so nevertheless that they keep out of the villas, that is,
     the habitations, monuments, and public buildings, erected
     there, and do them no injury."

     [32] "The most favored nation."


XXVII.--_Report on the case of Charles Russell and others, claiming
certain lands._

                                                     January 21, 1792.

The Secretary of State, to whom was referred, by the President of the
United States, the letter of the Governor of Virginia of January 7th,
1792, with the report of a committee of the House of Delegates of that
commonwealth, of December 12th, 1791, and resolution of the General
Assembly thereon, of December 17th, on the case of Charles Russell,
late an officer in the service of the said commonwealth, stating that a
considerable part of the tract of country allotted for the officers and
soldiers having fallen into the State of North Carolina on the extension
of their common boundary, the legislature of the said State had, in
1781, passed an act substituting in lieu thereof the tract of country
between the said boundary and the rivers Mississippi, Ohio, Tennessee,
and subjecting the same to the claims of their officers and soldiers.
That the said Charles Russell had in consequence thereof, directed
warrants for two thousand six hundred and sixty-six and two-thirds acres
of land to be located within the said tract of country; but that the
same belonging to the Chickasaws, he is unable to obtain a right thereto,
and that there are other officers and soldiers of the said commonwealth
under like circumstances:

Reports, That the tract of country before described, is within the
boundaries of the Chickasaw nation as established by the treaty of
Hopewell, the 16th day of January 1786.

That the right of occupancy of the said lands, therefore, being vested
in the said nation, the case of the said Charles Russell, and other
officers and soldiers of the said commonwealth, becomes proper to be
referred to the legislature of the United States for their consideration.


XXVIII.--_Report relative to negotiations at Madrid._

                                                        March 7, 1792.

The Secretary of State having understood, from communications with
the commissioners of his Catholic Majesty, subsequent to that which
he reported to the President on the 22d of December last, that though
they considered the navigation of the Mississippi as the principal
object of negotiation between the two countries, yet it was expected by
their court that the conferences would extend to all the matters which
were under negotiation on the former occasion with Mr. Gardoqui, and
particularly to some arrangements of commerce, is of opinion, that,
to renew the conferences on this subject also, since they desire it,
will be but friendly and respectful, and can lead to nothing without
our own consent; and that, to refuse it, might obstruct the settlement
of the questions of navigation and boundary; and, therefore, reports
to the President of the United States, the following observations and
instructions to the commissioners of the United States, appointed to
negotiate with the court of Spain a treaty or convention relative to the
navigation of the Mississippi; which observations and instructions, he
is of opinion, should be laid before the Senate of the United States,
and their decision be desired, whether they will advise and consent that
a treaty be entered into by the commissioners of the United States with
Spain conformable thereto.

After stating to our commissioners the foundation of our rights to
navigate the Mississippi, and to hold our southern boundary at the 31st
degree of latitude, and that each of these is to be a _sine quâ non_,
it is proposed to add as follows:

On the former conferences on the navigation of the Mississippi, Spain
chose to blend with it the subject of commerce; and, accordingly,
specific propositions thereon passed between the negotiators. Her object
then was to obtain our renunciation of the navigation, and to hold out
commercial arrangements perhaps as a lure to us. Perhaps, however, she
might then, and may now, really set a value on commercial arrangements
with us, and may receive them as a consideration for accommodating us in
the navigation, or may wish for them to have the appearance of receiving
a consideration. Commercial arrangements, if acceptable in themselves,
will not be the less so, if coupled with those relating to navigation and
boundary. We have only to take care that they be acceptable in themselves.

       *       *       *       *       *


XXIX.--_Opinion on the Bill apportioning Representation._

                                                        April 4, 1792.

The Constitution has declared that representatives and direct taxes shall
be apportioned among the several States according to their respective
numbers. That the number of representatives shall not exceed one for
every 30,000, but each State shall have at least one representative, and
until such enumeration shall be made, the State of New Hampshire shall
be entitled to choose 3, Massachusetts 2.

The bill for apportioning representatives among the several States,
without explaining any principle at all, which may show its conformity
with the constitution, to guide future apportionments, says, that New
Hampshire shall have 3 members, Massachusetts 16, &c. We are, therefore,
to find by experiment what has been the principle of the bill; to do
which, it is proper to state the federal or representable numbers of
each State, and the numbers allotted to them by the bill. They are as
follows:--

                                     Members.

     Vermont                85,532      3
     New Hampshire         141,823      5
     Massachusetts         475,327     16
     Rhode Island           68,444      2
     Connecticut           285,941      8
     New York              352,915     11
     New Jersey            179,556      6
     Pennsylvania          432,880     14
     Delaware               55,538      2
     Maryland              278,513      9
     Virginia              630,558     21
     Kentucky               68,705      2
     North Carolina        353,521     11
     South Carolina        206,236      6
     Georgia                70,843      2
                         ---------    ---
                         3,636,312    120

It happens that this representation, whether tried as between great and
small States, or as between north and south, yields, in the present
instance, a tolerably just result; and, consequently, could not be
objected to on that ground, if it were obtained by the process prescribed
in the Constitution; but if obtained by any process out of that, it
becomes arbitrary and inadmissible.

The 1st member of the clause of the Constitution above cited is express,
that representatives shall be apportioned among the several States
according to their _respective numbers_. That is to say, they shall
be apportioned by some common ratio--for proportion, and ratio, are
equivalent words; and, in the definition of _proportion among numbers_,
that they have a ratio common to all, or in other words, a common divisor.
Now, trial will show that there is no common ratio, or divisor, which,
applied to the numbers of each State, will give to them the number of
representatives allotted in this bill. For trying the several ratios of
29, 30, 31, 32, 33, the allotments would be as follows:--

                       29   30   31   32   33  The Bill
                       --   --   --   --   --  --------
     Vermont            2    2    2    2    2      3
     New Hampshire      4    4    4    4    4      5
     Massachusetts     16   15   15   14   14     16
     Rhode Island       2    2    2    2    2      2
     Connecticut        8    7    7    7    7      8
     New York          12   11   11   11   10     11
     New Jersey         6    5    5    5    5      6
     Pennsylvania      14   14   13   13   13     14
     Delaware           1    1    1    1    1      2
     Maryland           9    9    8    8    8      9
     Virginia          21   21   20   19   19     21
     Kentucky           2    2    2    2    2      2
     North Carolina    12   11   11   11   10     12
     South Carolina     7    6    6    6    6      7
     Georgia            2    2    2    2    2      2
                      ---  ---  ---  ---  ---    ---
                      118  112  109  107  105    120

Then the bill reverses the constitutional precept, because, by it,
representatives are _not_ apportioned among the several States, according
to their respective numbers.

It will be said that, though, for taxes, there may always be found a
divisor which will apportion them among the States according to numbers
exactly, without leaving any remainder, yet, for _representatives_, there
can be no such common ratio, or divisor, which, applied to the several
numbers, will divide them exactly, without a remainder or fraction. I
answer, then, that taxes must be divided _exactly_, and representatives
_as nearly_ as the _nearest ratio_ will admit; and the fractions must
be neglected, because the Constitution calls absolutely that there be
an _apportionment or common ratio_, and if any fractions result from
the operation, it has left them unprovided for. In fact it could not
but foresee that such fractions would result, and it meant to submit
to them. It knew they would be in favor of one part of the Union at one
time, and of another at another, so as, in the end, to balance occasional
irregularities. But instead of such a _single_ common ratio, or uniform
divisor, as prescribed by the Constitution, the bill has applied _two
ratios_, at least, to the different States, to wit, that of 30,026 to
the seven following: Rhode Island, New York, Pennsylvania, Maryland,
Virginia, Kentucky and Georgia; and that of 27,770 to the eight others,
namely: Vermont, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut, New Jersey,
Delaware, North Carolina, and South Carolina, as follows:--

     Rhode Island      68,444 divided by 30,026 gives  2
     New York         352,915    "         "      "   11
     Pennsylvania     432,880    "         "      "   14
     Maryland         278,513    "         "      "    9
     Virginia         630,558    "         "      "   21
     Kentucky          58,705    "         "      "    2
     Georgia           70,843    "         "      "    2

     Vermont           85,532 divided by 27,770 gives  3
     New Hampshire    141,823    "         "      "    5
     Massachusetts    475,327    "         "      "   16
     Connecticut      235,941    "         "      "    8
     New Jersey       179,556    "         "      "    6
     Delaware          55,538    "         "      "    2
     North Carolina   353,521    "         "      "   12
     South Carolina   206,236    "         "      "    7

And if _two_ ratios be applied, then _fifteen_ may, and the distribution
become arbitrary, instead of being apportioned to numbers. Another member
of the clause of the Constitution which has been cited, says "the number
of representatives shall not exceed one for every 30,000, but each State
shall have at least one representative." This last phrase proves that
it had no contemplation that all fractions, or _numbers below the common
ratio_ were to be unrepresented; and it provides especially that in the
case of a State whose whole number shall be below the common ratio, one
representative shall be given to it. This is the single instance where
it allows representation to any smaller number than the common ratio,
and by providing especially for it in this, shews it was understood
that, without special provision, the smaller number would in this case,
be involved in the general principle. The first phrase of the above
citations, that "the number of representatives shall not exceed one for
every 30,000," is violated by this bill which has given to eight States
a number exceeding one for every 30,000, to wit, one for every 27,770.

In answer to this, it is said that this phrase may mean either the 30,000
_in each State_, or the 30,000 _in the whole Union_, and that in the
latter case it serves only to find the amount of the whole representation;
which, in the present state of population, is 120 members. Suppose the
phrase might bear both meanings, which will common sense apply to it?
Which did the universal understanding of our country apply to it? Which
did the Senate and Representatives apply to it during the pendency of the
first bill, and even till an advanced stage of this second bill, when
an ingenious gentleman found out the doctrine of fractions, a doctrine
so difficult and inobvious, as to be rejected at first sight by the very
persons who afterwards became its most zealous advocates?

The phrase stands in the midst of a number of others, every one of which
relates to States in their separate capacity. Will not plain common sense
then, understand it, like the rest of its context, to relate to States
in their separate capacities?

But if the phrase of one for 30,000 is only meant to give the aggregate
of representatives, and not at all to influence their apportionment
among the States, then the 120 being once found, in order to apportion
them, we must recur to the former rule which does it according to the
numbers of _the respective States_; and we must take the _nearest common
divisor_, as the ratio of distribution, that is to say, that divisor
which, applied to every State, gives to them such numbers as, added
together, come nearest to 120. This nearest common ratio will be found
to be 28,658, and will distribute 119 of the 120 members, leaving only
a single residuary one. It will be found too to place 96,648 fractional
numbers in the eight northernmost States, and 106,582 in the seven
southernmost. The following table shows it:

                                Ratio, 28,658  Fraction.
                                       ------
     Vermont             85,832           2     27,816
     New Hampshire      141,823           4     26,391
     Massachusetts      475,327          16     13,599
     Rhode Island        68,444           2     10,728
     Connecticut        235,941           8      5,077
     New York           352,915          12      6,619
     New Jersey         119,856           6      6,408
     Pennsylvania       432,880          15         10   96,648

     Delaware            55,538           1     26,680
     Maryland           278,503           9     18,191
     Virginia           630,558          21     24,540
     Kentucky            68,705           2     10,989
     North Carolina     353,521          12      7,225
     South Carolina     206,236           7      4,230
     Virginia            70,843           2     23,137  105,582
                      ---------        ----    -------  -------
                      3,636,312         119    202,230  202,230

Whatever may have been the intention, the effect of neglecting the
nearest divisor, (which leaves but one residuary member,) and adopting
a distant one (which leaves eight), is merely to take a member from New
York and Pennsylvania, each, and give them to Vermont and New Hampshire.
But it will be said, this is giving more than one for 30,000. True, but
has it not been just said that the one for 30,000 is prescribed only to
fix the aggregate number, and that we are not to mind it when we come
to apportion them among the States? That for this we must recur to the
former rule which distributes them according to the numbers in each
State? Besides does not the bill itself apportion among seven of the
States by the ratio of 27,770? which is much more than one for 30,000.

Where a phrase is susceptible of two meanings, we ought certainly to
adopt that which will bring upon us the fewest inconveniences. Let us
weigh those resulting from both constructions.

From that giving to each State a member for every 30,000 in that State
results the single inconvenience that there may be large portions
unrepresented, but it being a mere hazard on which State this will
fall, hazard will equalize it in the long run. From the others result
exactly the same inconvenience. A thousand cases may be imagined to
prove it. Take one. Suppose eight of the States had 45,000 inhabitants
each, and the other seven 44,999 each, that is to say each one less than
each of the others. The aggregate would be 674,993, and the number of
representatives at one for 30,000 of the aggregate, would be 22. Then,
after giving one member to each State, distribute the seven residuary
members among the seven highest fractions, and though the difference of
population be only an unit, the representation would be the double.

                                           Fractions.

      1st.                     45,000   2   15,000
       2d.                     45,000   2   15,000
       3d.                     45,000   2   15,000
      4th.                     45,000   2   15,000
      5th.                     45,000   2   15,000
      6th.                     45,000   2   15,000
      7th.                     45,000   2   15,000
      8th.                     45,000   1   15,000
      9th.                     44,999   1   14,999
     10th.                     44,999   1   14,999
     11th.                     44,999   1   14,999
     12th.                     44,999   1   14,999
     13th.                     44,999   1   14,999
     14th.                     44,999   1   14,999
     15th.                                  14,999
                              -------  --
                              674,993  22

Here a single inhabitant the more would count as 30,000. Nor is this case
imaginable, only it will resemble the real one whenever the fractions
happen to be pretty equal through the whole States. The numbers of our
census happen by accident to give the fractions all very small, or very
great, so as to produce the strongest case of inequality that could
possibly have occurred, and which may never occur again. The probability
is that the fractions will generally descend gradually from 29,999 to
1. The inconvenience then of large unrepresented fractions attends both
constructions; and while the most obvious construction is liable to no
other, that of the bill incurs many and grievous ones.

1. If you permit the large fraction in one State to choose a
representative for one of the small fractions in another State, you take
from the latter its election, which constitutes real representation,
and substitute a virtual representation of the disfranchised fractions,
and the tendency of the doctrine of virtual representation has been too
well discussed and appreciated by reasoning and resistance on a former
great occasion to need development now.

2. The bill does not say that it has given the residuary representatives
_to the greatest fraction_; though in fact it has done so. It seems to
have avoided establishing that into a rule, lest it might not suit on
another occasion. Perhaps it may be found the next time more convenient
to distribute them _among the smaller States_; at another time _among
the larger States_; at other times according to any other crotchet which
ingenuity may invent, and the combinations of the day give strength to
carry; or they may do it arbitrarily by open bargains and cabal. In short
this construction introduces into Congress a scramble, or a vendue for
the surplus members. It generates waste of time, hot blood, and may at
some time, when the passions are high, extend a disagreement between
the two Houses, to the perpetual loss of the thing, as happens now in
the Pennsylvania assembly; whereas the other construction reduces the
apportionment always to an arithmetical operation, about which no two
men can ever possibly differ.

3. It leaves in full force the violation of the precept which declares
that representatives shall be _apportioned_ among the States according
to their numbers, _i. e._, by some common ratio.

Viewing this bill either as a _violation of the constitution_, or as
giving an _inconvenient exposition of its words_, is it a case wherein
the President ought to interpose his negative? I think it is.

1. The non-user of his negative begins already to excite a belief that no
President will ever venture to use it; and has, consequently, begotten a
desire to raise up barriers in the State legislatures against Congress,
throwing off the control of the constitution.

2. It can never be used more pleasingly to the public, than in the
protection of the constitution.

3. No invasions of the constitution are fundamentally so dangerous as the
tricks played on their own numbers, apportionment, and other circumstances
respecting themselves, and affecting their legal qualifications to
legislate for the union.

4. The majorities by which this bill has been carried (to wit: of one in
the Senate and two in the Representatives) show how divided the opinions
were there.

5. The whole of both houses admit the constitution will bear the other
exposition, whereas the minorities in both deny it will bear that of
the bill.

6. The application of any one ratio is intelligible to the people, and
will, therefore be approved, whereas the complex operations of this bill
will never be comprehended by them, and though they may acquiesce, they
cannot approve what they do not understand.


XXX.--_Opinion relative to a case of recapture, by citizens of the
United States, of slaves escaped into Florida, and of an American captain
enticing French slaves from St. Domingo._

                                                     December 3, 1792.

Complaint has been made by the Representatives of Spain that certain
individuals of Georgia entered the State of Florida, and without any
application to the Government, seized and carried into Georgia, certain
persons, whom they claimed to be their slaves. This aggression was thought
the more of, as there exists a convention between that government and
the United States against receiving fugitive slaves.

The minister of France has complained that the master of an American
vessel, while lying within a harbor of St. Domingo, having enticed some
negroes on board his vessel, under pretext of employment, bought them
off, and sold them in Georgia as slaves.

1. Has the general government cognizance of these offences? 2. If it
has, is any law already provided for trying and punishing them?

1. The Constitution says "Congress shall have power to lay and collect
taxes, duties, imposts, and excises, to pay the debts &c., provide for
the common defence and _general welfare_ of the United States." I do
not consider this clause as reaching the point. I suppose its meaning
to be, that Congress may collect taxes for the purpose of providing for
the _general welfare_, in those cases wherein the Constitution empowers
them to act for the general welfare. To suppose that it was meant to give
them a distinct substantive power, to do _any act_ which might tend to
the _general welfare_, is to render all the enumerations useless, and to
make their powers unlimited. We must seek the power therefore in some
other clause of the Constitution. It says further, that Congress shall
have power to "define and punish piracies and felonies committed on
the high seas, and offences against the law of nations." These offences
were not committed on the high seas, and consequently not within that
branch of the clause. Are they against the law of nations, taken as it
may be in its whole extent, as founded, 1st, in nature; 2d, usage; 3d,
convention? So much may be said in the affirmative, that the legislators
ought to send the case before the judiciary for discussion; and the
rather, when it is considered that unless the offenders can be punished
under this clause, there is no other which goes directly to their case,
and consequently our peace with foreign nations will be constantly at
the discretion of individuals.

2. Have the legislators sent this question before the Courts by any
law already provided? The act of 1789, chapter 20, section 9, says the
district courts shall have cognizance concurrent with the courts of the
several States, or the circuit courts, of all causes, where an _alien
sues for a tort only_, in violation of the law of nations: but what if
there be no alien whose interest is such as to support an action for
the tort?--which is precisely the case of the aggression on Florida. If
the act in describing the jurisdiction of the Courts, had given them
cognizance of proceedings by way of indictment or information against
offenders under the law of nations, for the public wrong, and on the
public behalf, as well as to an individual for the special tort, it
would have been the thing desired.

The same act, section 13, says, the "Supreme Court shall have exclusively
all such jurisdiction of suits or proceedings against ambassadors,
or other public ministers, or their domestics or domestic servants,
as a court of law can have or exercise consistently, with the law of
nations."--Still this is not the case, no ambassador, &c., being concerned
here. I find nothing else in the law applicable to this question, and
therefore presume the case is still to be provided for, and that this
may be done by enlarging the jurisdiction of the courts, so that they may
sustain indictments and informations on the public behalf, for offences
against the law of nations.

[_A note added by Mr. Jefferson at a later period._]

On further examination it does appear that the 11th section of the
judiciary act above cited gives to the circuit courts exclusively,
cognizance of all crimes and offences cognizable under the authority
of the United States, and not otherwise provided for. This removes the
difficulty, however, but one step further;--for questions then arise,
1st. What is the peculiar character of the offence in question; to wit,
treason, felony, misdemeanor, or trespass? 2d. What is its specific
punishment--capital or what? 3d. Whence is the venue to come?


XXXI.--_Report on Assays at the Mint, communicated to the House of
Representatives, January 8, 1793._

The Secretary of State, to whom was referred, by the President of the
United States, the resolution of the House of Representatives of the
29th of November, 1792, on the subject of experiments of France, England,
Spain, and Portugal, reports:

That assays and experiments have been, accordingly, made at the mint,
by the director, and under his care and inspection, of sundry gold and
silver coins of France, England, Spain, and Portugal, and of the quantity
of fine gold and alloy in each of them, and the specific gravities of
those of gold given in by the director, a copy of which, and of the
