letter into the same pocket; his heart beating at the sight of her hand
and the memory of the words she had written, and then he set out. It
was already late in the evening, and after the rain the air was soft and
balmy, though the western sky was becoming overcast again by a cloud,
which low down on the horizon was piling up mountain on mountain of
vapor, as if it might rain again by night. Darby, however, having
dressed, crossed the flat without much trouble, only getting a little
wet in some places where the logs were gone. As he turned into the path
up the hill, he stood face to face with Vashti. She was standing by
a little spring which came from under an old oak, the only one on the
hill-side of pines, and was in a faded black calico. He scarcely took in
at first that it was Vashti, she was so changed. He had always thought
of her as he last saw her that evening in pink, with her white throat
and her scornful eyes. She was older now than she was then; looked more
a woman and taller; and her throat if anything was whiter than ever
against her black dress; her face was whiter too, and her eyes darker
and larger. At least, they opened wide when Darby appeared in the path.
Her hands went up to her throat as if she suddenly wanted breath. All of
the young man’s heart went out to her, and the next moment he was within
arm’s length of her. Her one word was in his ears:

“Darby!” He was about to catch her in his arms when a gesture restrained
him, and her look turned him to stone.

“Yer uniform?” she gasped, stepping back. Darby was not quick always,
and he looked down at his clothes and then at her again, his dazed brain
wondering.

“Whar’s yer uniform?” she asked.

“At home,” he said, quietly, still wondering. She seemed to catch some
hope.

“Yer got a furlough?” she said, more quietly, coming a little nearer to
him, and her eyes growing softer.

“Got a furlough?” he repeated to gain time for thought. “I--I----” He
had never thought of it before; the words in her letter flashed into his
mind, and he felt his face flush. He would not tell her a lie. “No, I
ain’t got no furlough,” he said, and paused whilst he tried to get his
words together to explain. But she did not give him time.

“What you doin’ with them clo’se on?” she asked again.

“I--I----” he began, stammering as her suspicion dawned on him.

“You’re a deserter!” she said, coldly, leaning forward, her hands
clenched, her face white, her eyes contracted.

“A what!” he asked aghast, his brain not wholly taking in her words.

“You’re a deserter!” she said again--“and--a coward!”

All the blood in him seemed to surge to his head and leave his heart
like ice. He seized her arm with a grip like steel.

“Vashti Mills,” he said, with his face white, “don’t you say that to
me--if yer were a man I’d kill yer right here where yer stan’!” He
tossed her hand from him, and turned on his heel.

The next instant she was standing alone, and when she reached the point
in the path where she could see the crossing, Darby was already on the
other side of the swamp, striding knee-deep through the water as if he
were on dry land. She could not have made him hear if she had wished it;
for on a sudden a great rushing wind swept through the pines, bending
them down like grass and blowing the water in the bottom into white
waves, and the thunder which had been rumbling in the distance suddenly
broke with a great peal just overhead.

In a few minutes the rain came; but the girl did not mind it. She stood
looking across the bottom until it came in sheets, wetting her to the
skin and shutting out everything a few yards away.

The thunder-storm passed, but all that night the rain came down, and all
the next day, and when it held up a little in the evening the bottom was
a sea.

The rain had not prevented Darby from going out--he was used to it; and
he spent most of the day away from home. When he returned he brought his
mother a few provisions, as much meal perhaps as a child might carry,
and spent the rest of the evening sitting before the fire, silent and
motionless, a flame burning back deep in his eyes and a cloud fixed on
his brow. He was in his uniform, which he had put on again the night
before as soon as he got home, and the steam rose from it as he sat. The
other clothes were in a bundle on the floor where he had tossed them
the evening before. He never moved except when his mother now and then
spoke, and then sat down again as before. Presently he rose and said he
must be going; but as he rose to his feet, a pain shot through him like
a knife; everything turned black before him and he staggered and fell
full length on the floor.

He was still on the floor next morning, for his mother had not been able
to get him to the bed, or to leave to get any help; but she had made
him a pallet, and he was as comfortable as a man might be with a raging
fever. Feeble as she was, the sudden demand on her had awakened the old
woman’s faculties and she was stronger than might have seemed possible.
One thing puzzled her: in his incoherent mutterings, Darby constantly
referred to a furlough and a deserter. She knew that he had a furlough,
of course; but it puzzled her to hear him constantly repeating the
words. So the day passed and then, Darby’s delirium still continuing,
she made out to get to a neighbor’s to ask help. The neighbor had to go
to Mrs. Douwill’s as the only place where there was a chance of getting
any medicine, and it happened that on the way back she fell in with a
couple of soldiers, on horseback, who asked her a few questions. They
were members of a home and conscript guard just formed, and when she
left them they had learned her errand.

Fortunately, Darby’s illness took a better turn next day, and by sunset
he was free from delirium.

Things had not fared well over at Cove Mills’s during these days any
more than at Mrs. Stanley’s. Vashti was in a state of mind which made
her mother wonder if she were not going crazy. She set it down to the
storm she had been out in that evening, for Vashti had not mentioned
Darby’s name. She kept his presence to herself, thinking that--thinking
so many things that she could not speak or eat. Her heart was like lead
within her; but she could not rid herself of the thought of Darby. She
could have torn it out for hate of herself; and to all her mother’s
questioning glances she turned the face of a sphinx. For two days she
neither ate nor spoke. She watched the opposite hill through the rain
which still kept up--something was going on over there, but what it was
she could not tell. At last, on the evening of the third day, she could
stand it no longer, and she set out from home to learn something; she
could not have gone to Mrs. Stanley’s, even if she had wished to do so;
for the bottom was still a sea extending from side to side, and it was
over her head in the current. She set off, therefore, up the stream on
her own side, thinking to learn something up that way. She met the woman
who had taken the medicine to Darby that evening, and she told her all
she knew, mentioning among other things the men of the conscript guard
she had seen. Vashti’s heart gave a sudden bound up into her throat.
As she was so near she went on up to the Cross-roads; but just as she
stepped out into the road before she reached there, she came on a small
squad of horsemen riding slowly along. She stood aside to let them pass;
but they drew in and began to question her as to the roads about them.
They were in long cloaks and overcoats, and she thought they were the
conscript guard, especially as there was a negro with them who seemed
to know the roads and to be showing them the way. Her one thought was
of Darby; he would be arrested and shot. When they questioned her,
therefore, she told them of the roads leading to the big river around
the fork and quite away from the district. Whilst they were still
talking, more riders came around the curve, and the next instant Vashti
was in the midst of a column of cavalry, and she knew that they were the
Federals. She had one moment of terror for herself as the restive horses
trampled around her, and the calls and noises of a body of cavalry
moving dinned in her ears; but the next moment, when the others gave way
and a man whom she knew to be the commander pressed forward and began to
question her, she forgot her own terror in fear for her cause. She had
all her wits about her instantly; and under a pretence of repeating
what she had already told the first men, she gave them such a mixture
of descriptions that the negro was called up to unravel it. She made
out that they were trying to reach the big river by a certain road, and
marched in the night as well as in the day. She admitted that she had
never been on that road but once. And when she was taken along with them
a mile or two to the place where they went into bivouac until the moon
should rise, she soon gave such an impression of her denseness and
ignorance that, after a little more questioning, she was told that she
might go home if she could find her way, and was sent by the commander
out of the camp. She was no sooner out of hearing of her captors than
she began to run with all her speed. Her chief thought was of Darby.
Deserter as he was, and dead to her, he was a man, and could advise
her, help her. She tore through the woods the nearest way, unheeding the
branches which caught and tore her clothes; the stream, even where she
struck it, was out of its banks; but she did not heed it--she waded
through, it reaching about to her waist, and struck out again at the top
of her speed.

It must have been a little before midnight when she emerged from the
pines in front of the Stanley cabin. The latch-string was out, and she
knocked and pushed open the door almost simultaneously. All she could
make out to say was, “Darby.” The old woman was on her feet, and the
young man was sitting up in the bed, by the time she entered.

Darby was the first to speak.

“What do you want here?” he asked, sternly.

“Darby--the Yankees--all around,” she gasped--“out on the road yonder.”

“What!”

A minute later the young man, white as a ghost, was getting on his
jacket while she told her story, beginning with what the woman she had
met had told her of the two men she had seen. The presence of a soldier
had given her confidence, and having delivered her message both women
left everything else to him. His experience or his soldier’s instinct
told him what they were doing and also how to act. They were a raid
which had gotten around the body of the army and were striking for the
capital; and from their position, unless they could be delayed they
might surprise it. In the face of the emergency a sudden genius seemed
to illuminate the young man’s mind. By the time he was dressed he was
ready with his plan--Did Vashti know where any of the conscript guard
stayed?

Yes, down the road at a certain place. Good; it was on the way. Then he
gave her his orders. She was to go to this place and rouse any one she
might find there and tell them to send a messenger to the city with all
speed to warn them, and were to be themselves if possible at a certain
point on the road by which the raiders were travelling, where a little
stream crossed it in a low place in a heavy piece of swampy woods. They
would find a barricade there and a small force might possibly keep them
back. Then she was to go on down and have the bridge, ten or twelve
miles below on the road between the forks burned, and if necessary was
to burn it herself; and it must be done by sunrise. But they were on
the other road, outside of the forks, the girl explained, to which Darby
only said, he knew that, but they would come back and try the bridge
road.

“And you burn the bridge if you have to do it with your own hand, you
hear--and now go,” he said.

“Yes--I’ll do it,” said the girl obediently and turned to the door. The
next instant she turned back to him: he had his gun and was getting his
axe.

“And, Darby----?” she began falteringly, her heart in her eyes.

“Go,” said the young soldier, pointing to the door, and she went just as
he took up his old rifle and stepped over to where his mother sat white
and dumb. As she turned at the edge of the clearing and looked back up
the path over the pine-bushes she saw him step out of the door with his
gun in one hand and his axe in the other.

An hour later Darby, with the fever still hot on him, was cutting
down trees in the darkness on the bank of a marshy little stream, and
throwing them into the water on top of one another across the road, in
a way to block it beyond a dozen axemen’s work for several hours, and
Vashti was trudging through the darkness miles away to give the warning.
Every now and then the axeman stopped cutting and listened, and then
went on again. He had cut down a half-dozen trees and formed a barricade
which it would take hours to clear away before cavalry could pass, when,
stopping to listen, he heard a sound that caused him to put down his
axe: the sound of horses splashing along through the mud. His practised
ear told him that there were only three or four of them, and he took up
his gun and climbed up on the barricade and waited. Presently the little
squad of horsemen came in sight, a mere black group in the road. They
saw the dark mass lying across the road and reined in; then after a
colloquy came on down slowly. Darby waited until they were within fifty
yards of his barricade, and then fired at the nearest one. A horse
wheeled, plunged, and then galloped away in the darkness, and several
rounds from pistols were fired toward him, whilst something went on
on the ground. Before he could finish reloading, however, the men had
turned around and were out of sight. In a minute Darby climbed over the
barricade and strode up the road after them. He paused where the man he
had shot had fallen. The place in the mud was plain; but his comrades
had taken him up and carried him off. Darby hurried along after them.
Day was just breaking, and the body of cavalry were preparing to leave
their bivouac when a man emerged from the darkness on the opposite side
of the camp from that where Little Darby had been felling trees,
and walked up to the picket. He was halted and brought up where the
fire-light could shine on him, and was roughly questioned--a tall young
countryman, very pale and thin, with an old ragged slouched hat pulled
over his eyes, and an old patched uniform on his gaunt frame. He did not
seem at all disturbed by the pistols displayed around him, but seated
himself at the fire and looked about in a dull kind of way.

“What do you want?” they asked him, seeing how cool he was.

“Don’t you want a guide?” he asked, drawlingly.

“Who are you?” inquired the corporal in charge. He paused.

“Some calls me a d’serter,” he said, slowly.

The men all looked at him curiously.

“Well, what do you want?”

“I thought maybe as you wanted a guide,” he said, quietly.

“We don’t want you. We’ve got all the guide we want,” answered the
corporal, roughly, “and we don’t want any spies around here either, you
understand?”

“Does he know the way? All the creeks is up now, an’ it’s sort o’
hard to git erlong through down yonder way if you don’t know the way
toller’ble well?”

“Yes, he knows the way too--every foot of it--and a good deal more than
you’ll see of it if you don’t look out.”

“Oh! That road down that way is sort o’ stopped up,” said the man, as if
he were carrying on a connected narrative and had not heard him. “They’s
soldiers on it too a little fur’er down, and they’s done got word you’re
a-comin’ that a-way.”

“What’s that?” they asked, sharply.

“Leastways it’s stopped up, and I knows a way down this a-way in and
about as nigh as that,” went on the speaker, in the same level voice.

“Where do you live?” they asked him.

“I lives back in the pines here a piece.”

“How long have you lived here?”

“About twenty-three years, I b’leeves; ‘ats what my mother says.”

“You know all the country about here?”

“Ought to.”

“Been in the army?”

“Ahn--hahn.”

“What did you desert for?”

Darby looked at him leisurely.

“‘D you ever know a man as ‘lowed he’d deserted? I never did.” A faint
smile flickered on his pale face.

He was taken to the camp before the commander, a dark, self-contained
looking man with a piercing eye and a close mouth, and there closely
questioned as to the roads, and he gave the same account he had already
given. The negro guide was brought up and his information tallied with
the new comer’s as far as he knew it, though he knew well only the road
which they were on and which Darby said was stopped up. He knew, too,
that a road such as Darby offered to take them by ran somewhere down
that way and joined the road they were on a good distance below; but he
thought it was a good deal longer way and they had to cross a fork of
the river.

There was a short consultation between the commander and one or two
other officers, and then the commander turned to Darby, and said:

“What you say about the road’s being obstructed this way is partly true;
do you guarantee that the other road is clear?”

Darby paused and reflected.

“I’ll guide you,” he said, slowly.

“Do you guarantee that the bridge on the river is standing and that we
can get across?”

“Hit’s standing now, fur as I know.”

“Do you understand that you are taking your life in your hand?”

Darby looked at him coolly.

“And that if you take us that way and for any cause--for any cause
whatsoever we fail to get through safe, we will hang you to the nearest
tree?”

Darby waited as if in deep reflection.

“I understand,” he said. “I’ll guide you.”

The silence that followed seemed to extend all over the camp. The
commander was reflecting and the others had their eyes fastened on
Darby. As for him, he sat as unmoved as if he had been alone in the
woods.

“All right,” said the leader, suddenly, “it’s a bargain: we’ll take your
road. What do you want?”

“Could you gi’me a cup o’ coffee? It’s been some little time since I had
anything to eat, an’ I been sort o’ sick.”

“You shall have ‘em,” said the officer, “and good pay besides, if you
lead us straight; if not, a limb and a halter rein; you understand?”

A quarter of an hour later they were on the march, Darby trudging in
front down the middle of the muddy road between two of the advance
guard, whose carbines were conveniently carried to insure his fidelity.
What he thought of, who might know?--plain; poor; ignorant; unknown;
marching every step voluntarily nearer to certain and ignominious death
for the sake of his cause.

As day broke they saw a few people who lived near the road, and some of
them recognized Darby and looked their astonishment to see him guiding
them. One or two of the women broke out at him for a traitor and a dog,
to which he said nothing; but only looked a little defiant with two red
spots burning in his thin cheeks, and trudged on as before; now and then
answering a question; but for the most part silent.

He must have thought of his mother, old and by herself in her cabin;
but she would not live long; and of Vashti some. She had called him a
deserter, as the other women had done. A verse from the Testament she
gave him may have come into his mind; he had never quite understood it:
“Blessed are ye when men shall revile ye.” Was this what it meant?
This and another one seemed to come together. It was something about
“enduring hardship like a good soldier”, he could not remember it
exactly. Yes, he could do that. But Vashti had called him a deserter.
Maybe now though she would not; and the words in the letter she had
written him came to him, and the little package in his old jacket pocket
made a warm place there; and he felt a little fresher than before. The
sun came up and warmed him as he trudged along, and the country grew
flatter and flatter, and the road deeper and deeper. They were passing
down into the bottom. On either side of them were white-oak swamps, so
that they could not see a hundred yards ahead; but for several miles
Darby had been watching for the smoke of the burning bridge, and as they
neared the river his heart began to sink. There was one point on the
brow of a hill before descending to the bottom, where a sudden bend of
the road and curve of the river two or three miles below gave a sight
of the bridge. Darby waited for this, and when he reached it and saw the
bridge still standing his heart sank like lead. Other eyes saw it too,
and a score of glasses were levelled at it, and a cheer went up.

“Why don’t you cheer too?” asked an officer. “You have more to make or
lose than anyone else.”

“We ain’t there yit,” said Darby.

Once he thought he had seen a little smoke, but it had passed away, and
now they were within three miles of the bridge and there was nothing.
What if, after all, Vashti had failed and the bridge was still standing!
He would really have brought the raiders by the best way and have helped
them. His heart at the thought came up into his throat. He stopped and
began to look about as if he doubted the road. When the main body came
up, however, the commander was in no doubt, and a pistol stuck against
his head gave him to understand that no fooling would be stood. So he
had to go on.

As to Vashti, she had covered the fifteen miles which lay between the
district and the fork-road; and had found and sent a messenger to give
warning in the city; but not finding any of the homeguard where she
thought they were, she had borrowed some matches and had trudged on
herself to execute the rest of Darby’s commands.

The branches were high from the backwater of the fork, and she often had
to wade up to her waist, but she kept on, and a little after daylight
she came to the river. Ordinarily, it was not a large stream; a boy
could chuck a stone across it, and there was a ford above the bridge
not very deep in dry weather, which people sometimes took to water their
horses, or because they preferred to ride through the water to crossing
the steep and somewhat rickety old bridge. Now, however, the water
was far out in the woods, and long before the girl got in sight of the
bridge she was wading up to her knees. When she reached the point where
she could see it, her heart for a moment failed her; the whole flat was
under water. She remembered Darby’s command, however, and her courage
came back to her. She knew that it could not be as deep as it looked
between her and the bridge, for the messenger had gone before her that
way, and a moment later she had gone back and collected a bundle of
“dry-wood”, and with a long pole to feel her way she waded carefully in.
As it grew deeper and deeper until it reached her breast, she took the
matches out and held them in her teeth, holding her bundle above her
head. It was hard work to keep her footing this way, however, and once
she stepped into a hole and went under to her chin, having a narrow
escape from falling into a place which her pole could not fathom; but
she recovered herself and at last was on the bridge. When she tried to
light a fire, however, her matches would not strike. They as well as the
wood had gotten wet when she slipped, and not one would light. She might
as well have been at her home in the district. When every match had been
tried and tried again on a dry stone, only to leave a white streak of
smoking sulphur on it, she sat down and cried. For the first time she
felt cold and weary. The rays of the sun fell on her and warmed her a
little, and she wiped her eyes on her sleeve and looked up. The sun had
just come up over the hill. It gave her courage. She turned and looked
the other way from which she had come--nothing but a waste of water and
woods. Suddenly, from a point up over the nearer woods a little sparkle
caught her eye; there must be a house there, she thought; they might
have matches, and she would go back and get some. But there it was
again--it moved. There was another--another--and something black moving.
She sprang to her feet and strained her eyes. Good God! they were
coming! In a second she had turned the other way, rushed across the
bridge, and was dashing through the water to her waist. The water was
not wide that way. The hill rose almost abruptly on that side, and up it
she dashed, and along the road. A faint curl of smoke caught her eye and
she made for it through the field.

It was a small cabin, and the woman in it had just gotten her fire
well started for the morning, when a girl bare-headed and bare-footed,
dripping wet to the skin, her damp hair hanging down her back, her face
white and her eyes like coals, rushed in almost without knocking and
asked for a chunk of fire. The woman had no time to refuse (she told of
it afterward when she described the burning of the bridge); for without
waiting for answer and before she really took in that it was not a
ghost, the girl had seized the biggest chunk on the hearth and was
running with it across the field. In fact, the woman rather thought she
was an evil spirit; for she saw her seize a whole panel of fence--more
rails than she could have carried to save her life, she said, and dashed
with them over the hill.

In Vashti’s mind, indeed, it was no time to waste words, she was back
on the bridge with the chunk of fire and an armful of rails before the
woman recovered from her astonishment, and was down on her knees blowing
her chunk to rekindle it. The rails, however, like everything else,
were wet and would not light, and she was in despair. At last she got a
little blaze started, but it would not burn fast; it simply smoked. She
expected the soldiers to come out of the woods every minute, and every
second she was looking up to see if they were in sight. What would Darby
think? What would happen if she failed? She sprang up to look around:
the old rail of the bridge caught her eye; it was rotted, but what
remained was heart and would burn like light-wood. She tore a piece
of it down and stuck one end in the fire: it caught and sputtered and
suddenly flamed up; the next second she was tearing the rail down all
along and piling it on the blaze, and as it caught she dashed back
through the water and up the hill, and brought another armful of rails.
Back and forth she waded several times and piled on rails until she got
a stack of them--two stacks, and the bridge floor dried and caught and
began to blaze; and when she brought her last armful it was burning all
across. She had been so busy bringing wood that she had forgotten to
look across to the other side for some time, and was only reminded of
it as she was wading back with her last armful of rails by something
buzzing by her ear, and the second after the crack of a half-dozen guns
followed from the edge of the wood the other side. She could not see
them well for the burden in her arms, but she made out a number of
horses dashing into the water on the little flat, and saw some puffs of
smoke about their heads. She was bound to put her wood on, however, so
she pushed ahead, went up on the bridge through the smoke as far as she
could go, and flung her rails on the now devouring fire. A sudden veer
of the wind blew the smoke behind her and bent the flames aside, and
she could see clear across the fire to the other bank. She saw a great
number of men on horses at the edge of the woods, in a sort of mass;
and a half-dozen or so in the water riding up to their saddle-skirts
half-way to the bridge, and between the first two, wading in water to
his waist, Darby. He was bare-headed and he waved his hat to her, and
she heard a single cheer. She waved her hand to him, and there was
a little puff of smoke and something occurred in the water among the
horses. The smoke from the fire suddenly closed around her and shut out
everything from her eyes, and when it blew away again one of the horses
had thrown his rider in the water. There was a lot of firing both from
the edge of the wood and from the horsemen in the water, and Darby had
disappeared.

She made her way back to the bank and plunged into a clump of bushes,
where she was hidden and watched the raiders. She saw several of them
try to ford the river, one got across but swam back, the others were
swept down by the current, and the horse of one got out below without
his rider. The other she did not see again.

Soon after their comrade had rejoined them, the men on the edge of the
wood turned around and disappeared, and a half-hour later she saw the
glint of the sun on their arms and accoutrements as they crossed over
the top of the hill returning two miles above.

*****

This is the story of the frustration of the raid upon which so much hope
was built by some in high position at Washington. A day was lost, and
warning was given to the Confederate Government, and the bold plan of
the commander of the raiding party was defeated.

As to Little Darby, the furlough he had applied for came, but came too
late and was returned. For a time some said he was a deserter; but two
women knew differently.

A Federal soldier who was taken prisoner gave an account of the raid. He
said that a contraband had come from Washington and undertaken to lead
them across the country, and that he had brought them around the head
of the streams, when one night a rebel deserter came into camp and
undertook to show them a better way by a road which ran between the
rivers, but crossed lower down by a bridge; that they had told him that,
if for any reason they failed to get through by his road they would hang
him, a bargain which he had accepted. That he had led them straight, but
when they had got to the bridge it had been set on fire and was burning
at that moment; that a half-dozen men, of whom he, the narrator, was
one, rode in, taking the guide along with them, to see if they could not
put the fire out, or, failing that, find the ford; and when they were
about half-way across the little flat they saw the person on the bridge
in the very act of burning it, and waving his hand in triumph; and the
man who was riding abreast of him in front fired his carbine at him. As
he did so the deserter wheeled on him, and said, “God d--n you--don’t
you know that’s a woman,” and springing on him like a tiger tore him
from his horse; and, before they took in what he was doing, had, before
their very eyes, flung both of them into a place where the current was
running, and they had disappeared. They had seen the deserter’s head
once in the stream lower down, and had fired at him, and he thought had
hit him, as he went down immediately and they did not see him again.

This is all that was known of Little Darby, except that a year or more
afterward, and nearly a year after Mrs. Stanley’s death, a package with
an old needle-case in it and a stained little Testament with a bullet
hole through it, was left at the Cross-roads, with a message that a man
who had died at the house of the person who left it as he was trying
to make his way back to his command, asked to have that sent to Vashti
Mills.


                The End.




NOTES:

     Thomas Nelson Page is known primarily for his short stories.
     1853.  Born at Oakland Plantation, in Hanover County, Virginia.
     1872.  Graduated from Washington and Lee University.
     1874.  Received his degree in law from the University of Virginia.
     1922.  Died.

Some books by Thomas Nelson Page:

     In Ole Virginia.
     Meh Lady.  A Story of the War.
     Marse Chan.  A Tale of Old Virginia.
     The Burial of the Guns.
     Elsket and Other Stories.
     Newfound River.
     The Old South.
     Polly.  A Christmas Recollection.
     Among the Camps.  Young People’s Stories of the War.
     Two Little Confederates.
     “Befo’ de War.”  Echoes of Negro Dialect.  (with A. C. Gordon)





End of Project Gutenberg’s The Burial of the Guns, by Thomas Nelson Page

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BURIAL OF THE GUNS ***

***** This file should be named 332-0.txt or 332-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/332/

Produced by A. Light and Sherrie Settle

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

