XX

THREE ARE ENLISTED

Now in that blazing noon Canaan looked upon a strange sight: an open
carriage whirling through Main Street behind two galloping bays; upon
the back seat a ghostly white old man with closed eyes, supported by
two pale ladies, his head upon the shoulder of the taller; while beside
the driver, a young man whose coat and hands were bloody, worked over
the hurts of an injured dog.  Sam Warden's whip sang across the horses;
lather gathered on their flanks, and Ariel's voice steadily urged on
the pace:  "Quicker, Sam, if you can."  For there was little breath
left in the body of Eskew Arp.

Mamie, almost as white as the old man, was silent; but she had not
hesitated in her daring, now that she had been taught to dare; she had
not come to be Ariel's friend and honest follower for nothing; and it
was Mamie who had cried to Joe to lift Eskew into the carriage.  "You
must come too," she said.  "We will need you."  And so it came to pass
that under the eyes of Canaan Joe Louden rode in Judge Pike's carriage
at the bidding of Judge Pike's daughter.

Toward Ariel's own house they sped with the stricken octogenarian, for
he was "alone in the world," and she would not take him to the cottage
where he had lived for many years by himself, a bleak little house, a
derelict of the "early days" left stranded far down in the town between
a woollen-mill and the water-works.  The workmen were beginning their
dinners under the big trees, but as Sam Warden drew in the lathered
horses at the gate, they set down their tin buckets hastily and ran to
help Joe lift the old man out. Carefully they bore him into the house
and laid him upon a bed in one of the finished rooms.  He did not speak
or move and the workmen uncovered their heads as they went out, but Joe
knew that they were mistaken.  "It's all right, Mr. Arp," he said, as
Ariel knelt by the bed with water and restoratives.  "It's all right.
Don't you worry."

Then the veteran's lips twitched, and though his eyes remained closed,
Joe saw that Eskew understood, for he gasped, feebly:
"Pos-i-tive-ly--no--free--seats!"

To Mrs. Louden, sewing at an up-stairs window, the sight of her stepson
descending from Judge Pike's carriage was sufficiently startling, but
when she saw Mamie Pike take Respectability from his master's arms and
carry him tenderly indoors, while Joe and Ariel occupied themselves
with Mr. Arp, the good lady sprang to her feet as if she had been
stung, regardlessly sending her work-basket and its contents scattering
over the floor, and ran down the stairs three steps at a time.

At the front door she met her husband, entering for his dinner, and she
leaped at him.  Had he seen?  What was it?  What had happened?

Mr. Louden rubbed his chin-beard, indulging himself in a pause which
was like to prove fatal to his companion, finally vouchsafing the
information that the doctor's buggy was just turning the corner; Eskew
Arp had suffered a "stroke," it was said, and, in Louden's opinion, was
a mighty sick man. His spouse replied in no uncertain terms that she
had seen quite that much for herself, urging him to continue, which he
did with a deliberation that caused her to recall their wedding-day
with a gust of passionate self-reproach.  Presently he managed to
interrupt, reminding her that her dining-room windows commanded as
comprehensive a view of the next house as did the front steps, and
after a time her housewifely duty so far prevailed over her indignation
at the man's unwholesome stolidity that she followed him down the hall
to preside over the meal, not, however, to partake largely of it
herself.

Mr. Louden had no information of Eugene's mishap, nor had Mrs. Louden
any suspicion that all was not well with the young man, and, hearing
him enter the front door, she called to him that his dinner was
waiting.  Eugene, however, made no reply and went up-stairs to his own
apartment without coming into the dining-room.

A small crowd, neighboring children, servants, and negroes, had
gathered about Ariel's gate, and Mrs. Louden watched the working-men
disperse this assembly, gather up their tools, and depart; then Mamie
came out of the house, and, bowing sadly to three old men who were
entering the gate as she left it, stepped into her carriage and drove
away.  The new-comers, Colonel Flitcroft, Squire Buckalew, and Peter
Bradbury, glanced at the doctor's buggy, shook their heads at one
another, and slowly went up to the porch, where Joe met them.  Mrs.
Louden uttered a sharp exclamation, for the Colonel shook hands with
her stepson.

Perhaps Flitcroft himself was surprised; he had offered his hand almost
unconsciously, and the greeting was embarrassed and perfunctory; but
his two companions, each in turn, gravely followed his lead, and Joe's
set face flushed a little.  It was the first time in many years that
men of their kind in Canaan had offered him this salutation.

"He wouldn't let me send for you," he told them.  "He said he knew
you'd be here soon without that."  And he led the way to Eskew's
bedside.

Joe and the doctor had undressed the old man, and had put him into
night-gear of Roger Tabor's, taken from an antique chest; it was soft
and yellow and much more like color than the face above it, for the
white hair on the pillow was not whiter than that.  Yet there was a
strange youthfulness in the eyes of Eskew; an eerie, inexplicable,
luminous, LIVE look; the thin cheeks seemed fuller than they had been
for years; and though the heavier lines of age and sorrow could be
seen, they appeared to have been half erased.  He lay not in sunshine,
but in clear light; the windows were open, the curtains restrained, for
he had asked them not to darken the room.

The doctor was whispering in a doctor's way to Ariel at the end of the
room opposite the bed, when the three old fellows came in.  None of
them spoke immediately, and though all three cleared their throats with
what they meant for casual cheerfulness, to indicate that the situation
was not at all extraordinary or depressing, it was to be seen that the
Colonel's chin trembled under his mustache, and his comrades showed
similar small and unwilling signs of emotion.

Eskew spoke first.  "Well, boys?" he said, and smiled.

That seemed to make it more difficult for the others; the three white
heads bent silently over the fourth upon the pillow; and Ariel saw
waveringly, for her eyes suddenly filled, that the Colonel laid his
unsteady hand upon Eskew's, which was outside the coverlet.

"It's--it's not," said the old soldier, gently--"it's not on--on both
sides, is it, Eskew?"

Mr. Arp moved his hand slightly in answer.  "It ain't paralysis," he
said.  "They call it 'shock and exhaustion'; but it's more than that.
It's just my time.  I've heard the call.  We've all been slidin' on
thin ice this long time--and it's broke under me--"

"Eskew, Eskew!" remonstrated Peter Bradbury. "You'd oughtn't to talk
that-a-way!  You only kind of overdone a little--heat o' the day, too,
and--"

"Peter," interrupted the sick man, with feeble asperity, "did you ever
manage to fool me in your life?"

"No, Eskew."

"Well, you're not doin' it now!"

Two tears suddenly loosed themselves from Squire Buckalew's eyelids,
despite his hard endeavor to wink them away, and he turned from the bed
too late to conceal what had happened. "There ain't any call to feel
bad," said Eskew. "It might have happened any time--in the night,
maybe--at my house--and all alone--but here's Airie Tabor brought me to
her own home and takin' care of me.  I couldn't ask any better way to
go, could I?"

"I don't know what we'll do," stammered the Colonel, "if you--you talk
about goin' away from us, Eskew.  We--we couldn't get along--"

"Well, sir, I'm almost kind of glad to think," Mr. Arp murmured,
between short struggles for breath, "that it 'll be--quieter--on
the--"National House" corner!"

A moment later he called the doctor faintly and asked for a
restorative.  "There," he said, in a stronger voice and with a gleam of
satisfaction in the vindication of his belief that he was dying.  "I
was almost gone then.  _I_ know!"  He lay panting for a moment, then
spoke the name of Joe Louden.

Joe came quickly to the bedside.

"I want you to shake hands with the Colonel and Peter and Buckalew."

"We did," answered the Colonel, infinitely surprised and troubled.  "We
shook hands outside before we came in."


"Do it again," said Eskew.  "I want to see you."

And Joe, making shift to smile, was suddenly blinded, so that he could
not see the wrinkled hands extended to him, and was fain to grope for
them.

"God knows why we didn't all take his hand long ago," said Eskew Arp.
"I didn't because I was stubborn.  I hated to admit that the argument
was against me.  I acknowledge it now before him and before you--and I
want the word of it CARRIED!"

"It's all right, Mr. Arp," began Joe, tremulously. "You mustn't--"

"Hark to me"--the old man's voice lifted higher:  "If you'd ever
whimpered, or give back-talk, or broke out the wrong way, it would of
been different.  But you never did.  I've watched you and I know; and
you've just gone your own way alone, with the town against you because
you got a bad name as a boy, and once we'd given you that, everything
you did or didn't do, we had to give you a blacker one.  Now it's time
some one stood by you!  Airie Tabor 'll do that with all her soul and
body.  She told me once I thought a good deal of you.  She knew!  But I
want these three old friends of mine to do it, too.  I was boys with
them and they'll do it, I think.  They've even stood up fer you against
me, sometimes, but mostly fer the sake of the argument, I reckon; but
now they must do it when there's more to stand against than just my
talk.  They saw it all to-day--the meanest thing I ever knew!  I could
of stood it all except that!"  Before they could prevent him he had
struggled half upright in bed, lifting a clinched fist at the town
beyond the windows. "But, by God! when they got so low down they tried
to kill your dog--"

He fell back, choking, in Joe's arms, and the physician bent over him,
but Eskew was not gone, and Ariel, upon the other side of the room,
could hear him whispering again for the restorative. She brought it,
and when he had taken it, went quickly out-of-doors to the side yard.

She sat upon a workman's bench under the big trees, hidden from the
street shrubbery, and breathing deeply of the shaded air, began to cry
quietly.  Through the windows came the quavering voice of the old man,
lifted again, insistent, a little querulous, but determined.  Responses
sounded, intermittently, from the Colonel, from Peter, and from
Buckalew, and now and then a sorrowful, yet almost humorous, protest
from Joe; and so she made out that the veteran swore his three comrades
to friendship with Joseph Louden, to lend him their countenance in all
matters, to stand by him in weal and woe, to speak only good of him and
defend him in the town of Canaan.  Thus did Eskew Arp on the verge of
parting this life render justice.


The gate clicked, and Ariel saw Eugene approaching through the
shrubbery.  One of his hands was bandaged, a thin strip of
court-plaster crossed his forehead from his left eyebrow to his hair,
and his thin and agitated face showed several light scratches.

"I saw you come out," he said.  "I've been waiting to speak to you."

"The doctor told us to let him have his way in whatever he might ask."
Ariel wiped her eyes. "I'm afraid that means--"

"I didn't come to talk about Eskew Arp," interrupted Eugene.  "I'm not
laboring under any anxiety about him.  You needn't be afraid; he's too
sour to accept his conge so readily."

"Please lower your voice," she said, rising quickly and moving away
from him toward the house; but, as he followed, insisting sharply that
he must speak with her, she walked out of ear-shot of the windows, and
stopping, turned toward him.

"Very well," she said.  "Is it a message from Mamie?"

At this he faltered and hung fire.

"Have you been to see her?" she continued.

"I am anxious to know if her goodness and bravery caused her any--any
discomfort at home."

"You may set your mind at rest about that," returned Eugene.  "I was
there when the Judge came home to dinner.  I suppose you fear he may
have been rough with her for taking my step-brother into the carriage.
He was not.  On the contrary, he spoke very quietly to her, and went on
out toward the stables.  But I haven't come to you to talk of Judge
Pike, either!"

"No," said Ariel.  "I don't care particularly to hear of him, but of
Mamie."

"Nor of her, either!" he broke out.  "I want to talk of you!"

There was not mistaking him; no possibility of misunderstanding the
real passion that shook him, and her startled eyes betrayed her
comprehension.

"Yes, I see you understand," he cried, bitterly. "That's because you've
seen others the same way. God help me," he went on, striking his
forehead with his open hand, "that young fool of a Bradbury told me you
refused him only yesterday!  He was proud of even rejection from you!
And there's Norbert--and half a dozen others, perhaps, already, since
you've been here."  He flung out his arms in ludicrous, savage despair.
"And here am I--"

"Ah yes," she cut him off, "it is of yourself that you want to speak,
after all--not of me!"

"Look here," he vociferated; "are you going to marry that Joe Louden?
I want to know whether you are or not.  He gave me this--and this
to-day!"  He touched his bandaged hand and plastered forehead.  "He ran
into me--over me--for nothing, when I was not on my guard; struck me
down--stamped on me--"

She turned upon him, cheeks aflame, eyes sparkling and dry.

"Mr. Bantry," she cried, "he did a good thing! And now I want you to go
home.  I want you to go home and try if you can discover anything in
yourself that is worthy of Mamie and of what she showed herself to be
this morning!  If you can, you will have found something that I could
like!"

She went rapidly toward the house, and he was senseless enough to
follow, babbling:  "What do you think I'm made of?  You trample on
me--as he did!  I can't bear everything; I tell you--"

But she lifted her hand with such imperious will that he stopped short.
Then, through the window of the sick-room came clearly the querulous
voice:

"I tell you it was; I heard him speak just now--out there in the yard,
that no-account step-brother of Joe's!  What if he IS a hired hand on
the Tocsin? He'd better give up his job and quit, than do what he's
done to help make the town think hard of Joe.  And what IS he?  Why,
he's worse than Cory.  When that Claudine Fear first came here, 'Gene
Bantry was hangin' around her himself. Joe knew it and he'd never tell,
but I will. I saw 'em buggy-ridin' out near Beaver Beach and she
slapped his face fer him.  It ought to be TOLD!"

"I didn't know that Joe knew--that!" Eugene stammered huskily.  "It
was--it was--a long time ago--"

"If you understood Joe," she said, in a low voice, "you would know that
before these men leave this house, he will have their promise never to
tell."

His eyes fell miserably, then lifted again; but in her clear and
unbearable gaze there shone such a flame of scorn as he could not
endure to look upon. For the first time in his life he saw a true light
upon himself, and though the vision was darkling, the revelation was
complete.

"Heaven pity you!" she whispered.

Eugene found himself alone, and stumbled away, his glance not lifted.
He passed his own home without looking up, and did not see his mother
beckoning frantically from a window.  She ran to the door and called
him.  He did not hear her, but went on toward the Tocsin office with
his head still bent.



