The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Conquest of Canaan
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Conquest of Canaan

Author: Booth Tarkington


        
Release date: April 1, 1996 [eBook #483]
                Most recently updated: January 1, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/483

Credits: Produced by Charles Keller.  HTML version by Al Haines






Produced by Charles Keller.  HTML version by Al Haines








THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN


BY

BOOTH TARKINGTON




   To
  L.F.T.


CONTENTS

CHAPTER

     I.  ENTER CHORUS
    II.  A RESCUE
   III.  OLD HOPES
    IV.  THE DISASTER
     V.  BEAVER BEACH
    VI.  "YE'LL TAK' THE HIGH ROAD AND I'LL TAK' THE LOW ROAD"
   VII.  GIVE A DOG A BAD NAME
  VIII.  A BAD PENNY TURNS UP
    IX.  OUTER DARKNESS
     X.  THE TRYST
    XI.  WHEN HALF-GODS GO
   XII.  TO REMAIN ON THE FIELD OF BATTLE IS NOT ALWAYS A VICTORY
  XIII.  THE WATCHER AND THE WARDEN
   XIV.  WHITE ROSES IN A LAW-OFFICE
    XV.  HAPPY FEAR GIVES HIMSELF UP
   XVI.  THE TWO CANAANS
  XVII.  MR. SHEEHAN'S HINTS
 XVIII.  IN THE HEAT OF THE DAY
   XIX.  ESKEW ARP
    XX.  THREE ARE ENLISTED
   XXI.  NORBERT WAITS FOR JOE
  XXII.  MR. SHEEHAN SPEAKS
 XXIII.  JOE WALKS ACROSS THE COURT-HOUSE YARD
  XXIV.  MARTIN PIKE KEEPS AN ENGAGEMENT
   XXV.  THE JURY COMES IN
  XXVI.  "ANCIENT OF DAYS"



THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN




I

ENTER CHORUS

A dry snow had fallen steadily throughout the still night, so that when
a cold, upper wind cleared the sky gloriously in the morning the
incongruous Indiana town shone in a white harmony--roof, ledge, and
earth as evenly covered as by moonlight.  There was no thaw; only where
the line of factories followed the big bend of the frozen river, their
distant chimneys like exclamation points on a blank page, was there a
first threat against the supreme whiteness.  The wind passed quickly
and on high; the shouting of the school-children had ceased at nine
o'clock with pitiful suddenness; no sleigh-bells laughed out on the
air; and the muffling of the thoroughfares wrought an unaccustomed
peace like that of Sunday. This was the phenomenon which afforded the
opening of the morning debate of the sages in the wide windows of the
"National House."

Only such unfortunates as have so far failed to visit Canaan do not
know that the "National House" is on the Main Street side of the
Court-house Square, and has the advantage of being within two minutes'
walk of the railroad station, which is in plain sight of the
windows--an inestimable benefit to the conversation of the aged men who
occupied these windows on this white morning, even as they were wont in
summer to hold against all comers the cane-seated chairs on the
pavement outside.  Thence, as trains came and went, they commanded the
city gates, and, seeking motives and adding to the stock of history,
narrowly observed and examined into all who entered or departed.  Their
habit was not singular.  He who would foolishly tax the sages of Canaan
with a bucolic light-mindedness must first walk in Piccadilly in early
June, stroll down the Corso in Rome before Ash Wednesday, or regard
those windows of Fifth Avenue whose curtains are withdrawn of a winter
Sunday; for in each of these great streets, wherever the windows, not
of trade, are widest, his eyes must behold wise men, like to those of
Canaan, executing always their same purpose.

The difference is in favor of Canaan; the "National House" was the
club, but the perusal of traveller or passer by was here only the spume
blown before a stately ship of thought; and you might hear the sages
comparing the Koran with the speeches of Robert J. Ingersoll.

In the days of board sidewalks, "mail-time" had meant a precise moment
for Canaan, and even now, many years after the first postman, it
remained somewhat definite to the aged men; for, out of deference to a
pleasant, olden custom, and perhaps partly for an excuse to "get down
to the hotel" (which was not altogether in favor with the elderly
ladies), most of them retained their antique boxes in the post-office,
happily in the next building.

In this connection it may be written that a subscription clerk in the
office of the Chicago Daily Standard, having noted a single subscriber
from Canaan, was, a fortnight later, pleased to receive, by one mail,
nine subscriptions from that promising town.  If one brought nine
others in a fortnight, thought he, what would nine bring in a month?
Amazingly, they brought nothing, and the rest was silence.  Here was a
matter of intricate diplomacy never to come within that youth his ken.
The morning voyage to the post-office, long mocked as a fable and
screen by the families of the sages, had grown so difficult to
accomplish for one of them, Colonel Flitcroft (Colonel in the war with
Mexico), that he had been put to it, indeed, to foot the firing-line
against his wife (a lady of celebrated determination and hale-voiced at
seventy), and to defend the rental of a box which had sheltered but
three missives in four years. Desperation is often inspiration; the
Colonel brilliantly subscribed for the Standard, forgetting to give his
house address, and it took the others just thirteen days to wring his
secret from him.  Then the Standard served for all.

Mail-time had come to mean that bright hour when they all got their
feet on the brass rod which protected the sills of the two big windows,
with the steam-radiators sizzling like kettles against the side wall.
Mr. Jonas Tabor, who had sold his hardware business magnificently (not
magnificently for his nephew, the purchaser) some ten years before, was
usually, in spite of the fact that he remained a bachelor at
seventy-nine, the last to settle down with the others, though often the
first to reach the hotel, which he always entered by a side door,
because he did not believe in the treating system. And it was Mr. Eskew
Arp, only seventy-five, but already a thoroughly capable cynic, who,
almost invariably "opened the argument," and it was he who discovered
the sinister intention behind the weather of this particular morning.
Mr. Arp had not begun life so sourly: as a youth he had been proud of
his given name, which had come to him through his mother's family, who
had made it honorable, but many years of explanations that Eskew did
not indicate his initials had lowered his opinion of the intelligence
and morality of the race.

The malevolence of his voice and manner this morning, therefore, when
he shook his finger at the town beyond the windows, and exclaimed, with
a bitter laugh, "Look at it!" was no surprise to his companions.  "Jest
look at it!  I tell you the devil is mighty smart.  Ha, ha!  Mighty
smart!"

Through custom it was the duty of Squire Buckalew (Justice of the Peace
in '59) to be the first to take up Mr. Arp.  The others looked to him
for it.  Therefore, he asked, sharply:

"What's the devil got to do with snow?"

"Everything to do with it, sir," Mr. Arp retorted.  "It's plain as day
to anybody with eyes and sense."

"Then I wish you'd p'int it out," said Buckalew, "if you've got either."

"By the Almighty, Squire"--Mr. Arp turned in his chair with sudden
heat--"if I'd lived as long as you--"

"You have," interrupted the other, stung. "Twelve years ago!"

"If I'd lived as long as you," Mr. Arp repeated, unwincingly, in a
louder voice, "and had follered Satan's trail as long as you have, and
yet couldn't recognize it when I see it, I'd git converted and vote
Prohibitionist."

"_I_ don't see it," interjected Uncle Joe Davey, in his querulous
voice.  (He was the patriarch of them all.)  "_I_ can't find no
cloven-hoof-prints in the snow."

"All over it, sir!" cried the cynic.  "All over it! Old Satan loves
tricks like this.  Here's a town that's jest one squirmin' mass of lies
and envy and vice and wickedness and corruption--"

"Hold on!" exclaimed Colonel Flitcroft.  "That's a slander upon our
hearths and our government. Why, when I was in the Council--"

"It wasn't a bit worse then," Mr. Arp returned, unreasonably.  "Jest
you look how the devil fools us. He drops down this here virgin mantle
on Canaan and makes it look as good as you pretend you think it is: as
good as the Sunday-school room of a country church--though THAT"--he
went off on a tangent, venomously--"is generally only another whited
sepulchre, and the superintendent's mighty apt to have a bottle of
whiskey hid behind the organ, and--"

"Look here, Eskew," said Jonas Tabor, "that's got nothin' to do with--"

"Why ain't it?  Answer me!" cried Mr. Arp, continuing, without pause:
"Why ain't it?  Can't you wait till I git through?  You listen to me,
and when I'm ready I'll listen to--"

"See here," began the Colonel, making himself heard over three others,
"I want to ask you--"

"No, sir!" Mr. Arp pounded the floor irascibly with his hickory stick.
"Don't you ask me anything! How can you tell that I'm not going to
answer your question without your asking it, till I've got through?
You listen first.  I say, here's a town of nearly thirty thousand
inhabitants, every last one of 'em--men, women, and children--selfish
and cowardly and sinful, if you could see their innermost natures; a
town of the ugliest and worst built houses in the world, and governed
by a lot of saloon-keepers--though I hope it 'll never git down to
where the ministers can run it.  And the devil comes along, and in one
night--why, all you got to do is LOOK at it!  You'd think we needn't
ever trouble to make it better.  That's what the devil wants us to
do--wants us to rest easy about it, and paints it up to look like a
heaven of peace and purity and sanctified spirits.  Snowfall like this
would of made Lot turn the angel out-of-doors and say that the old home
was good enough for him.  Gomorrah would of looked like a Puritan
village--though I'll bet my last dollar that there was a lot, and a
WHOLE lot, that's never been told about Puritan villages.  A lot that--"

"WHAT never was?" interrupted Mr. Peter Bradbury, whose granddaughter
had lately announced her discovery that the Bradburys were descended
from Miles Standish.  "What wasn't told about Puritan villages?"

"Can't you wait?" Mr. Arp's accents were those of pain.  "Haven't I got
ANY right to present my side of the case?  Ain't we restrained enough
to allow of free speech here?  How can we ever git anywhere in an
argument like this, unless we let one man talk at a time?  How--"

"Go on with your statement," said Uncle Joe Davey, impatiently.

Mr. Arp's grievance was increased.  "Now listen to YOU!  How many more
interruptions are comin'? I'll listen to the other side, but I've got
to state mine first, haven't I?  If I don't make my point clear, what's
the use of the argument? Argumentation is only the comparison of two
sides of a question, and you have to see what the first side IS before
you can compare it with the other one, don't you?  Are you all agreed
to that?"

"Yes, yes," said the Colonel.  "Go ahead.  We won't interrupt until
you're through."

"Very well," resumed Mr. Arp, with a fleeting expression of
satisfaction, "as I said before, I wish to--as I said--" He paused, in
some confusion.  "As I said, argumentation is--that is, I say--"  He
stopped again, utterly at sea, having talked himself so far out of his
course that he was unable to recall either his sailing port or his
destination.  Finally he said, feebly, to save the confession, "Well,
go on with your side of it."

This generosity was for a moment disconcerting; however, the quietest
of the party took up the opposition--Roger Tabor, a very thin, old man
with a clean-shaven face, almost as white as his hair, and melancholy,
gentle, gray eyes, very unlike those of his brother Jonas, which were
dark and sharp and button-bright.  (It was to Roger's son that Jonas
had so magnificently sold the hardware business.)  Roger was known in
Canaan as "the artist"; there had never been another of his profession
in the place, and the town knew not the word "painter," except in
application to the useful artisan who is subject to lead-poisoning.
There was no indication of his profession in the attire of Mr. Tabor,
unless the too apparent age of his black felt hat and a neat patch at
the elbow of his shiny, old brown overcoat might have been taken as
symbols of the sacrifice to his muse which his life had been.  He was
not a constant attendant of the conclave, and when he came it was
usually to listen; indeed, he spoke so seldom that at the sound of his
voice they all turned to him with some surprise.

"I suppose," he began, "that Eskew means the devil is behind all
beautiful things."

"Ugly ones, too," said Mr. Arp, with a start of recollection.  "And I
wish to state--"

"Not now!" Colonel Flitcroft turned upon him violently.  "You've
already stated it."

"Then, if he is behind the ugly things, too," said Roger, "we must take
him either way, so let us be glad of the beauty for its own sake.
Eskew says this is a wicked town.  It may be--I don't know. He says
it's badly built; perhaps it is; but it doesn't seem to me that it's
ugly in itself.  I don't know what its real self is, because it wears
so many aspects.  God keeps painting it all the time, and never shows
me twice the same picture; not even two snowfalls are just alike, nor
the days that follow them; no more than two misty sunsets are
alike--for the color and even the form of the town you call ugly are a
matter of the season of the year and of the time of day and of the
light and air.  The ugly town is like an endless gallery which you can
walk through, from year-end to year-end, never seeing the same canvas
twice, no matter how much you may want to--and there's the pathos of
it.  Isn't it the same with people with the characters of all of us,
just as it is with our faces?  No face remains the same for two
successive days--"

"It don't?" Colonel Flitcroft interrupted, with an explosive and rueful
incredulity.  "Well, I'd like to--"  Second thoughts came to him almost
immediately, and, as much out of gallantry as through discretion,
fearing that he might be taken as thinking of one at home, he relapsed
into silence.

Not so with the others.  It was as if a firecracker had been dropped
into a sleeping poultry-yard.  Least of all could Mr. Arp contain
himself. At the top of his voice, necessarily, he agreed with Roger
that faces changed, not only from day to day, and not only because of
light and air and such things, but from hour to hour, and from minute
to minute, through the hideous stimulus of hypocrisy.

The "argument" grew heated; half a dozen tidy quarrels arose; all the
sages went at it fiercely, except Roger Tabor, who stole quietly away.
The aged men were enjoying themselves thoroughly, especially those who
quarrelled.  Naturally, the frail bark of the topic which had been
launched was whirled about by too many side-currents to remain long in
sight, and soon became derelict, while the intellectual dolphins dove
and tumbled in the depths.  At the end of twenty minutes Mr. Arp
emerged upon the surface, and in his mouth was this:

"Tell me, why ain't the Church--why ain't the Church and the rest of
the believers in a future life lookin' for immortality at the other end
of life, too?  If we're immortal, we always have been; then why don't
they ever speculate on what we were before we were born?  It's because
they're too blame selfish--don't care a flapdoodle about what WAS, all
they want is to go on livin' forever."

Mr. Arp's voice had risen to an acrid triumphancy, when it suddenly
faltered, relapsed to a murmur, and then to a stricken silence, as a
tall, fat man of overpowering aspect threw open the outer door near by
and crossed the lobby to the clerk's desk.  An awe fell upon the sages
with this advent. They were hushed, and after a movement in their
chairs, with a strange effect of huddling, sat disconcerted and
attentive, like school-boys at the entrance of the master.

The personage had a big, fat, pink face and a heavily undershot jaw,
what whitish beard he wore following his double chin somewhat after the
manner displayed in the portraits of Henry the Eighth. His eyes, very
bright under puffed upper lids, were intolerant and insultingly
penetrating despite their small size.  Their irritability held a kind
of hotness, and yet the personage exuded frost, not of the weather, all
about him.  You could not imagine man or angel daring to greet this
being genially--sooner throw a kiss to Mount Pilatus!

"Mr. Brown," he said, with ponderous hostility, in a bull bass, to the
clerk--the kind of voice which would have made an express train leave
the track and go round the other way--"do you hear me?"

"Oh yes, Judge," the clerk replied, swiftly, in tones as unlike those
which he used for strange transients as a collector's voice in his
ladylove's ear is unlike that which he propels at delinquents.

"Do you see that snow?" asked the personage, threateningly.

"Yes, Judge."  Mr. Brown essayed a placating smile.  "Yes, indeed,
Judge Pike."

"Has your employer, the manager of this hotel, seen that snow?" pursued
the personage, with a gesture of unspeakable solemn menace.

"Yes, sir.  I think so.  Yes, sir."

"Do you think he fully understands that I am the proprietor of this
building?"

"Certainly, Judge, cer--"

"You will inform him that I do not intend to be discommoded by his
negligence as I pass to my offices.  Tell him from me that unless he
keeps the sidewalks in front of this hotel clear of snow I will cancel
his lease.  Their present condition is outrageous.  Do you understand
me?  Outrageous! Do you hear?"

"Yes, Judge, I do so," answered the clerk, hoarse with respect.  "I'll
see to it this minute, Judge Pike."

"You had better."  The personage turned himself about and began a grim
progress towards the door by which he had entered, his eyes fixing
themselves angrily upon the conclave at the windows.

Colonel Flitcroft essayed a smile, a faltering one.

"Fine weather, Judge Pike," he said, hopefully.

There was no response of any kind; the undershot jaw became more
intolerant.  The personage made his opinion of the group
disconcertingly plain, and the old boys understood that he knew them
for a worthless lot of senile loafers, as great a nuisance in his
building as was the snow without; and much too evident was his unspoken
threat to see that the manager cleared them out of there before long.

He nodded curtly to the only man of substance among them, Jonas Tabor,
and shut the door behind him with majestic insult.  He was Canaan's
millionaire.

He was one of those dynamic creatures who leave the haunting impression
of their wills behind them, like the tails of Bo-Peep's sheep, like the
evil dead men have done; he left his intolerant image in the ether for
a long time after he had gone, to confront and confound the aged men
and hold them in deferential and humiliated silence. Each of them was
mysteriously lowered in his own estimation, and knew that he had been
made to seem futile and foolish in the eyes of his fellows. They were
all conscious, too, that the clerk had been acutely receptive of Judge
Pike's reading of them; that he was reviving from his own squelchedness
through the later snubbing of the colonel; also that he might further
seek to recover his poise by an attack on them for cluttering up the
office.

Naturally, Jonas Tabor was the first to speak. "Judge Pike's lookin'
mighty well," he said, admiringly.

"Yes, he is," ventured Squire Buckalew, with deference; "mighty well."

"Yes, sir," echoed Peter Bradbury; "mighty well."

"He's a great man," wheezed Uncle Joe Davey; "a great man, Judge Martin
Pike; a great man!"

"I expect he has considerable on his mind," said the Colonel, who had
grown very red.  "I noticed that he hardly seemed to see us."

"Yes, sir," Mr. Bradbury corroborated, with an attempt at an amused
laugh.  "I noticed it, too. Of course a man with all his cares and
interests must git absent-minded now and then."

"Of course he does," said the colonel.  "A man with all his
responsibilities--"

"Yes, that's so," came a chorus of the brethren, finding comfort and
reassurance as their voices and spirits began to recover from the
blight.

"There's a party at the Judge's to-night," said Mr. Bradbury--"kind of
a ball Mamie Pike's givin' for the young folks.  Quite a doin's, I
hear."

"That's another thing that's ruining Canaan," Mr. Arp declared,
morosely.  "These entertainments they have nowadays.  Spend all the
money out of town--band from Indianapolis, chicken salad and darkey
waiters from Chicago!  And what I want to know is, What's this town
goin' to do about the nigger question?"

"What about it?" asked Mr. Davey, belligerently.

"What about it?" Mr. Arp mocked, fiercely. "You better say, 'What about
it?'"

"Well, what?" maintained Mr. Davey, steadfastly.

"I'll bet there ain't any less than four thousand niggers in Canaan
to-day!" Mr. Arp hammered the floor with his stick.  "Every last one of
'em criminals, and more comin' on every train."

"No such a thing," said Squire Buckalew, living up to his bounden duty.
"You look down the street.  There's the ten-forty-five comin' in now.
I'll bet you a straight five-cent Peek-a-Boo cigar there ain't ary
nigger on the whole train, except the sleepin'-car porters."

"What kind of a way to argue is that?" demanded Mr. Arp, hotly.
"Bettin' ain't proof, is it?  Besides, that's the through express from
the East.  I meant trains from the South."

"You didn't say so," retorted Buckalew, triumphantly.  "Stick to your
bet, Eskew, stick to your bet."

"My bet!" cried the outraged Eskew.  "Who offered to bet?"

"You did," replied the Squire, with perfect assurance and sincerity.
The others supported him in the heartiest spirit of on-with-the-dance,
and war and joy were unconfined.

A decrepit hack or two, a couple of old-fashioned surreys, and a few
"cut-unders" drove by, bearing the newly arrived and their valises, the
hotel omnibus depositing several commercial travellers at the door.  A
solitary figure came from the station on foot, and when it appeared
within fair range of the window, Uncle Joe Davey, who had but hovered
on the flanks of the combat, first removed his spectacles and wiped
them, as though distrusting the vision they offered him, then,
replacing them, scanned anew the approaching figure and uttered a
smothered cry.

"My Lord A'mighty!" he gasped.  "What's this?  Look there!"

They looked.  A truce came involuntarily, and they sat in paralytic
silence as the figure made its stately and sensational progress along
Main Street.

Not only the aged men were smitten.  Men shovelling snow from the
pavements stopped suddenly in their labors; two women, talking busily
on a doorstep, were stilled and remained in frozen attitudes as it
passed; a grocer's clerk, crossing the pavement, carrying a heavily
laden basket to his delivery wagon, halted half-way as the figure came
near, and then, making a pivot of his heels as it went by, behaved
towards it as does the magnetic needle to the pole.

It was that of a tall gentleman, cheerfully, though somewhat with
ennui, enduring his nineteenth winter.  His long and slender face he
wore smiling, beneath an accurately cut plaster of dark hair cornicing
his forehead, a fashion followed by many youths of that year.  This
perfect bang was shown under a round black hat whose rim was so small
as almost not to be there at all; and the head was supported by a
waxy-white sea-wall of collar, rising three inches above the blue
billows of a puffed cravat, upon which floated a large, hollow pearl.
His ulster, sporting a big cape at the shoulders, and a tasselled hood
over the cape, was of a rough Scotch cloth, patterned in faint,
gray-and-white squares the size of baggage-checks, and it was so long
that the skirts trailed in the snow.  His legs were lost in the
accurately creased, voluminous garments that were the tailors' canny
reaction from the tight trousers with which the 'Eighties had begun:
they were, in color, a palish russet, broadly striped with gray, and,
in size, surpassed the milder spirit of fashion so far as they
permitted a liberal knee action to take place almost without
superficial effect.  Upon his feet glistened long shoes, shaped, save
for the heels, like sharp racing-shells; these were partially protected
by tan-colored low gaiters with flat, shiny, brown buttons.  In one
hand the youth swung a bone-handled walking-stick, perhaps an inch and
a half in diameter, the other carried a yellow leather banjo-case, upon
the outer side of which glittered the embossed-silver initials, "E. B."
He was smoking, but walked with his head up, making use, however, of a
gait at that time new to Canaan, a seeming superbly irresponsible
lounge, engendering much motion of the shoulders, producing an effect
of carelessness combined with independence--an effect which the
innocent have been known to hail as an unconscious one.

He looked about him as he came, smilingly, with an expression of
princely amusement--as an elderly cabinet minister, say, strolling
about a village where he had spent some months in his youth, a hamlet
which he had then thought large and imposing, but which, being
revisited after years of cosmopolitan glory, appeals to his whimsy and
his pity.  The youth's glance at the court-house unmistakably said:
"Ah, I recall that odd little box. I thought it quite large in the days
before I became what I am now, and I dare say the good townsfolk still
think it an imposing structure!" With everything in sight he deigned to
be amused, especially with the old faces in the "National House"
windows.  To these he waved his stick with airy graciousness.

"My soul!" said Mr. Davey.  "It seems to know some of us!"

"Yes," agreed Mr. Arp, his voice recovered, "and _I_ know IT."

"You do?" exclaimed the Colonel.

"I do, and so do you.  It's Fanny Louden's boy, 'Gene, come home for
his Christmas holidays."

"By George! you're right," cried Flitcroft; "I recognize him now."

"But what's the matter with him?" asked Mr. Bradbury, eagerly.  "Has he
joined some patent-medicine troupe?"

"Not a bit," replied Eskew.  "He went East to college last fall."

"Do they MAKE the boys wear them clothes?" persisted Bradbury.  "Is it
some kind of uniform?"

"I don't care what it is," said Jonas Tabor.  "If I was Henry Louden I
wouldn't let him wear 'em around here."

"Oh, you wouldn't, wouldn't you, Jonas?" Mr. Arp employed the accents
of sarcasm.  "I'd like to see Henry Louden try to interfere with 'Gene
Bantry.  Fanny'd lock the old fool up in the cellar."

The lofty vision lurched out of view.

"I reckon," said the Colonel, leaning forward to see the last of it--"I
reckon Henry Louden's about the saddest case of abused step-father I
ever saw."

"It's his own fault," said Mr. Arp--"twice not havin' sense enough not
to marry.  Him with a son of his own, too!"

"Yes," assented the Colonel, "marryin' a widow with a son of her own,
and that widow Fanny!"

"Wasn't it just the same with her first husband--Bantry?" Mr. Davey
asked, not for information, as he immediately answered himself.  "You
bet it was!  Didn't she always rule the roost?  Yes, she did.  She made
a god of 'Gene from the day he was born.  Bantry's house was run for
him, like Louden's is now."

"And look," exclaimed Mr. Arp, with satisfaction, "at the way he's
turned out!"

"He ain't turned out at all yet; he's too young," said Buckalew.
"Besides, clothes don't make the man."

"Wasn't he smokin' a cigareet!" cried Eskew, triumphantly.  This was
final.

"It's a pity Henry Louden can't do something for his own son," said Mr.
Bradbury.  "Why don't he send him away to college?"

"Fanny won't let him," chuckled Mr. Arp, malevolently.  "Takes all
their spare change to keep 'Gene there in style.  I don't blame her.
'Gene certainly acts the fool, but that Joe Louden is the orneriest boy
I ever saw in an ornery world-full."

"He always was kind of misCHEEvous," admitted Buckalew.  "I don't think
he's mean, though, and it does seem kind of not just right that Joe's
father's money--Bantry didn't leave anything to speak of--has to go to
keepin' 'Gene on the fat of the land, with Joe gittin' up at half-past
four to carry papers, and him goin' on nineteen years old."

"It's all he's fit for!" exclaimed Eskew.  "He's low down, I tell ye.
Ain't it only last week Judge Pike caught him shootin' craps with
Pike's nigger driver and some other nigger hired-men in the alley back
of Pike's barn."

Mr. Schindlinger, the retired grocer, one of the silent members,
corroborated Eskew's information. "I heert dot, too," he gave forth, in
his fat voice. "He blays dominoes pooty often in der room back off
Louie Farbach's tsaloon.  I see him myself. Pooty often.  Blayin' fer a
leedle money--mit loafers!  Loafers!"

"Pretty outlook for the Loudens!" said Eskew Arp, much pleased.  "One
boy a plum fool and dressed like it, the other gone to the dogs
already!"

"What could you expect Joe to be?" retorted Squire Buckalew.  "What
chance has he ever had?  Long as I can remember Fanny's made him fetch
and carry for 'Gene.  'Gene's had everything--all the fancy clothes,
all the pocket-money, and now college!"

"You ever hear that boy Joe talk politics?" asked Uncle Joe Davey,
crossing a cough with a chuckle.  "His head's so full of schemes fer
running this town, and state, too, it's a wonder it don't bust.  Henry
Louden told me he's see Joe set around and study by the hour how to
save three million dollars for the state in two years."

"And the best he can do for himself," added Eskew, "is deliverin' the
Daily Tocsin on a second-hand Star bicycle and gamblin' with niggers
and riff-raff!  None of the nice young folks invite him to their doin's
any more."

"That's because he's got so shabby he's quit goin' with em," said
Buckalew.

"No, it ain't," snapped Mr. Arp.  "It's because he's so low down.  He's
no more 'n a town outcast.  There ain't ary one of the girls 'll have a
thing to do with him, except that rip-rarin' tom-boy next door to
Louden's; and the others don't have much to do with HER, neither, I can
tell ye. That Arie Tabor--"

Colonel Flitcroft caught him surreptitiously by the arm.  "SH, Eskew!"
he whispered.  "Look out what you're sayin'!"

"You needn't mind me," Jonas Tabor spoke up, crisply.  "I washed my
hands of all responsibility for Roger's branch of the family long ago.
Never was one of 'em had the energy or brains to make a decent livin',
beginning with Roger; not one worth his salt!  I set Roger's son up in
business, and all the return he ever made me was to go into bankruptcy
and take to drink, till he died a sot, like his wife did of shame.  I
done all I could when I handed him over my store, and I never expect to
lift a finger for 'em again.  Ariel Tabor's my grandniece, but she
didn't act like it, and you can say anything you like about her, for
what I care.  The last time I spoke to her was a year and a half ago,
and I don't reckon I'll ever trouble to again."

"How was that, Jonas?" quickly inquired Mr. Davey, who, being the
eldest of the party, was the most curious.  "What happened?"

"She was out in the street, up on that high bicycle of Joe Louden's.
He was teachin' her to ride, and she was sittin' on it like a man does.
I stopped and told her she wasn't respectable. Sixteen years old, goin'
on seventeen!"

"What did she say?"

"Laughed," said Jonas, his voice becoming louder as the recital of his
wrongs renewed their sting in his soul.  "Laughed!"

"What did you do?"

"I went up to her and told her she wasn't a decent girl, and shook the
wheel."  Mr. Tabor illustrated by seizing the lapels of Joe Davey and
shaking him.  "I told her if her grandfather had any spunk she'd git an
old-fashioned hidin' for behavin' that way.  And I shook the wheel
again." Here Mr. Tabor, forgetting in the wrath incited by the
recollection that he had not to do with an inanimate object, swung the
gasping and helpless Mr. Davey rapidly back and forth in his chair. "I
shook it good and hard!"

"What did she do then?" asked Peter Bradbury.

"Fell off on me," replied Jonas, violently.  "On purpose!"

"I wisht she'd killed ye," said Mr. Davey, in a choking voice, as,
released, he sank back in his chair.

"On purpose!" repeated Jonas.  "And smashed a straw hat I hadn't had
three months!  All to pieces!  So it couldn't be fixed!"

"And what then?" pursued Bradbury.

"SHE ran," replied Jonas, bitterly--"ran!  And Joe Louden--Joe
Louden--"  He paused and gulped.

"What did he do?" Peter leaned forward in his chair eagerly.

The narrator of the outrage gulped again, and opened and shut his mouth
before responding.

"He said if I didn't pay for a broken spoke on his wheel he'd have to
sue me!"

No one inquired if Jonas had paid, and Jonas said no more.  The
recollection of his wrongs, together with the illustrative violence
offered to Mr. Davey, had been too much for him.  He sank back,
panting, in his chair, his hands fluttering nervously over his heart,
and closed his eyes.

"I wonder why," ruminated Mr. Bradbury--"I wonder why 'Gene Bantry
walked up from the deepo.  Don't seem much like his style.  Should
think he'd of rode up in a hack."

"Sho!" said Uncle Joe Davey, his breath recovered.  "He wanted to walk
up past Judge Pike's, to see if there wasn't a show of Mamie's bein' at
the window, and give her a chance to look at that college uniform and
banjo-box and new walk of his."

Mr. Arp began to show signs of uneasiness.

"I'd like mighty well to know," he said, shifting round in his chair,
"if there's anybody here that's been able to answer the question I PUT,
yesterday, just before we went home.  You all tried to, but I didn't
hear anything I could consider anyways near even a fair argument."

"Who tried to?" asked Buckalew, sharply, sitting up straight.  "What
question?"

"What proof can you bring me," began Mr. Arp, deliberately, "that we
folks, modernly, ain't more degenerate than the ancient Romans?"



