XXII

MR. SHEEHAN SPEAKS

Joe helped to carry what was mortal of Eskew from Ariel's house to its
final abiding-place.  With him, in that task, were Buckalew, Bradbury,
the Colonel, and the grandsons of the two latter, and Mrs. Louden drew
in her skirts grimly as her step-son passed her in the mournful
procession through the hall.  Her eyes were red with weeping (not for
Eskew), but not so red as those of Mamie Pike, who stood beside her.

On the way to the cemetery, Joe and Ariel were together in a carriage
with Buckalew and the minister who had read the service, a dark,
pleasant-eyed young man;--and the Squire, after being almost overcome
during the ceremony, experienced a natural reaction, talking cheerfully
throughout the long drive.  He recounted many anecdotes of Eskew,
chuckling over most of them, though filled with wonder by a coincidence
which he and Flitcroft had discovered; the Colonel had recently been
made the custodian of his old friend's will, and it had been opened the
day before the funeral.  Eskew had left everything he possessed--with
the regret that it was so little--to Joe.

"But the queer thing about it," said the Squire, addressing himself to
Ariel, "was the date of it, the seventeenth of June.  The Colonel and I
got to talkin' it over, out on his porch, last night, tryin' to
rec'lect what was goin' on about then, and we figgered it out that it
was the Monday after you come back, the very day he got so upset when
he saw you goin' up to Louden's law-office with your roses."

Joe looked quickly at Ariel.  She did not meet his glance, but, turning
instead to Ladew, the clergyman, began, with a barely perceptible
blush, to talk of something he had said in a sermon two weeks ago.  The
two fell into a thoughtful and amiable discussion, during which there
stole into Joe's heart a strange and unreasonable pain.  The young
minister had lived in Canaan only a few months, and Joe had never seen
him until that morning; but he liked the short, honest talk he had
made; liked his cadenceless voice and keen, dark face; and, recalling
what he had heard Martin Pike vociferating in his brougham one Sunday,
perceived that Ladew was the fellow who had "got to go" because his
sermons did not please the Judge.  Yet Ariel remembered for more than a
fortnight a passage from one of these sermons. And as Joe looked at the
manly and intelligent face opposite him, it did not seem strange that
she should.

He resolutely turned his eyes to the open window and saw that they had
entered the cemetery, were near the green knoll where Eskew was to lie
beside a brother who had died long ago.  He let the minister help Ariel
out, going quickly forward himself with Buckalew; and then--after the
little while that the restoration of dust to dust mercifully needs--he
returned to the carriage only to get his hat.

Ariel and Ladew and the Squire were already seated and waiting.
"Aren't you going to ride home with us?" she asked, surprised.

"No," he explained, not looking at her.  "I have to talk with Norbert
Flitcroft.  I'm going back with him.  Good-bye."

His excuse was the mere truth, his conversation with Norbert, in the
carriage which they managed to secure to themselves, continuing
earnestly until Joe spoke to the driver and alighted at a corner, near
Mr. Farbach's Italian possessions.  "Don't forget," he said, as he
closed the carriage door, "I've got to have both ends of the string in
my hands."

"Forget!" Norbert looked at the cupola of the Pike Mansion, rising
above the maples down the street.  "It isn't likely I'll forget!"


When Joe entered the "Louis Quinze room" which some decorator, drunk
with power, had mingled into the brewer's villa, he found the owner and
Mr. Sheehan, with five other men, engaged in a meritorious attempt to
tone down the apartment with smoke.  Two of the five others were
prosperous owners of saloons; two were known to the public (whose
notion of what it meant when it used the term was something of the
vaguest) as politicians; the fifth was Mr. Farbach's closest friend,
one who (Joe had heard) was to be the next chairman of the city
committee of the party. They were seated about a table, enveloped in
blue clouds, and hushed to a grave and pertinent silence which
clarified immediately the circumstance that whatever debate had
preceded his arrival, it was now settled.

Their greeting of him, however, though exceedingly quiet, indicated a
certain expectancy, as he accepted the chair which had been left for
him at the head of the table.  He looked thinner and paler than usual,
which is saying a great deal; but presently, finding that the fateful
hush which his entrance had broken was immediately resumed, a twinkle
came into his eye, one of his eyebrows went up and a corner of his
mouth went down.

"Well, gentlemen?" he said.

The smokers continued to smoke and to do nothing else; the exception
being Mr. Sheehan, who, though he spoke not, exhibited tokens of
agitation and excitement which he curbed with difficulty; shifting
about in his chair, gnawing his cigar, crossing and uncrossing his
knees, rubbing and slapping his hands together, clearing his throat
with violence, his eyes fixed all the while, as were those of his
companions, upon Mr. Farbach; so that Joe was given to perceive that it
had been agreed that the brewer should be the spokesman. Mr. Farbach
was deliberate, that was all, which added to the effect of what he
finally did say.

"Choe," he remarked, placidly, "you are der next Mayor off Canaan."

"Why do you say that?" asked the young man, sharply.

"Bickoss us here," he answered, interlocking the tips of his fingers
over his waistcoat, that being as near folding his hands as lay within
his power,--"bickoss us here shall try to fix it so, und so hef
ditcided."

Joe took a deep breath.  "Why do you want me?"

"Dot," replied the brewer, "iss someding I shall tell you."  He paused
to contemplate his cigar. "We want you bickoss you are der best man fer
dot positsion."

"Louie, you mustn't make a mistake at the beginning," Joe said,
hurriedly.  "I may not be the kind of man you're looking for.  If I
went in--" He hesitated, stammering.  "It seems an ungrateful thing to
say, but--but there wouldn't be any slackness--I couldn't be bound to
anybody--"

"Holt up your hosses!" Mr. Farbach, once in his life, was so ready to
reply that he was able to interrupt.  "Who hef you heert speak off
bounding? Hef I speakt off favors?  Dit I say der shoult be slackness
in der city gofer'ment?  Litsen to me, Choe."  He renewed his
contemplation of his cigar, then proceeded:  "I hef been t'inkin' it
ofer, now a couple years.  I hef mate up my mind.  If some peobles are
gombelt to keep der laws and oders are not, dot's a great atwantitch to
der oders. Dot iss what iss ruining der gountry und der peobles iss
commencement to take notice.  Efer'veres in oder towns der iss
housecleaning; dey are reforming und indieding, und pooty soon dot
mofement comes here--shoo-er!  If we intent to holt der parsly in
power, we shoult be a leetle ahead off dot mofement so, when it shoult
be here, we hef a goot 'minadstration to fall beck on.  Now, dere iss
anoder brewery opened und trying to gombete mit me here in Canaan.  If
dot brewery owns der Mayor, all der tsaloons buying my bier must shut
up at 'leven o'glock und Sundays, but der oders keep open.  If I own
der Mayor, I make der same against dot oder brewery.  Now I am pooty
sick off dot ways off bitsness und fighting all times. Also," Mr.
Farbach added, with magnificent calmness, "my trade iss larchly
owitside off Canaan, und it iss bedder dot here der laws shoult be
enforced der same fer all.  Litsen, Choe; all us here beliefs der same
way.  You are square.  Der whole tsaloon element knows dot, und knows
dot all voult be treated der same.  Mit you it voult be fairness fer
each one.  Foolish peobles hef sait you are a law-tricker, but we know
dot you hef only mate der laws brotect as well as bunish.  Und at such
times as dey het been broken, you hef made dem as mertsiful as you
coult.  You are no tricker. We are willing to help you make it a glean
town. Odervise der fightin' voult go on until der mofement strikes here
und all der granks vake up und we git a fool reformer fer Mayor und der
town goes to der dogs.  If I try to put in a man dot I own, der oder
brewery iss goin' to fight like hell, but if I work fer you it will not
fight so hart."

"But the other people," Joe objected, "those outside of what is called
the saloon element--do you understand how many of them will be against
me?"

"It iss der tsaloon element," Mr. Farbach returned, peacefully, "dot
does der fightin'."

"And you have considered my standing with that part of Canaan which
considers itself the most respectable section?"  He rose to his feet,
standing straight and quiet, facing the table, upon which, it chanced,
there lay a copy of the Tocsin.

"Und yet," observed Mr. Farbach, with mildness, "we got some pooty
risbecdable men right here."

"Except me," broke in Mr. Sheehan, grimly, "you have."

"Have you thought of this?" Joe leaned forward and touched the paper
upon the table.

"We hef," replied Mr. Farbach.  "All of us. You shall beat it."

There was a strong chorus of confirmation from the others, and Joe's
eyes flashed.

"Have you considered," he continued, rapidly, while a warm color began
to conquer his pallor,--"have you considered the powerful influence
which will be against me, and more against me now, I should tell you,
than ever before?  That influence, I mean, which is striving so hard to
discredit me that lynch-law has been hinted for poor Fear if I should
clear him!  Have you thought of that? Have you thought--"

"Have we thought o' Martin Pike?" exclaimed Mr. Sheehan, springing to
his feet, face aflame and beard bristling.  "Ay, we've thought o'
Martin Pike, and our thinkin' of him is where he begins to git what's
comin' to him!  What d'ye stand there pickin' straws fer?  What's the
matter with ye?" he demanded, angrily, his violence tenfold increased
by the long repression he had put upon himself during the brewer's
deliberate utterances. "If Louie Farbach and his crowd says they're fer
ye, I guess ye've got a chanst, haven't ye?"

"Wait," said Joe.  "I think you underestimate Pike's influence--"

"Underestimate the devil!" shouted Mr. Sheehan, uncontrollably excited.
"You talk about influence!  He's been the worst influence this town's
ever had--and his tracks covered up in the dark wherever he set his
ugly foot down.  These men know it, and you know some, but not the
worst of it, because none of ye live as deep down in it as I do!  Ye
want to make a clean town of it, ye want to make a little heaven of the
Beach--"

"And in the eyes of Judge Pike," Joe cut him off, "and of all who take
their opinions from him, I REPRESENT Beaver Beach!"

Mike Sheehan gave a wild shout.  "Whooroo! It's come!  I knowed it
would!  The day I couldn't hold my tongue, though I passed my word I
would when the coward showed the deed he didn't dare to git recorded!
Waugh!"  He shouted again, with bitter laughter.  "Ye do!  In the eyes
o' them as follow Martin Pike ye stand fer the Beach and all its
wickedness, do ye?  Whooroo!  It's come!  Ye're an offence in the eyes
o' Martin Pike and all his kind because ye stand fer the Beach, are ye?"

"You know it!" Joe answered, sharply.  "If they could wipe the Beach
off the map and me with it--"

"Martin Pike would?" shouted Mr. Sheehan, while the others,
open-mouthed, stared at him. "Martin Pike would?"

"I don't need to tell you that," said Joe.

Mr. Sheehan's big fist rose high over the table and descended crashing
upon it.  "It's a damn lie!" he roared.  "Martin Pike owns Beaver
Beach!"



