V

BEAVER BEACH

The Canaan Daily Tocsin of the following morning "ventured the
assertion" upon its front page that "the scene at the Pike Mansion was
one of unalloyed festivity, music, and mirth; a fairy bower of airy
figures wafting here and there to the throb of waltz-strains; a
veritable Temple of Terpsichore, shining forth with a myriad of lights,
which, together with the generous profusion of floral decorations and
the mingled delights afforded by Minds's orchestra of Indianapolis and
Caterer Jones of Chicago, was in all likelihood never heretofore
surpassed in elegance in our city....  Only one incident," the Tocsin
remarked, "marred an otherwise perfect occasion, and out of regard for
the culprit's family connections, which are prominent in our social
world, we withhold his name.  Suffice it to say that through the
vigilance of Mr. Norbert Flitcroft, grandson of Colonel A. A.
Flitcroft, who proved himself a thorough Lecoq (the celebrated French
detective), the rascal was seized and recognized.  Mr. Flitcroft,
having discovered him in hiding, had a cordon of waiters drawn up
around his hiding-place, which was the charmingly decorated side piazza
of the Pike Mansion, and sent for Judge Pike, who came upon the
intruder by surprise.  He evaded the Judge's indignant grasp, but
received a well-merited blow over the head from a poker which the Judge
had concealed about his person while pretending to approach the
hiding-place casually. Attracted to the scene by the cries of Mr.
Flitcroft, who, standing behind Judge Pike, accidentally received a
blow from the same weapon, all the guests of the evening sprang to view
the scene, only to behold the culprit leap through a crevice between
the strips of canvas which enclosed the piazza. He was seized by the
colored coachman of the Mansion, Sam Warden, and immediately pounced
upon by the cordon of Caterer Jones's dusky assistants from Chicago,
who were in ambush outside. Unfortunately, after a brief struggle he
managed to trip Warden, and, the others stumbling upon the prostrate
body of the latter, to make his escape in the darkness.

"It is not believed by many that his intention was burglary, though
what his designs were can only be left to conjecture, as he is far
beyond the age when boys perform such actions out of a sense of
mischief.  He had evidently occupied his hiding-place some time, and an
idea of his coolness may be obtained from his having procured and eaten
a full meal through an unknown source. Judge Pike is justly incensed,
and swears that he will prosecute him on this and other charges as soon
as he can be found.  Much sympathy is felt for the culprit's family,
who feel his shame most keenly, but who, though sorrowing over the
occurrence, declare that they have put up with his derelictions long
enough, and will do nothing to step between him and the Judge's
righteous indignation."

The Pike Mansion, "scene of festivity, music, and mirth" (not quite so
unalloyed, after all, the stricken Flitcroft keeping his room for a
week under medical supervision), had not been the only bower of the
dance in Canaan that evening: another Temple of Terpsichore had shone
forth with lights, though of these there were not quite a myriad. The
festivities they illumined obtained no mention in the paper, nor did
they who trod the measures in this second temple exhibit any sense of
injury because of the Tocsin's omission.  Nay, they were of that class,
shy without being bashful, exclusive yet not proud, which shuns
publicity with a single-heartedness almost unique in our republic,
courting observation neither in the prosecution of their professions
nor in the pursuit of happiness.

Not quite a mile above the northernmost of the factories on the
water-front, there projected into the river, near the end of the
crescent bend above the town, a long pier, relic of steamboat days,
rotting now, and many years fallen from its maritime uses.  About
midway of its length stood a huge, crazy shed, long ago utilized as a
freight storeroom.  This had been patched and propped, and a
dangerous-looking veranda attached to it, over-hanging the water.
Above the doorway was placed a sign whereon might be read the words,
"Beaver Beach, Mike's Place."  The shore end of the pier was so ruinous
that passage was offered by a single row of planks, which presented an
appearance so temporary, as well as insecure, that one might have
guessed their office to be something in the nature of a drawbridge.
From these a narrow path ran through a marsh, left by the receding
river, to a country road of desolate appearance.  Here there was a
rough enclosure, or corral, with some tumble-down sheds which afforded
shelter, on the night of Joseph Louden's disgrace, for a number of
shaggy teams attached to those decrepit and musty vehicles known
picturesquely and accurately as Night-Hawks.  The presence of such
questionable shapes in the corral indicated that the dance was on at
Beaver Beach, Mike's Place, as surely as the short line of cabs and
family carriages on upper Main Street made it known that gayety was the
order of the night at the Pike Mansion.  But among other differences
was this, that at the hour when the guests of the latter were leaving,
those seeking the hospitalities of Beaver Beach had just begun to
arrive.

By three o'clock, however, joy at Mike's Place had become beyond
question unconfined, and the tokens of it were audible for a long
distance in all directions.  If, however, there is no sound where no
ear hears, silence rested upon the country-side until an hour later.
Then a lonely figure came shivering from the direction of the town, not
by the road, but slinking through the snow upon the frozen river.  It
came slowly, as though very tired, and cautiously, too, often turning
its head to look behind.  Finally it reached the pier, and stopped as
if to listen.

Within the house above, a piano of evil life was being beaten to death
for its sins and clamoring its last cries horribly.  The old shed
rattled in every part with the thud of many heavy feet, and trembled
with the shock of noise--an incessant roar of men's voices, punctuated
with women's screams. Then the riot quieted somewhat; there was a
clapping of hands, and a violin began to squeak measures intended to be
Oriental.  The next moment the listener scrambled up one of the rotting
piles and stood upon the veranda.  A shaft of red light through a
broken shutter struck across the figure above the shoulders, revealing
a bloody handkerchief clumsily knotted about the head, and, beneath it,
the face of Joe Louden.

He went to the broken shutter and looked in. Around the blackened walls
of the room stood a bleared mob, applausively watching, through a fog
of smoke, the contortions of an old woman in a red calico wrapper, who
was dancing in the centre of the floor.  The fiddler--a rubicund person
evidently not suffering from any great depression of spirit through the
circumstance of being "out on bail," as he was, to Joe's intimate
knowledge--sat astride a barrel, resting his instrument upon the foamy
tap thereof, and playing somewhat after the manner of a 'cellist; in no
wise incommoded by the fact that a tall man (known to a few friends as
an expert in the porch-climbing line) was sleeping on his shoulder,
while another gentleman (who had prevented many cases of typhoid by
removing old plumbing from houses) lay on the floor at the musician's
feet and endeavored to assist him by plucking the strings of the fiddle.

Joe opened the door and went in.  All of the merry company (who were
able) turned sharply toward the door as it opened; then, recognizing
the new-comer, turned again to watch the old woman.  One or two nearest
the door asked the boy, without great curiosity, what had happened to
his head.  He merely shook it faintly in reply, and crossed the room to
an open hallway beyond. At the end of this he came to a frowzy bedroom,
the door of which stood ajar.  Seated at a deal table, and working by a
dim lamp with a broken chimney, a close-cropped, red-bearded,
red-haired man in his shirt-sleeves was jabbing gloomily at a column of
figures scrawled in a dirty ledger.  He looked up as Joe appeared in
the doorway, and his eyes showed a slight surprise.

"I never thought ye had the temper to git somebody to split yer head,"
said he.  "Where'd ye collect it?"

"Nowhere," Joe answered, dropping weakly on the bed.  "It doesn't
amount to anything."

"Well, I'll take just a look fer myself," said the red-bearded man,
rising.  "And I've no objection to not knowin' how ye come by it.
Ye've always been the great one fer keepin' yer mysteries to yerself."

He unwound the handkerchief and removed it from Joe's head gently.
"WHEE!" he cried, as a long gash was exposed over the forehead.  "I
hope ye left a mark somewhere to pay a little on the score o' this!"

Joe chuckled and dropped dizzily back upon the pillow.  "There was
another who got something like it," he gasped, feebly; "and, oh, Mike,
I wish you could have heard him going on!  Perhaps you did--it was only
three miles from here."

"Nothing I'd liked better!" said the other, bringing a basin of clear
water from a stand in the corner.  "It's a beautiful thing to hear a
man holler when he gits a grand one like ye're wearing to-night."

He bathed the wound gently, and hurrying from the room, returned
immediately with a small jug of vinegar.  Wetting a rag with this
tender fluid, he applied it to Joe's head, speaking soothingly the
while.

"Nothing in the world like a bit o' good cider vinegar to keep off the
festerin'.  It may seem a trifle scratchy fer the moment, but it
assassinates the blood-p'ison.  There ye go!  It's the fine thing fer
ye, Joe--what are ye squirmin' about?"

"I'm only enjoying it," the boy answered, writhing as the vinegar
worked into the gash.  "Don't you mind my laughing to myself."

"Ye're a good one, Joe!" said the other, continuing his ministrations.
"I wisht, after all, ye felt like makin' me known to what's the
trouble. There's some of us would be glad to take it up fer ye, and--"

"No, no; it's all right.  I was somewhere I had no business to be, and
I got caught."

"Who caught ye?"

"First, some nice white people"--Joe smiled his distorted smile--"and
then a low-down black man helped me to get away as soon as he saw who
it was.  He's a friend of mine, and he fell down and tripped up the
pursuit."

"I always knew ye'd git into large trouble some day."  The red-bearded
man tore a strip from an old towel and began to bandage the boy's head
with an accustomed hand.  "Yer taste fer excitement has been growin' on
ye every minute of the four years I've known ye."

"Excitement!" echoed Joe, painfully blinking at his friend.  "Do you
think I'm hunting excitement?"

"Be hanged to ye!" said the red-bearded man. "Can't I say a teasing
word without gittin' called to order fer it?  I know ye, my boy, as
well as ye know yerself.  Ye're a queer one.  Ye're one of the few that
must know all sides of the world--and can't content themselves with
bein' respectable! Ye haven't sunk to 'low life' because ye're low
yourself, but ye'll never git a damned one o' the respectable to
believe it.  There's a few others like ye in the wide world, and I've
seen one or two of 'em.  I've been all over, steeple-chasin',
sailorman, soldier, pedler, and in the PO-lice; I've pulled the Grand
National in Paris, and I've been handcuffed in Hong-Kong; I've seen all
the few kinds of women there is on earth and the many kinds of men.
Yer own kind is the one I've seen the fewest of, but I knew ye belonged
to it the first time I laid eyes on ye!"  He paused, then continued
with conviction:  "Ye'll come to no good, either, fer yerself, yet no
one can say ye haven't the talents.  Ye've helped many of the boys out
of a bad hole with a word of advice around the courts and the jail.
Who knows but ye'd be a great lawyer if ye kept on?"

Young people usually like to discuss themselves under any
conditions--hence the rewards of palmistry,--but Joe's comment on this
harangue was not so responsive as might have been expected. "I've got
seven dollars," he said, "and I'll leave the clothes I've got on.  Can
you fix me up with something different?"

"Aha!" cried the red-bearded man.  "Then ye ARE in trouble!  I thought
it 'd come to ye some day!  Have ye been dinnymitin' Martin Pike?"

"See what you can do," said Joe.  "I want to wait here until daybreak."

"Lie down, then," interrupted the other.  "And fergit the hullabaloo in
the throne-room beyond."

"I can easily do that"--Joe stretched himself upon the bed,--"I've got
so many other things to remember."

"I'll have the things fer ye, and I'll let ye know I have no use fer
seven dollars," returned the red-bearded man, crossly.  "What are ye
sniffin' fer?"

"I'm thinking of the poor fellow that got the mate to this," said Joe,
touching the bandage. "I can't help crying when I think they may have
used vinegar on his head, too."

"Git to sleep if ye can!" exclaimed the Samaritan, as a hideous burst
of noise came from the dance-room, where some one seemed to be breaking
a chair upon an acquaintance.  "I'll go out and regulate the boys a
bit."  He turned down the lamp, fumbled in his hip-pocket, and went to
the door.

"Don't forget," Joe called after him.

"Go to sleep," said the red-bearded man, his hand on the door-knob.
"That is, go to thinkin', fer ye won't sleep; ye're not the kind.  But
think easy; I'll have the things fer ye.  It's a matter of pride with
me that I always knew ye'd come to trouble."



