III

OLD HOPES

The door which Ariel had entered opened upon a narrow hall, and down
this she ran to her own room, passing, with face averted, the entrance
to the broad, low-ceilinged chamber that had served Roger Tabor as a
studio for almost fifty years.  He was sitting there now, in a hopeless
and disconsolate attitude, with his back towards the double doors,
which were open, and had been open since their hinges had begun to give
way, when Ariel was a child.  Hearing her step, he called her name, but
did not turn; and, receiving no answer, sighed faintly as he heard her
own door close upon her.

Then, as his eyes wandered about the many canvases which leaned against
the dingy walls, he sighed again.  Usually they showed their brown
backs, but to-day he had turned them all to face outward.  Twilight,
sunset, moonlight (the Court-house in moonlight), dawn, morning, noon
(Main Street at noon), high summer, first spring, red autumn,
midwinter, all were there--illimitably detailed, worked to a smoothness
like a glaze, and all lovingly done with unthinkable labor.

And there were "Italian Flower-Sellers," damsels with careful hair, two
figures together, one blonde, the other as brunette as lampblack, the
blonde--in pink satin and blue slippers--leaning against a pillar and
smiling over the golden coins for which she had exchanged her posies;
the brunette seated at her feet, weeping upon an unsold bouquet.  There
were red-sashed "Fisher Lads" wading with butterfly-nets on their
shoulders; there was a "Tying the Ribbon on Pussy's Neck"; there were
portraits in oil and petrifactions in crayon, as hard and tight as the
purses of those who had refused to accept them, leaving them upon their
maker's hands because the likeness had failed.

After a time the old man got up, went to his easel near a window, and,
sighing again, began patiently to work upon one of these failures--a
portrait, in oil, of a savage old lady, which he was doing from a
photograph.  The expression of the mouth and the shape of the nose had
not pleased her descendants and the beneficiaries under the will, and
it was upon the images of these features that Roger labored.  He leaned
far forward, with his face close to the canvas, holding his brushes
after the Spencerian fashion, working steadily through the afternoon,
and, when the light grew dimmer, leaning closer to his canvas to see.
When it had become almost dark in the room, he lit a student-lamp with
a green-glass shade, and, placing it upon a table beside him, continued
to paint. Ariel's voice interrupted him at last.

"It's quitting-time, grandfather," she called, gently, from the doorway
behind him.

He sank back in his chair, conscious, for the first time, of how tired
he had grown.  "I suppose so," he said, "though it seemed to me that I
was just getting my hand in."  His eyes brightened for a moment.  "I
declare, I believe I've caught it a great deal better.  Come and look,
Ariel.  Doesn't it seem to you that I'm getting it?  Those pearly
shadows in the flesh--"

"I'm sure of it.  Those people ought to be very proud to have it."  She
came to him quietly, took the palette and brushes from his hands and
began to clean them, standing in the shadow behind him. "It's too good
for them."

"I wonder if it is," he said, slowly, leaning forward and curving his
hands about his eyes so as to shut off everything from his view except
the canvas.  "I wonder if it is!" he repeated.  Then his hands dropped
sadly in his lap, and he sank back again with a patient kind of
revulsion.  "No, no, it isn't!  I always think they're good when I've
just finished them.  I've been fooled that way all my life.  They don't
look the same afterwards."

"They're always beautiful," she said, softly.

"Ah, ah!" he sighed.

"Now, Roger!" she cried, with cheerful sharpness, continuing her work.

"I know," he said, with a plaintive laugh,--"I know.  Sometimes I think
that all my reward has been in the few minutes I've had just after
finishing them.  During those few minutes I seem to see in them all
that I wanted to put in them; I see it because what I've been trying to
express is still so warm in my own eyes that I seem to have got it on
the canvas where I wanted it."

"But you do," she said.  "You do get it there."

"No," he murmured, in return.  "I never did. I got out some of the old
ones when I came in this morning, some that I hadn't looked at for
years, and it's the same with them.  You can do it much better
yourself--your sketches show it."

"No, no!" she protested, quickly.

"Yes, they do; and I wondered if it was only because you were young.
But those I did when I was young are almost the same as the ones I
paint now.  I haven't learned much.  There hasn't been any one to show
me!  And you can't learn from print, never!  Yet I've grown in what I
SEE--grown so that the world is full of beauty to me that I never
dreamed of seeing when I began. But I can't paint it--I can't get it on
the canvas. Ah, I think I might have known how to, if I hadn't had to
teach myself, if I could only have seen how some of the other fellows
did their work. If I'd ever saved money to get away from Canaan--if I
could have gone away from it and come back knowing how to paint it--if
I could have got to Paris for just one month!  PARIS--for just one
month!"

"Perhaps we will; you can't tell what MAY happen." It was always her
reply to this cry of his.

"PARIS--for just one month!" he repeated, with infinite wistfulness,
and then realizing what an old, old cry it was with him, he shook his
head, impatiently sniffing out a laugh at himself, rose and went
pottering about among the canvases, returning their faces to the wall,
and railing at them mutteringly.

"Whatever took me into it, I don't know.  I might have done something
useful.  But I couldn't bring myself ever to consider doing anything
else--I couldn't bear even to think of it!  Lord forgive me, I even
tried to encourage your father to paint. Perhaps he might as well, poor
boy, as to have put all he'd made into buying Jonas out.  Ah me! There
you go, 'Flower-Girls'!  Turn your silly faces to the wall and smile
and cry there till I'm gone and somebody throws you on a bonfire.  I'LL
never look at you again."  He paused, with the canvas half turned.
"And yet," he went on, reflectively, "a man promised me thirty-five
dollars for that picture once.  I painted it to order, but he went away
before I finished it, and never answered the letters I wrote him about
it.  I wish I had the money now--perhaps we could have more than two
meals a day."

"We don't need more," said Ariel, scraping the palette attentively.
"It's healthier with only breakfast and supper.  I think I'd rather
have a new dress than dinner."

"I dare say you would," the old man mused. "You're young--you're young.
What were you doing all this afternoon, child?"

"In my room, trying to make over mamma's wedding-dress for to-night."

"To-night?"

"Mamie Pike invited me to a dance at their house."

"Very well; I'm glad you're going to be gay," he said, not seeing the
faintly bitter smile that came to her face.

"I don't think I'll be very gay," she answered.

"I don't know why I go--nobody ever asks me to dance."

"Why not?" he asked, with an old man's astonishment.

"I don't know.  Perhaps it's because I don't dress very well."  Then,
as he made a sorrowful gesture, she cut him off before he could speak.
"Oh, it isn't altogether because we're poor; it's more I don't know how
to wear what I've got, the way some girls do.  I never cared much
and--well, I'M not worrying, Roger!  And I think I've done a good deal
with mamma's dress.  It's a very grand dress.  I wonder I never thought
of wearing it until to-day.  I may be"--she laughed and blushed--"I may
be the belle of the ball--who knows!"

"You'll want me to walk over with you and come for you afterwards, I
expect."

"Only to take me.  It may be late when I come away--if a good many
SHOULD ask me to dance, for once!  Of course I could come home alone.
But Joe Louden is going to sort of hang around outside, and he'll meet
me at the gate and see me safe home."

"Oh!" he exclaimed, blankly.

"Isn't it all right?" she asked.

"I think I'd better come for you," he answered, gently.  "The truth is,
I--I think you'd better not be with Joe Louden a great deal."

"Why?"

"Well, he doesn't seem a vicious boy to me, but I'm afraid he's getting
rather a bad name, my dear."

"He's not getting one," she said, gravely.  "He's already got one.
He's had a bad name in Canaan for a long while.  It grew in the first
place out of shabbiness and mischief, but it did grow; and if people
keep on giving him a bad name the time will come when he'll live up to
it.  He's not any worse than I am, and I guess my own name isn't too
good--for a girl.  And yet, so far, there's nothing against him except
his bad name."

"I'm afraid there is," said Roger.  "It doesn't look very well for a
young man of his age to be doing no better than delivering papers."

"It gives him time to study law," she answered, quickly.  "If he
clerked all day in a store, he couldn't."

"I didn't know he was studying now.  I thought I'd heard that he was in
a lawyer's office for a few weeks last year, and was turned out for
setting fire to it with a pipe--"

"It was an accident," she interposed.

"But some pretty important papers were burned, and after that none of
the other lawyers would have him."

"He's not in an office," she admitted.  "I didn't mean that.  But he
studies a great deal.  He goes to the courts all the time they're in
session, and he's bought some books of his own."

"Well--perhaps," he assented; "but they say he gambles and drinks, and
that last week Judge Pike threatened to have him arrested for throwing
dice with some negroes behind the Judge's stable."

"What of it?  I'm about the only nice person in town that will have
anything to do with him--and nobody except you thinks I'M very nice!"

"Ariel!  Ariel!"

"I know all about his gambling with darkies," she continued, excitedly,
her voice rising, "and I know that he goes to saloons, and that he's an
intimate friend of half the riffraff in town; and I know the reason for
it, too, because he's told me.  He wants to know them, to understand
them; and he says some day they'll make him a power, and then he can
help them!"

The old man laughed helplessly.  "But I can't let him bring you home,
my dear."

She came to him slowly and laid her hands upon his shoulders.
Grandfather and granddaughter were nearly of the same height, and she
looked squarely into his eyes.  "Then you must say it is because you
want to come for me, not because I mustn't come with Joe."

"But I think it is a little because you mustn't come with Joe," he
answered, "especially from the Pikes'.  Don't you see that it mightn't
be well for Joe himself, if the Judge should happen to see him?  I
understand he warned the boy to keep away from the neighborhood
entirely or he would have him locked up for dice-throwing.  The Judge
is a very influential man, you know, and as determined in matters like
this as he is irritable."

"Oh, if you put it on that ground," the girl replied, her eyes
softening, "I think you'd better come for me yourself."

"Very well, I put it on that ground," he returned, smiling upon her.

"Then I'll send Joe word and get supper," she said, kissing him.

It was the supper-hour not only for them but everywhere in Canaan, and
the cold air of the streets bore up and down and around corners the
smell of things frying.  The dining-room windows of all the houses
threw bright patches on the snow of the side-yards; the windows of
other rooms, except those of the kitchens, were dark, for the rule of
the place was Puritanical in thrift, as in all things; and the good
housekeepers disputed every record of the meters with unhappy
gas-collectors.

There was no better housekeeper in town than Mrs. Louden, nor a
thriftier, but hers was one of the few houses in Canaan, that evening,
which showed bright lights in the front rooms while the family were at
supper.  It was proof of the agitation caused by the arrival of Eugene
that she forgot to turn out the gas in her parlor, and in the chamber
she called a library, on her way to the evening meal.

That might not have been thought a cheerful feast for Joe Louden.  The
fatted calf was upon the board, but it had not been provided for the
prodigal, who, in this case, was the brother that stayed at home: the
fete rewarded the good brother, who had been in strange lands, and the
good one had found much honor in his wanderings, as he carelessly let
it appear.  Mrs. Louden brightened inexpressibly whenever Eugene spoke
of himself, and consequently she glowed most of the time.  Her
husband--a heavy, melancholy, silent man with a grizzled beard and no
mustache--lowered at Joe throughout the meal, but appeared to take a
strange comfort in his step-son's elegance and polish.  Eugene wore new
evening clothes and was lustrous to eye and ear.

Joe escaped as soon as he could, though not before the count of his
later sins had been set before Eugene in detail, in mass, and in all of
their depth, breadth, and thickness.  His father spoke but once, after
nodding heavily to confirm all points of Mrs. Louden's recital.

"You better use any influence you've got with your brother," he said to
Eugene, "to make him come to time.  I can't do anything with him.  If
he gets in trouble, he needn't come to me!  I'll never help him again.
I'm TIRED of it!"

Eugene glanced twinklingly at the outcast.  "I didn't know he was such
a roarer as all that!" he said, lightly, not taking Joe as of enough
consequence to be treated as a sinner.

This encouraged Mrs. Louden to pathos upon the subject of her shame
before other women when Joe happened to be mentioned, and the supper
was finished with the topic.  Joe slipped away through the kitchen,
sneakingly, and climbed the back fence.  In the alley he lit a cheap
cigarette, and thrusting his hands into his pockets and shivering
violently--for he had no overcoat,--walked away singing to himself, "A
Spanish cavalier stood in his retreat," his teeth affording an
appropriate though involuntary castanet accompaniment.

His movements throughout the earlier part of that evening are of
uncertain report.  It is known that he made a partial payment of
forty-five cents at a second-hand book-store for a number of
volumes--Grindstaff on Torts and some others--which he had negotiated
on the instalment system; it is also believed that he won twenty-eight
cents playing seven-up in the little room behind Louie Farbach's bar;
but these things are of little import compared to the established fact
that at eleven o'clock he was one of the ball guests at the Pike
Mansion.  He took no active part in the festivities, nor was he one of
the dancers: his was, on the contrary, the role of a quiet observer.
He lay stretched at full length upon the floor of the enclosed porch
(one of the strips of canvas was later found to have been loosened),
wedged between the outer railing and a row of palms in green tubs.  The
position he occupied was somewhat too draughty to have been recommended
by a physician, but he commanded, between the leaves of the screening
palms, an excellent view of the room nearest the porch.  A long window,
open, afforded communication between this room, one of those used for
dancing, and the dim bower which had been made of the veranda, whither
flirtatious couples made their way between the dances.

It was not to play eavesdropper upon any of these that the uninvited
Joe had come.  He was not there to listen, and it is possible that, had
the curtains of other windows afforded him the chance to behold the
dance, he might not have risked the dangers of his present position.
He had not the slightest interest in the whispered coquetries that he
heard; he watched only to catch now and then, over the shoulders of the
dancers, a fitful glimpse of a pretty head that flitted across the
window--the amber hair of Mamie Pike.  He shivered in the draughts; and
the floor of the porch was cement, painful to elbow and knee, the space
where he lay cramped and narrow; but the golden bubbles of her hair,
the shimmer of her dainty pink dress, and the fluffy wave of her lace
scarf as she crossed and recrossed in a waltz, left him, apparently, in
no discontent.  He watched with parted lips, his pale cheeks reddening
whenever those fair glimpses were his.  At last she came out to the
veranda with Eugene and sat upon a little divan, so close to Joe that,
daring wildly in the shadow, he reached out a trembling hand and let
his fingers rest upon the end of her scarf, which had fallen from her
shoulders and touched the floor.  She sat with her back to him, as did
Eugene.

"You have changed, I think, since last summer," he heard her say,
reflectively.

"For the worse, ma cherie?" Joe's expression might have been worth
seeing when Eugene said "ma cherie," for it was known in the Louden
household that Mr. Bantry had failed to pass his examination in the
French language.

"No," she answered.  "But you have seen so much and accomplished so
much since then.  You have become so polished and so--" She paused, and
then continued, "But perhaps I'd better not say it; you might be
offended."

"No.  I want you to say it," he returned, confidently, and his
confidence was fully justified, for she said:

"Well, then, I mean that you have become so thoroughly a man of the
world.  Now I've said it! You ARE offended--aren't you?"

"Not at all, not at all," replied Mr. Bantry, preventing by a masterful
effort his pleasure from showing in his face.  "Though I suppose you
mean to imply that I'm rather wicked."

"Oh no," said Mamie, with profound admiration, "not exactly wicked."

"University life IS fast nowadays," Eugene admitted.  "It's difficult
not to be drawn into it!"

"And I suppose you look down on poor little Canaan now, and everybody
in it!"

"Oh no," he laughed, indulgently.  "Not at all, not at all!  I find it
very amusing."

"All of it?"

"Not you," he answered, becoming very grave.

"Honestly--DON'T you?"  Her young voice trembled a little.

"Honestly--indeed--truly--" Eugene leaned very close to her and the
words were barely audible.

"You KNOW I don't!"

"Then I'm--glad," she whispered, and Joe saw his step-brother touch her
hand, but she rose quickly. "There's the music," she cried, happily.
"It's a waltz, and it's YOURS!"

Joe heard her little high heels tapping gayly towards the window,
followed by the heavier tread of Eugene, but he did not watch them go.

He lay on his back, with the hand that had touched Mamie's scarf
pressed across his closed eyes.

The music of that waltz was of the old-fashioned swingingly sorrowful
sort, and it would be hard to say how long it was after that before the
boy could hear the air played without a recurrence of the bitterness of
that moment.  The rhythmical pathos of the violins was in such accord
with a faint sound of weeping which he heard near him, presently, that
for a little while he believed this sound to be part of the music and
part of himself.  Then it became more distinct, and he raised himself
on one elbow to look about.

Very close to him, sitting upon the divan in the shadow, was a girl
wearing a dress of beautiful silk. She was crying softly, her face in
her hands.



