II

A RESCUE

Main Street, already muffled by the snow, added to its quietude a
frozen hush where the wonder-bearing youth pursued his course along its
white, straight way.  None was there in whom impertinence overmastered
astonishment, or who recovered from the sight in time to jeer with
effect; no "Trab's boy" gathered courage to enact in the thoroughfare a
scene of mockery and of joy.  Leaving business at a temporary
stand-still behind him, Mr. Bantry swept his long coat steadily over
the snow and soon emerged upon that part of the street where the mart
gave way to the home.  The comfortable houses stood pleasantly back
from the street, with plenty of lawn and shrubbery about them; and
often, along the picket-fences, the laden branches of small cedars,
bending low with their burden, showered the young man's swinging
shoulders glitteringly as he brushed by.

And now that expression he wore--the indulgent amusement of a man of
the world--began to disintegrate and show signs of change.  It became
finely grave, as of a high conventionality, lofty, assured, and
mannered, as he approached the Pike mansion.  (The remotest stranger
must at once perceive that the Canaan papers could not have called it
otherwise without pain.)

It was a big, smooth-stone-faced house, product of the 'Seventies,
frowning under an outrageously insistent mansard, capped by a cupola,
and staring out of long windows overtopped with "ornamental" slabs.
Two cast-iron deer, painted death-gray, twins of the same mould, stood
on opposite sides of the front walk, their backs towards it and each
other, their bodies in profile to the street, their necks bent,
however, so that they gazed upon the passer-by--yet gazed without
emotion.  Two large, calm dogs guarded the top of the steps leading to
the front-door; they also were twins and of the same interesting metal,
though honored beyond the deer by coats of black paint and shellac.  It
was to be remarked that these dogs were of no distinguishable species
or breed, yet they were unmistakably dogs; the dullest must have
recognized them as such at a glance, which was, perhaps, enough.  It
was a hideous house, important-looking, cold, yet harshly aggressive, a
house whose exterior provoked a shuddering guess of the brass
lambrequins and plush fringes within; a solid house, obviously--nay,
blatantly--the residence of the principal citizen, whom it had grown to
resemble, as is the impish habit of houses; and it sat in the middle of
its flat acre of snowy lawn like a rich, fat man enraged and sitting
straight up in bed to swear.

And yet there was one charming thing about this ugly house.  Some
workmen were enclosing a large side porch with heavy canvas, evidently
for festal purposes.  Looking out from between two strips of the canvas
was the rosy and delicate face of a pretty girl, smiling upon Eugene
Bantry as he passed.  It was an obviously pretty face, all the youth
and prettiness there for your very first glance; elaborately pretty,
like the splendid profusion of hair about and above it--amber-colored
hair, upon which so much time had been spent that a circle of large,
round curls rose above the mass of it like golden bubbles tipping a
coronet.

The girl's fingers were pressed thoughtfully against her chin as Eugene
strode into view; immediately her eyes widened and brightened.  He
swung along the fence with the handsomest appearance of
unconsciousness, until he reached a point nearly opposite her.  Then he
turned his head, as if haphazardly, and met her eyes.  At once she
threw out her hand towards him, waving him a greeting--a gesture which,
as her fingers had been near her lips, was a little like throwing a
kiss.  He crooked an elbow and with a one-two-three military movement
removed his small-brimmed hat, extended it to full arm's-length at the
shoulder-level, returned it to his head with Life-Guard precision. This
was also new to Canaan.  He was letting Mamie Pike have it all at once.

The impression was as large as he could have desired.  She remained at
the opening in the canvas and watched him until he wagged his shoulders
round the next corner and disappeared into a cross street.  As for
Eugene, he was calm with a great calm, and very red.

He had not covered a great distance, however, before his gravity was
replaced by his former smiling look of the landed gentleman amused by
the innocent pastimes of the peasants, though there was no one in sight
except a woman sweeping some snow from the front steps of a cottage,
and she, not perceiving him, retired in-doors without knowing her loss.
He had come to a thinly built part of the town, the perfect quiet of
which made the sound he heard as he opened the picket gate of his own
home all the more startling.  It was a scream--loud, frantic, and
terror-stricken.

Eugene stopped, with the gate half open.

Out of the winter skeleton of a grape-arbor at one side of the
four-square brick house a brown-faced girl of seventeen precipitated
herself through the air in the midst of a shower of torn card-board
which she threw before her as she leaped.  She lit upon her toes and
headed for the gate at top speed, pursued by a pale young man whose
thin arms strove spasmodically to reach her.  Scattering snow behind
them, hair flying, the pair sped on like two tattered branches before a
high wind; for, as they came nearer Eugene (of whom, in the tensity of
their flight, they took no note), it was to be seen that both were so
shabbily dressed as to be almost ragged.  There was a brown patch upon
the girl's faded skirt at the knee; the shortness of the garment
indicating its age to be something over three years, as well as
permitting the knowledge to become more general than befitting that her
cotton stockings had been clumsily darned in several places.  Her
pursuer was in as evil case; his trousers displayed a tendency to
fringedness at pocket and heel; his coat, blowing open as he ran, threw
pennants of torn lining to the breeze, and made it too plain that there
were but three buttons on his waistcoat.

The girl ran beautifully, but a fleeter foot was behind her, and though
she dodged and evaded like a creature of the woods, the reaching hand
fell upon the loose sleeve of her red blouse, nor fell lightly.  She
gave a wrench of frenzy; the antique fabric refused the strain; parted
at the shoulder seam so thoroughly that the whole sleeve came away--but
not to its owner's release, for she had been brought round by the jerk,
so that, agile as she had shown herself, the pursuer threw an arm about
her neck, before she could twist away, and held her.

There was a sharp struggle, as short as it was fierce.  Neither of
these extraordinary wrestlers spoke.  They fought.  Victory hung in the
balance for perhaps four seconds; then the girl was thrown heavily upon
her back, in such a turmoil of snow that she seemed to be the mere
nucleus of a white comet.  She struggled to get up, plying knee and
elbow with a very anguish of determination; but her opponent held her,
pinioned both her wrists with one hand, and with the other rubbed great
handfuls of snow into her face, sparing neither mouth nor eyes.

"You will!" he cried.  "You will tear up my pictures!  A dirty trick,
and you get washed for it!"

Half suffocated, choking, gasping, she still fought on, squirming and
kicking with such spirit that the pair of them appeared to the beholder
like figures of mist writhing in a fountain of snow.

More violence was to mar the peace of morning. Unexpectedly attacked
from the rear, the conqueror was seized by the nape of the neck and one
wrist, and jerked to his feet, simultaneously receiving a succession of
kicks from his assailant. Prompted by an entirely natural curiosity, he
essayed to turn his head to see who this might be, but a twist of his
forearm and the pressure of strong fingers under his ear constrained
him to remain as he was; therefore, abandoning resistance, and, oddly
enough, accepting without comment the indication that his captor
desired to remain for the moment incognito, he resorted calmly to
explanations.

"She tore up a picture of mine," he said, receiving the punishment
without apparent emotion. "She seemed to think because she'd drawn it
herself she had a right to."

There was a slight whimsical droop at the corner of his mouth as he
spoke, which might have been thought characteristic of him.  He was an
odd-looking boy, not ill-made, though very thin and not tall.  His
pallor was clear and even, as though constitutional; the features were
delicate, almost childlike, but they were very slightly distorted,
through nervous habit, to an expression at once wistful and humorous;
one eyebrow was a shade higher than the other, one side of the mouth
slightly drawn down; the eyelids twitched a little, habitually; the
fine, blue eyes themselves were almost comically reproachful--the look
of a puppy who thinks you would not have beaten him if you had known
what was in his heart.  All of this was in the quality of his voice,
too, as he said to his invisible captor, with an air of detachment from
any personal feeling:

"What peculiar shoes you wear!  I don't think I ever felt any so
pointed before."

The rescuing knight took no thought of offering to help the persecuted
damsel to arise; instead, he tightened his grip upon the prisoner's
neck until, perforce, water--not tears--started from the latter's eyes.

"You miserable little muff," said the conqueror, "what the devil do you
mean, making this scene on our front lawn?"

"Why, it's Eugene!" exclaimed the helpless one. "They didn't expect you
till to-night.  When did you get in?"

"Just in time to give you a lesson, my buck," replied Bantry, grimly.
"In GOOD time for that, my playful step-brother."

He began to twist the other's wrist--a treatment of bone and ligament
in the application of which school-boys and even freshmen are often
adept. Eugene made the torture acute, and was apparently enjoying the
work, when suddenly--without any manner of warning--he received an
astounding blow upon the left ear, which half stunned him for the
moment, and sent his hat flying and himself reeling, so great was the
surprise and shock of it. It was not a slap, not an open-handed push,
nothing like it, but a fierce, well-delivered blow from a clinched fist
with the shoulder behind it, and it was the girl who had given it.

"Don't you dare to touch Joe!" she cried, passionately.  "Don't you lay
a finger on him."

Furious and red, he staggered round to look at her.

"You wretched little wild-cat, what do you mean by that?" he broke out.

"Don't you touch Joe!" she panted.  "Don't you--"  Her breath caught
and there was a break in her voice as she faced him.  She could not
finish the repetition of that cry, "Don't you touch Joe!"

But there was no break in the spirit, that passion of protection which
had dealt the blow.  Both boys looked at her, something aghast.

She stood before them, trembling with rage and shivering with cold in
the sudden wind which had come up.  Her hair had fallen and blew across
her streaming face in brown witch-wisps; one of the ill-darned
stockings had come down and hung about her shoe in folds full of snow;
the arm which had lost its sleeve was bare and wet; thin as the arm of
a growing boy, it shook convulsively, and was red from shoulder to
clinched fist.  She was covered with snow.  Mists of white drift blew
across her, mercifully half veiling her.

Eugene recovered himself.  He swung round upon his heel, restored his
hat to his head with precision, picked up his stick and touched his
banjo-case with it.

"Carry that into the house," he said, indifferently, to his
step-brother.

"Don't you do it!" said the girl, hotly, between her chattering teeth.

Eugene turned towards her, wearing the sharp edge of a smile.  Not
removing his eyes from her face, he produced with deliberation a flat
silver box from a pocket, took therefrom a cigarette, replaced the box,
extracted a smaller silver box from another pocket, shook out of it a
fusee, slowly lit the cigarette--this in a splendid silence, which he
finally broke to say, languidly, but with particular distinctness:

"Ariel Tabor, go home!"

The girl's teeth stopped chattering, her lips remaining parted; she
shook the hair out of her eyes and stared at him as if she did not
understand, but Joe Louden, who had picked up the banjo-case
obediently, burst into cheerful laughter.

"That's it, 'Gene," he cried, gayly.  "That's the way to talk to her!"

"Stow it, you young cub," replied Eugene, not turning to him.  "Do you
think I'm trying to be amusing?"

"I don't know what you mean by 'stow it,'" Joe began, "but if--"

"I mean," interrupted the other, not relaxing his faintly smiling stare
at the girl--"I mean that Ariel Tabor is to go home.  Really, we can't
have this kind of thing occurring upon our front lawn!"

The flush upon her wet cheeks deepened and became dark; even her arm
grew redder as she gazed back at him.  In his eyes was patent his
complete realization of the figure she cut, of this bare arm, of the
strewn hair, of the fallen stocking, of the ragged shoulder of her
blouse, of her patched short skirt, of the whole dishevelled little
figure.  He was the master of the house, and he was sending her home as
ill-behaved children are sent home by neighbors.

The immobile, amused superiority of this proprietor of silver boxes,
this wearer of strange and brilliant garments, became slightly
intensified as he pointed to the fallen sleeve, a rag of red and snow,
lying near her feet.

"You might take that with you?" he said, interrogatively.

Her gaze had not wavered in meeting his, but at this her eyelashes
began to wink uncontrollably, her chin to tremble.  She bent over the
sleeve and picked it up, before Joe Louden, who had started towards
her, could do it for her.  Then turning, her head still bent so that
her face was hidden from both of them, she ran out of the gate.

"DO go!" Joe called after her, vehemently.  "Go! Just to show what a
fool you are to think 'Gene's in earnest."

He would have followed, but his step-brother caught him by the arm.
"Don't stop her," said Eugene.  "Can't you tell when I AM in earnest,
you bally muff!"

"I know you are," returned the other, in a low voice.  "I didn't want
her to think so for your sake."

"Thousands of thanks," said Eugene, airily. "You are a wise young
judge.  She couldn't stay--in THAT state, could she?  I sent her for
her own good."

"She could have gone in the house and your mother might have loaned her
a jacket," returned Joe, swallowing.  "You had no business to make her
go out in the street like that."

Eugene laughed.  "There isn't a soul in sight--and there, she's all
right now.  She's home."

Ariel had run along the fence until she came to the next gate, which
opened upon a walk leading to a shabby, meandering old house of one
story, with a very long, low porch, once painted white, running the
full length of the front.  Ariel sprang upon the porch and disappeared
within the house.

Joe stood looking after her, his eyelashes winking as had hers.  "You
oughtn't to have treated her that way," he said, huskily.

Eugene laughed again.  "How were YOU treating her when I came up?  You
bully her all you want to yourself, but nobody else must say even a
fatherly word to her!"

"That wasn't bullying," explained Joe.  "We fight all the time."

"Mais oui!" assented Eugene.  "I fancy!"

"What?" said the other, blankly.

"Pick up that banjo-case again and come on," commanded Mr. Bantry,
tartly.  "Where's the mater?"

Joe stared at him.  "Where's what?"

"The mater!" was the frowning reply.

"Oh yes, I know!" said Joe, looking at his step-brother curiously.
"I've seen it in stories.  She's up-stairs.  You'll be a surprise.
You're wearing lots of clothes, 'Gene."

"I suppose it will seem so to Canaan," returned the other, weariedly.
"Governor feeling fit?"

"I never saw him," Joe replied; then caught himself.  "Oh, I see what
you mean!  Yes, he's all right."

They had come into the hall, and Eugene was removing the long coat,
while his step-brother looked at him thoughtfully.

"'Gene," asked the latter, in a softened voice, "have you seen Mamie
Pike yet?"

"You will find, my young friend," responded Mr. Bantry, "if you ever go
about much outside of Canaan, that ladies' names are not supposed to be
mentioned indiscriminately."

"It's only," said Joe, "that I wanted to say that there's a dance at
their house to-night.  I suppose you'll be going?"

"Certainly.  Are you?"

Both knew that the question was needless; but Joe answered, gently:

"Oh no, of course not."  He leaned over and fumbled with one foot as if
to fasten a loose shoe-string.  "She wouldn't be very likely to ask me."

"Well, what about it?"

"Only that--that Arie Tabor's going."

"Indeed!" Eugene paused on the stairs, which he had begun to ascend.
"Very interesting."

"I thought," continued Joe, hopefully, straightening up to look at him,
"that maybe you'd dance with her.  I don't believe many will ask
her--I'm afraid they won't--and if you would, even only once, it would
kind of make up for"--he faltered--"for out there," he finished,
nodding his head in the direction of the gate.

If Eugene vouchsafed any reply, it was lost in a loud, shrill cry from
above, as a small, intensely nervous-looking woman in blue silk ran
half-way down the stairs to meet him and caught him tearfully in her
arms.

"Dear old mater!" said Eugene.

Joe went out of the front-door quickly.



