XIV

WHITE ROSES IN A LAW-OFFICE

As upon a world canopied with storm, hung with mourning purple and
habited in black, did Mr. Flitcroft turn his morning face at eight
o'clock antemeridian Monday, as he hied himself to his daily duty at
the Washington National Bank.  Yet more than the merely funereal
gloomed out from the hillocky area of his countenance.  Was there not,
i'faith, a glow, a Vesuvian shimmer, beneath the murk of that darkling
eye? Was here one, think you, to turn the other cheek? Little has he
learned of Norbert Flitcroft who conceives that this fiery spirit was
easily to be quenched!  Look upon the jowl of him, and let him who
dares maintain that people--even the very Pikes themselves--were to
grind beneath their brougham wheels a prostrate Norbert and ride on
scatheless! In this his own metaphor is nearly touched "I guess not!
They don't run over ME!  Martin Pike better look out how he tries it!"

So Mother Nature at her kindly tasks, good Norbert, uses for her
unguent our own perfect inconsistency: and often when we are stabbed
deep in the breast she distracts us by thin scratches in other parts,
that in the itch of these we may forget the greater hurt till it be
healed.  Thus, the remembrance of last night, when you undisguisedly
ran from the wrath of a Pike, with a pretty girl looking on (to say
nothing of the acrid Arp, who will fling the legend on a thousand
winds), might well agonize you now, as, in less hasty moments and at a
safe distance, you brood upon the piteous figure you cut.  On the
contrary, behold: you see no blood crimsoning the edges of the horrid
gash in your panoply of self-esteem: you but smart and scratch the
scratches, forgetting your wound in the hot itch for vengeance.  It is
an itch which will last (for in such matters your temper shall be
steadfast), and let the great Goliath in the mean time beware of you!
You ran, last night.  You ran--of course you ran.  Why not?  You ran to
fight another day!

A bank clerk sometimes has opportunities.

The stricken fat one could not understand how it came about that he had
blurted out the damning confession that he had visited Beaver Beach.
When he tried to solve the puzzle, his mind refused the strain, became
foggy and the terrors of his position acute.  Was he, like Joe Louden,
to endure the ban of Canaan, and like him stand excommunicate beyond
the pale because of Martin Pike's displeasure?  For Norbert saw with
perfect clearness to-day what the Judge had done for Joe. Now that he
stood in danger of a fate identical, this came home to him.  How many
others, he wondered, would do as Mamie had done and write notes such as
he had received by the hand of Sam Warden, late last night?


"DEAR SIR."  (This from Mamie, who, in the Canaanitish way, had been
wont to address him as "Norb"!)--"My father wishes me to state that
after your remark yesterday afternoon on the steps which was overheard
by my mother who happened to be standing in the hall behind you and
your BEHAVIOR to himself later on--he considers it impossible to allow
you to call any more or to speak to any member of his household.

               "Yours respectfully,
                                 "MAMIE PIKE."


Erasures and restorations bore witness to a considerable doubt in
Mamie's mind concerning "Yours respectfully," but she had finally let
it stand, evidently convinced that the plain signature, without
preface, savored of an intimacy denied by the context.

"'DEAR SIR'!" repeated Norbert, between set teeth.  "'IMPOSSIBLE TO
ALLOW YOU TO CALL any more'!" These and other terms of his dismissal
recurred to him during the morning, and ever and anon he looked up from
his desk, his lips moving to the tune of those horrid phrases, and
stared out at the street. Basilisk glaring this, with no Christian
softness in it, not even when it fell upon his own grandfather, sitting
among the sages within easy eye-shot from the big window at Norbert's
elbow.  However, Colonel Flitcroft was not disturbed by the gaze of his
descendant, being, in fact, quite unaware of it.  The aged men were
having a busy morning.

The conclave was not what it had been.  [See Arp and all his works.]
There had come, as the years went by, a few recruits; but faces were
missing: the two Tabors had gone, and Uncle Joe Davey could no longer
lay claim to the patriarchship; he had laid it down with a half-sigh
and gone his way. Eskew himself was now the oldest of the conscript
fathers, the Colonel and Squire Buckalew pressing him closely, with
Peter Bradbury no great time behind.

To-day they did not plant their feet upon the brass rail inside the
hotel windows, but courted the genial weather out-doors, and, as their
summer custom was, tilted back their chairs in the shade of the western
wall of the building.

"And who could of dreamed," Mr. Bradbury was saying, with a side-glance
of expectancy at Eskew, "that Jonas Tabor would ever turn out to have a
niece like that!"

Mr. Arp ceased to fan himself with his wide straw hat and said grimly:

"I don't see as Jonas HAS 'turned out'--not in particular!  If he's
turned at all, lately, I reckon it's in his grave, and I'll bet he HAS
if he had any way of hearin' how much she must of spent for clothes!"

"I believe," Squire Buckalew began, "that young folks' memories are
short."

"They're lucky!" interjected Eskew.  "The shorter your memory the less
meanness you know."

"I meant young folks don't remember as well as older people do,"
continued the Squire.  "I don't see what's so remarkable in her comin'
back and walkin' up-street with Joe Louden.  She used to go kitin'
round with him all the time, before she left here.  And yet everybody
talks as if they never HEARD of sech a thing!"

"It seems to me," said Colonel Flitcroft, hesitatingly, "that she did
right.  I know it sounds kind of a queer thing to say, and I stirred up
a good deal of opposition at home, yesterday evening, by sort of
mentioning something of the kind.  Nobody seemed to agree with me,
except Norbert, and he didn't SAY much, but--"

He was interrupted by an uncontrollable cackle which issued from the
mouth of Mr. Arp.  The Colonel turned upon him with a frown, inquiring
the cause of his mirth.

"It put me in mind," Mr. Arp began promptly, "of something that
happened last night."

"What was it?"

Eskew's mouth was open to tell, but he remembered, just in time, that
the grandfather of Norbert was not the audience properly to be selected
for this recital, choked a half-born word, coughed loudly, realizing
that he must withhold the story of the felling of Martin Pike until the
Colonel had taken his departure, and replied:

"Nothin' to speak of.  Go on with your argument."

"I've finished," said the Colonel.  "I only wanted to say that it seems
to me a good action for a young lady like that to come back here and
stick to her old friend and playmate."

"STICK to him!" echoed Mr. Arp.  "She walked up Main Street with him
yesterday.  Do you call that stickin' to him?  She's been away a good
while; she's forgotten what Canaan IS.  You wait till she sees for
herself jest what his standing in this com--"

"I agree with Eskew for once," interrupted Peter Bradbury.  "I agree
because--"

"Then you better wait," cried Eskew, allowing him to proceed no
farther, "till you hear what you're agreein' to!  I say: you take a
young lady like that, pretty and rich and all cultured up, and it
stands to reason that she won't--"

"No, it don't," exclaimed Buckalew, impatiently. "Nothing of the sort!
I tell you--"

Eskew rose to his feet and pounded the pavement with his stick.  "It
stands to reason that she won't stick to a man no other decent woman
will speak to, a feller that's been the mark for every stone throwed in
the town, ever since he was a boy, an outcast with a reputation as
black as a preacher's shoes on Sunday!  I don't care if he's her oldest
friend on EARTH, she won't stick to him!  She walked with him
yesterday, but you can mark my words: his goose is cooked!"  The old
man's voice rose, shrill and high.  "It ain't in human nature fer her
to do it! You hear what I say: you'll never see her with Joe Louden
again in this livin' world, and she as good as told me so, herself,
last night.  You can take your oath she's quit him already!  Don't--"

Eskew paused abruptly, his eyes widening behind his spectacles; his jaw
fell; his stick, raised to hammer the pavement, remained suspended in
the air.  A sudden color rushed over his face, and he dropped
speechless in his chair.  The others, after staring at him in momentary
alarm, followed the direction of his gaze.

Just across Main Street, and in plain view, was the entrance to the
stairway which led to Joe's office. Ariel Tabor, all in cool gray,
carrying a big bunch of white roses in her white-gloved hands, had just
crossed the sidewalk from a carriage and was ascending the dark
stairway.  A moment later she came down again, empty-handed, got into
the carriage, and drove away.

"She missed him," said Squire Buckalew.  "I saw him go out half an hour
ago.  BUT," he added, and, exercising a self-restraint close upon the
saintly, did not even glance toward the heap which was Mr. Arp, "I
notice she left her flowers!"


Ariel was not the only one who climbed the dingy stairs that day and
read the pencilled script upon Joe's door:  "Will not return until
evening.  J. Louden."  Many others came, all exceedingly unlike the
first visitor: some were quick and watchful, dodging into the narrow
entrance furtively; some smiled contemptuously as long as they were in
view of the street, drooping wanly as they reached the stairs: some
were brazen and amused; and some were thin and troubled.  Not all of
them read the message, for not all could read, but all looked curiously
through the half-opened door at the many roses which lifted their heads
delicately from a water-pitcher on Joe's desk to scent that dusty place
with their cool breath.

Most of these clients, after a grunt of disappointment, turned and went
away; though there were a few, either unable to read the message or so
pressed by anxiety that they disregarded it, who entered the room and
sat down to wait for the absentee.  [There were plenty of chairs in the
office now, bookcases also, and a big steel safe.] But when evening
came and the final gray of twilight had vanished from the window-panes,
all had gone except one, a woman who sat patiently, her eyes upon the
floor, and her hands folded in her lap, until the footsteps of the last
of the others to depart had ceased to sound upon the pavement below.
Then, with a wordless exclamation, she sprang to her feet, pulled the
window-shade carefully down to the sill, and, when she had done that,
struck a match on the heel of her shoe--a soiled white canvas shoe, not
a small one--and applied the flame to a gas jet.  The yellow light
flared up; and she began to pace the room haggardly.

The court-house bell rang nine, and as the tremors following the last
stroke pulsed themselves into silence, she heard a footfall on the
stairs and immediately relapsed into a chair, folding her hands again
in her lap, her expression composing itself to passivity, for the step
was very much lighter than Joe's.

A lady beautifully dressed in white dimity appeared in the doorway.
She hesitated at the threshold, not, apparently, because of any
timidity (her expression being too thoughtfully assured for that), but
almost immediately she came in and seated herself near the desk,
acknowledging the other's presence by a slight inclination of the head.

This grave courtesy caused a strong, deep flush to spread itself under
the rouge which unevenly covered the woman's cheeks, as she bowed
elaborately in return.  Then, furtively, during a protracted silence,
she took stock of the new-comer, from the tip of her white suede shoes
to the filmy lace and pink roses upon her wide white hat; and the
sidelong gaze lingered marvellingly upon the quiet, delicate hands,
slender and finely expressive, in their white gloves.

Her own hands, unlike the lady's, began to fidget confusedly, and, the
silence continuing, she coughed several times, to effect the preface
required by her sense of fitness, before she felt it proper to observe,
with a polite titter:

"Mr. Louden seems to be a good while comin'."

"Have you been waiting very long?" asked the lady.

"Ever since six o'clock!"

"Yes," said the other.  "That is very long."

"Yes, ma'am, it cert'nly is."  The ice thus broken, she felt free to
use her eyes more directly, and, after a long, frank stare, exclaimed:

"Why, you must be Miss Ariel Tabor, ain't you?"

"Yes."  Ariel touched one of the roses upon Joe's desk with her
finger-tips.  "I am Miss Tabor."

"Well, excuse me fer asking; I'm sure it ain't any business of mine,"
said the other, remembering the manners due one lady from another.
"But I thought it must be.  I expect," she added, with loud,
inconsequent laughter, "there's not many in Canaan ain't heard you've
come back."  She paused, laughed again, nervously, and again, less
loudly, to take off the edge of her abruptness: gradually tittering
herself down to a pause, to fill which she put forth:  "Right nice
weather we be'n havin'."

"Yes," said Ariel.

"It was rainy, first of last week, though.  _I_ don't mind rain so
much"--this with more laughter,--"I stay in the house when it rains.
Some people don't know enough to, they say!  You've heard that saying,
ain't you, Miss Tabor?"

"Yes."

"Well, I tell YOU," she exclaimed, noisily, "there's plenty ladies and
gen'lemen in this town that's like that!"

Her laughter did not cease; it became louder and shriller.  It had
been, until now, a mere lubrication of the conversation, helping to
make her easier in Miss Tabor's presence, but as it increased in
shrillness, she seemed to be losing control of herself, as if her
laughter were getting away with her; she was not far from hysteria,
when it stopped with a gasp, and she sat up straight in her chair,
white and rigid.

"THERE!" she said, listening intently.  "Ain't that him?"  Steps
sounded upon the pavement below; paused for a second at the foot of the
stairs; there was the snap of a match; then the steps sounded again,
retreating.  She sank back in her chair limply.  "It was only some one
stoppin' to light his cigar in the entry.  It wasn't Joe Louden's step,
anyway."

"You know his step?" Ariel's eyes were bent upon the woman wonderingly.

"I'd know it to-night," was the answer, delivered with a sharp and
painful giggle.  "I got plenty reason to!"

Ariel did not respond.  She leaned a little closer to the roses upon
the desk, letting them touch her face, and breathing deeply of their
fragrance to neutralize a perfume which pervaded the room; an odor as
heavy and cheap-sweet as the face of the woman who had saturated her
handkerchief with it, a scent which went with her perfectly and made
her unhappily definite; suited to her clumsily dyed hair, to her soiled
white shoes, to the hot red hat smothered in plumage, to the restless
stub-fingered hands, to the fat, plated rings, of which she wore a
great quantity, though, surprisingly enough, the large diamonds in her
ears were pure, and of a very clear water.

It was she who broke the silence once more. "Well," she drawled,
coughing genteelly at the same time, "better late than never, as the
saying is.  I wonder who it is gits up all them comical sayings?"
Apparently she had no genuine desire for light upon this mystery, as
she continued, immediately:  "I have a gen'leman friend that's always
gittin' 'em off.  'Well,' he says, 'the best of friends must part,'
and, 'Thou strikest me to the heart'--all kinds of cracks like that.
He's real comical.  And yet," she went on in an altered voice, "I don't
like him much.  I'd be glad if I'd never seen him."

The change of tone was so marked that Ariel looked at her keenly, to
find herself surprised into pitying this strange client of Joe's; for
tears had sprung to the woman's eyes and slid along the lids, where she
tried vainly to restrain them.  Her face had altered too, like her
voice, haggard lines suddenly appearing about the eyes and mouth as if
they had just been pencilled there: the truth issuing from beneath her
pinchbeck simulations, like a tragic mask revealed by the displacement
of a tawdry covering.

"I expect you think I'm real foolish," she said, "but I be'n waitin' so
awful long--and I got a good deal of worry on my mind till I see Mr.
Louden."

"I am sorry," Ariel turned from the roses, and faced her and the heavy
perfume.  "I hope he will come soon."

"I hope so," said the other.  "It's something to do with me that keeps
him away, and the longer he is the more it scares me."  She shivered
and set her teeth together.  "It's kind of hard, waitin'.  I cert'nly
got my share of troubles."

"Don't you think that Mr. Louden will be able to take care of them for
you?"

"Oh, I HOPE so, Miss Tabor!  If he can't, nobody can."  She was crying
openly now, wiping her eyes with her musk-soaked handkerchief.  "We had
to send fer him yesterday afternoon--"

"To come to Beaver Beach, do you mean?" asked Ariel, leaning forward.

"Yes, ma'am.  It all begun out there,--least-ways it begun before that
with me.  It was all my fault.  I deserve all that's comin' to me, I
guess.  I done wrong--I done wrong!  I'd oughtn't never to of went out
there yesterday."

She checked herself sharply, but, after a moment's pause, continued,
encouraged by the grave kindliness of the delicate face in the shadow
of the wide white hat.  "I'd oughtn't to of went," she repeated.  "Oh,
I reckon I'll never, never learn enough to keep out o' trouble, even
when I see it comin'!  But that gentleman friend of mine--Mr. Nashville
Cory's his name--he kind o' coaxed me into it, and he's right comical
when he's with ladies, and he's good company--and he says, 'Claudine,
we'll dance the light fantastic,' he says, and I kind o' wanted
something cheerful--I'd be'n workin' steady quite a spell, and it
looked like he wanted to show me a good time, so I went, and that's
what started it."  Now that she had begun, she babbled on with her
story, at times incoherently; full of excuses, made to herself more
than to Ariel, pitifully endeavoring to convince herself that the
responsibility for the muddle she had made was not hers.

"Mr. Cory told me my husband was drinkin' and wouldn't know about it,
and, 'Besides,' he says, 'what's the odds?'  Of course I knowed there
was trouble between him and Mr. Fear--that's my husband--a good while
ago, when Mr. Fear up and laid him out.  That was before me and Mr.
Fear got married; I hadn't even be'n to Canaan then; I was on the
stage.  I was on the stage quite a while in Chicago before I got
acquainted with my husband."

"You were on the stage?" Ariel exclaimed, involuntarily.

"Yes, ma'am.  Livin' pitchers at Goldberg's Rat'skeller, and amunchoor
nights I nearly always done a sketch with a gen'leman friend.  That's
the way I met Mr. Fear; he seemed to be real struck with me right away,
and soon as I got through my turn he ast me to order whatever I wanted.
He's always gen'lemanlike when he ain't had too much, and even then he
vurry, vurry seldom acks rough unless he's jealous.  That was the
trouble yesterday. I never would of gone to the Beach if I'd dreamed
what was comin'!  When we got there I saw Mike--that's the gen'leman
that runs the Beach--lookin' at my company and me kind of anxious, and
pretty soon he got me away from Mr. Cory and told me what's what.
Seems this Cory only wanted me to go with him to make my husband mad,
and he'd took good care that Mr. Fear heard I'd be there with him!  And
he'd be'n hangin' around me, every time he struck town, jest to make
Mr. Fear mad--the fresh thing!  You see he wanted to make my husband
start something again, this Mr. Cory did, and he was fixed for it."

"I don't understand," said Ariel.

"It's this way: if Mr. Fear attacted Mr. Cory, why, Mr. Cory could
shoot him down and claim self-defence.  You see, it would be easy for
Mr. Cory, because Mr Fear nearly killed him when they had their first
trouble, and that would give Mr. Cory a good excuse to shoot if Mr.
Fear jest only pushed him.  That's the way it is with the law.  Mr.
Cory could wipe out their old score and git off scot-free."

"Surely not!"

"Yes, ma'am, that's the way it would be.  And when Mike told me that
Mr. Cory had got me out there jest to provoke my husband I went
straight up to him and begun to give him a piece of my mind. I didn't
talk loud, because I never was one to make a disturbance and start
trouble the way SOME do; and right while I was talkin' we both see my
husband pass the window.  Mr. Cory give a kind of yelling laugh and put
his arm round me jest as Mr. Fear come in the door.  And then it all
happened so quick that you could hardly tell what WAS goin' on.  Mr.
Fear, we found afterwards, had promised Mr. Louden that he wouldn't
come out there, but he took too much--you could see that by the look of
him--and fergot his promise; fergot everything but me and Cory, I guess.

"He come right up to us, where I was tryin' to git away from Cory's
arm--it was the left one he had around me, and the other behind his
back--and neither of 'em said a word.  Cory kept on laughin' loud as he
could, and Mr. Fear struck him in the mouth.  He's little, but he can
hit awful hard, and Mr. Cory let out a screech, and I see his gun go
off--right in Mr. Fear's face, I thought, but it wasn't; it only
scorched him.  Most of the other gen'lemen had run, but Mike made a
dive and managed to knock the gun to one side, jest barely in time.
Then Mike and three or four others that come out from behind things
separated 'em--both of 'em fightin' to git at each other.  They locked
Mr. Cory up in Mike's room, and took Mr. Fear over to where they hitch
the horses.  Then Mike sent fer Mr. Louden to come out to talk to my
husband and take care of him--he's the only one can do anything with
him when he's like that--but before Mr. Louden could git there, Mr.
Fear broke loose and run through a corn-field and got away; at least
they couldn't find him.  And Mr. Cory jumped through a window and slid
down into one of Mike's boats, so they'd both gone.  When Mr. Louden
come, he only stayed long enough to hear what had happened and started
out to find Happy--that's my husband. He's bound to keep them apart,
but he hasn't found Mr. Fear yet or he'd be here."

Ariel had sunk back in her chair.  "Why should your husband hide?" she
asked, in a low voice.

"Waitin' fer his chance at Cory," the woman answered, huskily.  "I
expect he's afraid the cops are after him, too, on account of the
trouble, and he doesn't want to git locked up till he's met Cory again.
They ain't after him, but he may not know it.  They haven't heard of
the trouble, I reckon, or they'd of run Cory in.  HE'S around town
to-day, drinkin' heavy, and I guess he's lookin' fer Mr. Fear about as
hard as Mr. Louden is."  She rose to her feet, lifted her coarse hands,
and dropped them despairingly.  "Oh, I'm scared!" she said.  "Mr.
Fear's be'n mighty good to me."

A slow and tired footstep was heard upon the stairs, and Joe's dog ran
into the room droopingly, wagged his tail with no energy, and crept
under the desk.  Mrs. Fear wheeled toward the door and stood, rigid,
her hands clenched tight, her whole body still, except her breast,
which rose and fell with her tumultuous breathing.  She could not wait
till the laggard step reached the landing.

"MR. LOUDEN!" she called, suddenly.

Joe's voice came from the stairway.  "It's all right, Claudine.  It's
all fixed up.  Don't worry."

Mrs. Fear gave a thick cry of relief and sank back in her chair as Joe
entered the room.  He came in shamblingly, with his hand over his eyes
as if they were very tired and the light hurt them, so that, for a
moment or two, he did not perceive the second visitor.  Then he let his
hand fall, revealing a face very white and worn.

"It's all right, Claudine," he repeated.  "It's all right."

He was moving to lay his hat on the desk when his eye caught first the
roses, then fell upon Ariel, and he stopped stock-still with one arm
outstretched, remaining for perhaps ten seconds in that attitude, while
she, her lips parted, her eyes lustrous, returned his gaze with a look
that was as inscrutable as it was kind.

"Yes," she said, as if in answer to a question, "I have come here twice
to-day."  She nodded slightly toward Mrs. Fear.  "I can wait.  I am
very glad you bring good news."

Joe turned dazedly toward the other.  "Claudine," he said, "you've been
telling Miss Tabor."

"I cert'nly have!" Mrs. Fear's expression had cleared and her tone was
cheerful.  "I don't see no harm in that!  I'm sure she's a good friend
of YOURS, Mr. Louden."

Joe glanced at Ariel with a faint, troubled smile, and turned again to
Mrs. Fear.  "I've had a long talk with Happy."

"I'm awful glad.  Is he ready to listen to reason? she asked, with a
titter.

"He's waiting for you."

"Where?"  She rose quickly.

"Stop," said Joe, sharply.  "You must be very careful with him--"

"Don't you s'pose I'm goin' to be?" she interrupted, with a catch in
her voice.  "Don't you s'pose I've had trouble enough?"

"No," said Joe, deliberately and impersonally, "I don't.  Unless you
keep remembering to be careful all the time, you'll follow the first
impulse you have, as you did yesterday, and your excuse will be that
you never thought any harm would come of it.  He's in a queer mood; but
he will forgive you if you ask him--"

"Well, ain't that what I WANT to do!" she exclaimed.

"I know, I know," he said, dropping into the desk-chair and passing his
hand over his eyes with a gesture of infinite weariness.  "But you must
be very careful.  I hunted for him most of the night and all day.  He
was trying to keep out of my way because he didn't want me to find him
until he had met this fellow Nashville.  Happy is a hard man to come at
when he doesn't care to be found, and he kept shifting from place to
place until I ran him down.  Then I got him in a corner and told him
that you hadn't meant any harm--which is always true of you, poor
woman!--and I didn't leave him till he had promised me to forgive you
if you would come and ask him.  And you must keep him out of Cory's way
until I can arrange to have him--Cory, I mean--sent out of town.  Will
you?"

"Why, cert'nly," she answered, smiling.  "That Nashville's the vurry
last person I ever want to see again--the fresh thing!" Mrs. Fear's
burden had fallen; her relief was perfect and she beamed vapidly; but
Joe marked her renewed irresponsibility with an anxious eye.

"You mustn't make any mistakes," he said, rising stiffly with fatigue.

"Not ME!  _I_ don't take no more chances," she responded, tittering
happily.  "Not after yesterday. MY! but it's a load off my shoulders!
I do hate it to have gen'lemen quarrelling over me, especially Mr.
Fear.  I never DID like to START anything; I like to see people laugh
and be friendly, and I'm mighty glad it's all blown over.  I kind o'
thought it would, all along.  PSHO!" She burst into genuine, noisy
laughter.  "I don't expect either of 'em meant no real harm to each
other, after they got cooled off a little!  If they'd met to-day,
they'd probably both run!  Now, Mr. Louden, where's Happy?"

Joe went to the door with her.  He waited a moment, perplexed, then his
brow cleared and he said in a low voice:  "You know the alley beyond
Vent Miller's pool-room?  Go down the alley till you come to the second
gate.  Go in, and you'll see a basement door opening into a little room
under Miller's bar.  The door won't be locked, and Happy's in there
waiting for you.  But remember--"

"Oh, don't you worry," she cut him off, loudly. "I know HIM!  Inside of
an hour I'll have him LAUGHIN' over all this.  You'll see!"

When she had gone, he stood upon the landing looking thoughtfully after
her.  "Perhaps, after all, that is the best mood to let her meet him
in," he murmured.

Then, with a deep breath, he turned.  The heavy perfume had gone; the
air was clear and sweet, and Ariel was pressing her face into the roses
again.  As he saw how like them she was, he was shaken with a profound
and mysterious sigh, like that which moves in the breast of one who
listens in the dark to his dearest music.



