CHAPTER III.

FALLACIES OF SIMPLE INSPECTION; OR, À PRIORI FALLACIES.


There must be some _à priori_ knowledge, some propositions to be
received without proof; for there cannot be a chain suspended from
nothing. What these are is disputed, one school recognising as ultimate
premisses only the facts of our subjective consciousness, e.g.
Sensations, while Ontologists hold that the mind intuitively, and not
through experience, recognises as realities other existences, e.g.
Substances, which are suggested by, though not inferrible from, those
facts of consciousness. But, as both schools, in fact, allow that the
mind infers the _reality_ from the _idea_ of a thing, and that it may do
this unduly, there results a class of Fallacies resting on the tacit
assumption that the objects in nature have the same order as our ideas
of them. Hence not only arose the vulgar belief that facts which make us
think of an event are omens foreboding (e.g. lucky or unlucky names), or
even causing its occurrence; but even men of science both did and do
fall into this Fallacy. The following dogmas express the different forms
of this error:--

1. [Greek: a]. _Things which we cannot help thinking of together must
coexist_; thus Descartes held that, because existence is involved
(though really only by the thinker himself) in the idea of a geometrical
figure, a thing like the idea must exist. [Greek: b]. _Whatever is
inconceivable is false._ The latter proposition has been defended by
drawing a distinction between the principle, and its possibly wrong
application to facts, e.g. to Antipodes; but how can we ever know that
it has been rightly applied? Coleridge, again, has distinguished between
the unimaginable, which he thinks may possibly be true, and the
inconceivable, which he thinks cannot be; but Antipodes were imaginable
at the same period when they were inconceivable. In fact, as even to
Newton it seemed inconceivable, that a thing should act where it is not
(e.g. that the sun should act upon the earth without the medium of an
ether), simply because his mind was not familiar with the idea, so it
_may_ be with _our_ incapability (if not, indeed, resulting merely from
our limited faculties) of _conceiving_, e.g. that matter cannot think;
that space is infinite; that _ex nihilo nihil fit_. Leibnitz's tenet
that all _natural_ phenomena must be explicable _à priori_, and the
further assumption by some that Nature always acts by the simplest, i.e.
by the most easily conceivable means (and that, therefore, e.g. the
heavenly bodies have a circular movement), exhibit vividly this Fallacy
of Simple Inspection.

2. _Whatever can be thought of apart, or has a separate name, exists
apart as a separate entity_, e.g. Nature, Time, qualities, as e.g.
Whiteness, and, worst of all, the Substantiæ Secundæ. Mysticism is this
habit of ascribing objective existence to the subjective creations of
the mind, and reasoning from them to the things themselves.

3. _A fact must follow a certain law, because we see no reason for its
deviating from it in one way rather than in another._ This, which is the
same as the Principle of the Sufficient Reason, has been used to prove
the Law of Inertia (the very point to be proved, viz. that only external
force can be a sufficient reason for motion _in a particular direction_,
being assumed), and also the First Law of Motion, the argument being, in
the latter case, that a moving body, if it do _not_ continue of itself
to move uniformly in a straight line, must deviate right or left, and
that there is _no reason_ for its going one way more than the other: to
which the answer is, that, apart from experience, we could not know
whether or not there were a reason. Geometers often fall into this
Fallacy.

4. _The differences in nature must correspond to our received
distinctions_ (in names and classifications). Thus, the Greeks thought
that, by determining the meanings of words, they ascertained facts.
Aristotle usually starts with 'We say thus or thus.' So, with the
_Doctrine of Contrarieties_, in which the Pythagoreans and others
assumed that oppositions in language imply similar ones in nature.
Hence, too, the ancient belief in the essential difference between the
laws of things terrestrial and things celestial, and in man's
incapability of imitating nature's works. Bacon's error (which vitiates
his inductive system) was analogous, in looking (either through his
eagerness for practical results, or a lingering belief that causes were
the sole object of philosophy) for the cause of given effects rather
than the effects of a given cause. Hence sprang his tacit assumption
(and that in enquiries into the causes of a thing's sensible qualities,
where it was especially fatal), that in all cases, e.g. of heat or cold,
the _forma_, or set of conditions, is _one_ thing. A similar notion,
viz. that each property of gold, as of other things, has its one
_forma_, produced the belief in Alchemy.

5. The conditions of a phenomenon often do resemble the phenomenon
itself, e.g. in cases of Motion, Contagion, Feelings; but it is a
Fallacy to suppose that _they must or probably will_. By this fancied
law men guided their conjectures. Thus, the _Doctrine of Signatures_
was, that substances showed their uses as medicines by external
resemblance, either to their supposed effect, or to the disease. So, the
Cartesians, and even Leibnitz, argued, that nothing physical but
previous motion could account for motion, explaining the human body's
voluntary motions by Nervous Vibrations or by Animal Spirits. Hence,
too, the inference that there is a correspondence between the physical
qualities of the cause, and like or like-named ones, either of the
phenomenon (e.g. between sharp particles and a sharp taste), or of its
effects (e.g. between the redness of Mars, and fire and slaughter as
results of that planet's influence). In metaphysics, the Epicureans'
doctrine of _species sensibiles_, and the moderns' of _perception
through ideas_, arose from this fallacy (combined with another, viz.
that a thing cannot act where it is not). Again, the conditions of a
thing are sometimes spoken of even as though they were the thing itself.
Thus, in the Novum Organon, heat (i.e. really the conditions of the
feeling of it) is called a kind of motion; and Darwin, in his Zoonomia,
after describing _idea_ as a kind of _notion of external things_,
defines it as _a motion of the fibres_. Cousin says: 'Tout ce qui est
vrai de l'effet est vrai de la cause,' though, the reverse _might_ be
true; and Coleridge affirms, as _an evident truth_, that mind and
matter, as having no common property, cannot act on each other. The same
fallacy led Leibnitz to his _pre-established harmony_, and Malebranche
to his _occasional causes_. So, Cicero argues that mental pleasures, if
arising from the bodily, could not, as they do, exceed their cause; and
Descartes, that the Efficient Cause must have all the perfections of the
effect. Conversely Descartes, too, and persons who assail, e.g. the
Principle of Population by reference to Divine benevolence (thus
implying that, because God is perfect, therefore what _they_ think
perfection must obtain in nature), assume that effects must resemble
their causes.




