BOOK II.

REASONING.




CHAPTER I.

INFERENCE, OR REASONING IN GENERAL.


The preceding book treated, not of the proper subject of logic, viz. the
nature of proof, but of assertion. Assertions (as, e.g. definitions)
which relate to the meaning of words, are, since _that_ is arbitrary,
incapable of truth or falsehood, and therefore of proof or disproof. But
there are assertions which are subjects for proof or disproof, viz. the
propositions (the real, and not the verbal) whose subject is some fact
of consciousness, or its hidden cause, about which is predicated, in the
affirmative or negative, one of five things, viz. existence, order in
place, order in time, causation, resemblance: in which, in short, it is
asserted, that some given subject does or does not possess some
attribute, or that two attributes, or sets of attributes, do or do not
(constantly or occasionally) coexist.

A proposition not believed on its own evidence, but inferred from
another, is said to be _proved_; and this process of inferring, whether
syllogistically or not, is _reasoning_. But whenever, as in the
deduction of a particular from a universal, or, in Conversion, the
assertion in the new proposition is the same as the whole or part of
the assertion in the original proposition, the inference is only
apparent; and such processes, however useful for cultivating a habit of
detecting quickly the concealed identity of assertions, are not
reasoning.

Reasoning, or Inference, properly so called, is, 1, Induction, when a
proposition is inferred from another, which, whether particular or
general, is less general than itself; 2, Ratiocination, or Syllogism,
when a proposition is inferred from others equally or more general; 3, a
kind which falls under neither of these descriptions, yet is the basis
of both.




CHAPTER II.

RATIOCINATION, OR SYLLOGISM.


The syllogistic figures are determined by the position of the middle
term. There are four, or, if the fourth be classed under the first,
three. But syllogisms in the other figures can be reduced to the first
by conversion. Such reduction may not indeed be necessary, for different
arguments are suited to different figures; the first figure, says
Lambert, being best adapted to the discovery or proof of the properties
of things; the second, of the distinctions between things; the third, of
instances and exceptions; the fourth, to the discovery or exclusion of
the different species of a genus. Still, as the premisses of the first
figure, got by reduction, are really the same as the original ones, and
as the only arguments of great scientific importance, viz. those in
which the conclusion is a universal affirmative, can be proved in the
first figure alone, it is best to hold that the two elementary forms of
the first figure are the universal types, the one in affirmatives, the
other in negatives, of all correct ratiocination.

The _dictum de omni et nullo_, viz. that whatever can be affirmed or
denied of a class can be affirmed or denied of everything included in
the class, which is a true account generalised of the constituent parts
of the syllogism in the first figure, was thought the basis of the
syllogistic theory. The fact is, that when universals were supposed to
have an independent objective existence, this dictum stated a supposed
law, viz. that the _substantia secunda_ formed part of the properties of
each individual substance bearing the name. But, now that we know that a
class or universal is nothing but the individuals in the class, the
dictum is nothing but the identical proposition, that whatever is true
of certain objects is true of each of them, and, to mean anything, must
be considered, not as an axiom, but as a circuitous definition of the
word _class_.

It was the attempt to combine the nominalist view of the signification
of general terms with the retention of the dictum as the basis of all
reasoning, that led to the self-contradictory theories disguised under
the ultra-nominalism of Hobbes and Condillac, the ontology of the later
Kantians, and (in a less degree) the abstract ideas of Locke. It was
fancied that the process of inferring new truths was only the
substitution of one arbitrary sign for another; and Condillac even
described science as _une langue bien faite_. But language merely
enables us to remember and impart our thoughts; it strengthens, like an
artificial memory, our power of thought, and is thought's powerful
instrument, but not its exclusive subject. If, indeed, propositions in a
syllogism did nothing but refer something to or exclude it from a class,
then certainly syllogisms might have the dictum for their basis, and
import only that the classification is consistent with itself. But such
is not the primary object of propositions (and it is on this account, as
well as because men will never be persuaded in common discourse to
_quantify_ the predicate, that Mr. De Morgan's or Sir William Hamilton's
_quantification of the predicate_ is a device of little value). What is
asserted in every proposition which conveys real knowledge, is a fact
dependent, not on artificial classification, but on the laws of nature;
and as ratiocination is a mode of gaining real knowledge, the principle
or law of all syllogisms, with propositions not purely verbal, must be,
for affirmative syllogisms, that; Things coexisting with the same thing
coexist with one another; and for negative, that; A thing coexisting
with another, with which a third thing does not coexist, does not
coexist with that third thing. But if (see _suprà_, p. 26) propositions
(and, of course, all combinations of them) be regarded, not
speculatively, as portions of our knowledge of nature, but as memoranda
for practical guidance, to enable us, when we know that a thing has one
of two attributes, to infer it has the other, these two axioms may be
translated into one, viz. Whatever has any mark has that which it is a
mark of; or, if both premisses are universal, Whatever is a mark of any
mark, is a mark of that of which this last is a mark.




