CHAPTER IV.

THE LAWS OF MIND.


By the laws of mind (i.e. as considered in this treatise, the laws of
mental phenomena) are meant the laws according to which one state of
mind is produced by another. If M. Comte and others be right in saying
that, in like manner with the mental phenomena called sensations, all
the other states of mind have for their proximate causes nervous states,
there would be no original laws of mind, and Psychology would be a mere
branch of Physiology. But at present, this tenet is not proved, however
highly probable; and, at all events, the characteristics of those
nervous states are quite unknown; consequently the uniformities of
succession among the mental phenomena, which undoubtedly do exist, and
which are not proved to result from more general laws, must be
considered as the subject of a distinct science called Psychology. We
can ascertain only by experiment the simple laws of Mind, such as--1.
That a state of consciousness can be reproduced in the absence of the
cause which first excited it (i.e. that every mental impression has its
idea), and--2. That these secondary mental states themselves are
produced according to the three laws of ideas. But the complex laws are
got from these simple laws, according either to the Composition of
Causes, when the complex idea is said to _consist of_ the Simple Ideas,
or to chemical combination, when it is said to be _generated by_ them.
Hartley and Mr. James Mill indeed hold _all_ the mental phenomena to be
generated by chemical combination from simple ideas of _sensation_,
however unlike to the alleged results; but even though they had proved
their theory, employing the Method of Difference, and not only the
Method of Agreement (which latter itself they have used only partially),
we should still have to study the complex ideas themselves inductively,
before we could ascertain their sequences.

The analytical enquiry (neglected alike by the German metaphysical
school, and by M. Comte) into the general laws of mind, will show that
the mental differences of individuals are not ultimate facts, but may be
referred generally to their particular mental history, their education
and circumstances, but sometimes also to organic differences influencing
the mental phenomena, not directly, but through the medium of the
psychological causes of the latter. Men's animal instincts, however, are
probably, equally with the mere sensations, connected directly with
physical conditions of the brain and nerves. Whether or not there be any
direct relation between organic causes and any other mental phenomena,
Physiology is likely in time to show; but at least Phrenology does not
embody the principles of the relation.




CHAPTER V.

ETHOLOGY, OR THE SCIENCE OF THE FORMATION OF CHARACTER.


Till the Empirical laws of Mind, i.e. the truths of common experience,
are _explained_ by being resolved into the causal laws (the subject of
the last chapter), they are mere approximate generalisations which
cannot be safely applied beyond the limits in which they were collected
by observation. But this does not prove aught against the universality
and simplicity of the ultimate mental laws; for the same is the case
with the empirical laws even in astronomy, where each effect results
from but few causes; _à fortiori_, therefore, will it be so in regard to
man's character, which is influenced by each of his circumstances, which
differ in the case of each nation, generation, and individual. But
though mankind have not one universal character, yet there exist
universal laws of the formation of character. These universal laws
cannot be discovered experimentally, i.e. either by artificial
experiment, since we can seldom vary the experiment sufficiently, and
exclude all but known circumstances, or by observation, since, even in
the most favourable instances for the latter, viz. National acts, only
the Method of Agreement can be applied. Observation has its uses in
relation to this subject; but only as verification of the results
arrived at by the Deductive Method. The Deductive Method must be
employed to obtain the laws of the formation of character. They are got
by supposing any given circumstances, and then considering how these
will, according to the general laws of mind, influence the formation of
character. So, contrary to Bacon's rule, laid down wrongly as universal,
for the discovery of principles, the highest generalisations must be
first ascertained by the experimental science of Psychology; and then
will come what is in fact a system of corollaries from the latter
science, viz. Ethology, i.e. (as dealing only with tendencies) the
_exact_ science of human character, or of education both national and
individual, and which has for its principles the middle principles
(_axiomata media_) of mental science. It does not yet, but it will soon,
exist as a science. Its object must be to determine, from the general
laws of mind, combined with man's general position in the universe, what
circumstances will aid or check the growth of good or bad qualities, so
that the Art of Education will be merely the transformation of these
middle principles into precepts and their adaptation to the special
cases. But at every step these middle principles, got by deduction, must
be verified _à posteriori_ by empirical laws, and by specific experience
respecting the assumed circumstances.




CHAPTER VI.

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS ON THE SOCIAL SCIENCE.


Political and social phenomena have been thought too complex for
scientific treatment. Practitioners hitherto have been the only
students; and so, as in medicine, before the rise of Physiology and
Natural History, _experimenta fructifera_, and not _lucifera_, have been
sought. The scheme of such a science has even been thought quackery,
through the vain attempts of some theorists to frame universal precepts,
as though their failure (arising from the variety of human
circumstances) proved that the phenomena do not conform to universal
laws. Social phenomena, however, being phenomena of human nature in
masses, must, as human nature is itself subject to fixed laws, obey
fixed laws resulting from the fixed laws of human nature. The number and
changefulness of the data (unlike those of Astronomy) will prevent our
ever predicting the far future of society. But, when general laws have
been ascertained, an application of them to the individual circumstances
of a given age and country will show us the causes and tendencies of,
and the means of modifying, its actual condition. A consideration of two
methods, erroneously used for this science, viz. the Experimental or
Chemical, and the Abstract or Geometrical, will introduce us to the true
one.




