CHAPTER II.

ABSTRACTION, OR THE FORMATION OF CONCEPTIONS.

_This Chapter is a digression._


Abstract Ideas, that is, General Conceptions, certainly do exist,
however Metaphysics may decide as to their composition. They
_represent_ in our minds the whole classes of things called by the
general names; and, being implied in the mental operation whereby
classes are formed, viz. in the comparison of phenomena, to ascertain in
what they agree, cannot be dispensed with in induction, since such a
comparison is a necessary preliminary to an induction, and more than two
objects cannot well be compared without a type, in which capacity
conceptions serve.

But, though implied in the comparison, it does not follow that, as Dr.
Whewell supposes, they must have existed in the mind prior to
comparison. Sometimes, but only sometimes, they are pre-existent to the
comparison of the particular facts in question, being, as was Kepler's
hypothesis of an ellipse, familiar conceptions borrowed from different
facts, and _superinduced_, to use Dr. Whewell's expression, on the facts
in question. But even such conceptions are the results of former
comparisons of individual facts. And much more commonly (and these are
the more difficult cases in science) conceptions are not pre-existent
even in this sense; but they have to be got (e.g. the Idea of Polarity)
by abstraction, that is, by comparison, from among the very phenomena
which they afterwards serve to arrange, or, as Dr. Whewell says, to
_connect_. They seem to be pre-existent; but this is only because the
mind keeps ever forming conceptions from the facts, which at the time
are before it, and then tentatively applies these conceptions (which it
is always remodelling, dropping some which are found not to suit
after-found facts, and generalising others by a further effort of
abstraction) as types of comparison for phenomena subsequently
presented to it; so that, being found in these later stages of the
comparison already in the mind, they appear in the character simply of
types, and not as being also themselves results of comparison. Really
they are always both; and the term _comparison_ expresses as well their
origin as (and this far more exactly than to _connect_ or to
_superinduce_) their function.

Dr. Whewell says that conceptions must be _appropriate_ and _clear_.
They must, indeed, be appropriate relatively to the purpose in view (for
appropriateness is only relative); but they cannot avoid being
appropriate (though one may be more so than another) if our comparison
of the objects has led to a conception corresponding to any real
agreement in the facts: the ancients' and schoolmen's conceptions were
often absolutely inappropriate, because grounded on only apparent
agreement. So, again, they must be _clear_ in the following sense; that
is to say, a _sufficient number_ of facts must have been _carefully
observed_, and accurately _remembered_. It is also a condition (and one
implied in the latter qualities) of clearness, that the conception
should be _determinate_, that is, that we should know precisely what
agreements we include in it, and never vary the connotation except
consciously.

Activity, carefulness, and accuracy in the observing and comparing
faculties are therefore needed; the first quality to produce
appropriateness, and the latter two, clearness. Moreover, _scientific
imagination_, i.e. the faculty of mentally arranging known elements into
new combinations, is necessary for forming true conceptions; and the
mind should be stored with previously acquired conceptions, kindred to
the subject of inquiry, since a comparison of the facts themselves often
fails to suggest the principle of their agreement; just as, in seeking
for anything lost, we often have to ask ourselves in what places it may
be hid, that we may search for it there.




CHAPTER III.

NAMING AS SUBSIDIARY TO INDUCTION.


As reasoning is from particulars to particulars, and consists simply in
recognising one fact as a mark of another, or a mark of a mark of
another, the only necessary conditions of the exertion of the reasoning
power are senses, to perceive that two facts are conjoined; and
association, as the law by which one of the two facts raises up the idea
of the other. The existence of artificial signs is not a third
_necessary_ condition. It is only, however, the rudest inductions (and
of such even brutes are capable) that can be made without language or
other artificial signs. Without such we could avail ourselves but little
of the experience of others; and (except in cases involving our intenser
sensations or emotions) of none of our own long past experience. It is
only through the medium of such permanent signs that we can register
uniformities; and the existence of uniformities is necessary to justify
an inference, even in a single case, and they can be ascertained once
for all.

General names are not, as some have argued, a mere contrivance to
economise words. For, if there were a name for every individual object,
but no general names, we could not record one uniformity, or the result
of a single comparison. To effect this, all indeed, that are
_indispensable_, are the abstract names of attributes; but, in fact, men
have always given general names to objects also.




