CHAPTER IV.

TRAINS OF REASONING, AND DEDUCTIVE SCIENCES.


The minor premiss always asserts a resemblance between a new case and
cases previously known. When this resemblance is not obvious to the
senses, or ascertainable at once by direct observation, but is itself
matter of inference, the conclusion is the result of a train of
reasoning. However, even then the conclusion is really the result of
induction, the only difference being that there are two or more
inductions instead of one. The inference is still from particulars to
particulars, though drawn in conformity, not to one, but to several
formulæ. This need of several formulæ arises merely from the fact that
the marks by which we perceive that an inference can be drawn (and of
which marks the formulæ are records) happen to be recognisable, not
directly, but only through the medium of other marks, which were, by a
previous induction, collected to be marks of them.

All reasoning, then, is induction: but the difficulties in sciences
often lie (as, e.g. in geometry, where the inductions are the simple
ones of which the axioms and a few definitions are the formulæ) not at
all in the inductions, but only in the formation of trains of reasoning
to prove the minors; that is, in so combining a few simple inductions as
to bring a new case, by means of one induction within which it evidently
falls, within others in which it cannot be directly seen to be included.
In proportion as this is more or less completely effected (that is, in
proportion as we are able to discover marks of marks), a science, though
always remaining inductive, tends to become also _deductive_, and, to
the same extent, to cease to be one of the _experimental_ sciences, in
which, as still in chemistry, though no longer in mechanics, optics,
hydrostatics, acoustics, thermology, and astronomy, each generalisation
rests on a special induction, and the reasonings consist but of one step
each.

An experimental science may become deductive by the mere progress of
experiment. The mere connecting together of a few detached
generalisations, or even the discovery of a great generalisation working
only in a limited sphere, as, e.g. the doctrine of chemical equivalents,
does not make a science deductive as a whole; but a science is thus
transformed when some comprehensive induction is discovered connecting
hosts of formerly isolated inductions, as, e.g. when Newton showed that
the motions of all the bodies in the solar system (though each motion
had been separately inferred and from separate marks) are all marks of
one like movement. Sciences have become deductive usually through its
being shown, either by deduction or by direct experiment, that the
varieties of some phenomenon in them uniformly attend upon those of a
better known phenomenon, e.g. every variety of sound, on a distinct
variety of oscillatory motion. The science of number has been the grand
agent in thus making sciences deductive. The truths of numbers are,
indeed, affirmable of all things only in respect of their quantity; but
since the variations of _quality_ in various classes of phenomena have
(e.g. in mechanics and in astronomy) been found to correspond regularly
to variations of _quantity_ in the same or some other phenomena, every
mathematical formula applicable to quantities so varying becomes a mark
of a corresponding general truth respecting the accompanying variations
in quality; and as the science of quantity is, so far as a science can
be, quite deductive, the theory of that special kind of qualities
becomes so likewise. It was thus that Descartes and Clairaut made
geometry, which was already partially deductive, still more so, by
pointing out the correspondence between geometrical and algebraical
properties.




CHAPTERS V. AND VI.

DEMONSTRATION AND NECESSARY TRUTHS.


All sciences are based on induction; yet some, e.g. mathematics, and
commonly also those branches of natural philosophy which have been made
deductive through mathematics, are called Exact Sciences, and systems of
Necessary Truth. Now, their necessity, and even their alleged certainty,
are illusions. For the conclusions, e.g. of geometry, flow only
seemingly from the definitions (since from definitions, as such, only
propositions about the meaning of words can be deduced): really, they
flow from an implied assumption of the existence of real things
corresponding to the definitions. But, besides that the existence of
such things is not actual or possible consistently with the constitution
of the earth, neither can they even be _conceived_ as existing. In fact,
geometrical points, lines, circles, and squares, are simply copies of
those in nature, to a part alone of which we choose to _attend_; and the
definitions are merely some of our first generalisations about these
natural objects, which being, though equally true of all, not exactly
true of any one, must, actually, when extended to cases where the error
would be appreciable (e.g. to lines of perceptible breadth), be
corrected by the joining to them of new propositions about the
aberration. The exact correspondence, then, between the facts and those
first principles of geometry which are involved in the so-called
definitions, is a fiction, and is merely _supposed_. Geometry has,
indeed (what Dugald Stewart did not perceive), some first principles
which are true without any mixture of hypothesis, viz. the axioms, as
well those which are indemonstrable (e.g. Two straight lines cannot
enclose a space) as also the demonstrable ones; and so have all sciences
some exactly true general propositions: e.g. Mechanics has the first law
of motion. But, generally, the necessity of the conclusions in geometry
consists only in their following necessarily from certain _hypotheses_,
for which same reason the ancients styled the conclusions of all
deductive sciences _necessary_. That the hypotheses, which form part of
the premisses of geometry, must, as Dr. Whewell says, not be
arbitrary--that is, that in their positive part they are observed facts,
and only in their negative part hypothetical--happens simply because our
aim in geometry is to deduce conclusions which may be true of real
objects: for, when our object in reasoning is not to investigate, but to
illustrate truths, arbitrary hypotheses (e.g. the operation of British
political principles in Utopia) are quite legitimate.

The ground of our belief in axioms is a disputed point, and one which,
through the belief arising too early to be traced by the believer's own
recollection, or by other persons' observation, cannot be settled by
reference to actual dates. The axioms are really only generalisations
from experience. Dr. Whewell, however, and others think that, though
suggested, they are not proved by experience, and that their truth is
recognised _à priori_ by the constitution of the mind as soon as the
meaning of the proposition is understood. But this assumption of an _à
priori_ recognition is gratuitous. It has never been shown that there is
anything in the facts inconsistent with the view that the recognition of
the truth of the axioms, however exceptionally complete and instant,
originates simply in experience, equally with the recognition of
ordinary physical generalisations. Thus, that we see a property of
geometrical forms to be true, without inspection of the material forms,
is fully explained by the capacity of geometrical forms of being painted
in the imagination with a distinctness equal to reality, and by the fact
that experience has informed us of that capacity; so that a conclusion
on the faith of the imaginary forms is really an induction from
observation. Then, again, there is nothing inconsistent with the theory
that we learn by experience the truth of the axioms, in the fact that
they are conceived by the mind as universally and necessarily true, that
is, that we cannot figure them to ourselves as being false. Our capacity
or incapacity of conceiving depends on our associations. Educated minds
can break up their associations more easily than the uneducated; but
even the former not entirely at will, even when, as is proved later,
they are erroneous. The Greeks, from ignorance of foreign languages,
believed in an inherent connection between names and things. Even Newton
imagined the existence of a subtle ether between the sun and bodies on
which it acts, because, like his rivals the Cartesians, he could not
conceive a body acting where it is not. Indeed, inconceivableness
depends so completely on the accident of our mental habits, that it is
the essence of scientific triumphs to make the contraries of once
inconceivable views themselves appear inconceivable. For instance,
suppositions opposed even to laws so recently discovered as those of
chemical composition appear to Dr. Whewell himself to be inconceivable.
What wonder, then, that an acquired incapacity should be mistaken for a
natural one, when not merely (as in the attempt to conceive space or
time as finite) does experience afford no model on which to shape an
opposed conception, but when, as in geometry, we are unable even to call
up the geometrical ideas (which, being impressions of form, exactly
resemble, as has been already remarked, their prototypes), e.g. of two
straight lines, in order to try to conceive them inclosing a space,
without, by the very act, repeating the scientific experiment which
establishes the contrary.

Since, then, the axioms and the misnamed definitions are but inductions
from experience, and since the definitions are only hypothetically true,
the deductive or demonstrative sciences--of which these axioms and
definitions form together the first principles--must really be
themselves inductive and hypothetical. Indeed, it is to the fact that
the results are thus only conditionally true, that the necessity and
certainty ascribed to demonstration are due.

It is so even with the Science of Number, i.e. arithmetic and algebra.
But here the truth has been hidden through the errors of two opposite
schools; for while many held the truths in this science to be _à
priori_, others paradoxically considered them to be merely verbal, and
every process to be simply a succession of changes in terminology, by
which equivalent expressions are substituted one for another. The excuse
for such a theory as this latter was, that in arithmetic and algebra we
carry no ideas with us (not even, as in a geometrical demonstration, a
mental diagram) from the beginning, when the premisses are translated
into signs, till the end, when the conclusion is translated back into
things. But, though this is so, yet in every step of the calculation,
there is a real inference of facts from facts: but it is disguised by
the comprehensive nature of the induction, and the consequent generality
of the language. For numbers, though they must be numbers of something,
may be numbers of anything; and therefore, as we need not, when using an
algebraical symbol (which represents all numbers without distinction),
or an arithmetical number, picture to ourselves all that it stands for,
we may picture to ourselves (and this not as a sign of things, but as
being itself a thing) the number or symbol itself as conveniently as any
other single thing. That we are conscious of the numbers or symbols, in
their character of things, and not of mere signs, is shown by the fact
that our whole process of reasoning is carried on by predicating of them
the properties of things.

Another reason why the propositions in arithmetic and algebra have been
thought merely verbal, is that they seem to be _identical_ propositions.
But in 'Two pebbles and one pebble are equal to three pebbles,' equality
but not identity is affirmed; the subject and predicate, though names of
the same objects, being names of them in different states, that is, as
producing different impressions on the senses. It is on such inductive
truths, resting on the evidence of sense, that the Science of Number is
based; and it is, therefore, like the other deductive sciences, an
inductive science. It is also, like them, hypothetical. Its inductions
are the definitions (which, as in geometry, assert a fact as well as
explain a name) of the numbers, and two axioms, viz. The sums of equals
are equal; the differences of equals are equal. These axioms, and
so-called definitions are themselves exactly, and not merely
hypothetically, true. Yet the conclusions are true only on the
assumption that, 1 = 1, i.e. that all the numbers are numbers of the
same or equal units. Otherwise, the certainty in arithmetical processes,
as in those of geometry or mechanics, is not _mathematical_, i.e.
unconditional certainty, but only certainty of inference. It is the
enquiry (which can be gone through once for all) into the inferences
which can be drawn from assumptions, which properly constitutes all
demonstrative science.

New conclusions may be got as well from fictitious as from real
inductions; and this is even consciously done, viz. in the _reductio ad
absurdum_, in order to show the falsity of an assumption. It has even
been argued that all ratiocination rests, in the last resort, on this
process. But as this is itself syllogistic, it is useless, as a proof of
a syllogism, against a man who denies the validity of this kind of
reasoning process itself. Such a man cannot in fact be forced to a
contradiction in terms, but only to a contradiction, or rather an
infringement, of the fundamental maxim of ratiocination, viz. 'Whatever
has a mark, has what it is a mark of;' and, since it is only by
admitting premisses, and yet rejecting a conclusion from them, that this
axiom is infringed, consequently nothing is _necessary_ except the
connection between a conclusion and premisses.




