CHAPTER VIII.

DEFINITION.


A definition is a proposition declaring either the special or the
ordinary meaning, i.e. in the case of connotative names, the
connotation, of a word. This may be effected by stating directly the
attributes connoted; but it is more usual to predicate of the subject of
definition one name of synonymous, or several which, when combined, are
of equivalent, connotation. So that, a definition of a name being thus
generally the sum total of the essential propositions which could be
framed with that name for subject, is really, as Condillac says, an
_analysis_. Even when a name connotes only a single attribute, it (and
also the corresponding abstract name itself) can yet be defined (in this
sense of being analysed or resolved into its elements) by declaring the
connotation of that attribute, whether, if it be a union of several
attributes (e.g. Humanity), by enumerating them, or, if only one (e.g.
Eloquence), by dissecting the fact which is its foundation. Even when
the fact which is the foundation of the attribute is a simple feeling,
and therefore incapable of analysis, still, if the simple feeling have a
name, the attribute and the object possessing it may be defined by
reference to the fact: e.g. a white object is definable as one exciting
the sensation of white; and whiteness, as the power of exciting that
sensation. The only names, abstract or concrete, incapable of analysis,
and therefore of definition, are proper names, as having no meaning, and
also the names of the simple feelings themselves, since these can be
explained only by the resemblance of the feelings to former feelings
called by the same or by an exactly synonymous name, which consequently
equally needs definition.

Though the only accurate definition is one declaring all the facts
involved in the name, i.e. its connotation, men are usually satisfied
with anything which will serve as an index to its denotation, so as to
guard them from applying it inconsistently. This was the object of
logicians when they laid down that a species must be defined _per genus
et differentiam_, meaning by the _differentia one_ attribute included in
the essence, i.e. in the connotation. And, in fact, one attribute, e.g.
in defining man, Rationality (Swift's Houyhnhms having not been as yet
discovered) often does sufficiently mark out the objects denoted. But,
besides that a definition of this kind ought, in order to be complete,
to be _per genus et differentias_, i.e. by _all_ the connoted attributes
not implied in the name of the _genus_, still, even if all were given, a
_summum genus_ could not be so defined, since it has no superior genus.
And for merely marking out the objects denoted, Description, in which
none of the connoted attributes are given, answers as well as logicians'
so-called _essential_ definition. In Description, any one or a
combination of attributes may be given, the object being to make it
exactly coextensive with the name, so as to be predicable of the same
things. Such a description may be turned into an essential definition by
a change of the connotation (not the denotation) of the name; and, in
fact, thus are manufactured almost all scientific definitions, which,
being landmarks of classification, and not meant to declare the meaning
of the name (though, in fact, they do declare it in its new use), are
ever being modified (as is the definition of a science itself) with the
advance of knowledge. Thus, a technical definition helps to expound the
artificial classification from which it grows; but ordinary definition
cannot expound, as the Aristotelians fancied it could, the natural
classification of things, i.e. explain their division into _kinds_, and
the relations among the _kinds_: for the properties of every _kind_ are
innumerable, and all that definition can do is to state the connotation
of the name.

Both these two modes, viz. the essential but incomplete Definition, and
the accidental, or Description, are imperfect; but the Realists'
distinction between definition of names and of things is quite
erroneous. Their doctrine is now exploded; but many propositions
consistent with it alone (e.g. that the science of geometry is deduced
from definitions) have been retained by Nominalists, such as Hobbes.
Really a definition, as such, cannot explain a thing's nature, being
merely an identical proposition explaining the meaning of a word. But
definitions of names _known to be names of really existing objects_, as
in geometry, include two propositions, one a definition and another a
postulate. The latter affirms the existence of a thing answering to the
name. The science is based on the postulates (whether they rest on
intuition or proof), for the demonstration appeals to them alone, and
not on the definitions, which indeed might, though at some cost of
brevity, be dispensed with entirely. It has been argued that, at any
rate, definitions are premisses of science, _provided_ they give such
meanings to terms as suit existing things: but even so, the inference
would obviously be from the existence, not of the name which means, but
of the thing which has the properties.

One reason for the belief that demonstrative truths follow from the
definitions, not from the postulates, was because the postulates are
never quite true (though in reality so much of them is true as is true
of the conclusions). Philosophers, therefore, searching for something
more accurately true, surmised that definitions must be statements and
analyses, neither of words nor of things, as such, but of ideas; and
they supposed the subject-matter of all demonstrative sciences to be
abstractions of the mind. But even allowing this (though, in fact, the
mind cannot so abstract one property, e.g. length, from all others; it
only _attends_ to the one exclusively), yet the conclusions would still
follow, not from the mere definitions, but from the postulates of the
real existence of the ideas.

Definitions, in short, are of names, not things: yet they are not
therefore arbitrary; and to determine what _should be_ the meaning of a
term, it is often necessary to look at the objects. The obscurity as to
the connotation arises through the objects being named before the
attributes (though it is from the latter that the concrete general terms
get their meaning), and through the same name being popularly applied to
different objects on the ground of general resemblance, without any
distinct perception of their common qualities, especially when these are
complex. The philosopher, indeed, uses general names with a definite
connotation; but philosophers do not make language--it grows: so that,
by degrees, the same name often ceases to connote even general
resemblance. The object in remodelling language is to discover if the
things denoted have common qualities, i.e. if they form a class; and, if
they do not, to form one artificially for them. A language's rude
classifications often serve, when retouched, for philosophy. The
transitions in signification, which often go on till the different
members of the group seem to connote nought in common, indicate, at any
rate, a striking resemblance among the objects denoted, and are
frequently an index to a real connection; so that arguments turning
apparently on the double meaning of a term, may perhaps depend on the
connection of two ideas. To ascertain the link of connection, and to
procure for the name a distinct connotation, the resemblances of things
must be considered. Till the name has got a distinct connotation, it
cannot be defined. The philosopher chooses for his connotation of the
name the attributes most important, either directly, or as the
differentiæ leading to the most interesting propria. The enquiry into
the more hidden agreement on which these obvious agreements depend,
often itself arises under the guise of enquiries into the definition of
a name.




