BOOK VI.

ON THE LOGIC OF THE MORAL SCIENCES.

      I. Introductory Remarks                                     148

     II. Liberty and Necessity                                    148

    III. There is, or may be, a Science of Human Nature           150

     IV. The Laws of Mind                                         151

      V. Ethology, or the Science of the Formation of Character   153

     VI. General Considerations on the Social Science             155

    VII. The Chemical, or Experimental, Method in the Social
          Science                                                 156

   VIII. The Geometrical, or Abstract Method                      157

     IX. The Physical, or Concrete Deductive Method               158

      X. The Inverse Deductive, or Historical Method              161

     XI. The Logic of Practice, or Art; including Morality
          and Policy                                              165




ANALYSIS OF MILL'S LOGIC.




INTRODUCTION.


No adequate definition is possible till the properties of the thing to
be defined are known. Previously we can define only the scope of the
inquiry. Now, Logic has been considered as both the science of
reasoning, i.e. the analysis of the mental process when we reason, and
the art of reasoning, i.e. the rules for the process. The term
_reasoning_, however, is not wide enough. _Reasoning_ means either
syllogising, or (and this is its truer sense) the drawing inferences
from assertions already admitted. But the Aristotelian or Scholastic
logicians included in Logic terms and propositions, and the Port Royal
logicians spoke of it as equivalent to the art of thinking. Even
popularly, accuracy of classification, and the extent of command over
premisses, are thought clearer signs of logical powers than accuracy of
deduction. On the other hand, the definition of logic as a 'science
treating of the operations of the understanding in the search of truth,'
though wide enough, would err through including truths known from
intuition; for, though doubtless many seeming intuitions are processes
of inference, questions as to what facts are _real intuitions_ belong
to Metaphysics, not to Logic.

Logic is the science, not of Belief, but of Proof, or Evidence. Almost
all knowledge being matter of inference, the fields of Logic and of
Knowledge coincide; but the two differ in so far that Logic does not
find evidence, but only judges of it. All science is composed of data,
and conclusions thence: Logic shows what relations must subsist between
them. All inferential knowledge is true or not, according as the laws of
Logic have been obeyed or not. Logic is Bacon's _Ars Artium_, the
science of sciences. Genius sometimes employs laws unconsciously; but
only genius: as a rule, the advances of a science have been ever found
to be preceded by a fuller knowledge of the laws of Logic applicable to
it. Logic, then, may be described as the science of the operations of
the understanding which aid in the estimation of evidence. It includes
not only the process of proceeding from the known to the unknown, but,
as auxiliary thereto, Naming, Definition, and Classification.
Conception, Memory, and other like faculties, are not treated by it; but
it presupposes them. Our object, therefore, must be to analyse the
process of inference and the subsidiary operations, besides framing
canons to test any given evidence. We need not, however, carry the
analysis beyond what is necessary for the practical uses of Logic; for
one step in analysis is good without a second, and our purpose is simply
to see the difference between good and ill processes of inference.
Minuter analysis befits Metaphysics; though even that science, when
stepping beyond the interrogation of our consciousness, or rather of our
memory, is, as all other sciences, amenable to Logic.




BOOK I

NAMES AND PROPOSITIONS.




CHAPTER I.

ON THE NECESSITY OF COMMENCING WITH AN ANALYSIS OF LANGUAGE IN LOGIC.


The fact of Logic being a portion of the art of thinking, and of
thought's chief instrument being words, is one reason why we must first
inquire into the right use of words. But further, the import of
propositions cannot really be examined apart from that of words; and
(since whatever can be an object of belief assumes the form of a
proposition, and in propositions all truth and error lie) this is a
paramount reason why we must, as a preliminary, consider the import of
names, the neglecting which, and confining ourselves to things, would
indeed be to discard all past experience. The right method is, to take
men's classifications of things as shown by names, correcting them as we
proceed.




