CHAPTER XX.

ANALOGY.


One of the many meanings of _Analogy_ is, Resemblance of Relations. The
value of an analogical argument in this sense depends on the showing
that, on the common circumstance which is the _fundamentum relationis_,
the rest of the circumstances of the case depend. But, generally, _to
argue from analogy_ signifies to infer from resemblance in some points
(not necessarily in _relations_) resemblance in others. Induction does
the same: but analogy differs from induction in not requiring the
previous proof, by comparison of instances, of the invariable
conjunction between the known and the unknown properties; though it
requires that the latter should not have been ascertained to be
_unconnected_ with the common properties.

If a fair proportion of the properties of the two cases are known, every
resemblance affords ground for expecting an indefinite number of other
resemblances, among which the property in question may perhaps be found.
On the other hand, every dissimilarity will lead us to expect that the
two cases differ in an indefinite number of properties, including,
perhaps, the one in question. These dissimilarities may even be such as
would, in regard to one of the two cases, imply the absence of that
property; and then every resemblance, as showing that the two cases have
a similar nature, is even a reason for presuming against the presence of
that property. Hence, the value of an analogical argument depends on
the extent of ascertained resemblance as compared, first, with the
amount of ascertained difference, and next, with the extent of the
unexplored region of unascertained properties.

The conclusions of analogy are not of direct use, unless when the case
to which we reason is a case _adjacent_, not, as before, in time or
place, but in _circumstances_. Even then a complete induction should be
sought after. But the great value of analogy, even when faint, in
science, is that it may suggest observations and experiments, with a
view to establishing positive scientific truths, for which, however, the
hypotheses based on analogies must never be mistaken.




CHAPTER XXI.

THE EVIDENCE OF THE LAW OF UNIVERSAL CAUSATION.


The validity of all the four inductive methods depends on our assuming
that there is a cause for every event. The belief in this, i.e. in the
law of universal causation, some affirm, is an instinct which needs no
warrant other than all men's disposition to believe it; and they argue
that to demand evidence of it is to appeal to the intellect from the
intellect. But, though there is no appeal from the faculties all
together, there may be from one to another: and, as belief is not proof
(for it may be generated by association of ideas as well as by
evidence), a case of belief does require to be proved by an appeal to
something else, viz. to the faculties of sense and consciousness.

The law of universal causation is, in fact, a generalisation from many
partial uniformities of sequence. Consequently, like these, which cannot
have been arrived at by any strict inductive method (for all such
methods presuppose the law of causation itself), it must itself be based
on inductions _per simplicem enumerationem_, that is, generalisations of
observed facts, from the mere absence of any known instances to the
contrary. This unscientific process is, it is true, usually delusive;
but only because, and in proportion as, the subject-matter of the
observation is limited in extent. Its results, whenever the number of
coincidences is too large for chance to explain, are empirical laws.
These are ordinarily true only within certain limits of time, place, and
circumstance, since, beyond these, there may be different collocations
or counteracting agencies. But the subject-matter of the law of
universal causation is so diffused that there is no time, place, or set
of circumstances, at least within the portion of the universe within our
observation, and adjacent cases, but must prove the law to be either
true or false. It has, in fact, never been found to be false, but in
ever increasing multitudes of cases to be true; and phenomena, even
when, from their rarity or inaccessibility, or the number of modifying
causes, they are not reducible _universally_ to any law, yet _in some
instances_ do conform to this. Thus, it may be regarded as coextensive
with all human experience, at which point the distinction between
empirical laws and laws of nature vanishes. Formerly, indeed, it was
only a very high probability; but, with our modern experience, it is,
practically, absolutely certain, and it confirms the particular laws of
causation, whence itself was drawn, when there seem to be exceptions to
them. All narrower inductions got by simple enumeration are unsafe,
till, by the application to them of the four methods, the supposition of
their falsity is shown to contradict _this_ law, though it was itself
arrived at by simple enumeration.




CHAPTER XXII.

UNIFORMITIES OF COEXISTENCE NOT DEPENDENT ON CAUSATION.


Besides uniformities of succession, which always depend on causation,
there are uniformities of coexistence. These also, whenever the
coexisting phenomena are effects of causes, whether of one common cause
or of several different causes, depend on the laws of their cause or
causes; and, till resolved into these laws, are mere empirical laws. But
there are some uniformities of coexistence, viz. those between the
ultimate properties of _kinds_, which do not depend on causation, and
therefore seem entitled to be classed as a peculiar sort of laws of
nature. As, however, the presumption always is (except in the case of
those _kinds_ which are called _simple substances_ or elementary natural
agents), that a thing's properties really depend on causes though not
traced, and we _never_ can be certain that they do not; we cannot safely
claim (though it _may_ be an ultimate truth) higher certainty than that
of an empirical law for any generalisation about coexistence, that is to
say (since _kinds_ are known to us only by their properties, and,
consequently, all assertions about them are assertions about the
coexistence of something with those properties), about the properties of
_kinds_.

Besides, no rigorous inductive system can be applied to the uniformities
of coexistence, since there is no general axiom related to them, as is
the law of causation to those of succession, to serve as a basis for
such a system. Thus, Bacon's practical applications of his method
failed, from his supposing that we can have previous certainty that a
property must have an invariable coexistent (as it must have an
invariable antecedent), which he called its form. He ought to have seen
that his great logical instrument, elimination, is inapplicable to
coexistences, since things, which agree in having certain apparently
ultimate properties, often agree in nothing else; even the properties
which (e.g. Hotness) are effects of causes, generally being not
connected with the ultimate resemblances or diversities in the objects,
but depending on some outward circumstance.

Our only substitute for an universal law of coexistence is the ancients'
induction _per enumerationem simplicem ubi non reperitur instantia
contradictoria_, that is, the improbability that an exception, if any
existed, could have hitherto remained unobserved. But the certainty thus
arrived at can be only that of an empirical law, true within the limits
of the observations. For the coexistent property must be either a
property of the _kind_, or an accident, that is, something due to an
extrinsic cause, and not to the _kind_ (whose own indigenous properties
are always the same). And the ancients' class of induction can only
prove that _within given limits_, either (in the latter case) one
common, though unknown, cause has always been operating, or (in the
former case) that no new _kind_ of the object has _as yet_ or _by us_
been discovered.

The evidence is, of course (with respect both to the derivative and the
ultimate uniformities of coexistence), stronger in proportion as the law
is more general; for the greater the amount of experience from which it
is derived, the more probable is it that counteracting causes, or that
exceptions, if any, would have presented themselves. Consequently, it
needs more evidence to establish an exception to a very general, than to
a special, empirical law. And common usage agrees with this principle.
Still, even the greater generalisations, when not based on connection by
causation, are delusive, unless grounded on a separate examination of
_each_ of the included _infimæ species_, though certainly there is a
probability (no more) that a sort of parallelism will be found in the
properties of different kinds; and that their degree of unlikeness in
one respect bears some proportion to their unlikeness in others.




