CHAPTER IV.

PROPOSITIONS.


The copula is a mere sign of predication, though it is often confounded
with _to be_, the verb of existence (and that not merely by Greeks, but
even by moderns, whose larger experience how one word in one language
often answers to several in another, should have saved them from
thinking that things with a common name must have a common nature). The
_first_ division of propositions is into Affirmative and Negative, the
copula in the latter being _is not_. Hobbes and others, by joining the
_not_ to the predicate, made the latter what they call a _negative
name_. But as a negative name is one expressing the _absence_ of an
attribute, we thus in fact merely deny its presence, and therefore the
affirmative guise these thinkers give to negative propositions is only a
fiction. Again, _modal_ propositions cannot be reduced to the common
form by joining the modality to the predicate, and turning, e.g. The sun
_did_ rise, into, The sun is a thing having risen; for the past time is
not a particular kind of rising, and it affects not the predicate, but
the predication, i.e. the applicability of the predicate to the subject.
There are, however, certain cases in which the qualification may be
detached from the copula; e.g. in such expressions as, _may be_, _is
perhaps_; for, then we really do not mean to assert anything about the
fact, but only about the state of our mind about it, so that it is not
the predication which is affected: e.g. Cæsar _may be_ dead, may
properly be rendered, I am not sure that he is alive.

The _second_ division is into Simple and Complex. Several propositions
joined by a conjunction do not make a complex proposition. The
conjunction, so far from making the two one, adds another, as being an
abbreviation generally of an additional proposition: e.g. _and_ is an
abbreviation of one additional proposition, viz. We must think of the
two together; while _but_ is an abbreviation of two additional
propositions, viz. We must think of them together, and we must recollect
there is a contrast between them. But hypothetical propositions, i.e.
both disjunctives and conditionals, are true complex propositions, since
with several terms they contain but a single assertion. Thus, in, If the
Koran comes from God, Mahomet is God's prophet, we do not assert the
truth of either of the simple propositions therein contained (viz. the
Koran comes from God, and Mahomet is God's prophet), but only the
inferribility of one from the other. The only difference, then, between
a hypothetical and a categorical proposition, is that the former is
always an assertion about an assertion (though some categoricals are so
likewise; e.g. That the whole is greater than its parts, is an axiom).
Their conspicuous place in treatises on Logic arises from this attribute
which they predicate of a proposition (for a proposition, like other
things, has attributes), viz. its being an inference from something
else, being, with reference to Logic, its chief attribute.

The _third_ common division is into Universal, Particular, Indefinite,
and Singular. A proposition whose subject is an individual name, even if
not a proper name, is singular, e.g. The founder of Rome was killed. In
particular propositions, if the part of the class meant by the _some_
were specified, the proposition would become either singular, or
universal with a different subject including all the part. Indefinite in
Logic is a solecism like _doubtful gender_ in grammar, for the speaker
must mean to make either a particular or a universal assertion.




CHAPTER V.

THE IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS.


The object of an inquiry into the nature of propositions must be to
analyse, either, 1, the state of mind called belief, or 2, what is
believed. Philosophers have usually, but wrongly, thought the former,
i.e. an analysis of the act of judgment, the chief duty of Logic,
considering a proposition to consist in the denying or affirming one
_idea_ of another. True, we must have the two ideas in the mind
together, in order to believe the assertion about the two _things_; but
so we must also in order to disbelieve it. True also, that besides the
putting the ideas together, there may be a mental process; but this has
nothing to do with the import of propositions, since they are assertions
about things, i.e. facts of external nature, not about the ideas of
them, i.e. facts in our mental history. Logic has suffered from stress
being laid on the relation between the ideas rather than the phenomena,
nature thus coming to be studied by logicians second-hand, that is to
say, as represented in our minds. Our present object, therefore, must
be to investigate judgments, not judgment, and to inquire what it is
which we assert when we make a proposition.

Hobbes (though he certainly often shows his belief that all propositions
are not merely about the meaning of words, and that general names are
given to things on account of their attributes) declares that what we
assert, is our belief that the subject and predicate are names of the
same thing. This is, indeed, a property of all true propositions, and
the only one true of all. But it is not the scientific definition of
propositions; for though the mere collocation which makes a proposition
a proposition, signifies only this, yet that _form_, combined with other
_matter_, conveys much more meaning. Hobbes's principle accounts _fully_
only for propositions where both terms are proper names. He applied it
to others, through attending, like all nominalists, to the denotation,
and not the connotation of words, holding them to be, like proper names,
mere marks put upon individuals. But when saying that, e.g. Socrates is
wise, is a true proposition, because of the conformity of import between
the terms, he should have asked himself why _Socrates_ and _wise_ are
names of the same person. He ought to have seen that they are given to
the same person, not because of the intention of the maker of each word,
but from the resemblance of their connotation, since a word means
properly certain attributes, and, only secondarily, objects denoted by
it. What we really assert, therefore, in a proposition, is, that where
we find certain attributes, we shall find a certain other one, which is
a question not of the meaning of names, but of the laws of nature.

Another theory virtually identical with Hobbes's, is that commonly
received, which makes predication consist in referring things to a
_class_; that is (since a class is only an indefinite number of
individuals denoted by a general name), in viewing them as some of those
to be called by that general name. This view is the basis of the _dictum
de omni et nullo_, on which is supposed to rest the validity of all
reasoning. Such a theory is an example of [Greek: hysteron proteron]: it
explains the cause by the effect, since the predicate cannot be known
for a class name which includes the subject, till several propositions
having it for predicate have been first assented to. This doctrine seems
to suppose all individuals to have been made into parcels, with the
common name outside; so that, to know if a general name can be
predicated correctly of the subject, we need only search the roll so
entitled. But the truth is, that general names are marks put, not upon
definite objects, but upon collections of objects ever fluctuating. We
may frame a class without knowing a single individual belonging to it:
the individual is placed in the class because the proposition is true;
the proposition is not made true by the individual being placed there.

Analysis of different propositions shows what is the real import of
propositions not simply verbal. Thus, we find that even a proposition
with a proper name for subject, means to assert that an individual thing
has the attributes connoted by the predicate, the name being thought of
only as means for giving information of a physical fact. This is still
more the case in propositions with connotative subjects. In these the
denoted objects are indicated by some of their attributes, and the
assertion really is, that the predicate's set of attributes constantly
accompanies the subject's set. But as every attribute is grounded on
some fact or phenomenon, a proposition, when asserting the attendance of
one or some attributes on others, really asserts simply the attendance
of one phenomenon on another; e.g. When we say Man is mortal, we mean
that where certain physical and moral facts called humanity are found,
there also will be found the physical and moral facts called death. But
analysis shows that propositions assert other things besides (although
this is indeed their ordinary import) this coexistence or sequence of
two phenomena, viz. two states of consciousness. Assertions in
propositions about those unknowable entities (_noümena_) which are the
hidden causes of phenomena, are made, indeed, only in virtue of the
knowable _phenomena_. Still, such propositions do, besides asserting the
sequence or coexistence of the phenomena, assert further the _existence_
of the noümena; and, moreover, in affirming the existence of a noümenon,
which is an unknowable _cause_, they assert _causation_ also. Lastly,
propositions sometimes assert _resemblance_ between two phenomena. It is
not true that, as some contend, every proposition whose predicate is a
general name affirms resemblance to the other members of the class; for
such propositions generally assert only the possession by the subject of
certain common peculiarities; and the assertion would be true though
there were no members of the class besides those denoted by the
subject. Nevertheless, _resemblance alone_ is _sometimes_ predicated.
Thus, when individuals are put into a class as belonging to it, not
absolutely, but rather than to any other, the assertion is, not that
they have the attributes connoted, but that they resemble those having
them more than they do other objects. So, again, _only resemblance_ is
predicated, when, though the predicate is a class name, the class is
based on general unanalysable resemblance. The classes in question are
those of the simple feelings; the names of feelings being, like all
concrete general names, connotative, but only of a mere resemblance.

In short, one of _five_ things, viz. Existence, Coexistence (or, to be
more particular, Order in Place), Sequence (or, more particularly, Order
in Time, which comprises also the _mere fact of Coexistence_),
Causation, and Resemblance, is asserted or denied in every proposition.
This division is an exhaustive classification with respect to all things
that can be believed. Although only propositions with concrete terms
have been spoken of, it is equally the fact that, in propositions with
an abstract term or terms, we predicate one of these same _five_ things.
There cannot be any difference in the import of these two classes of
propositions, since there is none in the import of their terms, for the
real signification of a concrete term resides in its connotation (so
that in a concrete proposition we really predicate an attribute), and
what the concrete term connotes forms the whole sense of the abstract.
Thus, all propositions with abstract terms can be turned into equivalent
ones with concrete, the new terms being either the names which connote
the attributes, or names of the facts which are the _fundamenta_ of the
attributes: e.g. Thoughtlessness is danger, is equivalent to,
Thoughtless actions (the _fundamentum_) are dangerous.

Finally, as these _five_ are the only things affirmable, so are they the
only things deniable.




