CHAPTER III.

THE THINGS DENOTED BY NAMES.


Logic is the theory of Proof, and everything provable can be exhibited
as a proposition, propositions alone being objects of belief. Therefore,
the import of propositions, that is, the import of predication, must be
ascertained. But, as to make a proposition, i.e. to predicate, is to
assert one _thing_ of another _thing_, the way to learn the import of
predication is, by discovering what are the _things_ signified by names
which are capable of being subject or predicate. It was with this object
that Aristotle formed his Categories, i.e. an attempted enumeration of
all nameable things by the _summa genera_ or highest predicates, one or
other of which must, he asserted, be predicable of everything. His,
however, is a rude catalogue, without philosophical analysis of the
rationale even of familiar distinctions. For instance, his Relation
properly includes Action, Passivity, and Local Situation, and also the
two categories of Position [Greek: pote] and [Greek: pou], while the
difference between [Greek: pou] and [Greek: keisthai] is only verbal,
and [Greek: echein] is not a _summum genus_ at all. Besides--only
substantives and attributes being there considered--there is no category
for sensation and other mental states, since, though these may rightly
be placed, so far as they express their relation, if active, to their
objects, if passive to their causes, in the Categories of Actio and
Passio, the things, viz., the mental states, do not belong there.

The absence of a well-defined concrete name answering to the abstract
_existence_, is one great obstacle to renewing Aristotle's attempt. The
words used for the purpose commonly denote substances only, though
attributes and feelings are equally existences. Even _being_ is
inadequate, since it denotes only _some_ existences, being used by
custom as synonymous with _substance_, both material and spiritual. That
is, it is applied to what excites feelings and has attributes, but not
to feelings and attributes themselves; and if we called extension,
virtue, &c., _beings_, we should be accused of believing in the Platonic
self-existing ideas, or Epicurus's sensible forms--in short, of deeming
attributes substances. To fill this gap, the abstract, _entity_, was
made into a concrete, equivalent to _being_. Yet even _entity_ implies,
though not so much as _being_, the notion of substance. In fact, every
word originally connoting simply existence, gradually enlarges its
connotation to mean _separate_ existence, i.e. existence freed from the
condition of belonging to a substance, so as to exclude attributes and
feelings. Since, then, all the terms are ambiguous, that among them (and
the same principle applies to terms generally) will be employed here
which seems on each occasion to be _least_ ambiguous: and terms will be
used even in improper senses, when these by familiar association convey
the proper meaning.

_Nameable things_ are--I. Feelings or States of Consciousness.--A
feeling, being anything of which the mind is conscious, is synonymous
with _state of consciousness_. It is commonly confined to the sensations
and emotions, or to the emotions alone; but it is properly a genus,
having for species, Sensation, Emotion, Thought, and Volition. By
thought is meant all that we are internally conscious of when we think;
e.g. the idea of the sun, and not the sun itself, is a thought; and so,
not even an imaginary thing like a ghost, but only the idea of it, is a
thought. In like manner, a sensation differs both from the object
causing it, and the attribute ascribed to the object. Yet language
(except in the case of the sensations of hearing) has seldom provided
the sensations with separate names; so that we have to name the
sensation from the object or the attribute exciting it, though we might
_conceive_ the sensation to exist, though it never actually does,
without an exciting cause. Again, another distinction has to be attended
to, viz. the difference between the sensation and the state of the
bodily organs, which is the physical agency producing it. This
distinction escapes notice partly by reason of the division of the
feelings into bodily and mental. But really there is no such division,
even sensations being states of the sentient mind, and not of the body.
The difference, in fact, between sensations, thoughts, and emotions, is
only in the different agency producing the feeling; it being, in the
case of the sensations, a bodily, and, for the other two, a mental
state. Some suppose, after the sensation, in which, they say, the mind
is passive, a distinct active process called perception, which is the
direct recognition of an external object, as the cause of the sensation.
Probably, perceptions are simply cases of belief claiming to be
intuitive, i.e. free of external evidence. But, at any rate, any
question as to their nature is irrelevant to an inquiry like the
present, viz. how we get the non-original part of our knowledge. And so
also is the distinction in German metaphysics, between the mind's _acts_
and its passive _states_. Enough for us now that they are all states of
the mind.

II. Substances.--Logicians think they have defined substance and
attribute, when they have shown merely what difference the use of them
respectively makes in the grammar of a sentence. They say an attribute
must be an attribute _of_ something, but that a substance is
self-existent (being followed, if a relative, by _of_, not _quâ_
substance, but _quâ_ the relation). But this _of_, as distinguishing
attributes, itself needs explanation: besides, we can no more conceive a
substance independent of attributes, than an attribute independent of a
substance. Metaphysicians go deeper into the distinction than logicians.
Substances, most of them say, are either bodies or minds; and, of these,
a body is the external cause to which we ascribe sensations. Berkeley
and the Idealists, however, deny that there exists any cause of
sensations (except, indeed, a First Cause). They argue that the _whole_
of our notion of a body consists of a number of our own or others'
sensations occurring together habitually (so that, the thought of one
being associated with the thought of the others, we get what Hartley and
Locke call a complex idea). They deny that a residuum would remain if
all the attributes were pared off; for that, though the sensations are
bound together by a law, the existence of a _substratum_ is but one of
many forms of mentally realising the connection. And they ask how it
is,--since so long as the sensations occurred in the old order, we
should not miss such a _substratum_, supposing it to have once existed
_and to have perished_--that we can know it exists even now? Their
opponents used formerly to reply, that the uniform order of sensations
implies an external cause determining the law of the order; and that the
attributes _inhere_ in this external cause or substratum, viz. matter.
But at last it was seen that the existence of matter could not be proved
by extrinsic evidence; consequently, now the answer to the idealist
argument simply is, that the belief in an external cause of sensations
is universal, and as intuitive as our knowledge of sensations
themselves. Even Kant allows this (notwithstanding his belief in the
existence of a universe of _things in themselves_, i.e. Noümena, as
contrasted with the mental representation of them, where the sensations,
he thinks, furnish the matter, and the laws of the mind, the form).
Brown even traced up to the sensations of touch, combined with the
sensations seated in the muscular frame, those very properties, viz.,
extension and figure, which Reid referred to as proving that some
qualities must exist, not in the sensations, but in the things
themselves, _since_ they cannot possibly be copies of any impression on
the senses. We have, in truth, no right to consider a thing's sensible
qualities akin to its nature, unless we suppose an absurdity, viz. that
a cause must, as such, resemble its effects. In any case, the question
whether Ontology be a possible science, concerns, not Logic, but the
nature and laws of intuitive knowledge. And the question as to the
nature of Mind is as out of place here as that about Body. As body is
the unknown exciting cause of sensations, so mind, the other kind of
substance, is the unknown recipient both of the sensations and of all
the other feelings. Though I call a something _myself_, as distinct from
the series of feelings, the 'thread of consciousness,' yet this self
shows itself only through its capacity of feeling or being conscious;
and I can, with my present faculties, conceive the gaining no new
information but about as yet unknown faculties of feeling. In short, as
body is the unsentient cause of all feelings, so mind is the sentient
_subject_ (in the German sense) of them, viz. that which feels them.
About this inner nature we know nothing, and Logic cares nothing.

III. Attributes.--Qualities are the first class of attributes. Now, if
we know nothing about bodies but the sensations they excite, we can mean
nothing by the attributes of bodies but sensations. Against this it has
been urged that, though we know nothing of sensible objects except the
sensations, the quality which we ascribe on the _ground_ of the
sensation may yet be a real hidden power or quality in the object, of
which the sensation is only the evidence. Seemingly, this doctrine
arises only from the tendency to suppose that there must be two
different things to answer to two names when not quite synonymous.
Quality and sensation are probably names for the same thing viewed in
different lights. The doctrine of an entity _per se_, called quality, is
a relic of the scholastic _occult causes_; the only intelligible cause
of sensation being the presence of the assemblage of phenomena, called
the _object_. Why the presence of the object causes the sensation, we
know not; and, granting an _occult cause_, we are still in the dark as
to how _that_ produces the effect. However, the question belongs to
metaphysics; and it suits this doctrine, as well as the opposed one, to
say that a quality has for its _foundation_ a sensation.

Relations form the second class of attributes. In all cases of relation
there exists some fact into which the relatives enter as parties
concerned; and this is the _fundamentum relationis_. Whenever two things
are involved in some one fact, we may ascribe to them a relation
grounded on it, however general the fact may be. As, then, a quality is
an attribute based on the fact of a sensation, so a relation is an
attribute based on a fact into which two objects enter jointly. This
fact in both is always composed entirely of states of consciousness; and
this, whether it be complicated, as in many legal relations, or simple,
as in the relations expressed by _antecedent_ and _consequent_ and by
_simultaneous_, where the fact consists merely of the two things so
related, since the consciousness either of the succession or of the
simultaneousness of the two sensations which represent the things, is a
feeling not added to, but involved in _them_, being a condition under
which we must suppose things. And so, likewise, with the relations of
likeness and unlikeness. The feeling of these sometimes cannot be
analysed, when the _fundamentum relationis_ is, as in the case of two
simple sensations, e.g. two sensations of white, only the two sensations
themselves, the consequent feeling of their resemblance being, like that
of their succession or simultaneousness, apparently involved in the
sensations themselves. Sometimes, again, the likeness or unlikeness is
complex, and therefore can be analysed into simpler cases. In any case,
likeness or unlikeness must resolve itself into likeness or unlikeness
between states of our own or some other mind; and this, whether the
feeling of the resemblance or dissimilarity relate to bodies or to
attributes, since the former we know only through the sensations they
are supposed to excite, and the latter through the sensations on which
they are grounded. And so, again, when we say that two relations are
alike (one of the many senses of analogy), we simply assert resemblance
between the facts constituting the two _fundamenta relationis_. Several
relations, called by different names, are really cases of resemblance.
Thus, equality, i.e. the exact resemblance existing between things in
respect of their quantity, is often called identity.

The _third_ species of attributes is Quantity. The assertion of likeness
or unlikeness in quantity, as in quality, is always founded on a
likeness or unlikeness in the sensations excited. What the difference is
all who have had the sensations know, but it cannot be explained to
those who never had them.

In fine, all the attributes classed under Quality and Quantity are the
powers bodies have of exciting certain sensations. So, Relation
generally is but the power which an object has of joining its
correlative in producing the series of sensations, which is the only
sign of the existence of the fact on which they both are grounded. The
relations of succession and simultaneousness, indeed, are not based on
any fact (i.e. any feeling) distinct from the related objects. But these
relations are themselves states of consciousness; resemblance, for
example, being nothing but our feeling of resemblance: at least, we
ascribe these relations to objects or attributes simply because they
hold between the feelings which the objects excite and on which the
attributes are grounded. And as with the attributes of bodies, so also
those of minds are grounded on states of consciousness. Considered in
itself, we can predicate of a mind only the series of its own feelings:
e.g. by _devout_ we mean that the feelings implied in that word form an
oft-recurring part of the series of feelings filling up the sentient
existence of that mind. Again, attributes may be ascribed to a mind as
to a body, as grounded on the thoughts or emotions (not the sensations,
for only bodies excite them) which it excites in others: e.g. when we
call a character admirable, we mean that it causes feelings in us of
admiration. Sometimes, under one word really two attributes are
predicated, one a state of the mind, the other of other minds affected
by thinking of it: e.g. He is generous. Sometimes, even bodies have the
attribute of producing an emotion: e.g. That statue is beautiful.

The general result is, that there are three chief kinds of nameable
things:--1. Feelings distinct from the objects exciting and the organs
supposed to convey them, and divisible into four classes, perceptions
being only a particular case of belief, which is itself a sort of
thought, while actions are only volitions followed by an effect. 2.
Substances, i.e. the unknown cause and the unknown recipient of our
sensations. 3. Attributes, subdivisible into Quality, Relation,
Quantity. Of these ([Greek: a]) qualities, like substances, are known
only by the states of consciousness which they excite, and on which they
are based, and by which alone, though they are treated as a distinct
class, they can be described. ([Greek: b]) Relations also, with four
exceptions, are based on some fact, i.e. a series of states of
consciousness. ([Greek: g]) Quantity is, in the same way, based on our
sensations. In short, all attributes are only our sensations and other
feelings, or something involved in them. We may, then, classify nameable
things thus:--1, Feelings; 2, Minds; 3, Bodies, together with the
properties whereby they are _popularly_ (though the evidence is very
deficient) supposed to excite sensations; 4, the relations of Succession
and Coexistence, Likeness and Unlikeness, which subsist really only
between states of consciousness.

These four classes are a substitute for Aristotle's abortive Categories.
As they comprise all nameable things, every fact is made up of them or
some of them; those that are called _subjective_ facts being composed
wholly of feelings as such, and the _objective_ facts, though composed
wholly or partly of substances and attributes, being grounded on
corresponding subjective facts.




