CHAPTER XXV.

THE GROUNDS OF DISBELIEF.


The result of examining evidence is not always belief, or even
suspension of judgment, but is sometimes positive disbelief. This can
ensue only when the affirmative evidence does not amount to full proof,
but is based on some approximate generalisation. In such cases, if the
negative evidence consist of a stronger, though still only an
approximate, generalisation, we think the fact improbable, and
disbelieve it provisionally; but if of a complete generalisation based
on a rigorous induction, it is disbelieved by us totally, and thought
impossible. Hence, Hume declared miracles incredible, as being, he
considered, contrary to a complete induction. Now, it is true that _in
the absence of any adequate counteracting cause_, a fact contrary to a
complete induction is incredible, whatever evidence it may be grounded
on; unless, indeed, the evidence go to prove the supposed law
inconsistent with some better established one. But when a miracle is
asserted, the presence of an adequate counteracting cause _is_ asserted,
viz. a direct interposition of an act of the will of a Being having
power over nature. Therefore, all that Hume proved is, that we cannot
believe in a miracle unless we believe in the power, and _the will_, of
the Deity to interfere with existing causes by introducing new ones; and
that, in default of such belief, not the most satisfactory evidence of
our senses or of testimony can hinder us from holding a seeming miracle
to be merely the result of some unknown natural cause. The argument of
Dr. Campbell and others against Hume, however, is untenable, viz. that,
as we do not disbelieve an alleged fact (which may be something
conforming to the uniform course of experience) merely because the
chances are against it, therefore we need never disbelieve any fact
supported by credible testimony (even if contrary to the uniform course
of experience). But this is to confound _improbability before the fact_,
which is _not_ always a ground for disbelief, with _improbability after
the fact_, which always is.

Facts which conflict with special laws of causation are only improbable
before the fact; that is, our disbelief depends on the improbability
that there could have been present, without our knowledge, at the time
and place of the event, an adequate counteracting cause. So, too, with
facts which conflict with the properties of _kinds_ (which are
uniformities of mere coexistence not proved to be dependent on
causation), that is, facts which assert the existence of a new _kind_;
such facts we disbelieve only if, the generalisation being sufficiently
comprehensive, some properties are said to have been found in the
supposed new _kind_ disjoined from others which always have been known
to accompany them. When the assertion would amount, if admitted, only to
the existence of an unknown cause or an anomalous _kind_,
_unconformable_, but, as Hume puts it, _not contrary_ to experience, in
circumstances so little explored, that it is credible hitherto unknown
things may there be found, and when prejudice cannot have tempted to the
assertion, one ought neither to admit nor to reject the testimony, but
to suspend judgment till it be confirmed or disproved from other
sources. Only facts, then, which are contradictory to the laws of
Number, Extension, and Universal Causation (since these know no
counteraction or anomaly), or to laws nearly as general, are improbable
after, as well as before the fact, and only these we should term
_absolutely impossible_, calling other facts _improbable_ only, or, at
most, _impossible in the circumstances of the case_.

Between these two species of improbabilities lie _coincidences_; that
is, combinations of chances presenting some unexpected regularity
assimilating them in so far to the results of law. It was thought by
d'Alembert that, though regular combinations are as probable as others
according to the mathematical theory, some physical law prevents them
from occurring so often. Now, stronger testimony may indeed be needed
to support the assertion of such a combination as, e.g. ten successive
throws of sixes at dice, because such a regular series is more likely
than an irregular series to be the result of design; and because even
the desire to excite wonder is likely to tempt men to assert the
occurrence falsely, though this probability must be estimated afresh in
every instance. But though such a series _seems_ peculiarly improbable,
it is only because the comparison is tacitly made, not between it and
any one particular previously fixed series of throws, but between all
regular and all irregular successions taken together. The fact is not in
itself more improbable; and no stronger evidence is needed to give it
credibility, apart from the reasons above mentioned, than in the case of
ordinary events.




BOOK IV.

OPERATIONS SUBSIDIARY TO INDUCTION.




CHAPTER I.

OBSERVATION AND DESCRIPTION.


The mental process which Logic deals with, viz. the investigation of
truth by means of evidence, is always a process of Induction. Since
Induction is simply the extension to a class of something observed to be
true of certain members of it, Observation is the first preliminary to
it. It is, therefore, right to consider, not indeed how or what to
observe (for this belongs to the art of Education), but under what
conditions observation is to be relied on. The sole condition is, that
the supposed observation should really be an observation, and not an
inference, whereas it is usually a compound of both, there being, in our
propositions, besides observation which relates only to the sensations,
an inference from the sensations to the objects themselves. Thus
so-called errors of sense are only erroneous inferences from sense. The
sensations themselves must be genuine; but, as they generally arise on a
certain arrangement of outward objects being present to the organs, we,
as though by instinct, infer this arrangement even when not existing.
The sole object, then, of the logic of observation, is to separate the
inferences from observation from the observations themselves, the only
thing really observed by the mind (to waive the metaphysical problem as
to the _perception_ of objects) being its own feelings or states of
consciousness, outward, viz. Sensations, and inward, viz. Thoughts,
Emotions, and Volitions.

As in the simplest observation much is inference, so, in describing an
observed fact, we not merely describe the fact, but are always forced to
class it, affirming the resemblance, in regard of whatever is the ground
of the name being given, between it and all other things denoted by the
name. The resemblance is sometimes perceived by direct comparison of the
objects together; sometimes (as, e.g. in the description of the earth's
figure as globular and so forth) it is inferred through intermediate
marks, i.e. deductively. When a hypothesis is made (e.g. by Kepler, as
to the figure of the earth's orbit), and then verified by comparison
with actual observations, Dr. Whewell calls the process Colligation of
Facts by appropriate Conceptions, and affirms it to be the whole of
Induction. But this also is only description, being really the ordinary
process of ascertaining resemblance by a comparison of phenomena; and,
though subsidiary to Induction, it is not itself Induction at all.




