CHAPTER X.

PLURALITY OF CAUSES, AND INTERMIXTURE OF EFFECTS.


The difficulty in tracing the laws of nature arises chiefly from the
Intermixture of Effects, and from the Plurality of Causes. The
possibility of the latter in any given case--that is, the possibility
that the same effect may have been produced by different causes--makes
the Method of Agreement (when applied to positive instances)
inconclusive, if the instances are few; for that Method involves a tacit
supposition, that the same effect in different instances, which have
_one_ common antecedent, must follow in all from the same cause, viz.
from their common antecedent. When the instances are varied and very
many (how many, it is for the Theory of Probability to consider), the
supposition, that the presence in all of the common antecedent may be
simply a coincidence, is rebutted; and this is the sole reason why mere
_number_ of instances, differing only in immaterial points, is of any
value. As applied, indeed, to negative instances, i.e. to those
resembling each other in the absence of a certain circumstance, the
Method of Agreement is not vitiated by Plurality of Causes. But the
negative premiss cannot generally be worked unless an affirmative be
joined with it: and then the Method is the Joint Method of Agreement and
Difference. Thus, to find the cause of Transparency, we do not enquire
in what circumstance the numberless _non_-transparent objects agree; but
we enquire, first, in what the few transparent ones agree; and then,
whether all the opaque do not agree in the _absence_ of this
circumstance.

Not only may there be Plurality of Causes, the whole of the effect being
produced now by one, now by another antecedent; but there may also be
Intermixture of Effects, through the interference of different causes
with each other, so that part of the total effect is due to one, and
part to another cause. This latter contingency, which, more than all
else, complicates, the study of nature, does not affect the enquiry into
those (the exceptional) cases, where, as in chemistry, the total effect
is something quite different to the separate effects, and governed by
different laws. There the great problem is to discover, not the
properties, but the cause of the new phenomenon, i.e. the particular
conjunction of agents whence it results; which could indeed never be
ascertained by specific enquiry, were it not for the peculiarity, not of
all these cases (e.g. not of mental phenomena), but of many, viz. that
the heterogeneous effects of combined causes often reproduce, i.e. are
_transformed into_ their causes (as, e.g. water into its components,
hydrogen and oxygen). The great difficulty is _not_ there to discover
the properties of the new phenomenon itself, for these can be found by
experiment like the _simple_ effects of any other cause; since, in this
class of cases the effects of the separate causes give place to a new
effect, and thereby cease to need consideration as separate effects. But
in the far larger class of cases, viz. when the total effect is the
exact sum of the separate effects of all the causes (the case of the
Composition of Causes), at no point may it be overlooked that the effect
is not simple but complex, the result of various separate causes, all of
which are always tending to produce the whole of their several natural
effects; having, it may be, their _effects_ modified, disturbed, or even
prevented by each other, but always preserving their _action_, since
laws of causation cannot have exceptions.

These complex effects must be investigated by _deducing_ the law of the
effect from the laws of the separate causes on the combination of which
it depends. No inductive method is conclusive in such cases (e.g. in
physiology, or _à fortiori_, in politics and history), whether it be the
method of simple observation, which compares instances, whether positive
or negative, to see if they agree in the presence or the absence of one
common antecedent, or the empirical method, which proceeds by directly
trying different combinations (either made or found) of causes, and
watching what is the effect. Both are inconclusive; the former, because
an effect may be due to the concurrence of many causes, and the latter,
because we can rarely know what all the coexisting causes are; and still
more rarely whether a certain portion (if not all) of the total effect
is not due to these other causes, and not to the combination of causes
which we are observing.




CHAPTER XI.

THE DEDUCTIVE METHOD.


The deductive method is the main source of our knowledge of complex
phenomena, and the sole source of all the theories through which vast
and complicated facts have been embraced under a few simple laws. It
consists of processes of Induction, Ratiocination, and Verification.
First, by one of the four inductive methods, the simple laws (whence may
be _deduced_ the complex) of each separate cause which shares in
producing the effect, must be first ascertained. This is difficult, when
the causes or rather tendencies cannot be observed singly. Such is the
case in physiology, since the different agencies which make up an
organized body cannot be separated without destroying the phenomenon;
consequently there our sole resource is to produce experimentally, or
find (as in the case of diseases), pathological instances in which only
one organ at a time is affected. Secondly, when the laws of the causes
have been found, we calculate the effect of any given combination of
them by ratiocination, which may have (though not necessarily) among its
premisses the theorems of the sciences of number and geometry. Lastly,
as it might happen that some of the many concurring agencies have been
unknown or overlooked, the conclusions of ratiocination must be
_verified_; that is, it must be explained why they do not, or shown that
they do, accord with _observed_ cases of at least equal complexity, and
(which is the most effectual test) that the empirical laws and
uniformities, if any, arrived at by direct observation, can be deduced
from and so accounted for by them, as, e.g. Kepler's laws of the
celestial motions by Newton's theory.




CHAPTERS XII. AND XIII.

THE EXPLANATION AND EXAMPLES OF THE EXPLANATION OF LAWS OF NATURE.


The aim, in the deductive method, is either to discover the law of the
effect, or to account for it by _explaining_ it, that is, by pointing
out some more general phenomenon (though often less familiar to us) of
which this is a case and a partial exemplification, or some laws of
causation which produce it by their joint or successive action. This
explanation may be made, either--1. By resolving the laws of the complex
effect into its elements, which consist as well of the separate laws of
the causes which share in producing it, as also of their collocation,
i.e. the fact that these separate laws have been so combined; or--2. By
resolving the law which connects two links, not proximate, in a chain of
causation, into the laws which connect each link with the intermediate
links; or--3. By the _subsumption_ or gathering up of several laws under
one which amounts to the sum of them all, and which is the recognition
of the same sequence in different sets of instances. In the first two of
the processes, laws are resolved into others, which both extend to more
cases, i.e. are more _general_, and also, as being laws of nature, of
which the complex laws are but results, are more _certain_, i.e. more
_unconditional_ and more _universally true_. In the third process, laws
are resolved into others which are indeed more _general_, but not more
_certain_, since they are in fact the same laws, and therefore, subject
to the same exceptions.

Liebig's researches, e.g. into the Contagious Influence of Chemical
Action, and his Theory of Respiration, are among the finest examples,
since Newton's exposition of the law of gravitation, of the use of the
deductive method for _explanation_.[2] But the method is as available
for explaining mental as physical facts. It is destined to predominate
in philosophy. Before Bacon's time deductions were accepted as
sufficient, when neither had the premisses been established by proper
canons of experimental enquiry, nor the results tested by verification
by specific experience. He therefore changed the method of the sciences
from deductive to experimental. But, now that the principles of
deduction are better understood, it is rapidly reverting from
experimental to deductive. Only it must not be supposed that the
inductive part of the process is yet complete. Probably, few of the
great generalisations fitted to be the premisses for future deductions
will be found among truths now known. Some, doubtless, are yet unthought
of; others known only as laws of some limited class of facts, as
electricity once was. They will probably appear first in the shape of
hypotheses, needing to be tested by canons of legitimate induction.

FOOTNOTE:

[2] These, and other illustrations in chap. xiii., cannot be usefully
represented in an abridged form.




