CHAPTER VIII.

CLASSIFICATION BY SERIES.


The object of Classification generally is to bring our ideas of objects
into the order best fitted for prosecuting inductive enquiries into the
laws of the phenomena generally. But a Classification which aims at
facilitating an inductive enquiry into the laws of some special
phenomenon, must be based on that phenomenon itself. The requisites of
such a classification are, first, the bringing into one class all
_kinds_ of things which exhibit the phenomenon; next, the arranging
them in a _series_, according to the degrees in which they exhibit it.
Such a classification has been largely applied in Comparative Anatomy
and Physiology (and these alone), since there has been found a
recognisable difference in the degree in which animals possess one main
phenomenon, viz. Animal Life.

This arrangement of the instances, whence the law is to be collected, in
a series, is that which is always implied in and is a condition of _any_
application of the method, viz. that of Concomitant Variations, which
must be used when conjoined circumstances cannot easily be separated by
experiment. But sometimes (and it is so in Zoology) the law of the
subject of the special enquiry (e.g. Animal Life) has such influence
over the general character of the objects, that all other differences
among them seem mere modifications of it; and then the classification
required for the special purpose becomes the determining principle of
the classification of the same objects for general purposes.

To recognise the identity of phenomena which thus differ only in degree,
we must assume a type-species. This will be that _kind_ which has the
class-properties in their greatest intensity (and, therefore, most
easily studied with all their effects); and we must conceive the other
varieties as instances of degeneracy from that type.

The divisions of the series must be determined by the principles of
_natural_ grouping in general (that is, in effect, by natural affinity);
in subordination, however, to the principle of a natural series; that
is, in the same group must not be placed things which ought to occupy
different points of the general scale.

Zoology affords the only _complete_ example of the true principles of
rational classification, whether as to the formation of groups or of
series. Yet the same principles are applicable to all cases (to art and
business as well as science) where the various parts of a wide subject
have to be brought into mental co-ordination.




BOOK V.

FALLACIES.




CHAPTER I.

FALLACIES IN GENERAL.


The habit of reasoning well is the only complete safeguard against
reasoning ill, that is, against drawing conclusions with insufficient
evidence, a practice which the various contradictory opinions,
particularly about the phenomena relating to Man, show to be even now
common, and that too among the most enlightened. But, to be able to
explain an error is a necessary condition of seeing the truth; for,
'Contrariorum eadem est Scientia.' Consequently, a work on Logic must
classify Fallacies, that is, the varieties of Apparent Evidence; for
they _can_ be classified, though not in respect of their negative
quality of being either not evidence at all, or inconclusive, yet in
respect of the positive property they have of _appearing_ to be
evidence.

As Logic has been here treated as embracing the whole reasoning process,
so it must notice the fallacies incident to any part of it (not to
Ratiocination merely), whether arising from faulty Induction, or from
faulty Ratiocination, or from dispensing wholly with either or both of
them. It does not treat of errors from negligence, or from inexpertness
in using right methods, nor does it treat of errors from moral causes,
viz. Indifference to truth, or Bias by our wishes or our fears; for the
moral causes are but the _remote_ and _predisposing_, not the _exciting_
causes of opinions; and therefore inferences from them, since they must
always involve the intellectual operation of admitting insufficient
evidence as sufficient, really come under a classification of the things
which wrongly _appear_ evidence to the _understanding_.

Fallacies may be arranged, with reference either to the cause which
makes them (erroneously) appear evidence, or to the particular kind of
evidence they simulate. The following classification is grounded on both
these considerations jointly.




CHAPTER II.

CLASSIFICATION OF FALLACIES.


The business of Logic is, not to enumerate false opinions, but to
enquire what property in the facts led to them, that is, what
peculiarity of relation between two facts made us suppose them
habitually conjoined or disjoined, and thus regard the presence or
absence of the one as evidence of that of the other. For every such
property in the facts, or our mode of considering them, there is a
corresponding class of Fallacies.

As the supposed habitual connexion or repugnance of two facts may be
admitted, either as a self-evident and axiomatic truth, or as itself an
inference, the first great division is into Fallacies of Simple
Inspection or _à priori_ Fallacies, and Fallacies, of Inference. But
there is also an intermediate class. For, sometimes an inference is
erroneous through our not conceiving what our premisses precisely are,
and from our therefore substituting new premisses for the old, or a new
conclusion for the one we undertook to prove; and this is called the
Fallacy of Confusion. Under this head, indeed, of Fallacies of
Confusion, might strictly be brought almost any fallacy, though falling
also under some other head: for, some of the links in an argument,
especially if sophistical, are sure to be suppressed; and, it being left
doubtful which is the proposition to be supplied, we can seldom tell
with certainty under _which_ class the fallacy absolutely comes. It is,
however, convenient to reserve the name _Fallacy of Confusion_ for cases
where Confusion is the _sole_ cause of the error.

Cases, then, where there is more or less ground for the error in _the
nature of the apparent evidence itself_, the evidence being assumed to
be of a certain sort, and a false conclusion being drawn from it, may be
classed as Fallacies of Inference. According as the apparent evidence
consists of particular facts, or of foregone generalisations, we call
the errors Fallacies of Induction or of Deduction. Each of these
classes, again, may be subdivided into two species, according as the
apparent evidence is either false, or, though true, inconclusive. Such
subdivisions of the Fallacy of Induction are respectively called, in the
former case, Fallacies of Observation (including cases where the facts
are not directly observed, but inferred), and, in the latter, Fallacies
of Generalisation. Among Fallacies of Deduction, those which proceed on
false premisses have no specific name, for they must fall under one of
the other heads of Fallacies; but those, the premisses of which, though
true, do not support the conclusion, compose a subdivision, which may be
specified as Fallacies of Ratiocination.




