CHAPTER IV.

THE REQUISITES OF A PHILOSOPHICAL LANGUAGE, AND THE PRINCIPLES OF
DEFINITION.


Concrete general names (and the meaning of abstract names depends on the
concrete) should have a fixed and knowable connotation. This is easy
enough when, as in the case of new technical names, we choose the
connotation for ourselves; but it is hard when, as generally happens
with names in common use, the same name has been applied to different
objects, from only a vague feeling of resemblance. For, then, after a
time, general propositions are made, in which predicates are applied to
those names; and these propositions make up a loose connotation for the
class name, which, and the abstract at about this same period formed
from it, are consequently never understood by two people, or by the same
person at different times, in the same way. The logician has to fix this
fluctuating connotation, but so that the name may, if possible, still
_denote_ the things of which it is currently affirmed. To effect this
double object (which is called, though improperly, defining _not the
name but the thing_), he must select from the attributes in which the
denoted objects agree, choosing, as the common properties are always
many, and, in a _kind_, innumerable, those which are familiarly
predicated of the class, and out of them, if possible, or otherwise,
even in preference to them, the ones on which depend, or which are the
best marks of, those thus familiarly predicated. To do this
successfully, presumes a knowledge of all the common properties of the
class, and the relations between them of causation and dependence. Hence
the discussion of non-verbal definitions (which Dr. Whewell calls the
Explication of Conceptions) is part of the business of discovery. Hence,
too, disputes in science have often assumed the form of a battle of
definitions; such definitions being not arbitrary, but made with a view
to some tacitly assumed principle needing expression.

We ought, if possible, to define in consonance with the denotation. But
sometimes this is impossible, through the name having accumulated
_transitive_ applications, in its gradual extension from one object, in
relation to which it connotes one property, to another which resembles
the former, but in quite a different attribute. These _transitive_
applications, even when found to correspond in different languages, may
have arisen, not from any common quality in the objects, but from some
association of ideas founded on the common nature and condition of
mankind. When the association is so natural and habitual as to become
virtually indissoluble, the _transitive_ meanings are apt to coalesce in
one complex conception; and every new transition becomes a more
comprehensive generalisation of the term in question. In such cases the
ancients and schoolmen did not suspect, what otherwise they carefully
watched for, viz. ambiguities: not Plato, though his Comparisons and
Abstractions preparatory to Induction are perfect; not even Bacon, in
his speculations on Heat. Hence have sprung the various vain attempts to
trace a common idea in all the uses of a word, such as _Cause_
(Efficient, Material, Formal, and Final _Cause_), _the Good_, _the Fit_.

When a term is applied to many different objects agreeing _all_ only in
_one_ quality (e.g. things _beautiful_, in _agreeableness_), though
_most_ agree in something besides, it is better to exclude part of the
denotation than of the connotation, however indistinct: else language
ceases to keep alive old experience, alien perhaps to present
tendencies. In any case, words are always in danger of losing part of
their connotation. For, just one or two out of a complex cluster of
ideas, and sometimes merely the look or sound of the word itself, is
often all that is absolutely necessary for the suggesting another set of
ideas to continue the process of thought; and consequently, some
metaphysicians have even fancied that all reasoning is but the
mechanical use of terms according to a certain form. If persons be not
of active imaginations, the only antidote against the propensity to let
slip the connotation of names, is the habit of predicating of them the
properties connoted; though even the propositions themselves, as may be
seen from the way in which maxims of Religion, Ethics, and Politics are
used, are often repeated merely mechanically, not being questioned, but
also not being felt. Much of our knowledge recorded in words is ever
oscillating between its tendency, in consequence of different
generations attending exclusively to different properties in names, to
become partially dormant, and the counter-efforts of individuals, at
times, to revive it by tracing the forgotten properties historically in
the almost mechanically repeated formulas of propositions; and, when
they have been there rediscovered, promulgating them, not as
discoveries, but with authority as what men still profess to believe.
The danger is, lest the formula itself be dismissed by clear-headed
narrow-minded logicians, and the connotation fixed by them (in order
that the denotation may be extended) in accordance with the present use
of the term. Then, if the truths be at any time rediscovered, the
prejudice is against them as novelties. The _selfish_ theory of morals
partly fell because the inconsistency of received formulas with it
prompted a reconsideration of its basis. What would have been the result
if the formulas attaching odium to selfishness, praise to
self-sacrifice, had been dismissed, if this indeed had been possible!
Language, in short, is the depositary of all experience, which, being
the inheritance of posterity, we have a right to vary, but none to
curtail. We may improve the conclusions of our ancestors; we should not
let drop any of their premisses; we may alter a word's connotation; but
we must not destroy part of it.




CHAPTER V.

THE NATURAL HISTORY OF THE VARIATION IN THE MEANING OF TERMS.


The connotation of names shifts not only by reason of gradual
inattention to some of the common properties, which, if language were
ruled by convention alone, would be in their entirety both the perpetual
and the sole constituents of the connotation; but also from the
incorporation in the connotation, in addition to these, and often,
finally, to the _exclusion_ of them altogether, of other circumstances
at first only casually associated with it. These collateral associations
are the cause why there are so few exact synonymes; and why the
dictionary meaning, or Definition, is so bad a guide to its uses, as
compared with its history, since the latter explains the law of the
succession by showing the causes which determined the successive uses.

Two counter-movements are always going on in language. One is
generalisation, by which words are ever losing part of their
connotation, and becoming more general. This arises, partly from men,
such as historians and travellers, using words, especially those
expressing complicated mental and social facts strange to them, in a
loose sense, in ignorance of the true connotation; partly, from known
things multiplying faster than names for them; partly, also, from the
wish to give people some notion of a new object by reference to a known
thing resembling it however slightly. The other movement is
specialisation; and by it words (even the same words which, as, e.g.
_pagan_ and _villain_, later get generalised in a new direction) are
ever taking a fresh connotation, through their denotation being
diminished. Specialisations often occur even in scientific nomenclature,
a word which expressed general characters becoming confined to a
specific substance in which these characters are predominant. So it is
when any set of persons has to think of one species oftener than of any
other contained in the genus: e.g. some sportsmen mean partridges by the
term _birds_. But, as ideas of our pleasures and pains and their
supposed causes, cling, most of all, by association to what they have
been once connected with, the great source of specialisation is the
addition of the ideas of agreeableness or painfulness, and approbation
or censure, to the connotation. And hence arises the fallacy of
_question-begging_ names referred to later on.

It is the business of logicians not to ignore, for they cannot prevent,
transformations of terms in common use, but to trace and embody them,
and men's half unconscious reasons for them, in distinct definitions.




