CHAPTER XXIII.

APPROXIMATE GENERALISATIONS, AND PROBABLE EVIDENCE.


The inferences called _probable_ rest on approximate generalisations.
Such generalisations, besides the inferior assurance with which they
can be applied to individual cases, are _generally_ almost useless as
premisses in a deduction; and therefore in _Science_ they are valuable
chiefly as steps towards universal truths, the discovery of which is its
proper end. But in _practice_ we are forced to use them--1, when we have
no others, in consequence of not knowing what general property
distinguishes the portion of the class which have the attribute
predicated, from the portion which have it not (though it is true that
we can, in such a case, usually obtain a collection of exactly true
propositions by subdividing the class into smaller classes); and, 2,
when we _do_ know this, but cannot examine whether that general property
is present or not in the individual case; that is, when (as usually in
_moral_ inquiries) we could get universal majors, but not minors to
correspond to them. In any case an approximate generalisation can never
be more than an empirical law. Its authority, however, is less when it
composes the whole of our knowledge of the subject, than when it is
merely the most available form of our knowledge for practical guidance,
and the causes, or some certain mark of the attribute predicated, being
known to us as well as the effects, the proposition can be tested by our
trying to deduce it from the causes or mark. Thus, our belief that most
Scotchmen can read, rests on our knowledge, not merely that most
Scotchmen that we have known about could read, but also that most have
been at efficient schools.

Either a single approximate generalisation may be applied to an
individual instance, or several to the same instance. In the former
case, the proposition, as stating a general average, must be applied
only to average cases; it is, therefore, generally useless for guidance
in affairs which do not concern large numbers, and simply supplies, as
it were, the first term in a series of approximations. In the latter
case, when two or more approximations (not connected with each other)
are _separately_ applicable to the instance, it is said that two (or
more) _probabilities are joined by addition_, or, that there is a
_self-corroborative chain_ of evidence. Its type is: Most A are B; most
C are B; this is both an A and a C; therefore it is probably a B. On the
other hand, when the subsequent approximation or approximations is or
are applicable only by virtue of the application of the first, this is
joining two (or more) probabilities, _by way of Deduction_, which
produces a _self-infirmative chain_; and the type is: Most A are B; most
C are A; this is a C; therefore it is probably an A; therefore it is
probably a B. As, in the former case, the probability increases at each
step, so, in the latter, it progressively dwindles. It is measured by
the probability arising from the first of the propositions, abated in
the ratio of that arising from the subsequent; and the error of the
conclusion amounts to the aggregate of the errors of all the premisses.

In two classes of cases (exceptions which prove the rule) approximate
can be employed in deduction as usefully as complete generalisations.
Thus, first, we stop at them sometimes, from the inconvenience, not the
impossibility, of going further; and, by adding provisos, we might
change the approximate into an universal proposition; the sum of the
provisos being then the sum of the errors liable to affect the
conclusion. Secondly, they are used in Social Science with reference to
masses with _absolute_ certainty, even without the addition of such
provisos. Although the premisses in the Moral and Social Sciences are
only probable, these sciences differ from the exact only in that we
cannot decipher so many of the laws, and not in the conclusions that we
do arrive at being less scientific or trustworthy.




CHAPTER XXIV.

THE REMAINING LAWS OF NATURE.


There are, we have seen, five facts, one of which every proposition must
assert, viz. Existence, Order in Place, Order in Time, Causation, and
Resemblance. Causation is not fundamentally different from Coexistence
and Sequence, which are the two modes of Order in Time. They have been
already discussed. Of the rest, Existence, if of things in themselves,
is a topic for Metaphysics, Logic regarding the existence of _phenomena_
only; and as this, when it is not perceived directly, is proved by
proving that the unknown phenomenon is connected by _succession or
coexistence_ with some known phenomenon, the fact of Existence is not
amenable to any _peculiar_ inductive principles. There remain
Resemblance and Order in Place.

As for Resemblance, Locke indeed, and, in a more unqualified way, his
school, asserted that all reasoning is simply a comparison of two ideas
by means of a third, and that knowledge is only the perception of the
agreement or disagreement, that is, the resemblance or dissimilarity, of
two ideas: they did not perceive, besides erring in supposing ideas, and
not the phenomena themselves, to be the subjects of reasoning, that it
is only sometimes (as, particularly, in the sciences of Quantity and
Extension) that the agreement or disagreement of two things is the one
thing to be established. Reasonings, however, about _Resemblances_,
whenever the two things cannot be directly compared by the virtually
simultaneous application of our faculties to each, do agree with Locke's
account of reasoning; being, in fact, simply such a comparison of two
things through the medium of a third. There are laws or formulæ for
guiding the comparison; but the only ones which do not come under the
principles of Induction already discussed, are the mathematical axioms
of Equality, Inequality, and Proportionality, and the theorems based on
them. For these, which are true of all phenomena, or, at least, without
distinction of origin, have no connection with laws of Causation,
whereas all other theorems asserting resemblance have, being true only
of special phenomena originating in a certain way, and the resemblances
between which phenomena must be derived from, or be identical with, the
laws of their causes.

In respect to Order in Place, as well as in respect to Resemblance, some
mathematical truths are the only general propositions which, as being
independent of Causation, require separate consideration. Such are
certain geometrical laws, through which, from the position of certain
points, lines, or spaces, we infer the position of others, without any
reference to their physical causes, or to their special nature, except
as regards position or magnitude. There is no other peculiarity as
respects Order in Place. For, the Order in Place of effects is of course
a mere consequence of the laws of their causes; and, as for primæval
causes, in _their_ Order in Place, called their _collocation_, no
uniformities are traceable.

Hence, only the methods of Mathematics remain to be investigated; and
they are partly discussed in the Second Book. The directly inductive
truths of Mathematics are few: being, first, certain propositions about
existence, tacitly involved in the so-called definitions; and secondly,
the axioms, to which latter, though resting only on induction, _per
simplicem enumerationem_, there could never have been even any apparent
exceptions. Thus, every arithmetical calculation rests (and this is what
makes Arithmetic the type of a deductive science) on the evidence of the
axiom: The sums of equals are equals (which is coextensive with nature
itself)--combined with the definitions of the numbers, which are
severally made up of the explanation of the name, which connotes the way
in which the particular agglomeration is composed, and of the assertion
of a fact, viz. the physical property so connoted.

The propositions of Arithmetic affirm the modes of formation of given
numbers, and are true of all things under the condition of being divided
in a particular way. Algebraical propositions, on the other hand, affirm
the equivalence of different modes of formation of numbers generally,
and are true of all things under condition of being divided in _any_
way.

Though the laws of Extension are not, like those of Number, remote from
visual and tactual imagination, Geometry has not commonly been
recognised as a strictly physical science. The reason is, first, the
possibility of collecting its facts as effectually from the ideas as
from the objects; and secondly, the illusion that its ideal data are not
mere hypotheses, like those in now deductive physical sciences, but a
peculiar class of realities, and that therefore its conclusions are
_exceptionally_ demonstrative. Really, all geometrical theorems are laws
of external nature. They might have been got by generalising from actual
comparison and measurement; only, that it was found practicable to
deduce them from a few obviously true general laws, viz. The sums of
equals are equals; things equal to the same thing are equal to one
another (which two belong to the Science of Number also); and, thirdly
(what is no merely verbal definition, though it has been so called):
Lines, surfaces, solid spaces, which can be so applied to one another as
to coincide, are equal. The rest of the premisses of Geometry consist of
the so-called definitions, which assert, together with one or more
properties, the real existence of objects corresponding to the names to
be defined. The reason why the premisses are so few, and why Geometry is
thus almost entirely deductive, is, that all questions of position and
figure, that is, of quality, may be resolved into questions of quantity
or magnitude, and so Geometry may be reduced to the one problem of the
measurement of magnitudes; that is, to the finding the equalities
between them.

Mathematical principles can be applied to other sciences. All causes
operate according to mathematical laws; an effect being ever dependent
on the quantity or a function of the agent, and generally on its
position too. Mathematical principles cannot, indeed, as M. Comte has
well explained, be usefully applied to physical questions, whenever the
causes are either too inaccessible for their numerical laws to be
ascertained, or are too complex for _us_ to compute the effect, or are
ever fluctuating. And, in proportion as physical questions cease to be
abstract and hypothetical, mathematical solutions of them become
imperfect. But the great value of mathematical training is, that we
learn to use its _method_ (which is the most perfect type of the
Deductive Method), that is, we learn to employ the laws of simpler
phenomena to explain and predict those of the more complex.




