CHAPTER VI.

TERMINOLOGY AND NOMENCLATURE.


Not only must words have a fixed and knowable meaning; but also, no
important meaning should be without its word: that is, there should be a
name for everything which we have often to make assertions about. There
should be, therefore, first, names suited to describe all the individual
facts; secondly, a name for every important common property detected by
comparing those facts; and, thirdly, a name for every _kind_.

First, it conduces to brevity and clearness to have separate names for
the oft-recurring combinations of feelings; but, as these can be defined
without reference back to the feelings themselves, it is _enough_ for a
_descriptive_ terminology, if there be a name for every variety of
elementary feeling, since none of these can be defined, or indicated to
a person, except either by his having the sensation itself, or being
referred through a known mark to his remembrance of it. The meaning of
the name when given to a feeling is fixed, in the first instance, by
convention, and must be associated _immediately_, not through the usage
of ordinary language, with the feeling, so that it may at once recall
the latter. But even among the elementary feelings, those purely mental,
and also sensations, such as those from disease, the identity of which
in different persons cannot be determined, cannot be exactly
_described_. It is only the impressions on the outward senses, or those
inward feelings connected uniformly with outward objects (and,
consequently, sciences, such as botany, conversant with outward
objects), which are susceptible of an exact descriptive language.

Secondly, there must also be a separate name for every important common
property recognised through that comparison of observed instances which
is preparatory to induction (including names for the classes which we
artificially construct in virtue of those properties). For, although a
definition would often convey the meaning, both time and space are
saved, perspicuity promoted, and the attention excited and concentrated,
by giving a brief and compact name to each of the new _general
conceptions_, as Dr. Whewell calls them, that is, the new results of
abstraction. Thenceforward the name nails down and clenches the
unfamiliar combination of ideas, and suggests its own definition.

Thirdly, as, besides the artificial classes which are marked out from
neighbouring classes by definite properties to be arrived at by
abstraction, there are classes, viz. _kinds_, distinguished severally by
an unknown multitude of independent properties (and about which classes
therefore many assertions will be made), there must be a name for every
_kind_. That is, besides a terminology, there must be a nomenclature,
i.e. a collection of the names of all the lowest _kinds_, or _infimæ
species_. The Linnæan arrangements of plants and animals, and the French
of chemistry, are nomenclatures. The peculiarity of a name which belongs
to a nomenclature is, not that its meaning resides in its denotation
instead of its connotation (for it resides in its connotation, like that
of other concrete general names); but that, besides connoting certain
attributes which its definition explains, it also connotes that these
attributes are distinctive of a _kind_; and this fact its definition
cannot explain.

A philosophical language, then, must possess, first, precision, and next
(the subject of the present chapter), completeness. Some have argued
that, in addition, names are fitted for the purposes of thought in
proportion as they approximate to mere symbols in compactness, through
meaninglessness, and capability of use as counters without reference to
the various objects which, though utterly different, they may thus at
different times equally well represent. Such are, indeed, the qualities
enabling us to employ the figures of arithmetic and the symbols of
algebra perfectly mechanically according to general technical rules.
But, in the first place, in our direct inductions, at all events,
depending as they do on our perception of the particulars of the
agreement and difference of the phenomena, we could never dispense with
a distinct mental image of the latter. Further, even in deduction,
though a syllogism is conclusive from its mere form, if the terms are
unambiguous, yet the _practical_ validity of the reasoning depends on
the hypothesis that no counteracting cause has interfered with the truth
of the premisses. We can assure ourselves of this only by studying the
phenomena at every step. For it is only in geometry and algebra that
there is no danger from the Composition of Causes, or the superseding of
one set of laws by another; and that, therefore, the propositions are
categorically true. In sciences in general, then, the object should be,
so far from keeping individualising peculiarities out of sight, to
contrive the greatest possible obstacles to a merely mechanical use of
language: we should carefully keep alive a consciousness of its meaning,
by referring, by aid of derivation and the analogies between the ideas
of the roots and the derivatives, to the origin of words; and as words,
however philosophically constructed, are always tending, like coins, to
have their inscription worn off, we should be ever stamping them afresh.
This we shall effect, if we contemplate habitually, not the _formulas_
which record the laws of the phenomena (for, if so, the formulas will
themselves progressively lose their meaning), but the phenomena whence
the laws were collected; and we must conceive these phenomena in the
concrete, and clothe them in circumstances.




CHAPTER VII.

CLASSIFICATION, AS SUBSIDIARY TO INDUCTION.


Every name which connotes an attribute thereby divides, but only
incidentally, all things, known and unknown, real and imagined, into two
classes, viz. those which have, and those which have not the attribute.
But sometimes the naming itself is but the secondary and subsidiary, and
the classification, the primary object. The general problem of such
classification is, to provide that things shall be thought of in such
groups, and the groups in such an order, as will best promote the
remembrance and ascertainment of their laws. Its subjects are _real
things_ exclusively, but _all_ real things, since, to place one object
in a group, we ought to know the divisions of nature at large.

Any property may be the basis for a classification; but those best
suited are properties which are causes, or, next, as the cause of a
class's chief peculiarities seldom serves as its diagnostic, any effect
which is a sure mark both of the cause and of the other effects. Only a
classification so grounded is scientific; the same also is not technical
or artificial, but natural, and emphatically _natural_ (as compared with
classifications in an inferior degree also _natural_, which are based on
properties important with reference to the reasoner's special practical
objects), when the classification is based on those properties which
would most impress one who knew all the properties, but was not
interested particularly in any one. Further, it is a great
recommendation of a classification, that it groups together things of
like general aspect; but this is not a _sine quâ non_: a group may be
_natural_ even if based on very _unobvious_ properties, provided these
are marks of many other properties, though certainly then there should
be also some more obvious property to act as a mark of the unobvious
ones which form the real basis.

As the first principle of _natural_ classification is that the classes
must be so formed that the objects composing each may have as many
properties in common as possible to serve as predicates, all _kinds_
should have places among the _natural_ groups, since the common
properties of _kinds_, and, therefore, the general assertions that can
be made about them, are innumerable. But _kinds_ are too few to make up
the whole of a classification: other classes also may be eminently
_natural_, though marked out from each other only by a definite number
of properties. Of neither sort of _natural_ groups is Dr. Whewell's
theory _strictly_ true, viz. that every _natural_ group is not
determined by definition, that is, by definite characters which can be
expressed in words, but is fixed by Type. He explains that a type is an
example of any class, for instance, a species of a genus, which
possesses all the characters and properties of the genus in a marked
way; that round this type-species are grouped all the other species,
which, though deviating from it in various directions and degrees, yet
are of closer affinity to it than to the centre of any other group; and
that this is the reason why propositions about _natural_ groups so often
state matters as being true not in all cases, but only in most. Now,
there is a truth, but only a partial truth, in this doctrine. It is
this: in forming _natural_ groups, species which want certain of the
class-characters, some one, and others another, are classed with those
(the majority) that have them all, because they are more like (that is,
in fact, have more of the common characters of) that particular group
than of any other. On account of the feeling of vagueness hence
engendered, we certainly, in deciding if an object belong to the group,
do generally (and _must_, when the classification is made expressly with
a view to a special inductive enquiry) refer mentally, not as a
substitute for, but in illustration of the definition of the group, to
some standard specimen which has _all_ the characters well developed.
But not the less, therefore, are all _natural_, equally with all
artificial, groups framed with distinct reference to certain definite
characters. In the case of _kinds_, a few characters are chosen as marks
of the rest. In the case of other _natural_ groups, the formation of the
larger groups, into which we collect the _infimæ species_, is suggested
indeed by resemblance to types (since we form each such larger group
round a selected _kind_ which serves as its exemplar); but the group
itself, when formed, is determined by definite characters.

Class names should by the mode of their construction help those who have
learnt about the thing, to remember it, and those who have not learnt,
now to learn, by being merely told the name. This is best effected, in
the case of _kinds_, when the word indicates by its very formation the
properties it connotes. But this is seldom possible. For, though a
_kind_-name connotes not all the _kind_-properties, but some only which
serve as sure marks of the rest, even these have been found too many to
be included conveniently in a name (except in Elementary Chemistry,
where every compound substance has one distinctive index-property, viz.
the chemical composition). A subsidiary resource is to point out the
_kind's_ nearest natural affinities. For instance, in the binary
Nomenclature of Botany and of Zoology, the name of every species
consists of the name of the _natural_ group next above, with a word
added expressive of some quality in the nature or mode of discovery, or
what not, of the particular species itself. By this device (obtaining at
present only in Botany and Zoology), as well is the expression, in the
name, of many of the _kind's characters_ secured, as the use of names
economised, and the memory relieved. Except for some such plan, what
hope of naming the 60,000 known species of Plants?




