CHAPTER XXII

It was opened by the little waiting-maid whom he had seen at Blanquais,
and who looked at him very hard before she answered his inquiry.

“You see I have found Mrs. Vivian’s dwelling, though you would n’t give
me the address,” Bernard said to her, smiling.

“Monsieur has put some time to it!” the young woman answered dryly. And
she informed him that Madame was at home, though Mademoiselle, for whom
he had not asked, was not.

Mrs. Vivian occupied a diminutive apartment at the summit of one of
the tall white houses which ornament the neighborhood of the Arc de
Triomphe. The early days of September had arrived, but Paris was still
a city of absentees. The weather was warm and charming, and a certain
savour of early autumn in the air was in accord with the somewhat
melancholy aspect of the empty streets and closed shutters of this
honorable quarter, where the end of the monumental vistas seemed to
be curtained with a hazy emanation from the Seine. It was late in
the afternoon when Bernard was ushered into Mrs. Vivian’s little
high-nestling drawing-room, and a patch of sunset tints, faintly red,
rested softly upon the gilded wall. Bernard had seen these ladies only
in borrowed and provisional abodes; but here was a place where they were
really living and which was stamped with their tastes, their habits,
their charm. The little salon was very elegant; it contained a
multitude of pretty things, and it appeared to Bernard to be arranged
in perfection. The long windows--the ceiling being low, they were really
very short--opened upon one of those solid balconies, occupying the
width of the apartment, which are often in Paris a compensation for
living up five flights of stairs, and this balcony was filled with
flowers and cushions. Bernard stepped out upon it to await the coming
of Mrs. Vivian, and, as she was not quick to appear, he had time to
see that his friends enjoyed a magnificent view. They looked up at the
triumphal Arch, which presented itself at a picturesque angle, and near
the green tree-tops of the Champs Elysees, beyond which they caught a
broad gleam of the Seine and a glimpse, blue in the distance, of the
great towers of Notre Dame. The whole vast city lay before them and
beneath them, with its ordered brilliancy and its mingled aspect of
compression and expansion; and yet the huge Parisian murmur died away
before it reached Mrs. Vivian’s sky-parlor, which seemed to Bernard the
brightest and quietest little habitation he had ever known.

His hostess came rustling in at last; she seemed agitated; she knocked
over with the skirt of her dress a little gilded chair which was
reflected in the polished parquet as in a sheet of looking-glass. Mrs.
Vivian had a fixed smile--she hardly knew what to say.

“I found your address at the banker’s,” said Bernard. “Your maid, at
Blanquais, refused to give it to me.”

Mrs. Vivian gave him a little look--there was always more or less of
it in her face--which seemed equivalent to an entreaty that her
interlocutor should spare her.

“Maids are so strange,” she murmured; “especially the French!”

It pleased Bernard for the moment not to spare her, though he felt a
sort of delight of kindness for her.

“Your going off from Blanquais so suddenly, without leaving me any
explanation, any clue, any message of any sort--made me feel at first as
if you did n’t wish that I should look you up. It reminded me of the way
you left Baden--do you remember?--three years ago.”

“Baden was so charming--but one could n’t stay forever,” said Mrs.
Vivian.

“I had a sort of theory one could. Our life was so pleasant that it
seemed a shame to break the spell, and if no one had moved I am sure we
might be sitting there now.”

Mrs. Vivian stared, still with her little fixed smile.

“I think we should have had bad weather.”

“Very likely,” said Bernard, laughing. “Nature would have grown jealous
of our good-humor--of our tranquil happiness. And after all, here we are
together again--that is, some of us. But I have only my own audacity
to thank for it. I was quite free to believe that you were not at all
pleased to see me re-appear--and it is only because I am not easy to
discourage--am indeed probably a rather impudent fellow--that I have
ventured to come here to-day.”

“I am very glad to see you re-appear, Mr. Longueville,” Mrs. Vivian
declared with the accent of veracity.

“It was your daughter’s idea, then, running away from Blanquais?”

Mrs. Vivian lowered her eyes.

“We were obliged to go to Fontainebleau. We have but just come back. I
thought of writing to you,” she softly added.

“Ah, what pleasure that would have given me!”

“I mean, to tell you where we were, and that we should have been so
happy to see you.”

“I thank you for the intention. I suppose your daughter would n’t let
you carry it out.”

“Angela is so peculiar,” Mrs. Vivian said, simply.

“You told me that the first time I saw you.”

“Yes, at Siena,” said Mrs. Vivian.

“I am glad to hear you speak frankly of that place!”

“Perhaps it ‘s better,” Mrs. Vivian murmured. She got up and went to the
window; then stepping upon the balcony, she looked down a moment into
the street. “She will come back in a moment,” she said, coming into the
room again. “She has gone to see a friend who lives just beside us. We
don’t mind about Siena now,” she added, softly.

Bernard understood her--understood this to be a retraction of the
request she had made of him at Baden.

“Dear little woman,” he said to himself, “she wants to marry her
daughter still--only now she wants to marry her to me!”

He wished to show her that he understood her, and he was on the point of
seizing her hand, to do he did n’t know what--to hold it, to press it,
to kiss it--when he heard the sharp twang of the bell at the door of the
little apartment.

Mrs. Vivian fluttered away.

“It ‘s Angela,” she cried, and she stood there waiting and listening,
smiling at Bernard, with her handkerchief pressed to her lips.

In a moment the girl came into the drawing-room, but on seeing Bernard
she stopped, with her hand on the door-knob. Her mother went to her and
kissed her.

“It ‘s Mr. Longueville, dearest--he has found us out.”

“Found us out?” repeated Angela, with a little laugh. “What a singular
expression!”

She was blushing as she had blushed when she first saw him at
Blanquais. She seemed to Bernard now to have a great and peculiar
brightness--something she had never had before.

“I certainly have been looking for you,” he said. “I was greatly
disappointed when I found you had taken flight from Blanquais.”

“Taken flight?” She repeated his words as she had repeated her mother’s.
“That is also a strange way of speaking!”

“I don’t care what I say,” said Bernard, “so long as I make you
understand that I have wanted very much to see you again, and that I
have wondered every day whether I might venture--”

“I don’t know why you should n’t venture!” she interrupted, giving her
little laugh again. “We are not so terrible, are we, mamma?--that is,
when once you have climbed our five flights of stairs.”

“I came up very fast,” said Bernard, “and I find your apartment
magnificent.”

“Mr. Longueville must come again, must he not, dear?” asked mamma.

“I shall come very often, with your leave,” Bernard declared.

“It will be immensely kind,” said Angela, looking away.

“I am not sure that you will think it that.”

“I don’t know what you are trying to prove,” said Angela; “first that we
ran away from you, and then that we are not nice to our visitors.”

“Oh no, not that!” Bernard exclaimed; “for I assure you I shall not care
how cold you are with me.”

She walked away toward another door, which was masked with a curtain
that she lifted.

“I am glad to hear that, for it gives me courage to say that I am very
tired, and that I beg you will excuse me.”

She glanced at him a moment over her shoulder; then she passed out,
dropping the curtain.

Bernard stood there face to face with Mrs. Vivian, whose eyes seemed to
plead with him more than ever. In his own there was an excited smile.

“Please don’t mind that,” she murmured. “I know it ‘s true that she is
tired.”

“Mind it, dear lady?” cried the young man. “I delight in it. It ‘s just
what I like.”

“Ah, she ‘s very peculiar!” sighed Mrs. Vivian.

“She is strange--yes. But I think I understand her a little.”

“You must come back to-morrow, then.”

“I hope to have many to-morrows!” cried Bernard as he took his
departure.






