CHAPTER XIX
A GLIMPSE OF PASTORAL LIFE.


HE was still eager upon the same inquiry; and having heard of a hermit
that lived near the lowest cataract of the Nile, and filled the whole
country with the fame of his sanctity, resolved to visit his retreat, and
inquire whether that felicity which public life could not afford was to
be found in solitude, and whether a man whose age and virtue made him
venerable could teach any peculiar art of shunning evils or enduring
them.

Imlac and the Princess agreed to accompany him, and after the necessary
preparations, they began their journey.  Their way lay through the
fields, where shepherds tended their flocks and the lambs were playing
upon the pasture.  “This,” said the poet, “is the life which has been
often celebrated for its innocence and quiet; let us pass the heat of the
day among the shepherds’ tents, and know whether all our searches are not
to terminate in pastoral simplicity.”

The proposal pleased them; and they induced the shepherds, by small
presents and familiar questions, to tell the opinion of their own state.
They were so rude and ignorant, so little able to compare the good with
the evil of the occupation, and so indistinct in their narratives and
descriptions, that very little could be learned from them.  But it was
evident that their hearts were cankered with discontent; that they
considered themselves as condemned to labour for the luxury of the rich,
and looked up with stupid malevolence towards those that were placed
above them.

The Princess pronounced with vehemence that she would never suffer these
envious savages to be her companions, and that she should not soon be
desirous of seeing any more specimens of rustic happiness; but could not
believe that all the accounts of primeval pleasures were fabulous, and
was in doubt whether life had anything that could be justly preferred to
the placid gratification of fields and woods.  She hoped that the time
would come when, with a few virtuous and elegant companions, she should
gather flowers planted by her own hands, fondle the lambs of her own ewe,
and listen without care, among brooks and breezes, to one of her maidens
reading in the shade.




CHAPTER XX
THE DANGER OF PROSPERITY.


ON the next day they continued their journey till the heat compelled them
to look round for shelter.  At a small distance they saw a thick wood,
which they no sooner entered than they perceived that they were
approaching the habitations of men.  The shrubs were diligently cut away
to open walks where the shades ware darkest; the boughs of opposite trees
were artificially interwoven; seats of flowery turf were raised in vacant
spaces; and a rivulet that wantoned along the side of a winding path had
its banks sometimes opened into small basins, and its stream sometimes
obstructed by little mounds of stone heaped together to increase its
murmurs.

They passed slowly through the wood, delighted with such unexpected
accommodations, and entertained each other with conjecturing what or who
he could be that in those rude and unfrequented regions had leisure and
art for such harmless luxury.

As they advanced they heard the sound of music, and saw youths and
virgins dancing in the grove; and going still farther beheld a stately
palace built upon a hill surrounded by woods.  The laws of Eastern
hospitality allowed them to enter, and the master welcomed them like a
man liberal and wealthy.

He was skilful enough in appearances soon to discern that they were no
common guests, and spread his table with magnificence.  The eloquence of
Imlac caught his attention, and the lofty courtesy of the Princess
excited his respect.  When they offered to depart, he entreated their
stay, and was the next day more unwilling to dismiss them than before.
They were easily persuaded to stop, and civility grew up in time to
freedom and confidence.

The Prince now saw all the domestics cheerful and all the face of nature
smiling round the place, and could not forbear to hope that he should
find here what he was seeking; but when he was congratulating the master
upon his possessions he answered with a sigh, “My condition has indeed
the appearance of happiness, but appearances are delusive.  My prosperity
puts my life in danger; the Bassa of Egypt is my enemy, incensed only by
my wealth and popularity.  I have been hitherto protected against him by
the princes of the country; but as the favour of the great is uncertain I
know not how soon my defenders may be persuaded to share the plunder with
the Bassa.  I have sent my treasures into a distant country, and upon the
first alarm am prepared to follow them.  Then will my enemies riot in my
mansion, and enjoy the gardens which I have planted.”

They all joined in lamenting his danger and deprecating his exile; and
the Princess was so much disturbed with the tumult of grief and
indignation that she retired to her apartment.  They continued with their
kind inviter a few days longer, and then went to find the hermit.




CHAPTER XXI
THE HAPPINESS OF SOLITUDE—THE HERMIT’S HISTORY.


THEY came on the third day, by the direction of the peasants, to the
hermit’s cell.  It was a cavern in the side of a mountain, overshadowed
with palm trees, at such a distance from the cataract that nothing more
was heard than a gentle uniform murmur, such as composes the mind to
pensive meditation, especially when it was assisted by the wind whistling
among the branches.  The first rude essay of Nature had been so much
improved by human labour that the cave contained several apartments
appropriated to different uses, and often afforded lodging to travellers
whom darkness or tempests happened to overtake.

The hermit sat on a bench at the door, to enjoy the coolness of the
evening.  On one side lay a book with pens and paper; on the other
mechanical instruments of various kinds.  As they approached him
unregarded, the Princess observed that he had not the countenance of a
man that had found or could teach the way to happiness.

They saluted him with great respect, which he repaid like a man not
unaccustomed to the forms of Courts.  “My children,” said he, “if you
have lost your way, you shall be willingly supplied with such
conveniences for the night as this cavern will afford.  I have all that
Nature requires, and you will not expect delicacies in a hermit’s cell.”

They thanked him; and, entering, were pleased with the neatness and
regularity of the place.  The hermit set flesh and wine before them,
though he fed only upon fruits and water.  His discourse was cheerful
without levity, and pious without enthusiasm.  He soon gained the esteem
of his guests, and the Princess repented her hasty censure.

At last Imlac began thus: “I do not now wonder that your reputation is so
far extended: we have heard at Cairo of your wisdom, and came hither to
implore your direction for this young man and maiden in the _choice of
life_.”

“To him that lives well,” answered the hermit, “every form of life is
good; nor can I give any other rule for choice than to remove all
apparent evil.”

“He will most certainly remove from evil,” said the Prince, “who shall
devote himself to that solitude which you have recommended by your
example.”

“I have indeed lived fifteen years in solitude,” said the hermit, “but
have no desire that my example should gain any imitators.  In my youth I
professed arms, and was raised by degrees to the highest military rank.
I have traversed wide countries at the head of my troops, and seen many
battles and sieges.  At last, being disgusted by the preferments of a
younger officer, and feeling that my vigour was beginning to decay, I
resolved to close my life in peace, having found the world full of
snares, discord, and misery.  I had once escaped from the pursuit of the
enemy by the shelter of this cavern, and therefore chose it for my final
residence.  I employed artificers to form it into chambers, and stored it
with all that I was likely to want.

“For some time after my retreat I rejoiced like a tempest-beaten sailor
at his entrance into the harbour, being delighted with the sudden change
of the noise and hurry of war to stillness and repose.  When the pleasure
of novelty went away, I employed my hours in examining the plants which
grow in the valley, and the minerals which I collected from the rocks.
But that inquiry is now grown tasteless and irksome.  I have been for
some time unsettled and distracted: my mind is disturbed with a thousand
perplexities of doubt and vanities of imagination, which hourly prevail
upon me, because I have no opportunities of relaxation or diversion.  I
am sometimes ashamed to think that I could not secure myself from vice
but by retiring from the exercise of virtue, and begin to suspect that I
was rather impelled by resentment than led by devotion into solitude.  My
fancy riots in scenes of folly, and I lament that I have lost so much,
and have gained so little.  In solitude, if I escape the example of bad
men, I want likewise the counsel and conversation of the good.  I have
been long comparing the evils with the advantages of society, and resolve
to return into the world to-morrow.  The life of a solitary man will be
certainly miserable, but not certainly devout.”

They heard his resolution with surprise, but after a short pause offered
to conduct him to Cairo.  He dug up a considerable treasure which he had
hid among the rocks, and accompanied them to the city, on which, as he
approached it, he gazed with rapture.




