CHAPTER XIII
RASSELAS DISCOVERS THE MEANS OF ESCAPE.


THE Prince now dismissed his favourite to rest; but the narrative of
wonders and novelties filled his mind with perturbation.  He revolved all
that he had heard, and prepared innumerable questions for the morning.

Much of his uneasiness was now removed.  He had a friend to whom he could
impart his thoughts, and whose experience could assist him in his
designs.  His heart was no longer condemned to swell with silent
vexation.  He thought that even the Happy Valley might be endured with
such a companion, and that if they could range the world together he
should have nothing further to desire.

In a few days the water was discharged, and the ground dried.  The Prince
and Imlac then walked out together, to converse without the notice of the
rest.  The Prince, whose thoughts were always on the wing, as he passed
by the gate said, with a countenance of sorrow, “Why art thou so strong,
and why is man so weak?”

“Man is not weak,” answered his companion; “knowledge is more than
equivalent to force.  The master of mechanics laughs at strength.  I can
burst the gate, but cannot do it secretly.  Some other expedient must be
tried.”

As they were walking on the side of the mountain they observed that the
coneys, which the rain had driven from their burrows, had taken shelter
among the bushes, and formed holes behind them tending upwards in an
oblique line.   “It has been the opinion of antiquity,” said Imlac, “that
human reason borrowed many arts from the instinct of animals; let us,
therefore, not think ourselves degraded by learning from the coney.  We
may escape by piercing the mountain in the same direction.  We will begin
where the summit hangs over the middle part, and labour upward till we
shall issue out beyond the prominence.”

The eyes of the Prince, when he heard this proposal, sparkled with joy.
The execution was easy and the success certain.

No time was now lost.  They hastened early in the morning to choose a
place proper for their mine.  They clambered with great fatigue among
crags and brambles, and returned without having discovered any part that
favoured their design.  The second and the third day were spent in the
same manner, and with the same frustration; but on the fourth day they
found a small cavern concealed by a thicket, where they resolved to make
their experiment.

Imlac procured instruments proper to hew stone and remove earth, and they
fell to their work on the next day with more eagerness than vigour.  They
were presently exhausted by their efforts, and sat down to pant upon the
grass.  The Prince for a moment appeared to be discouraged.  “Sir,” said
his companion, “practice will enable us to continue our labour for a
longer time.  Mark, however, how far we have advanced, and ye will find
that our toil will some time have an end.  Great works are performed not
by strength, but perseverance; yonder palace was raised by single stones,
yet you see its height and spaciousness.  He that shall walk with vigour
three hours a day, will pass in seven years a space equal to the
circumference of the globe.”

They returned to their work day after day, and in a short time found a
fissure in the rock, which enabled them to pass far with very little
obstruction.  This Rasselas considered as a good omen.  “Do not disturb
your mind,” said Imlac, “with other hopes or fears than reason may
suggest; if you are pleased with the prognostics of good, you will be
terrified likewise with tokens of evil, and your whole life will be a
prey to superstition.  Whatever facilitates our work is more than an
omen; it is a cause of success.  This is one of those pleasing surprises
which often happen to active resolution.  Many things difficult to design
prove easy to performance.”




CHAPTER XIV
RASSELAS AND IMLAC RECEIVE AN UNEXPECTED VISIT.


THEY had now wrought their way to the middle, and solaced their toil with
the approach of liberty, when the Prince, coming down to refresh himself
with air, found his sister Nekayah standing at the mouth of the cavity.
He started, and stood confused, afraid to tell his design, and yet
hopeless to conceal it.  A few moments determined him to repose on her
fidelity, and secure her secrecy by a declaration without reserve.

“Do not imagine,” said the Princess, “that I came hither as a spy.  I had
long observed from my window that you and Imlac directed your walk every
day towards the same point, but I did not suppose you had any better
reason for the preference than a cooler shade or more fragrant bank, nor
followed you with any other design than to partake of your conversation.
Since, then, not suspicion, but fondness, has detected you, let me not
lose the advantage of my discovery.  I am equally weary of confinement
with yourself, and not less desirous of knowing what is done or suffered
in the world.  Permit me to fly with you from this tasteless
tranquillity, which will yet grow more loathsome when you have left me.
You may deny me to accompany you, but cannot hinder me from following.”

The Prince, who loved Nekayah above his other sisters, had no inclination
to refuse her request, and grieved that he had lost an opportunity of
showing his confidence by a voluntary communication.  It was, therefore,
agreed that she should leave the valley with them; and that in the
meantime she should watch, lest any other straggler should, by chance or
curiosity, follow them to the mountain.

At length their labour was at an end.  They saw light beyond the
prominence, and, issuing to the top of the mountain, beheld the Nile, yet
a narrow current, wandering beneath them.

The Prince looked round with rapture, anticipated all the pleasures of
travel, and in thought was already transported beyond his father’s
dominions.  Imlac, though very joyful at his escape, had less expectation
of pleasure in the world, which he had before tried and of which he had
been weary.

Rasselas was so much delighted with a wider horizon, that he could not
soon be persuaded to return into the valley.  He informed his sister that
the way was now open, and that nothing now remained but to prepare for
their departure.




