CHAPTER IX
THE HISTORY OF IMLAC (_continued_).


“WHEN I first entered upon the world of waters, and lost sight of land, I
looked round about me in pleasing terror, and thinking my soul enlarged
by the boundless prospect, imagined that I could gaze around me for ever
without satiety; but in a short time I grew weary of looking on barren
uniformity, where I could only see again what I had already seen.  I then
descended into the ship, and doubted for awhile whether all my future
pleasures would not end, like this, in disgust and disappointment.  ‘Yet
surely,’ said I, ‘the ocean and the land are very different.  The only
variety of water is rest and motion.  But the earth has mountains and
valleys, deserts and cities; it is inhabited by men of different customs
and contrary opinions; and I may hope to find variety in life, though I
should miss it in nature.’

“With this thought I quieted my mind, and amused myself during the
voyage, sometimes by learning from the sailors the art of navigation,
which I have never practised, and sometimes by forming schemes for my
conduct in different situations, in not one of which I have been ever
placed.

“I was almost weary of my naval amusements when we safely landed at
Surat.  I secured my money and, purchasing some commodities for show,
joined myself to a caravan that was passing into the inland country.  My
companions, for some reason or other, conjecturing that I was rich, and,
by my inquiries and admiration, finding that I was ignorant, considered
me as a novice whom they had a right to cheat, and who was to learn, at
the usual expense, the art of fraud.  They exposed me to the theft of
servants and the exaction of officers, and saw me plundered upon false
pretences, without any advantage to themselves but that of rejoicing in
the superiority of their own knowledge.”

“Stop a moment,” said the Prince; “is there such depravity in man as that
he should injure another without benefit to himself?  I can easily
conceive that all are pleased with superiority; but your ignorance was
merely accidental, which, being neither your crime nor your folly, could
afford them no reason to applaud themselves; and the knowledge which they
had, and which you wanted, they might as effectually have shown by
warning as betraying you.”

“Pride,” said Imlac, “is seldom delicate; it will please itself with very
mean advantages, and envy feels not its own happiness but when it may be
compared with the misery of others.  They were my enemies because they
grieved to think me rich, and my oppressors because they delighted to
find me weak.”

“Proceed,” said the Prince; “I doubt not of the facts which you relate,
but imagine that you impute them to mistaken motives.”

“In this company,” said Imlac, “I arrived at Agra, the capital of
Hindostan, the city in which the Great Mogul commonly resides.  I applied
myself to the language of the country, and in a few months was able to
converse with the learned men; some of whom I found morose and reserved,
and others easy and communicative; some were unwilling to teach another
what they had with difficulty learned themselves; and some showed that
the end of their studies was to gain the dignity of instructing.

“To the tutor of the young princes I recommended myself so much that I
was presented to the Emperor as a man of uncommon knowledge.  The Emperor
asked me many questions concerning my country and my travels, and though
I cannot now recollect anything that he uttered above the power of a
common man, he dismissed me astonished at his wisdom and enamoured of his
goodness.

“My credit was now so high that the merchants with whom I had travelled
applied to me for recommendations to the ladies of the Court.  I was
surprised at their confidence of solicitation and greatly reproached them
with their practices on the road.  They heard me with cold indifference,
and showed no tokens of shame or sorrow.

“They then urged their request with the offer of a bribe, but what I
would not do for kindness I would not do for money, and refused them, not
because they had injured me, but because I would not enable them to
injure others; for I knew they would have made use of my credit to cheat
those who should buy their wares.

“Having resided at Agra till there was no more to be learned, I travelled
into Persia, where I saw many remains of ancient magnificence and
observed many new accommodations of life.  The Persians are a nation
eminently social, and their assemblies afforded me daily opportunities of
remarking characters and manners, and of tracing human nature through all
its variations.

“From Persia I passed into Arabia, where I saw a nation pastoral and
warlike, who lived without any settled habitation, whose wealth is their
flocks and herds, and who have carried on through ages an hereditary war
with mankind, though they neither covet nor envy their possessions.”




CHAPTER X
IMLAC’S HISTORY (_continued_)—A DISSERTATION UPON POETRY.


“WHEREVER I went I found that poetry was considered as the highest
learning, and regarded with a veneration somewhat approaching to that
which man would pay to angelic nature.  And yet it fills me with wonder
that in almost all countries the most ancient poets are considered as the
best; whether it be that every other kind of knowledge is an acquisition
greatly attained, and poetry is a gift conferred at once; or that the
first poetry of every nation surprised them as a novelty, and retained
the credit by consent which it received by accident at first; or whether,
as the province of poetry is to describe nature and passion, which are
always the same, the first writers took possession of the most striking
objects for description and the most probable occurrences for fiction,
and left nothing to those that followed them but transcription of the
same events and new combinations of the same images.  Whatever be the
reason, it is commonly observed that the early writers are in possession
of nature, and their followers of art; that the first excel in strength
and invention, and the latter in elegance and refinement.

“I was desirous to add my name to this illustrious fraternity.  I read
all the poets of Persia and Arabia, and was able to repeat by memory the
volumes that are suspended in the mosque of Mecca.  But I soon found that
no man was ever great by imitations.  My desire of excellence impelled me
to transfer my attention to nature and to life.  Nature was to be my
subject, and men to be my auditors.  I could never describe what I had
not seen.  I could not hope to move those with delight or terror whose
interests and opinions I did not understand.

“Being now resolved to be a poet, I saw everything with a new purpose; my
sphere of attention was suddenly magnified; no kind of knowledge was to
be overlooked.  I ranged mountains and deserts for images and
resemblances, and pictured upon my mind every tree of the forest and
flower of the valley.  I observed with equal care the crags of the rock
and the pinnacles of the palace.  Sometimes I wandered along the mazes of
the rivulet, and sometimes watched the changes of the summer clouds.  To
a poet nothing can be useless.  Whatever is beautiful and whatever is
dreadful must be familiar to his imagination; he must be conversant with
all that is awfully vast or elegantly little.  The plants of the garden,
the animals of the wood, the minerals of the earth, and meteors of the
sky, must all concur to store his mind with inexhaustible variety; for
every idea is useful for the enforcement or decoration of moral or
religious truth, and he who knows most will have most power of
diversifying his scenes and of gratifying his reader with remote
allusions and unexpected instruction.

“All the appearances of nature I was therefore careful to study, and
every country which I have surveyed has contributed something to my
poetical powers.”

“In so wide a survey,” said the Prince, “you must surely have left much
unobserved.  I have lived till now within the circuit of the mountains,
and yet cannot walk abroad without the sight of something which I had
never beheld before, or never heeded.”

“This business of a poet,” said Imlac, “is to examine, not the
individual, but the species; to remark general properties and large
appearances.  He does not number the streaks of the tulip, or describe
the different shades of the verdure of the forest.  He is to exhibit in
his portraits of nature such prominent and striking features as recall
the original to every mind, and must neglect the minuter discriminations,
which one may have remarked and another have neglected, for those
characteristics which are alike obvious to vigilance and carelessness.

“But the knowledge of nature is only half the task of a poet; he must be
acquainted likewise with all the modes of life.  His character requires
that he estimate the happiness and misery of every condition, observe the
power of all the passions in all their combinations, and trace the
changes of the human mind, as they are modified by various institutions
and accidental influences of climate or custom, from the sprightliness of
infancy to the despondence of decrepitude.  He must divest himself of the
prejudices of his age and country; he must consider right and wrong in
their abstracted and invariable state; he must disregard present laws and
opinions, and rise to general and transcendental truths, which will
always be the same.  He must, therefore, content himself with the slow
progress of his name, contemn the praise of his own time, and commit his
claims to the justice of posterity.  He must write as the interpreter of
nature and the legislator of mankind, and consider himself as presiding
over the thoughts and manners of future generations, as a being superior
to time and place.

“His labour is not yet at an end.  He must know many languages and many
sciences, and, that his style may be worthy of his thoughts, must by
incessant practice familiarise to himself every delicacy of speech and
grace of harmony.”




