CHAPTER XL
THE HISTORY OF A MAN OF LEARNING.


THEY returned to Cairo, and were so well pleased at finding themselves
together that none of them went much abroad.  The Prince began to love
learning, and one day declared to Imlac that he intended to devote
himself to science and pass the rest of his days in literary solitude.

“Before you make your final choice,” answered Imlac, “you ought to
examine its hazards, and converse with some of those who are grown old in
the company of themselves.  I have just left the observatory of one of
the most learned astronomers in the world, who has spent forty years in
unwearied attention to the motion and appearances of the celestial
bodies, and has drawn out his soul in endless calculations.  He admits a
few friends once a month to hear his deductions and enjoy his
discoveries.  I was introduced as a man of knowledge worthy of his
notice.  Men of various ideas and fluent conversation are commonly
welcome to those whose thoughts have been long fixed upon a single point,
and who find the images of other things stealing away.  I delighted him
with my remarks.  He smiled at the narrative of my travels, and was glad
to forget the constellations and descend for a moment into the lower
world.

“On the next day of vacation I renewed my visit, and was so fortunate as
to please him again.  He relaxed from that time the severity of his rule,
and permitted me to enter at my own choice.  I found him always busy, and
always glad to be relieved.  As each knew much which the other was
desirous of learning, we exchanged our notions with great delight.  I
perceived that I had every day more of his confidence, and always found
new cause of admiration in the profundity of his mind.  His comprehension
is vast, his memory capacious and retentive, his discourse is methodical,
and his expression clear.

“His integrity and benevolence are equal to his learning.  His deepest
researches and most favourite studies are willingly interrupted for any
opportunity of doing good by his counsel or his riches.  To his closest
retreat, at his most busy moments, all are admitted that want his
assistance; ‘For though I exclude idleness and pleasure, I will never,’
says he, ‘bar my doors against charity.  To man is permitted the
contemplation of the skies, but the practice of virtue is commanded.’”

“Surely,” said the Princess, “this man is happy.”

“I visited him,” said Imlac, “with more and more frequency, and was every
time more enamoured of his conversation; he was sublime without
haughtiness, courteous without formality, and communicative without
ostentation.  I was at first, great Princess, of your opinion, thought
him the happiest of mankind, and often congratulated him on the blessing
that he enjoyed.  He seemed to hear nothing with indifference but the
praises of his condition, to which he always returned a general answer,
and diverted the conversation to some other topic.

“Amidst this willingness to be pleased and labour to please, I had
quickly reason to imagine that some painful sentiment pressed upon his
mind.  He often looked up earnestly towards the sun, and let his voice
fall in the midst of his discourse.  He would sometimes, when we were
alone, gaze upon me in silence with the air of a man who longed to speak
what he was yet resolved to suppress.  He would often send for me with
vehement injunction of haste, though when I came to him he had nothing
extraordinary to say; and sometimes, when I was leaving him, would call
me back, pause a few moments, and then dismiss me.”




CHAPTER XLI
THE ASTRONOMER DISCOVERS THE CAUSE OF HIS UNEASINESS.


“AT last the time came when the secret burst his reserve.  We were
sitting together last night in the turret of his house watching the
immersion of a satellite of Jupiter.  A sudden tempest clouded the sky
and disappointed our observation.  We sat awhile silent in the dark, and
then he addressed himself to me in these words: ‘Imlac, I have long
considered thy friendship as the greatest blessing of my life.  Integrity
without knowledge is weak and useless, and knowledge without integrity is
dangerous and dreadful.  I have found in thee all the qualities requisite
for trust—benevolence, experience, and fortitude.  I have long discharged
an office which I must soon quit at the call of Nature, and shall rejoice
in the hour of imbecility and pain to devolve it upon thee.’

“I thought myself honoured by this testimony, and protested that whatever
could conduce to his happiness would add likewise to mine.

“‘Hear, Imlac, what thou wilt not without difficulty credit.  I have
possessed for five years the regulation of the weather and the
distribution of the seasons.  The sun has listened to my dictates, and
passed from tropic to tropic by my direction; the clouds at my call have
poured their waters, and the Nile has overflowed at my command.  I have
restrained the rage of the dog-star, and mitigated the fervours of the
crab.  The winds alone, of all the elemental powers, have hitherto
refused my authority, and multitudes have perished by equinoctial
tempests which I found myself unable to prohibit or restrain.  I have
administered this great office with exact justice, and made to the
different nations of the earth an impartial dividend of rain and
sunshine.  What must have been the misery of half the globe if I had
limited the clouds to particular regions, or confined the sun to either
side of the equator?’”




