CHAPTER XIII. Switzerland

On the homeward walk, that evening, Roderick preserved a silence which
Rowland allowed to make him uneasy. Early on the morrow Roderick,
saying nothing of his intentions, started off on a walk; Rowland saw
him striding with light steps along the rugged path to Engelberg. He was
absent all day and he gave no account of himself on his return. He said
he was deadly tired, and he went to bed early. When he had left the room
Miss Garland drew near to Rowland.

“I wish to ask you a question,” she said. “What happened to Roderick
yesterday at Engelberg?”

“You have discovered that something happened?” Rowland answered.

“I am sure of it. Was it something painful?”

“I don’t know how, at the present moment, he judges it. He met the
Princess Casamassima.”

“Thank you!” said Miss Garland, simply, and turned away.

The conversation had been brief, but, like many small things, it
furnished Rowland with food for reflection. When one is looking for
symptoms one easily finds them. This was the first time Mary Garland had
asked Rowland a question which it was in Roderick’s power to answer,
the first time she had frankly betrayed Roderick’s reticence. Rowland
ventured to think it marked an era.

The next morning was sultry, and the air, usually so fresh at those
altitudes, was oppressively heavy. Rowland lounged on the grass a while,
near Singleton, who was at work under his white umbrella, within view of
the house; and then in quest of coolness he wandered away to the rocky
ridge whence you looked across at the Jungfrau. To-day, however, the
white summits were invisible; their heads were muffled in sullen clouds
and the valleys beneath them curtained in dun-colored mist. Rowland had
a book in his pocket, and he took it out and opened it. But his page
remained unturned; his own thoughts were more importunate. His interview
with Christina Light had made a great impression upon him, and he was
haunted with the memory of her almost blameless bitterness, and of all
that was tragic and fatal in her latest transformation. These things
were immensely appealing, and Rowland thought with infinite impatience
of Roderick’s having again encountered them. It required little
imagination to apprehend that the young sculptor’s condition had
also appealed to Christina. His consummate indifference, his supreme
defiance, would make him a magnificent trophy, and Christina had
announced with sufficient distinctness that she had said good-by to
scruples. It was her fancy at present to treat the world as a garden of
pleasure, and if, hitherto, she had played with Roderick’s passion on
its stem, there was little doubt that now she would pluck it with an
unfaltering hand and drain it of its acrid sweetness. And why the
deuce need Roderick have gone marching back to destruction? Rowland’s
meditations, even when they began in rancor, often brought him peace;
but on this occasion they ushered in a quite peculiar quality of unrest.
He felt conscious of a sudden collapse in his moral energy; a current
that had been flowing for two years with liquid strength seemed at last
to pause and evaporate. Rowland looked away at the stagnant vapors on
the mountains; their dreariness seemed a symbol of the dreariness which
his own generosity had bequeathed him. At last he had arrived at the
uttermost limit of the deference a sane man might pay to other people’s
folly; nay, rather, he had transgressed it; he had been befooled on a
gigantic scale. He turned to his book and tried to woo back patience,
but it gave him cold comfort and he tossed it angrily away. He pulled
his hat over his eyes, and tried to wonder, dispassionately, whether
atmospheric conditions had not something to do with his ill-humor. He
remained for some time in this attitude, but was finally aroused from
it by a singular sense that, although he had heard nothing, some one had
approached him. He looked up and saw Roderick standing before him on the
turf. His mood made the spectacle unwelcome, and for a moment he felt
like uttering an uncivil speech. Roderick stood looking at him with an
expression of countenance which had of late become rare. There was an
unfamiliar spark in his eye and a certain imperious alertness in his
carriage. Confirmed habit, with Rowland, came speedily to the front.
“What is it now?” he asked himself, and invited Roderick to sit down.
Roderick had evidently something particular to say, and if he remained
silent for a time it was not because he was ashamed of it.

“I would like you to do me a favor,” he said at last. “Lend me some
money.”

“How much do you wish?” Rowland asked.

“Say a thousand francs.”

Rowland hesitated a moment. “I don’t wish to be indiscreet, but may I
ask what you propose to do with a thousand francs?”

“To go to Interlaken.”

“And why are you going to Interlaken?”

Roderick replied without a shadow of wavering, “Because that woman is to
be there.”

Rowland burst out laughing, but Roderick remained serenely grave. “You
have forgiven her, then?” said Rowland.

“Not a bit of it!”

“I don’t understand.”

“Neither do I. I only know that she is incomparably beautiful, and that
she has waked me up amazingly. Besides, she asked me to come.”

“She asked you?”

“Yesterday, in so many words.”

“Ah, the jade!”

“Exactly. I am willing to take her for that.”

“Why in the name of common sense did you go back to her?”

“Why did I find her standing there like a goddess who had just stepped
out of her cloud? Why did I look at her? Before I knew where I was, the
harm was done.”

Rowland, who had been sitting erect, threw himself back on the grass and
lay for some time staring up at the sky. At last, raising himself, “Are
you perfectly serious?” he asked.

“Deadly serious.”

“Your idea is to remain at Interlaken some time?”

“Indefinitely!” said Roderick; and it seemed to his companion that the
tone in which he said this made it immensely well worth hearing.

“And your mother and cousin, meanwhile, are to remain here? It will soon
be getting very cold, you know.”

“It does n’t seem much like it to-day.”

“Very true; but to-day is a day by itself.”

“There is nothing to prevent their going back to Lucerne. I depend upon
your taking charge of them.”

At this Rowland reclined upon the grass again; and again, after
reflection, he faced his friend. “How would you express,” he asked, “the
character of the profit that you expect to derive from your excursion?”

“I see no need of expressing it. The proof of the pudding is in the
eating! The case is simply this. I desire immensely to be near Christina
Light, and it is such a huge refreshment to find myself again desiring
something, that I propose to drift with the current. As I say, she has
waked me up, and it is possible something may come of it. She makes me
feel as if I were alive again. This,” and he glanced down at the inn, “I
call death!”

“That I am very grateful to hear. You really feel as if you might do
something?”

“Don’t ask too much. I only know that she makes my heart beat, makes me
see visions.”

“You feel encouraged?”

“I feel excited.”

“You are really looking better.”

“I am glad to hear it. Now that I have answered your questions, please
to give me the money.”

Rowland shook his head. “For that purpose, I can’t!”

“You can’t?”

“It ‘s impossible. Your plan is rank folly. I can’t help you in it.”

Roderick flushed a little, and his eye expanded. “I will borrow what
money I can, then, from Mary!” This was not viciously said; it had
simply the ring of passionate resolution.

Instantly it brought Rowland to terms. He took a bunch of keys from
his pocket and tossed it upon the grass. “The little brass one opens my
dressing-case,” he said. “You will find money in it.”

Roderick let the keys lie; something seemed to have struck him; he
looked askance at his friend. “You are awfully gallant!”

“You certainly are not. Your proposal is an outrage.”

“Very likely. It ‘s a proof the more of my desire.”

“If you have so much steam on, then, use it for something else. You say
you are awake again. I am delighted; only be so in the best sense. Is
n’t it very plain? If you have the energy to desire, you have also the
energy to reason and to judge. If you can care to go, you can also care
to stay, and staying being the more profitable course, the inspiration,
on that side, for a man who has his self-confidence to win back again,
should be greater.”

Roderick, plainly, did not relish this simple logic, and his eye grew
angry as he listened to its echo. “Oh, the devil!” he cried.

Rowland went on. “Do you believe that hanging about Christina Light will
do you any good? Do you believe it won’t? In either case you should keep
away from her. If it won’t, it ‘s your duty; and if it will, you can get
on without it.”

“Do me good?” cried Roderick. “What do I want of ‘good’--what should I
do with ‘good’? I want what she gives me, call it by what name you will.
I want to ask no questions, but to take what comes and let it fill the
impossible hours! But I did n’t come to discuss the matter.”

“I have not the least desire to discuss it,” said Rowland. “I simply
protest.”

Roderick meditated a moment. “I have never yet thought twice of
accepting a favor of you,” he said at last; “but this one sticks in my
throat.”

“It is not a favor; I lend you the money only under compulsion.”

“Well, then, I will take it only under compulsion!” Roderick exclaimed.
And he sprang up abruptly and marched away.

His words were ambiguous; Rowland lay on the grass, wondering what they
meant. Half an hour had not elapsed before Roderick reappeared, heated
with rapid walking, and wiping his forehead. He flung himself down and
looked at his friend with an eye which expressed something purer than
bravado and yet baser than conviction.

“I have done my best!” he said. “My mother is out of money; she is
expecting next week some circular notes from London. She had only ten
francs in her pocket. Mary Garland gave me every sou she possessed in
the world. It makes exactly thirty-four francs. That ‘s not enough.”

“You asked Miss Garland?” cried Rowland.

“I asked her.”

“And told her your purpose?”

“I named no names. But she knew!”

“What did she say?”

“Not a syllable. She simply emptied her purse.”

Rowland turned over and buried his face in his arms. He felt a movement
of irrepressible elation, and he barely stifled a cry of joy. Now,
surely, Roderick had shattered the last link in the chain that bound
Mary to him, and after this she would be free!... When he turned about
again, Roderick was still sitting there, and he had not touched the keys
which lay on the grass.

“I don’t know what is the matter with me,” said Roderick, “but I have an
insurmountable aversion to taking your money.”

“The matter, I suppose, is that you have a grain of wisdom left.”

“No, it ‘s not that. It ‘s a kind of brute instinct. I find it extremely
provoking!” He sat there for some time with his head in his hands and
his eyes on the ground. His lips were compressed, and he was evidently,
in fact, in a state of profound irritation. “You have succeeded in
making this thing excessively unpleasant!” he exclaimed.

“I am sorry,” said Rowland, “but I can’t see it in any other way.”

“That I believe, and I resent the range of your vision pretending to
be the limit of my action. You can’t feel for me nor judge for me, and
there are certain things you know nothing about. I have suffered, sir!”
 Roderick went on with increasing emphasis. “I have suffered damnable
torments. Have I been such a placid, contented, comfortable man this
last six months, that when I find a chance to forget my misery, I should
take such pains not to profit by it? You ask too much, for a man who
himself has no occasion to play the hero. I don’t say that invidiously;
it ‘s your disposition, and you can’t help it. But decidedly, there are
certain things you know nothing about.”

Rowland listened to this outbreak with open eyes, and Roderick, if
he had been less intent upon his own eloquence, would probably have
perceived that he turned pale. “These things--what are they?” Rowland
asked.

“They are women, principally, and what relates to women. Women for
you, by what I can make out, mean nothing. You have no imagination--no
sensibility!”

“That ‘s a serious charge,” said Rowland, gravely.

“I don’t make it without proof!”

“And what is your proof?”

Roderick hesitated a moment. “The way you treated Christina Light. I
call that grossly obtuse.”

“Obtuse?” Rowland repeated, frowning.

“Thick-skinned, beneath your good fortune.”

“My good fortune?”

“There it is--it ‘s all news to you! You had pleased her. I don’t say
she was dying of love for you, but she took a fancy to you.”

“We will let this pass!” said Rowland, after a silence.

“Oh, I don’t insist. I have only her own word for it.”

“She told you this?”

“You noticed, at least, I suppose, that she was not afraid to speak. I
never repeated it, not because I was jealous, but because I was curious
to see how long your ignorance would last if left to itself.”

“I frankly confess it would have lasted forever. And yet I don’t
consider that my insensibility is proved.”

“Oh, don’t say that,” cried Roderick, “or I shall begin to suspect--what
I must do you the justice to say that I never have suspected--that you
are a trifle conceited. Upon my word, when I think of all this, your
protest, as you call it, against my following Christina Light seems
to me thoroughly offensive. There is something monstrous in a man’s
pretending to lay down the law to a sort of emotion with which he is
quite unacquainted--in his asking a fellow to give up a lovely woman for
conscience’ sake, when he has never had the impulse to strike a blow for
one for passion’s!”

“Oh, oh!” cried Rowland.

“All that ‘s very easy to say,” Roderick went on; “but you must remember
that there are such things as nerves, and senses, and imagination, and
a restless demon within that may sleep sometimes for a day, or for six
months, but that sooner or later wakes up and thumps at your ribs till
you listen to him! If you can’t understand it, take it on trust, and let
a poor imaginative devil live his life as he can!”

Roderick’s words seemed at first to Rowland like something heard in a
dream; it was impossible they had been actually spoken--so supreme an
expression were they of the insolence of egotism. Reality was never so
consistent as that! But Roderick sat there balancing his beautiful
head, and the echoes of his strident accent still lingered along the
half-muffled mountain-side. Rowland suddenly felt that the cup of his
chagrin was full to overflowing, and his long-gathered bitterness surged
into the simple, wholesome passion of anger for wasted kindness. But
he spoke without violence, and Roderick was probably at first far from
measuring the force that lay beneath his words.

“You are incredibly ungrateful,” he said. “You are talking arrogant
nonsense. What do you know about my sensibilities and my imagination?
How do you know whether I have loved or suffered? If I have held my
tongue and not troubled you with my complaints, you find it the most
natural thing in the world to put an ignoble construction on my silence.
I loved quite as well as you; indeed, I think I may say rather better. I
have been constant. I have been willing to give more than I received. I
have not forsaken one mistress because I thought another more beautiful,
nor given up the other and believed all manner of evil about her because
I had not my way with her. I have been a good friend to Christina Light,
and it seems to me my friendship does her quite as much honor as your
love!”

“Your love--your suffering--your silence--your friendship!” cried
Roderick. “I declare I don’t understand!”

“I dare say not. You are not used to understanding such things--you are
not used to hearing me talk of my feelings. You are altogether too
much taken up with your own. Be as much so as you please; I have always
respected your right. Only when I have kept myself in durance on purpose
to leave you an open field, don’t, by way of thanking me, come and call
me an idiot.”

“Oh, you claim then that you have made sacrifices?”

“Several! You have never suspected it?”

“If I had, do you suppose I would have allowed it?” cried Roderick.

“They were the sacrifices of friendship and they were easily made; only
I don’t enjoy having them thrown back in my teeth.”

This was, under the circumstances, a sufficiently generous speech; but
Roderick was not in the humor to take it generously. “Come, be more
definite,” he said. “Let me know where it is the shoe has pinched.”

Rowland frowned; if Roderick would not take generosity, he should have
full justice. “It ‘s a perpetual sacrifice,” he said, “to live with a
perfect egotist.”

“I am an egotist?” cried Roderick.

“Did it never occur to you?”

“An egotist to whom you have made perpetual sacrifices?” He repeated
the words in a singular tone; a tone that denoted neither exactly
indignation nor incredulity, but (strange as it may seem) a sudden
violent curiosity for news about himself.

“You are selfish,” said Rowland; “you think only of yourself and believe
only in yourself. You regard other people only as they play into your
own hands. You have always been very frank about it, and the thing
seemed so mixed up with the temper of your genius and the very structure
of your mind, that often one was willing to take the evil with the good
and to be thankful that, considering your great talent, you were no
worse. But if one believed in you, as I have done, one paid a tax upon
it.”

Roderick leaned his elbows on his knees, clasped his hands together, and
crossed them, shadewise, over his eyes. In this attitude, for a
moment, he sat looking coldly at his friend. “So I have made you very
uncomfortable?” he went on.

“Extremely so.”

“I have been eager, grasping, obstinate, vain, ungrateful, indifferent,
cruel?”

“I have accused you, mentally, of all these things, with the exception
of vanity.”

“You have often hated me?”

“Never. I should have parted company with you before coming to that.”

“But you have wanted to part company, to bid me go my way and be
hanged!”

“Repeatedly. Then I have had patience and forgiven you.”

“Forgiven me, eh? Suffering all the while?”

“Yes, you may call it suffering.”

“Why did you never tell me all this before?”

“Because my affection was always stronger than my resentment; because
I preferred to err on the side of kindness; because I had, myself, in a
measure, launched you in the world and thrown you into temptations; and
because nothing short of your unwarrantable aggression just now could
have made me say these painful things.”

Roderick picked up a blade of long grass and began to bite it; Rowland
was puzzled by his expression and manner. They seemed strangely cynical;
there was something revolting in his deepening calmness. “I must have
been hideous,” Roderick presently resumed.

“I am not talking for your entertainment,” said Rowland.

“Of course not. For my edification!” As Roderick said these words there
was not a ray of warmth in his brilliant eye.

“I have spoken for my own relief,” Rowland went on, “and so that you
need never again go so utterly astray as you have done this morning.”

“It has been a terrible mistake, then?” What his tone expressed was not
willful mockery, but a kind of persistent irresponsibility which Rowland
found equally exasperating. He answered nothing.

“And all this time,” Roderick continued, “you have been in love? Tell me
the woman.”

Rowland felt an immense desire to give him a visible, palpable pang.
“Her name is Mary Garland,” he said.

Apparently he succeeded. The surprise was great; Roderick colored as he
had never done. “Mary Garland? Heaven forgive us!”

Rowland observed the “us;” Roderick threw himself back on the turf. The
latter lay for some time staring at the sky. At last he sprang to his
feet, and Rowland rose also, rejoicing keenly, it must be confessed, in
his companion’s confusion.

“For how long has this been?” Roderick demanded.

“Since I first knew her.”

“Two years! And you have never told her?”

“Never.”

“You have told no one?”

“You are the first person.”

“Why have you been silent?”

“Because of your engagement.”

“But you have done your best to keep that up.”

“That ‘s another matter!”

“It ‘s very strange!” said Roderick, presently. “It ‘s like something in
a novel.”

“We need n’t expatiate on it,” said Rowland. “All I wished to do was to
rebut your charge that I am an abnormal being.”

But still Roderick pondered. “All these months, while I was going on! I
wish you had mentioned it.”

“I acted as was necessary, and that ‘s the end of it.”

“You have a very high opinion of her?”

“The highest.”

“I remember now your occasionally expressing it and my being struck with
it. But I never dreamed you were in love with her. It ‘s a pity she does
n’t care for you!”

Rowland had made his point and he had no wish to prolong the
conversation; but he had a desire to hear more of this, and he remained
silent.

“You hope, I suppose, that some day she may?”

“I should n’t have offered to say so; but since you ask me, I do.”

“I don’t believe it. She idolizes me, and if she never were to see me
again she would idolize my memory.”

This might be profound insight, and it might be profound fatuity.
Rowland turned away; he could not trust himself to speak.

“My indifference, my neglect of her, must have seemed to you horrible.
Altogether, I must have appeared simply hideous.”

“Do you really care,” Rowland asked, “what you appeared?”

“Certainly. I have been damnably stupid. Is n’t an artist supposed to be
a man of perceptions? I am hugely disgusted.”

“Well, you understand now, and we can start afresh.”

“And yet,” said Roderick, “though you have suffered, in a degree, I
don’t believe you have suffered so much as some other men would have
done.”

“Very likely not. In such matters quantitative analysis is difficult.”

Roderick picked up his stick and stood looking at the ground.
“Nevertheless, I must have seemed hideous,” he repeated--“hideous.” He
turned away, scowling, and Rowland offered no contradiction.

They were both silent for some time, and at last Roderick gave a heavy
sigh and began to walk away. “Where are you going?” Rowland then asked.

“Oh, I don’t care! To walk; you have given me something to think
of.” This seemed a salutary impulse, and yet Rowland felt a nameless
perplexity. “To have been so stupid damns me more than anything!”
 Roderick went on. “Certainly, I can shut up shop now.”

Rowland felt in no smiling humor, and yet, in spite of himself, he could
almost have smiled at the very consistency of the fellow. It was egotism
still: aesthetic disgust at the graceless contour of his conduct, but
never a hint of simple sorrow for the pain he had given. Rowland let
him go, and for some moments stood watching him. Suddenly Mallet became
conscious of a singular and most illogical impulse--a desire to stop
him, to have another word with him--not to lose sight of him. He called
him and Roderick turned. “I should like to go with you,” said Rowland.

“I am fit only to be alone. I am damned!”

“You had better not think of it at all,” Rowland cried, “than think in
that way.”

“There is only one way. I have been hideous!” And he broke off and
marched away with his long, elastic step, swinging his stick. Rowland
watched him and at the end of a moment called to him. Roderick stopped
and looked at him in silence, and then abruptly turned, and disappeared
below the crest of a hill.

Rowland passed the remainder of the day uncomfortably. He was half
irritated, half depressed; he had an insufferable feeling of having been
placed in the wrong, in spite of his excellent cause. Roderick did not
come home to dinner; but of this, with his passion for brooding away the
hours on far-off mountain sides, he had almost made a habit. Mrs. Hudson
appeared at the noonday repast with a face which showed that Roderick’s
demand for money had unsealed the fountains of her distress. Little
Singleton consumed an enormous and well-earned dinner. Miss Garland,
Rowland observed, had not contributed her scanty assistance to her
kinsman’s pursuit of the Princess Casamassima without an effort. The
effort was visible in her pale face and her silence; she looked so ill
that when they left the table Rowland felt almost bound to remark upon
it. They had come out upon the grass in front of the inn.

“I have a headache,” she said. And then suddenly, looking about at the
menacing sky and motionless air, “It ‘s this horrible day!”

Rowland that afternoon tried to write a letter to his cousin Cecilia,
but his head and his heart were alike heavy, and he traced upon the
paper but a single line. “I believe there is such a thing as being too
reasonable. But when once the habit is formed, what is one to do?” He
had occasion to use his keys and he felt for them in his pocket; they
were missing, and he remembered that he had left them lying on the
hill-top where he had had his talk with Roderick. He went forth in
search of them and found them where he had thrown them. He flung
himself down in the same place again; he felt indisposed to walk. He
was conscious that his mood had vastly changed since the morning;
his extraordinary, acute sense of his rights had been replaced by the
familiar, chronic sense of his duties. Only, his duties now seemed
impracticable; he turned over and buried his face in his arms. He lay
so a long time, thinking of many things; the sum of them all was that
Roderick had beaten him. At last he was startled by an extraordinary
sound; it took him a moment to perceive that it was a portentous growl
of thunder. He roused himself and saw that the whole face of the sky had
altered. The clouds that had hung motionless all day were moving from
their stations, and getting into position, as it were, for a battle. The
wind was rising; the sallow vapors were turning dark and consolidating
their masses. It was a striking spectacle, but Rowland judged best to
observe it briefly, as a storm was evidently imminent. He took his way
down to the inn and found Singleton still at his post, profiting by the
last of the rapidly-failing light to finish his study, and yet at the
same time taking rapid notes of the actual condition of the clouds.

“We are going to have a most interesting storm,” the little painter
gleefully cried. “I should like awfully to do it.”

Rowland adjured him to pack up his tools and decamp, and repaired to
the house. The air by this time had become portentously dark, and the
thunder was incessant and tremendous; in the midst of it the lightning
flashed and vanished, like the treble shrilling upon the bass. The
innkeeper and his servants had crowded to the doorway, and were looking
at the scene with faces which seemed a proof that it was unprecedented.
As Rowland approached, the group divided, to let some one pass from
within, and Mrs. Hudson came forth, as white as a corpse and trembling
in every limb.

“My boy, my boy, where is my boy?” she cried. “Mr. Mallet, why are you
here without him? Bring him to me!”

“Has no one seen Mr. Hudson?” Rowland asked of the others. “Has he not
returned?”

Each one shook his head and looked grave, and Rowland attempted to
reassure Mrs. Hudson by saying that of course he had taken refuge in a
chalet.

“Go and find him, go and find him!” she cried, insanely. “Don’t stand
there and talk, or I shall die!” It was now as dark as evening, and
Rowland could just distinguish the figure of Singleton scampering
homeward with his box and easel. “And where is Mary?” Mrs. Hudson went
on; “what in mercy’s name has become of her? Mr. Mallet, why did you
ever bring us here?”

There came a prodigious flash of lightning, and the limitless tumult
about them turned clearer than midsummer noonday. The brightness lasted
long enough to enable Rowland to see a woman’s figure on the top of
an eminence near the house. It was Mary Garland, questioning the lurid
darkness for Roderick. Rowland sprang out to interrupt her vigil, but in
a moment he encountered her, retreating. He seized her hand and hurried
her to the house, where, as soon as she stepped into the covered
gallery, Mrs. Hudson fell upon her with frantic lamentations.

“Did you see nothing,--nothing?” she cried. “Tell Mr. Mallet he must go
and find him, with some men, some lights, some wrappings. Go, go, go,
sir! In mercy, go!”

Rowland was extremely perturbed by the poor lady’s vociferous folly, for
he deemed her anxiety superfluous. He had offered his suggestion with
sincerity; nothing was more probable than that Roderick had found
shelter in a herdsman’s cabin. These were numerous on the neighboring
mountains, and the storm had given fair warning of its approach. Miss
Garland stood there very pale, saying nothing, but looking at him. He
expected that she would check her cousin’s importunity. “Could you find
him?” she suddenly asked. “Would it be of use?”

The question seemed to him a flash intenser than the lightning that was
raking the sky before them. It shattered his dream that he weighed in
the scale! But before he could answer, the full fury of the storm was
upon them; the rain descended in sounding torrents. Every one fell back
into the house. There had been no time to light lamps, and in the little
uncarpeted parlor, in the unnatural darkness, Rowland felt Mary’s hand
upon his arm. For a moment it had an eloquent pressure; it seemed to
retract her senseless challenge, and to say that she believed, for
Roderick, what he believed. But nevertheless, thought Rowland, the cry
had come, her heart had spoken; her first impulse had been to sacrifice
him. He had been uncertain before; here, at least, was the comfort of
certainty!

It must be confessed, however, that the certainty in question did little
to enliven the gloom of that formidable evening. There was a noisy
crowd about him in the room--noisy even with the accompaniment of the
continual thunder-peals; lodgers and servants, chattering, shuffling,
and bustling, and annoying him equally by making too light of the
tempest and by vociferating their alarm. In the disorder, it was some
time before a lamp was lighted, and the first thing he saw, as it was
swung from the ceiling, was the white face of Mrs. Hudson, who was being
carried out of the room in a swoon by two stout maid-servants, with Mary
Garland forcing a passage. He rendered what help he could, but when they
had laid the poor woman on her bed, Miss Garland motioned him away.

“I think you make her worse,” she said.

Rowland went to his own chamber. The partitions in Swiss mountain-inns
are thin, and from time to time he heard Mrs. Hudson moaning, three
rooms off. Considering its great fury, the storm took long to expend
itself; it was upwards of three hours before the thunder ceased. But
even then the rain continued to fall heavily, and the night, which had
come on, was impenetrably black. This lasted till near midnight. Rowland
thought of Mary Garland’s challenge in the porch, but he thought even
more that, although the fetid interior of a high-nestling chalet may
offer a convenient refuge from an Alpine tempest, there was no possible
music in the universe so sweet as the sound of Roderick’s voice. At
midnight, through his dripping window-pane, he saw a star, and he
immediately went downstairs and out into the gallery. The rain had
ceased, the cloud-masses were dissevered here and there, and several
stars were visible. In a few minutes he heard a step behind him, and,
turning, saw Miss Garland. He asked about Mrs. Hudson and learned that
she was sleeping, exhausted by her fruitless lamentations. Miss Garland
kept scanning the darkness, but she said nothing to cast doubt on
Roderick’s having found a refuge. Rowland noticed it. “This also have I
guaranteed!” he said to himself. There was something that Mary wished to
learn, and a question presently revealed it.

“What made him start on a long walk so suddenly?” she asked. “I saw him
at eleven o’clock, and then he meant to go to Engelberg, and sleep.”

“On his way to Interlaken?” Rowland said.

“Yes,” she answered, under cover of the darkness.

“We had some talk,” said Rowland, “and he seemed, for the day, to have
given up Interlaken.”

“Did you dissuade him?”

“Not exactly. We discussed another question, which, for the time,
superseded his plan.”

Miss Garland was silent. Then--“May I ask whether your discussion was
violent?” she said.

“I am afraid it was agreeable to neither of us.”

“And Roderick left you in--in irritation?”

“I offered him my company on his walk. He declined it.”

Miss Garland paced slowly to the end of the gallery and then came back.
“If he had gone to Engelberg,” she said, “he would have reached the
hotel before the storm began.”

Rowland felt a sudden explosion of ferocity. “Oh, if you like,” he
cried, “he can start for Interlaken as soon as he comes back!”

But she did not even notice his wrath. “Will he come back early?” she
went on.

“We may suppose so.”

“He will know how anxious we are, and he will start with the first
light!”

Rowland was on the point of declaring that Roderick’s readiness to throw
himself into the feelings of others made this extremely probable; but he
checked himself and said, simply, “I expect him at sunrise.”

Miss Garland bent her eyes once more upon the irresponsive darkness, and
then, in silence, went into the house. Rowland, it must be averred, in
spite of his resolution not to be nervous, found no sleep that night.
When the early dawn began to tremble in the east, he came forth again
into the open air. The storm had completely purged the atmosphere, and
the day gave promise of cloudless splendor. Rowland watched the early
sun-shafts slowly reaching higher, and remembered that if Roderick
did not come back to breakfast, there were two things to be taken
into account. One was the heaviness of the soil on the mountain-sides,
saturated with the rain; this would make him walk slowly: the other
was the fact that, speaking without irony, he was not remarkable for
throwing himself into the sentiments of others. Breakfast, at the inn,
was early, and by breakfast-time Roderick had not appeared. Then Rowland
admitted that he was nervous. Neither Mrs. Hudson nor Miss Garland had
left their apartment; Rowland had a mental vision of them sitting there
praying and listening; he had no desire to see them more directly. There
were a couple of men who hung about the inn as guides for the ascent of
the Titlis; Rowland sent each of them forth in a different direction,
to ask the news of Roderick at every chalet door within a morning’s
walk. Then he called Sam Singleton, whose peregrinations had made him an
excellent mountaineer, and whose zeal and sympathy were now unbounded,
and the two started together on a voyage of research. By the time
they had lost sight of the inn, Rowland was obliged to confess that,
decidedly, Roderick had had time to come back.

He wandered about for several hours, but he found only the sunny
stillness of the mountain-sides. Before long he parted company with
Singleton, who, to his suggestion that separation would multiply their
resources, assented with a silent, frightened look which reflected too
vividly his own rapidly-dawning thought. The day was magnificent; the
sun was everywhere; the storm had lashed the lower slopes into a deeper
flush of autumnal color, and the snow-peaks reared themselves against
the near horizon in glaring blocks and dazzling spires. Rowland made his
way to several chalets, but most of them were empty. He thumped at their
low, foul doors with a kind of nervous, savage anger; he challenged the
stupid silence to tell him something about his friend. Some of these
places had evidently not been open in months. The silence everywhere
was horrible; it seemed to mock at his impatience and to be a conscious
symbol of calamity. In the midst of it, at the door of one of the
chalets, quite alone, sat a hideous cretin, who grinned at Rowland over
his goitre when, hardly knowing what he did, he questioned him. The
creature’s family was scattered on the mountain-sides; he could give
Rowland no help to find them. Rowland climbed into many awkward
places, and skirted, intently and peeringly, many an ugly chasm and
steep-dropping ledge. But the sun, as I have said, was everywhere; it
illumined the deep places over which, not knowing where to turn next,
he halted and lingered, and showed him nothing but the stony Alpine
void--nothing so human even as death. At noon he paused in his quest and
sat down on a stone; the conviction was pressing upon him that the worst
that was now possible was true. He suspended his search; he was afraid
to go on. He sat there for an hour, sick to the depths of his soul.
Without his knowing why, several things, chiefly trivial, that had
happened during the last two years and that he had quite forgotten,
became vividly present to his mind. He was aroused at last by the sound
of a stone dislodged near by, which rattled down the mountain. In a
moment, on a steep, rocky slope opposite to him, he beheld a figure
cautiously descending--a figure which was not Roderick. It was
Singleton, who had seen him and began to beckon to him.

“Come down--come down!” cried the painter, steadily making his own way
down. Rowland saw that as he moved, and even as he selected his foothold
and watched his steps, he was looking at something at the bottom of the
cliff. This was a great rugged wall which had fallen backward from
the perpendicular, and the descent, though difficult, was with care
sufficiently practicable.

“What do you see?” cried Rowland.

Singleton stopped, looked across at him and seemed to hesitate; then,
“Come down--come down!” he simply repeated.

Rowland’s course was also a steep descent, and he attacked it so
precipitately that he afterwards marveled he had not broken his neck.
It was a ten minutes’ headlong scramble. Half-way down he saw something
that made him dizzy; he saw what Singleton had seen. In the gorge below
them a vague white mass lay tumbled upon the stones. He let himself go,
blindly, fiercely. Singleton had reached the rocky bottom of the ravine
before him, and had bounded forward and fallen upon his knees. Rowland
overtook him and his own legs collapsed. The thing that yesterday was
his friend lay before him as the chance of the last breath had left it,
and out of it Roderick’s face stared upward, open-eyed, at the sky.

He had fallen from a great height, but he was singularly little
disfigured. The rain had spent its torrents upon him, and his clothes
and hair were as wet as if the billows of the ocean had flung him upon
the strand. An attempt to move him would show some hideous fracture,
some horrible physical dishonor; but what Rowland saw on first looking
at him was only a strangely serene expression of life. The eyes were
dead, but in a short time, when Rowland had closed them, the whole
face seemed to awake. The rain had washed away all blood; it was as if
Violence, having done her work, had stolen away in shame. Roderick’s
face might have shamed her; it looked admirably handsome.

“He was a beautiful man!” said Singleton.

They looked up through their horror at the cliff from which he had
apparently fallen, and which lifted its blank and stony face above
him, with no care now but to drink the sunshine on which his eyes were
closed, and then Rowland had an immense outbreak of pity and anguish. At
last they spoke of carrying him back to the inn. “There must be three or
four men,” Rowland said, “and they must be brought here quickly. I have
not the least idea where we are.”

“We are at about three hours’ walk from home,” said Singleton. “I will
go for help; I can find my way.”

“Remember,” said Rowland, “whom you will have to face.”

“I remember,” the excellent fellow answered. “There was nothing I could
ever do for him in life; I will do what I can now.”

He went off, and Rowland stayed there alone. He watched for seven long
hours, and his vigil was forever memorable. The most rational of men was
for an hour the most passionate. He reviled himself with transcendent
bitterness, he accused himself of cruelty and injustice, he would
have lain down there in Roderick’s place to unsay the words that had
yesterday driven him forth on his lonely ramble. Roderick had been fond
of saying that there are such things as necessary follies, and Rowland
was now proving it. At last he grew almost used to the dumb exultation
of the cliff above him. He saw that Roderick was a mass of hideous
injury, and he tried to understand what had happened. Not that it helped
him; before that confounding mortality one hypothesis after another
faltered and swooned away. Roderick’s passionate walk had carried him
farther and higher than he knew; he had outstayed, supposably, the first
menace of the storm, and perhaps even found a defiant entertainment
in watching it. Perhaps he had simply lost himself. The tempest had
overtaken him, and when he tried to return, it was too late. He
had attempted to descend the cliff in the darkness, he had made the
inevitable slip, and whether he had fallen fifty feet or three hundred
little mattered. The condition of his body indicated the shorter fall.
Now that all was over, Rowland understood how exclusively, for two
years, Roderick had filled his life. His occupation was gone.

Singleton came back with four men--one of them the landlord of the inn.
They had formed a sort of rude bier of the frame of a chaise a porteurs,
and by taking a very round-about course homeward were able to follow a
tolerably level path and carry their burden with a certain decency. To
Rowland it seemed as if the little procession would never reach the inn;
but as they drew near it he would have given his right hand for a longer
delay. The people of the inn came forward to meet them, in a little
silent, solemn convoy. In the doorway, clinging together, appeared the
two bereaved women. Mrs. Hudson tottered forward with outstretched hands
and the expression of a blind person; but before she reached her son,
Mary Garland had rushed past her, and, in the face of the staring,
pitying, awe-stricken crowd, had flung herself, with the magnificent
movement of one whose rights were supreme, and with a loud, tremendous
cry, upon the senseless vestige of her love.

That cry still lives in Rowland’s ears. It interposes, persistently,
against the reflection that when he sometimes--very rarely--sees her,
she is unreservedly kind to him; against the memory that during the
dreary journey back to America, made of course with his assistance,
there was a great frankness in her gratitude, a great gratitude in her
frankness. Miss Garland lives with Mrs. Hudson, at Northampton, where
Rowland visits his cousin Cecilia more frequently than of old. When he
calls upon Miss Garland he never sees Mrs. Hudson. Cecilia, who, having
her shrewd impression that he comes to see Miss Garland as much as to
see herself, does not feel obliged to seem unduly flattered, calls him,
whenever he reappears, the most restless of mortals. But he always says
to her in answer, “No, I assure you I am the most patient!”





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Roderick Hudson, by Henry James

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RODERICK HUDSON ***

***** This file should be named 176-0.txt or 176-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/176/

Produced by Judy Boss and David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

