II

DANTE'S LIFE AND PRINCIPLES

_II. IN EXILE_


A rapid sketch of the most decisive events and the leading motives of
the life of Dante Alighieri has brought us to the eventful period of
his Priorate in 1300 and his banishment in 1302. His unsuccessful
efforts to carry out a firm and statesmanlike policy in Florence, with
the wreck of his own fortunes consequent upon their failure, may be
regarded as the occasion if not the cause of his conceiving his
greatest work, the 'Divine Comedy.'

Nineteen years elapsed between Dante's exile and his death, and both
tradition and internal evidence indicate that the main strength of his
life was poured during the whole of this period into the channels
already laid down in its opening years. 'Forging on the anvil of
incessant toil' the several parts of his great work, and 'welding them
into imperishable symmetry,'[14] the might of his intellect and the
passion of his heart grappled for nineteen years with the task of
giving worthy utterance to his vast idea. Line by line, canto by canto,
the victory was won. Dante had shown that his mother tongue could rise
to loftier themes than Greek or Roman had ever touched, and had wrought
out the fitting garb of a poem that stands alone in the literature of
the world in the scope and sublimity of its conception.

Barely to realise what it was that Dante attempted, wakes feelings in
our hearts akin to awe. When we think of that work and of the man who,
knowing what it was, deliberately set himself to do it, an appalling
sense of the presence of overwhelming grandeur falls upon us, as when a
great wall of rocky precipice rises sheer at our side, a thousand and
yet a thousand feet towards heaven. Our heads swim as we gaze up to the
sky-line of such a precipice, the ground seems to drop from beneath our
feet, all our past and present becomes a dream, and our very hold of
life seems to slip away from us. But the next moment a great exultation
comes rushing upon our hearts, with quickened pulses and drawing
deeper breath we rise to the sublimity of the scene around us, and our
whole being is expanded and exalted by it. After holding converse with
such grandeur our lives can never be so small again. And so it is when
the meaning of Dante's Comedy breaks upon us. When we follow the poet
step by step as he beats or pours his thought into language, when we
note the firmness of his pace, the mastery with which he handles and
commands his infinite theme, the unflinching directness, the godlike
self-reliance, with which he lays bare the hearts of his fellow-men and
makes himself the mouthpiece of the Eternal, when we gaze upon his
finished work and the despair of Hell, the yearning of Purgatory, the
peace of Heaven, sweep over our hearts, we are ready to whisper in
awe-struck exultation:

    What immortal hand or eye
    Dared form thy fearful symmetry?

The allegory with which the 'Divine Comedy' opens, shadows forth the
meaning and the purpose of the whole poem. In interpreting it we may
at first give prominence to its political signification, not because
its main intention is certainly or probably political, but because we
shall thus be enabled to pass in due order from the outer to the inner
circle of the poet's beliefs and purposes.

In the year 1300, then, Dante Alighieri found that he had wandered, he
knew not how, from the true path of life, and was plunged into the
deadly forest of political, social, and moral disorder which darkened
with terrific shade the fair soil of Italy. Deep horror settled upon
the recesses of his heart during the awful night, but at last he saw
the fair light of the morning sun brightening the shoulders of a hill
that stretched above: this was the peaceful land of moral and political
order, which seemed to offer an escape from the bitterness of that
ghastly forest. Gathering heart at this sweet sight, Dante set himself
manfully to work, with the nether foot ever planted firmly on the soil,
to scale that glorious height. But full soon his toilsome path would be
disputed with him. The dire powers of Guelfism would not allow the
restoration of peace and order to Italy. His first foe was the
incurable factiousness and lightness of his own fair Florence. Like a
lithe and speckled panther it glided before him to oppose his upward
progress, and forced him once and again to turn back upon his steps
towards that dread forest he had left. But though forced back, Dante
could not lose hope. Might he not tame this wild but beauteous beast?
Yes; he might have coped with the fickle, lustful, factious, envious
but lovely Florence, had not haughty France rushed on him like a lion,
at whose voice the air must tremble, had not lean and hungry Rome,
laden with insatiable greed, skulked wolf-like in his path. It was the
wolf above all that forced him back into the sunless depths of that
forest of dismay, and dashed to the ground his hopes of gaining the
fair height. When could he, when could his Italy, rise from this chaos
and be at peace? Not till some great political Messiah should draw his
sword. With no base love of pelf or thirst for land, but fed with
wisdom, love, and virtue, he should exalt the humbled Italy and drive
away her foes. Like a noble hound, he should chase the insatiable wolf
of Roman greed from city to city back to the Hell from which it
came.[15]

Dante's hope in this political Messiah rose and fell, but never died in
his heart. Now with the gospel of Messianic peace, now with the
denunciation of Messianic judgment on his lips, he poured out his lofty
enthusiasm in those apostolic and prophetic letters, some few of which
survive amidst the wrecks of time as records of his changing moods and
his unchanging purposes.

Now one and now another of the Ghibelline leaders may have seemed to
Dante from time to time to be the hero, the Messiah, for whom he
waited. But again and yet again his hopes were crushed and blighted,
and the panther, the lion, and the wolf still cut off the approach to
that fair land.

More than once the poet's hopes must have hung upon the fortunes of the
mighty warrior Uguccione, whose prodigies of valour rivalled the fabled
deeds of the knights of story. To this man Dante was bound by ties of
closest friendship; to him he dedicated the Inferno, the first cantica
of his Comedy, and he may possibly have been that hero ''twixt the two
Feltros born'[16] to whom Dante first looked to slay the wolf of Rome.

Far higher probably, and certainly far better grounded, were the poet's
hopes when Henry VII. of Germany descended into Italy to bring order
into her troubled states. To Dante, as we have seen, the Emperor was
Emperor of Rome and not of Germany. He was Cæsar's successor, the
natural representative of Italian unity, the Divinely appointed
guardian of civil order. With what passionate yearning Dante looked
across the Alps for a deliverer, how large a part of the woes of Italy
he laid at the feet of Imperial neglect, may be gathered from many
passages in his several works; but nowhere do these thoughts find
stronger utterance than in the sixth canto of the Purgatory. The poet
sees the shades of Virgil and the troubadour Sordello join in a loving
embrace at the bare mention of the name of Mantua, where both of them
were born. 'O Italy!' he cries, 'thou slave! thou hostelry of woe! Ship
without helmsman, in the tempest rude! No queen of provinces, but
house of shame! See how that gentle soul, e'en at the sweet sound of
his country's name, was prompt to greet his fellow-citizen. Then see
thy living sons, how one with other ever is at war, and whom the
self-same wall and moat begird, gnaw at each other's lives. Search,
wretched one, along thy sea-bound coasts, then inward turn to thine own
breast, and see if any part of thee rejoice in peace. Of what avail
Justinian's curb of law, with none to stride the saddle of command,
except to shame thee more? Alas! ye priests, who should be at your
prayers, leaving to Cæsar the high seat of rule, did ye read well the
word of God to you, see ye not how the steed grows wild and fell by
long exemption from the chastening spur, since that ye placed your
hands upon the rein? O German Albert! who abandonest, wild and untamed,
the steed thou should'st bestride, may the just sentence from the stars
above fall on thy race in dire and open guise, that he who follows thee
may see and fear. For, drawn by lust of conquest otherwhere, thou and
thy sire, the garden of the empire have ye left a prey to desolation.
Come, thou insensate one, and see the Montagues and Capulets, Monaldi,
Philippeschi, for all whom the past has sadness or the future fear.
Come, come, thou cruel one, and see oppression trampling on thy
faithful ones, and heal their ills.... Come thou, and see thy Rome, who
weeps for thee, a lonely widow crying day and night, "My Cæsar,
wherefore hast thou left me thus?" Come, see how love here governs
every heart! Or if our sorrows move thee not at all, blush for thine
own fair fame.--Nay, let me say it: O Thou God Most High, Thou Who wast
crucified for us on earth, are Thy just eyes turned otherwhither now?
Or in the depth of counsel dost Thou work for some good end, clean cut
off from our ken? For all Italia's lands are full of tyrants, and every
hind--so he be factious--grows Marcellus-high.'[17]

Such was the cry for deliverance which went up from Dante's heart to
the Emperor. Picture his hopes when Henry VII. came with the blessing
of the Pope, who had had more than his fill of French influence at
last, to bring peace and order into Italy; picture the exultation with
which he learnt alike from Henry's deeds and words that he was just,
impartial, generous, and came not as a tyrant, not as a party leader,
but as a firm and upright ruler to restore prosperity and peace;
picture his indignation when the incurable factiousness and jealousies
of the Italian cities, and of Florence most of all, thwarted the
Emperor at every step; picture the bitterness of his grief when, after
struggling nigh three years in vain, Henry fell sick, and died at
Buonconvento. In Paradise the poet saw the place assigned to 'Henry's
lofty soul--his who should come to make the crooked straight, ere Italy
was ready for his hand;' but the dream of his throne on earth was
broken for ever.[18]

Henry died in 1313. This blow was followed by the fall of Uguccione
when he seemed almost on the point of realising some of Dante's dearest
hopes. The poet and the warrior alike found refuge at Verona now, with
Can Grande della Scala, to whom Dante dedicated the third cantica of
his Comedy, the Paradise.[19] Did the exile's hopes revive again at
the Court of Verona? Did the gallant and generous young soldier whose
gracious and delicate hospitality called out such warm affection from
his heart,[20] seem worthy to accomplish that great mission in which
Uguccione and Henry had failed? It is more than probable that such
thoughts found room in Dante's sorrow-laden heart. And yet we cannot
but suppose that while his certainty remained unshaken that in God's
good time the deliverer would come, yet the hopes which centred in any
single man must have had less and less assurance in them as
disappointment after disappointment came.

Be this as it may, near the close of his life Dante was still able to
make Beatrice testify of him in the courts of Heaven: 'Church militant
has not a son stronger in hope than he. God knows it.'[21] Simple as
these words are, yet by him who has scanned Dante's features and
pondered on his life, they may well be numbered amongst those moving
and strengthening human utterances that ring like a trumpet through the
ages and call the soul to arms.

But were Dante's hopes all concentrated on the advent of that political
Messiah who was not to come in truth till our own day? Had it been so,
the 'Divine Comedy' would never have been born.

When Dante realised his own helplessness in the struggle against the
panther of Florence, the lion of France, and the wolf of Rome, when he
saw that to reorganise his country and remodel the social and political
conditions of life would need the strong hand and the keen sword of
some great hero raised by God, he also saw that for himself another way
was opened, an escape from that wild forest into which his feet had
strayed, an escape which it must be the task of his life to point out
to others, without which the very work of the hero for whom he looked
would be in vain.

The deadly forest represented moral as well as political confusion; the
sunlit mountain, moral as well as political order; and the beasts that
cut off the ascent, moral as well as political foes to human progress.

From this moral chaos there was deliverance for every faithful soul,
despite the lion and the wolf; and though the noble hound came not to
chase the foul beasts back to Hell, yet was Dante led from the forest
gloom even to the light of Heaven.

And how was he delivered? By Divine grace he saw Hell and Purgatory and
Heaven--so was he delivered. He saw the souls of men stripped of every
disguise, he saw their secret deeds of good or ill laid bare. He saw
Popes and Emperors, ancient heroes and modern sages, the rich, the
valiant, the noble, the fair of face, the sweet of voice; and no longer
dazzled, no longer overawed, he saw them as they were, he saw their
deeds, he saw the fruits of them. So was he delivered from the
entanglements and perplexities, from the delusions and seductions of
the world, so were his feet set upon the rock, so did he learn to sift
the true from the false, to rise above all things base, and set his
soul at peace, even when sorrow was gnawing his heart to death. He,
while yet clothed in flesh and blood, went amongst the souls of the
departed, 'heard the despairing shrieks of spirits long immersed in
woe, who wept each one the second death; saw suffering souls contented
in the flames, for each one looked to reach the realms of bliss, though
long should be the time,' and lastly he saw the souls in Heaven, and
gazed upon the very light of God.[22]

All this he saw and heard under the guidance of human and Divine
philosophy, symbolised, or rather concentrated and personified, in
Virgil and Beatrice.

Of Virgil, and the unique position assigned to him in the Middle Ages,
it is impossible here to speak at length. Almost from the first
publication of the Æneid, and down to the time when the revival of
learning reopened the treasures of Greek literature to Western Europe,
Virgil reigned in the Latin countries supreme and unchallenged over the
domain of poetry and scholarship. Within two generations of his own
lifetime, altars were raised to him, by enthusiastic disciples, as to a
deity. When Christianity spread, his supposed prediction of Christ in
one of the Eclogues endowed him with the character of a prophet; and a
magic efficacy had already been attributed to verses taken from his
works. Throughout the Middle Ages, his fame still grew as the supreme
arbiter in every field of literature, and as the repositary of more
than human knowledge, while fantastic legends clustered round his name
as the great magician and necromancer. To Dante there must also have
been a special fascination in the Imperial scope and sympathies of the
Æneid; for Virgil is pre-eminently the poet of the Roman Empire. But we
must not pause to follow out this subject here. Suffice it that Dante
felt for Virgil a reverence so deep, an admiration so boundless, and an
affection so glowing, that he became to him the very type of human
wisdom and excellence, the first agent of his rescue from the maze of
passion and error in which his life had been entangled.

But Beatrice, the loved and lost, was the symbol and the channel of a
higher wisdom, a diviner grace. She it was round whose sweet memory
gathered the noblest purposes and truest wisdom of the poet's life. If
ever he suffered the intensity of his devotion to truth and virtue for
a moment to relax; if ever, as he passed amongst luxurious courts, some
siren voice soothed his cares with a moment of unworthy forgetfulness
and ignoble ease; if ever he suffered meaner cares or projects to draw
him aside so much as in thought from his great mission, then it was
Beatrice's glorified image that recalled him in tears of bitter shame
and penitence to the path of pain, of effort, and of glory. It was her
love that had rescued him from the fatal path; Virgil was but her agent
and emissary, and his mission was complete when he had led him to her.
Human wisdom and virtue could guide him through Hell and Purgatory,
could show him the misery of sin, and the need of purifying pain and
fire, but it was only in Beatrice's presence that he could _feel_ the
utter hatefulness and shame of an unworthy life, could _feel_ the
blessedness of Heaven.[23]

Under the guidance of Virgil and Beatrice, then, Dante had seen Hell
and Purgatory and Heaven. This had snatched his soul from death, had
taught him, even in the midst of the moral and political chaos of his
age, how to live and after what to strive. Could he show others what
he himself had seen? Could he save them, as he was saved, from the
meanness, from the blindness, from the delusions of the life they led?
He could. Though it should be the toil of long and painful years, yet
in the passionate conviction of his own experience he felt the power in
him of making real to others what was so intensely real to him. But
what did this involve? The truth if wholesome was yet hard. He had dear
and honoured friends whose lives had been stained by unrepented sin,
and whose souls he had seen in Hell. Was he to cry aloud to all the
world that these loved ones were amongst the damned, instead of
tenderly hiding their infirmities? Again, he was poor and an exile, he
had lost 'all things most dear,' and was dependent for his very bread
on the grace and favour of the great; yet if he told the world what he
had seen, a storm of resentful hatred would crash upon him from every
region of Italy. How would proud dames and lords brook to be told of
their dead associates in sin and shame cursing their names from the
very depths of Hell, and looking for their speedy advent there? How
would pope and cardinal and monarch brook to be told by the powerless
exile what he had heard from souls in Heaven, in Purgatory, and in
Hell? E'en let them brook it as they might. His cry should be like the
tempest that sweeps down upon the loftiest forest trees, but leaves the
brushwood undisturbed. The mightiest in the land should hear his voice,
and henceforth none should think that loftiness of place or birth could
shield the criminal. He would tell in utter truth what he had seen. He
knew that power was in him to brand the infamous with infamy that none
could wash away, to rescue the fair memory of those the world had
wrongfully condemned, to say what none but he dare say, in verse which
none but he could forge, and bring all those who hearkened through Hell
and Purgatory into Heaven.[24]

To deliver this message was the work of his life, the end to which all
his studies were directed, from the time of his exile to that of his
death. Hence his studious labours came to have a representative and
vicarious character in his mind. He was proudly conscious that he
lived and worked for mankind, and that his toil deserved the grateful
recognition of his city and his country.

This trait of his character comes out with striking force in the noble
letter which he wrote in answer to the proffered permission to return
to his beloved Florence, but upon disgraceful conditions which he could
not accept. The offer came when his fortunes were at their lowest ebb.
Henry VII. was dead, Uguccione had lost his power. All hope of the
exile's returning in triumph seemed at an end. Then came the offer of a
pardon and recall, for which he had longed with all the passionate
intensity of his nature. And yet it was but a mockery. It was a custom
in Florence upon the Day of St. John the Baptist, the patron saint of
the city, to release certain malefactors from the public gaols on their
performing set acts of contrition; and a decree was passed that all the
political exiles might return to their home on St. John's Day in 1317
if they would pay a sum of money, walk in procession, with tapers in
their hands and with other tokens of guilt and penitence, to the
church, and there offer themselves as ransomed malefactors to the
saint.

Many of the exiles accepted the terms, but Dante's proud and indignant
refusal shows us a spirit unbroken by disappointment and disaster,
scorning to purchase ease by degradation. 'Is this,' he cries to the
friend who communicated to him the conditions upon which he might
return, 'is this the glorious recall by which Dante Alighieri is
summoned back to his country after well-nigh fifteen years of exile? Is
this what innocence well known to all, is this what the heavy toil of
unbroken study, has deserved? Far be it from him who walks as her
familiar with Philosophy to stoop to the base grovelling of a soul of
clay and suffer himself thus to be treated like a vile malefactor. Far
be it from the preacher of justice, when suffering outrage, to pay the
acknowledgment of fair desert to the outrageous.

'Not by this path can I return. But let a way be found that hurts not
Dante's honour and fair fame, and I will tread it with no tardy feet.
If no such road leads back to Florence, then will I never enter
Florence more. What! can I not gaze, wherever I may be, upon the
spectacle of sun and stars? Can I not ponder on the sweetest truths in
any region under heaven, but I must first make myself base and vile
before the people of the State of Florence?'[25]

Such was the answer of Dante Alighieri to that cruel insult which makes
our cheeks glow even now with indignation. Such was the temper of the
man who had seen Hell and Purgatory and Heaven, and who shrank not from
the utterance of all that he had seen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dante must now have been engaged in writing the Paradise. Amongst the
sufferings and burdens which were fast drawing him to the grave,
amongst the agonies of indignation, of regret, of hope, of
disappointment which still wracked his soul, the deep peace of God had
come upon him; beneath a storm of passion at which our hearts quail was
a calm of trustful self-surrender which no earthly power could disturb;
for the harmonies of Paradise swelled in the poet's heart and sought
for utterance in these last years.

But though his spirit was thus rapt to Heaven, he never lost his hold
upon the earth; never disdained to toil as best he might for the
immediate instruction or well-being of his kind. More than once his
eloquence and skill enabled him to render signal service to his
protectors in conducting delicate negotiations, and at the same time to
further that cause of Italian unity which was ever near his heart. Nor
did the progress of his great work, the Comedy, withhold him from a
varied subsidiary activity as a poet, a moralist, and a student of
language and science.

One characteristic example of this by-work must suffice. In the last
year but one of his life when he must have been meditating the last,
perhaps the sublimest, cantos of the Paradise, when he might well have
been excused if he had ceased to concern himself with any of the lower
grades of truth, he heard a certain question of physics discussed and
re-discussed, and never decided because of the specious but sophistical
arguments which were allowed to veil it in doubt. The question was
whether some portions of the sea are or are not at a higher level than
some portions of the land; and Dante, 'nursed from his boyhood in the
love of truth,' as he says, 'could not endure to leave the question
unresolved, and determined to demonstrate the facts and to refute the
arguments alleged against them.'[26] Accordingly he defended his thesis
on a Sunday in one of the churches of Verona under the presidency of
Can Grande.

This essay is a model of close reasoning and sound scientific method,
and the average nineteenth century reader, with the average contempt
for fourteenth century science, would find much to reflect upon should
he read and understand it. The vague and inconclusive style of
reasoning against which Dante contends is still rampant everywhere,
though its forms have changed; while the firm grasp of scientific
method and the incisive reasoning of Dante himself are still the
exception in spite of all our modern training in research.

Thus Dante was engaged to the last upon the whole field of human
thought. Such was the scope and power of his mind that he could embrace
at the same moment the very opposite poles of speculation; and such
was his passion for truth that, when gazing upon the very presence of
God, he could not bear to leave men in error when he could set them
right, though it were but as to the level of the land and sea.

       *       *       *       *       *

But we must hasten to a close. Let us turn from the consideration of
Dante's work to a picture of personal character drawn by his own hand.
It is his ideal of a life inspired by that 'gentleness' for which,
since the days of chivalry, we have had no precise equivalent in
language, and which is itself too rare in every age.

    The soul that this celestial grace adorns
      In secret holds it not;
      For from the first, when she the body weds,
      She shows it, until death:
      Gentle, obedient, and alive to shame,
      Is seen in her first age,
      Adding a comely beauty to the frame,
      With all accomplishments:
      In youth is temperate and resolute,
      Replete with love and praise of courtesy,
      Placing in loyalty her sole delight:
      And in declining age
      Is prudent, just, and for her bounty known;
      And joys within herself
      To listen and discourse for others' good:
      Then in the fourth remaining part of life
      To God is re-espoused,
      Contemplating the end that draws a-nigh,
      And blesseth all the seasons that are past:
      --Reflect now, how the many are deceived![27]

Cherishing such an ideal, Dante wandered from court to court of Italy,
finding here and there a heart of gold, but for the most part moving
amongst those to whom grace and purity and justice were but names. Can
we wonder that sometimes the lonely exile felt as if his own
sorrow-laden heart were the sole refuge upon earth of love and
temperance?

Three noble dames, he tells us--noble in themselves but in nought else,
for their garments were tattered, their feet unshod, their hair
dishevelled, and their faces stained with tears--came and flung
themselves at the portal of his heart, for they knew that Love was
there. Moved with deep pity, Love came forth to ask them of their
state. They were Rectitude, Temperance, and Generosity, once honoured
by the world, now driven out in want and shame, and they came there for
refuge in their woe. Then Love, with moistened eyes, bade them lift up
their heads. If they were driven begging through the world, it was for
men to weep and wail whose lives had fallen in such evil times; but not
for them, hewn from the eternal rock--it was not for them to grieve. A
race of men would surely rise at last whose hearts would turn to them
again. And hearing thus how exiles great as these were grieved and
comforted, the lonely poet thought his banishment his glory.

Yet when he looked for his sweet home and found it not, the agony that
could not break his spirit fast destroyed his flesh, and he knew that
death had laid the key upon his bosom.[28]

When this sublime and touching poem was composed we have no means of
knowing, but it can hardly have been long before the end. When that end
came, Dante can barely have completed his great life work, he can
barely have written the last lines of the 'Divine Comedy.' He had been
on an unsuccessful mission in the service of his last protector, Guido
da Polenta of Ravenna. On his return he was seized with a fatal
illness, and died at Ravenna in 1321, at the age of fifty-six.

Who can grudge him his rest? As we read the four tracts of the
'Convito,' which were to have been the first of fourteen, but must now
remain alone, as we are brought to a sudden stand at the abrupt
termination of his unfinished work on the dialects and poetry of
Italy,[29] as we ponder on the unexhausted treasures that still lay in
the soul of him who could write as Dante wrote even to the end, we can
hardly suppress a sigh to think that our loss purchased his rest so
soon. But his great work was done; he had told his vision, that men
might go with him to Hell, to Purgatory, and to Heaven, and be saved
from all things base. Then his weary head was laid down in peace, and
his exile was at an end. 'That fair fold in which, a lamb, he lay'[30]
was never opened to him again, but he went home, and the blessings of
the pure in heart and strong in love go with him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The thoughts with which we turn from the contemplation of Dante's life
and work find utterance in the lines of Michael Angelo. 'The works of
Dante were unrecognised, and his high purpose, by the ungrateful folk
whose blessing rests on all--except the just. Yet would his fate were
mine! For his drear exile, with his virtue linked, glad would I change
the fairest state on earth.'


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 14: See Symonds, p. 186.]

[Footnote 15: See _Inferno_, i. 1-111.]

[Footnote 16: _Inferno_, i. 105.]

[Footnote 17: _Purgatorio_, vi. 76-126.]

[Footnote 18: See especially Epistolæ v-vii.; _Paradiso_, xxx.
133-138.]

[Footnote 19: See Epistola xi.]

[Footnote 20: _Paradiso_, xvii. 70-93.]

[Footnote 21: _Ibid._ xxv. 52-54.]

[Footnote 22: _Inferno_, i. 112-129.]

[Footnote 23: _Inferno_, i. 121-123, ii. 52-142; _Purgatorio_, xxx.
sqq.; _Paradiso_, passim.]

[Footnote 24: _Paradiso_, xvii. 103-142.]

[Footnote 25: Epistola x.]

[Footnote 26: _Quæstio de Aqua et Terra_, § 1.]

[Footnote 27: Canzone xvi., 'Le dolci rime,' st. vii. See _Convito_,
trat. iv. Translation slightly altered from Lyell.]

[Footnote 28: Canzone xix., 'Tre donne.']

[Footnote 29: _De Vulgari Eloquio._]

[Footnote 30: _Paradiso_, xxv. 5.]




III

HELL


The first cantica of the 'Divine Comedy'--the Inferno or Hell--is the
best known of all Dante's works in prose or verse, in Latin or Italian;
and though students of Dante may sometimes regret this fact, yet no one
can be at a moment's loss to understand it.

For the attributes of heart and brain requisite for some kind of
appreciation of the Inferno are by many degrees more common than those
to which the other works of Dante appeal. It is easy to imagine a
reader who has not even begun truly to understand either the poet or
the poem nevertheless rendering a sincere tribute of admiration to the
colossal force of the Inferno, and feeling the weird spell of
fascination and horror ever tightening its grasp on him as he descends
from circle to circle of that starless realm.

There is no mystery in the inveterate tendency to regard Dante as
pre-eminently the poet of Hell. Nor is it a new phenomenon. Tradition
tells of the women who shrank aside as Dante passed them by, and said
one to another, shuddering as they spoke, 'See how his black hair
crisped in the fire as he passed through Hell!' But no tradition tells
of awe-struck passers-by who noted that the stains had been wiped from
that clear brow in Purgatory, that the gleam of that pure and dauntless
eye had been kindled in Heaven.

The machinery of the Inferno, then, is moderately familiar to almost
all. Dante, lost in the darksome forest, scared from the sunlit heights
by the wild beasts that guard the mountain side, meets the shade of
Virgil, sent to rescue him by Beatrice, and suffered by Omnipotence to
leave for a time his abode in the limbo of the unbaptised, on this
mission of redeeming love. Virgil guides Dante through the open gate of
Hell, down through circle after circle of contracting span and
increasing misery and sin, down to the central depth where the
arch-rebel Satan champs in his triple jaws the arch-traitors against
Church and State, Judas Iscariot, and Brutus and Cassius.[31]

Through all these circles Dante passes under Virgil's guidance. He sees
and minutely describes the varying tortures apportioned to the varying
guilt of the damned, and converses with the souls of many illustrious
dead in torment.

And is this the poem that has enthralled and still enthrals so many a
heart? Are we to look for the strengthening, purifying, and uplifting
of our lives, are we to look for the very soul of poetry in an almost
unbroken series of descriptions, unequalled in their terrible
vividness, of ghastly tortures, interspersed with tales of shame, of
guilt, of misery? Even so. And we shall not look in vain.

But let us listen first to Dante's own account of the subject-matter of
his poem. Five words of his are better than a volume of the
commentators. 'The subject of the whole work, literally accepted,' he
says, 'is the state of souls after death.... But if the work is taken
allegorically the subject is MAN, as rendering himself liable, by good
or ill desert in the exercise of his free will, to rewarding or
punishing justice.'[32]

According to Dante, then, the real subject of the Inferno is 'Man, as
rendered liable, by ill desert in the exercise of his free will, to
punishing justice.' Surely a subject fraught with unutterable sadness,
compassed by impenetrable mystery, but one which in the hands of a
prophet may well be made to yield the bread of life; a subject fitly
introduced by those few pregnant words, 'The day was going, and the
dusky air gave respite to the animals that are on earth from all their
toils; and I alone girt me in solitude to bear the strain both of the
journey and the piteous sight, which memory that errs not shall
retrace.'[33]

       *       *       *       *       *

Now if this be the true subject of the poem, it follows that all those
physical horrors of which it seems almost to consist must be strictly
subordinate to something else, must be part of the machinery or means
by which the end of the poet is reached, but in no way the end itself.

If the subject of the poem is a moral one, then the descriptions of
physical torment and horror must never even for a moment overbalance or
overwhelm the true 'motive' of the work, must never even for a moment
so crush or deaden the feelings as to render them incapable of moral
impressions, must never in a single instance leave a prevailingly
physical impression upon the mind.

And it is just herein that the transcendent power of the Inferno is
displayed. Horrors which rise and ever rise in intensity till they
culminate in some of the ghastliest scenes ever conceived by mortal
brain are from first to last held under absolute control, are forced to
support and intensify moral conceptions which in less mighty hands they
would have numbed and deadened.

Oh, the pity of this sin, the unutterable, indelible pity of it! Its
wail can never be stilled in our hearts while thought and memory
remain. The misery of some forms of sin, the foul shame of others, the
vileness, the hatefulness, the hideous deformity of others yet--this,
and not horror at the punishment of sin, is what Dante stamps and
brands upon our hearts as we descend with him towards the central
depths, stamps and brands upon our hearts till the pity, the loathing,
the horror can endure no more;--then in the very depth of Hell, at the
core of the Universe, with one mighty strain that leaves us well-nigh
spent, we turn upon that central point, and, leaving Hell beneath our
feet, ascend by the narrow path at the antipodes.

With the horror and the burden of the starless land far off, we lift up
our eyes again to see the stars, and our souls are ready for the
purifying sufferings of Purgatory.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sometimes the tortures of the damned are a mere physical translation,
so to speak, of their crimes. Thus the ruthless disseminators of strife
and dissension who have torn asunder those who belonged one to another,
those who had no proper existence apart from one another, are in their
turn hewn and cleft by the avenging sword; and ever as their bodies
reunite and their wounds are healed, the fierce blow falls again.
Amongst them Dante sees the great troubadour Bertram de Born, who
fostered the rebellion of the sons of our own king Henry II. In that
he made father and son each other's enemy, his head is severed from his
trunk, his brain from its own root.[34]

In other cases a transparent metaphor or allegory dictates the form of
punishment; as when the hypocrites crawl in utter weariness under the
crushing weight of leaden garments, shaped like monkish cloaks and
cowls, and all covered with shining gold outside.[35] Or when the
flatterers and sycophants wallow in filth which fitly symbolises their
foul life on earth.[36]

It is probable that some special significance and appropriateness might
be traced in almost all the forms of punishment in Dante's Hell, though
it is not always obvious. But one thing at least is obvious: the
uniform congruousness of the impression which the physical and moral
factors of each description combine to produce. In fact, the Inferno is
an account of 'man, as deserving ill by the exercise of his free will,'
in which all the external surroundings are brought into precise accord
with the central conception. The tortures are only the background; and
as in the picture of a great artist, whether we can trace any special
significance and appropriateness in the background or not, we always
feel that it supports the true subject of the picture and never
overpowers it, so it is here. Man as misusing his free will. This is
the real subject of the Inferno. All else is accessory and subordinate.

But if this be so, we should expect to find an endless variety and
gradation, alike of guilt and punishment, as we pass through the
circles of Hell. And so we do. At one moment indignation and reproof
are all swallowed up in pity, and the suffering of the exiled soul only
serves to quicken an infinite compassion in our hearts, a compassion
not so much for the punishment of sin as for sin itself with its woeful
loss and waste of the blessings and the holiness of life. At another
moment we are brought face to face with a wretch whose tortures only
serve to throw his vileness into sharper relief; and when we think of
him and of his deeds, of him and of his victims, we can understand
those awful words of Virgil's when Dante weeps, 'Art thou too like the
other fools? The death of pity is true pity here.'[37] Infinite pity
would indeed embrace the most abandoned, but it is only weak and
misdirected pity that wakes or slumbers at the dictate of mere
suffering.

And as there is infinite variety of guilt and woe, so is there infinite
variety of character in Dante's Hell. Though the poet condemns with
sternest impartiality all who have died in unrepented sin, yet he
recognises and honours the moral distinctions amongst them. What a
difference, for instance, between the wild blaspheming robber Vanni
Fucci,[38] and the defiant Capaneus,[39] a prototype of Milton's Satan,
the one incited by the bestial rage of reckless self-abandonment, the
other by the proud self-reliance of a spirit that eternity cannot
break--alike in their defiance of the Almighty, but how widely severed
in the sources whence it springs.

Look again where Jason strides. The wrongs he did Medea and Hypsipyle
have condemned him to the fierce lash under which his base companions
shriek and fly; but he, still kingly in his mien, without a tear or cry
bears his eternal pain.[40]

See Farinata, the great Florentine--in his ever burning tomb he stands
erect and proud, 'as holding Hell in great disdain;' tortured less by
the flames than by the thought that the faction he opposed is now
triumphant in his city; proud, even in Hell, to remember how once he
stood alone between his country and destruction.[41]

See again where Pietro delle Vigne, in the ghastly forest of suicides,
longs with a passionate longing that his fidelity at that time when he
'held both the keys of the great Frederick's heart' should be
vindicated upon earth from the unjust calumnies that drove him to
self-slaughter.[42]

And see where statesmen and soldiers of Florence, themselves condemned
for foul and unrepented sin, still love the city in which they lived,
still long to hear some good of her. As the flakes of fire fall 'like
snow upon a windless day' on their defenceless bodies, see with what
dismay they gaze into one another's eyes when Dante brings ill news to
them of Florence.[43]

In a word, the souls in Hell are what they were on earth, no better and
no worse. This is the key-note to the comprehension of the poem. No
change has taken place; none are made rebels to God's will, and none
are brought into submission to it, by their punishment; but all are as
they were. Even amongst the vilest there is only the rejection of a
thin disguise, no real increase of shamelessness. Many souls desire to
escape notice and to conceal their crimes, just as they would have done
on earth; many condemn their evil deeds and are ashamed of them, just
as they would have been on earth; but there is no change of character,
no infusion of a new spirit either for good or ill; with all their
variety and complexity of character, the unrepentant sinners wake in
Hell as they would wake on earth our mingled pity and horror, our
mingled loathing and admiration. Man as misusing his free will, in all
the scope and variety of the infinite theme, is the subject of the
poem.

And this brings us to another consideration: the eternity of Dante's
Hell. Those who know no other line of Dante, know the last verse of the
inscription upon the gate of Hell: 'All hope relinquish, ye that enter
here.' The whole inscription is as follows: 'Through me the way lies to
the doleful city; through me the way lies to eternal pain; through me
the way lies 'mongst the people lost. 'Twas justice moved my Lofty
Maker; Divine Power made me, Wisdom Supreme and Primal Love. Before me
were no things created, save things eternal; and I, too, last eternal.
All hope relinquish, ye that enter here.'[44]

The gates of Hell reared by the Primal Love! If we believe in the
eternity of sin and evil, the eternity of suffering and punishment
follows of necessity. To be able to acquiesce in the one, but to shrink
from the thought of the other, is sheer weakness. The eternity and
hopelessness of Dante's Hell are the necessary corollaries of the
impenitence of his sinners. To his mind wisdom and love cannot exist
without justice, and justice demands that eternal ill-desert shall reap
eternal woe.

But how could one who so well knew what an eternal Hell of sin and
suffering meant, believe it to be founded on eternal love? Why did not
Dante's heart in the very strength of that eternal love rebel against
the hideous belief in eternal sin and punishment? I cannot answer the
question I have asked. Dante believed in the Church, believed in the
theology she taught, and could not have been what he was had he not
done so. Had he rejected any of the cardinal beliefs of the
Christianity of his age and rebelled against the Church, he might have
been the herald of future reformations, but he could never have been
the index and interpreter to remotest generations of that mediæval
Catholic religion of which his poem is the very soul.

Meanwhile note this, that if ever man realised the awful mystery and
contradiction involved in the conception of a good God condemning the
virtuous heathen to eternal exile, that man was Dante. If ever heart
of man was weighed down beneath the load of pity for the damned, that
heart was Dante's. The virtuous heathen he places in the first round of
Hell; here 'no plaint is to be heard except of sighs, which make the
eternal air to tremble;' here, with no other torture than the death of
hope without the death of longing, they live in neither joy nor sorrow,
eternal exiles from the realms of bliss.[45]

Dante, as we shall see hereafter, longed with a passionate thirsty
longing to know how the Divine justice could thus condemn the innocent.
But his thirst was never slaked. It was and remained an utter mystery
to him; and there are few passages of deeper pathos than those in which
he remembers that his beloved and honoured guide and master, even
Virgil, the very type of human wisdom and excellence, was himself
amongst these outcasts.[46]

Again and again, as we pass with Dante through the circles of Hell, we
feel that his yearning pity for the lost, racking his very soul and
flinging him senseless to the ground for misery, shows an awakening
spirit which could not long exist in human hearts without teaching them
that God's redeeming pity is greater and more patient than their own.
So, too, when Francesca and Paolo, touched by Dante's pitying sympathy,
exclaim, 'Oh, thou gracious being, if we were dear to God, how would we
pray for thee!'[47] who can help feeling that Dante was not far from
the thought that all souls are dear to God?

Meanwhile, how strong that faith which could lift up all this weight of
mystery and woe, and still believe in the Highest Wisdom and the Primal
Love! Only the man who knew the holiness of human life to the full as
well as he knew its infamy, only the man who had seen Purgatory and
Heaven, and who had actually felt the love of God, could know that with
all its mystery and misery the universe was made not only by the Divine
Power, but by the Supreme Wisdom and the Primal Love, could weave this
Trinity of Power, Wisdom, Love, into the Unity of the all-sustaining
God, who made both Heaven and Hell.

And we still have to face the same insoluble mystery. The darker shade
is indeed lifted from the picture upon which we gaze; we have no
eternal Hell, no eternity of sin, to reckon with; but to us too comes
the question, 'Can the world with all its sin and misery be built
indeed upon the Primal Love?' And our answer too must be the answer not
of knowledge but of faith. Only by making ourselves God's fellow
workers till we _feel_ that the Divine Power and the Primal Love are
one, can we gain a faith that will sustain the mystery it cannot solve.
Alas! how often our weaker faith fails in its lighter task, how often
do we speak of sin and misery as though they were discoveries of
yesterday that had brought new trials to our faith, unknown before; how
often do we feel it hard to say even of earth what Dante in the might
of his unshaken faith could say of Hell itself--that it is made by
Power, Wisdom, Love!

       *       *       *       *       *

But perhaps we have dwelt too long already on this topic, and in any
case we must now hasten on. Dante's Hell, as we have seen, represents
sinful and impenitent humanity with all its fitting surroundings and
accessories, cut off from everything that can distract the attention,
confuse the moral impression, or alleviate its appalling strength. And
as the magic power of his words, with the absolute sincerity and
clearness of his own conceptions, forces us to realise the details of
his vision as if we had trodden every step of the way with him, this
result follows amongst others: that we realise, with a vividness that
can never again grow dim, an existence without any one of those sweet
surroundings and embellishments of human life which seem the fit
support and reflection of purity and love.

We have been in a land where none of the fair sounds or sights of
nature have access, no flowers, no stars, no light, and if there are
streams and hills there they are hideously transformed into instruments
and emblems not of beauty but of horror. We are made to realise all
this, and to feel that it is absolutely and eternally fitting as the
abode of sin and of impenitence. And when once this association has
been stamped upon our minds, the beauty and the sweetness of the world
in which we live gain a new meaning for us. They become the standing
protest of all that is round us against every selfish, every sinful
thought or deed; the standing appeal to us to bring our souls into
sweet harmony with their surroundings, since God in His mercy brings
not their surroundings into ghastly harmony with them.

When we have been with the poor wretch, deep down in Hell, who gasps in
his burning fever for 'the rivulets that from the green slopes of
Casentino drop down into the Arno, freshening the soft, cool channels,
where they glide,'[48] and have realised that in that land there are
not and ought not to be the cooling streams and verdant slopes of
earth; we can never again enjoy the sweetness and the peace of nature
without our hearts being consciously or unconsciously purified, without
every evil thing in our lives feeling the rebuke.

When we have known what it is to be in a starless land, and have felt
how strange and incongruous the fair sights of Heaven would be, have
felt that they would have no place or meaning there, have felt that
cheerless gloom alone befits the souls enveloped there, then when we
leave the dreary realms, and once more gaze upon the heavens by night
and day, they are more to us than they have ever been before, they are
indeed what Dante so often calls them, using the language of the
falconers, the _lure_ by which God summons back our wayward souls from
vain and mean pursuits.

Look, again, upon this fearful picture. Dante and Virgil come to a
black and muddy lake in which the passionate tear and smite one another
in bestial rage; and all over its surface are bubbles rising up. They
come from the cries of the morose and sullen ones 'who are fixed in the
slime at the bottom of the lake. They cry: "Gloomy we were in the sweet
air that the sun gladdens, bearing in our hearts the smoke of
sullenness; now we are gloomy here in the black slime"--such is the
strain that gurgles in their throats, but cannot find full
utterance.'[49] Who that has seen those bubbles rise upon the lake can
ever suffer himself again to cherish sullenness within his heart
without feeling at the very instant the rebuke of the 'sweet air that
the sun gladdens,' and thinking of that gurgling strain of misery?

       *       *       *       *       *

Another of the lessons taught by the Inferno is, that no plea, however
moving, can avail the sinner, or take away the sinfulness of sin, that
no position can place him above punishment, that no authority can
shield him from it.

The guilty love of Francesca and Paolo, so strong, so deathless in that
it was love, has sunk them to Hell instead of raising them to Heaven in
that it was guilty. Stronger to make them one than Hell to sever them,
it is powerless to redeem the sin to which it has allied itself, and
its tenderness has but swelled the eternal anguish of those whom it
still joins together, because it has suffered the sanctuary of life,
which love is set to guard, to be polluted and betrayed. Sung in those
strains of deathless tenderness and pity where 'tears seem to drop from
the very words,' the story of this guilty love reveals the fatalest of
all mischoice, and tells us that no passion, however wild in its
intensity, however innocent in its beginnings, however unpremeditated
in its lawless outburst, however overmastering in its pleas, however
loyal to itself in time and in eternity, may dare to raise itself above
the laws of God and man, or claim immunity from its wretched
consequences for those who are its slaves. How infinite the pity and
the waste, how irreparable the loss, when the love that might have been
an ornament to Heaven, adds to the unmeasured guilt and anguish of Hell
a wail of more piercing sorrow than rings through all its lower depths!

Nor could any height of place claim exemption from the moral law. Dante
was a Catholic, and his reverence for the Papal Chair was deep. But
against the faithless Popes he cherished a fiery indignation
proportioned to his high estimate of the sacred office they abused. In
one of the most fearful passages of the Inferno he describes, in terms
that gain a terrible significance from one of the forms of criminal
execution practised in his day, how he stood by a round hole in one of
the circles of Hell, in which Pope Nicholas III. was thrust head
foremost--stood like the confessor hearing the assassin's final words,
and heard the guilty story of Pope Nicholas.[50]

It is characteristic of Dante that he tells us here, as if quite
incidentally, that these holes were about the size of the baptising
stands or fonts in the Church of San Giovanni, 'one of which,' says he,
'I broke not many years ago to save one who was drowning in it. Let
this suffice to disabuse all men.' Evidently he had been taxed with
sacrilege for saving the life of the drowning child at the expense of
the sacred vessel, and it can hardly be an accident that he recalls
this circumstance in the Hell of the sacrilegious Popes and Churchmen.
These men, who had despised their sacred trust and turned it to basest
trafficking, were the representatives of that hard system of soulless
officialism that would pollute the holiest functions of the Church,
while reverencing with superstitious scruple their outward symbols and
instruments.

And if the Papal office could not rescue the sinner that held it,
neither could the Papal authority shield the sins of others. It is said
that Catholics have not the keeping of their own consciences. Dante at
least thought they had. In the Hell of fraudulent counsellors, wrapped
in a sheet of eternal flame one comes to him and cries, 'Grudge not to
stay and speak with me a while. Behold, I grudge it not, although I
burn.' It is Guido da Montefeltro, whose fame in council and in war had
gone forth to the ends of the earth. All wiles and covert ways he knew,
and there had ever been more of the fox than of the lion in him. But
when he saw himself arriving at that age when every man should lower
sails and gather in his ropes, then did he repent of all that once had
pleased him, and girding him with the cord of St. Francis he became a
monk. Alas! his penitence would have availed him well but for the
Prince of the new Pharisees, Pope Boniface VIII., who was waging war
with Christians that should have been his friends, hard by the Lateran.
'He demanded counsel of me,' continues Guido, 'but I kept silence, for
his words seemed drunken. Then he said to me, "Let not thy heart
misdoubt: henceforth do I absolve thee, but do thou teach me so to act
that I may cast Prenestina to the ground. Heaven I can shut and open,
as thou knowest." ... Then the weighty arguments impelled me to think
silence worse than speech; and so I said, "Father, since thou dost
cleanse me from that guilt wherein I now must fall, long promise and
performance short will make thee triumph in thy lofty seat." Then when
I died St. Francis came for me, but one of the black cherubim said to
him: "Do me no wrong, nor take thou him away. He must come down amongst
my menials, e'en for the fraudulent advice he gave, since when I have
kept close upon his hair. He who repents not cannot be absolved, nor
can one will the same thing he repents, the contradiction not
permitting it." Ah wretched me! how did I shudder then, for he laid
hold of me, and with the cry, "Haply thou knew'st not I was a
logician?" bore me to judgment.'[51]

Who can fail to recognise the utter truth of Dante's teaching here?
What can stand between a man's own conscience and his duty? Though the
very symbol and mouthpiece of the collective wisdom and piety of
Christendom should hold the shield of authority before the culprit, yet
it cannot ward off the judgment for one single deed done in violation
of personal moral conviction. When once we have realised the meaning of
this awful passage, how can we ever urge again as an excuse for
unfaithfulness to our own consciences, that the assurance of those we
loved and reverenced overcame our scruples? Here as everywhere Dante
strips sin of every specious and distracting circumstance, and shows it
to us where it ought to be--in Hell.

Contrast with the scene we have just looked upon the companion picture
from the Purgatory; where Buonconte di Montefeltro tells how he fled on
foot from the battle-field of Campaldino, his throat pierced with a
mortal wound ensanguining the earth. Where Archiano falls into the Arno
there darkness came upon him, and he fell crossing his arms upon his
breast and calling on the name of Mary with his last breath. 'Then,' he
continues, 'God's angel came and took me, and Hell's angel shrieked, "O
thou of Heaven, wherefore dost thou rob me? Thou bear'st with thee the
eternal part of him, all for one wretched tear which saves it from me.
But with the other part of him I'll deal in other fashion."' Upon which
the infuriated demon swells the torrent with rain, sweeps the
warrior's body from the bank, dashes away the hateful cross into which
its arms are folded, and in impotent rage rolls it along the river bed
and buries it in slime so that men never see it more; but the soul is
meanwhile saved.[52]

       *       *       *       *       *

Here we must pause. I have made no attempt to give a systematic account
of the Inferno, still less to select the finest passages from it. I
have only tried to interpret some of the leading thoughts which run
through it, some of the deep lessons which it can hardly fail to teach
the reader.

Like all great works, the Inferno should be studied both in detail and
as a whole in order to be rightly understood; and when we understand
it, even partially, when we have been with Dante down through all the
circles to that central lake of ice in which all humanity seems frozen
out of the base traitors who showed no humanity on earth, when we have
faced the icy breath of the eternal air winnowed by Satan's wings, and
have been numbed to every thought and feeling except one--one which
has been burned and frozen into our hearts through all those rounds of
shame and woe--the thought of the pity, the misery, the hatefulness of
sin; then, but then only, we shall be ready to understand the
Purgatory, shall know something of what the last lines of the Inferno
meant to Dante: 'We mounted up, he first and second I, until through a
round opening I saw some of those beauteous things that Heaven bears;
and thence we issued forth again to see the stars.'[53]


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 31: Compare pp. 21-23.]

[Footnote 32: Epistola xi. § 8.]

[Footnote 33: _Inferno_, ii. 1-6.]

[Footnote 34: _Inferno_, xxviii.]

[Footnote 35: _Ibid._ xxiii. 58 sqq.]

[Footnote 36: _Ibid._ xviii. 103-136.]

[Footnote 37: _Inferno_, xx. 27, 28: 'Qui vive la pietà quand' è ben
morta.' The double force of pietà, 'pi[e]ty,' is lost in the
translation.]

[Footnote 38: _Ibid._ xxiv. 112-xxv. 9 &c.]

[Footnote 39: _Ibid._ xiv. 43-66.]

[Footnote 40: _Inferno_, xviii. 82-96.]

[Footnote 41: _Ibid._ x. 22-93.]

[Footnote 42: _Ibid._ xiii. 55-78.]

[Footnote 43: _Inferno_, xvi. 64-85.]

[Footnote 44: _Inferno_, iii. 1-9.]

[Footnote 45: _Inferno_, iv. 23-45, 84.]

[Footnote 46: Compare e.g. _Purgatorio_, iii. 34-45, xxii. 67-73.]

[Footnote 47: _Inferno_, v. 88, 91, 92.]

[Footnote 48: _Inferno_, xxx. 64-67.]

[Footnote 49: _Inferno_, vii. 117-126.]

[Footnote 50: _Inferno_, xix.]

[Footnote 51: _Inferno_, xxvii.]

[Footnote 52: _Purgatorio_, v. 85-129.]

[Footnote 53: _Inferno_, xxxiv. 136-139.]




