Chapter XII.

THE GIFT OF THE HOLY GHOST.


[Sidenote: The gift of the Holy Ghost is a gift of intelligence.]

Baptism by water is insufficient to open the door to God's Kingdom.
The Gift of the Holy Ghost, obtained by the laying on of Hands by one
having authority, completes the ordinance. Not only Joseph Smith, but
the Savior Himself taught distinctly that to enter the Kingdom of God,
a person must be baptized by water and by fire; and the promise is
given that those are "baptized by water for the remission of sins,
shall receive the Holy Ghost."[A]

[Footnote A: Doctrine and Covenants, 84:63, 64.]

Jesus, speaking to His disciples, taught that "the Comforter, which is
the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, He shall teach
you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I
have said unto you."[A] This clearly implies that the promised gift is
essentially a gift of increased intelligence with the added power that
results from a more intelligent action. That this is the Mormon view
of the effect of the Gift of the Holy Ghost may be amply demonstrated
from the standard works of the Church and from the writings of the
leading interpreters of Mormon doctrine. Parley P. Pratt in the Key to
Theology says, "It quickens all the intellectual faculties, increases,
enlarges, expands and purifies all the natural passions and affection
* * * *. It develops and invigorates all the faculties of the physical
and intellectual man."[B] The Prophet Joseph Smith declared "This
first Comforter or Holy Ghost has no other effect than pure
intelligence. It is * * * * powerful in expanding the mind,
enlightening the understanding, and storing the intellect with present
knowledge."[C] Concisely expressed, therefore, Joseph Smith and the
Church he restored, teach that the Gift of the Holy Ghost, is a gift
of "intelligence."

[Footnote A: John 14:26.]

[Footnote B: Key to Theology, 5th ed., pp. 101, 102.]

[Footnote C: History of the Church, Vol. III, p. 380.]

[Sidenote: Science furnishes an equivalent of the gift of the Holy
Ghost.]

If the equivalents of faith, repentance and baptism are irrevocable
laws for the individual who studies science, the question arises, Is
there also, a scientific equivalent for the Gift of the Holy Ghost?
Even a superficial view of the matter will reveal such an equivalent.
To use again the illustrations employed in the preceding chapter, if
the chemist has obeyed natural law in producing hydrogen, that is, has
been baptized into the kingdom of hydrogen, he may by the proper use
and study of the gas obtained, add much to his knowledge. He may learn
that it is extremely light; that it forms an explosive mixture with
air; that it will destroy many vegetable colors, and will burn with an
almost invisible flame. Thus, the possession of the gas enlarges the
knowledge and develops the intelligence of the scientist. Is not this
another form of the Gift of the Holy Ghost?

The man who is baptized into the kingdom of heavenly bodies by
grinding the lenses right, is enabled to learn many new facts
concerning the nature and motions of celestial bodies; and thus
receives intelligence. He who obediently winds the wire correctly
around the iron core, may generate a current of electricity with which
many mighty works may be accomplished. Do not these men, as their
intelligences are expanded, receive a Gift of the Holy Ghost, as a
reward for their obedience to the demands of nature?

It would be possible to carry the comparisons into every scientific
action without strengthening the argument. In science, if a person has
faith, repentance and is baptized, that is obeys, he will receive
added intelligence, which is the equivalent of the Gift of the Holy
Ghost as taught in theology. The four fundamental laws for the
guidance of the individual are identical in Mormon theology, and in
modern science.

Just why the laying on of hands should be necessary to complete the
ordinance of baptism is not known, any more than the reasons are known
for the results that follow the numberless relations that may be
established by mortal man. However, the dogma of the Gift of the Holy
Ghost, is logically the fourth step in attaining scientific salvation.

Thus, each of the minor laws of Mormonsim might be investigated, and
be shown to have a scientific counterpart. For the purpose of this
volume, however, a more extended consideration of the laws governing
the actions of the individual, is unnecessary.




Chapter XIII.

THE WORD OF WISDOM.


It has already been remarked that the nature of the mission of Joseph
Smith made it unlikely that references to scientific matters, and much
less to isolated scientific facts, obtainable by proper methods of
experimentation should be found in the writings of the Prophet.
Nevertheless, in a revelation given March 8, 1883, statements are made
that can now be connected with facts of science, not generally or not
at all known, at the time the revelation was received.

"Inasmuch as any man drinketh wine or strong drink among you, it is
not good, * * * strong drinks are not for the belly but for the
washing of your bodies."[A]

[Footnote A: Doctrine and Covenants, 89:5, 7.]

[Sidenote: The doctrine that alcohol is injurious to man is
scientific.]

At the time this was written, many persons believed that the use of
alcoholic drinks was injurious to human health; but more, especially
among the uneducated classes, held quite the opposite opinion. Since
that day, the question concerning the value of alcohol in any form has
been greatly agitated, and much new light has been obtained. This is
not the place to examine this famous controversy, but a few quotations
from authoritative books, which are not controversial in their nature,
will show the coincidence between the position of science, and the
doctrine of Joseph Smith, in respect to this matter.

The _United States Dispensatory_ (17th ed.) speaks of the medicinal
properties of alcohol as follows, "It is irritant even to the skin,
and much more so to the delicate organs; hence, the various abdominal
inflammations that are so frequent in habitual drunkards. A single
dose of it, if large enough, may produce death. The nervous symptoms
caused by alcohol show that it has a very powerful and direct
influence upon the nerve-centers. The arterial pressure and the
pulse-rate are both increased by moderate doses of alcohol, by a
direct influence upon the heart itself. * * * Taken habitually in
excess, alcohol produces the most deplorable results, and is a very
common cause of fatal maladies."[A]

[Footnote A: Page 129, art., Alcohol Ethylicum.]

Dr. W. Gilman Thompson in his authoritative book on _Practical
Dietetics,_ speaking of the constant use of alcoholic beverages, says,
"The use of alcohol in any shape is wholly unnecessary for the use of
the human organism in health. * * * * The lifelong use of alcohol in
moderation does not necessarily shorten life or induce disease in some
persons, while in others it undoubtedly produces gradual and permanent
changes which tend to weaken vital organs so that the resistance of
the body to disease is materially impaired. * * * * Many persons
should be particularly warned against the use of alcohol. * * * *
Although alcohol is such a strong force-producer and heat-generator,
its effect in this direction is very soon counter-balanced by its
stronger influence in lowering the general tone of the nervous system
and in producing positive degeneration in the tissues."[A]

[Footnote A: Pages 206, 207.]

The recent newspaper statements that alcohol has been shown to be a
food are based on a complete misunderstanding. The experiments
demonstrated that alcohol is burned within the body--which is the
simplest manner in which the body can rid itself of the alcohol.

No more authoritative opinions on this subject can be found than those
contained in the two volumes from which quotations have been made--and
the strongest opinions are not quoted. In spite of the isolated claims
made for alcohol, the fact remains that the knowledge of the world
indicates that alcohol is a poison to the human system; that it is not
"for the belly." However, the value of the external use of alcohol,
for various purposes, has never been denied. On the contrary almost
every up to date practitioner recommends the external use of alcohol,
as for instance after baths for lowering the temperature of fever
patients. In this matter, then, Joseph Smith was in perfect harmony
with the latest results of science. It is strange that he, unlearned
as he was, should have stated what is now known as truth, so clearly
and simply, yet so emphatically, more than seventy years ago, before
the main experiments on the effect of alcohol on the human organsim
had been made.

[Sidenote: The doctrine that tobacco is injurious to man is
scientific.]

"And again, tobacco is not for the body, neither for the belly, and is
not good for man, but is an herb for bruises and all sick cattle, to
be used with judgment and skill."[A] Although tobacco has been used
for several centuries by civilized man, the real cause of the effect
which it has upon the human body was not understood until the early
part of the last century. In 1809, a chemist separated from tobacco an
active principle, in an impure state, some of the properties of which
he observed. In 1822, two other chemists succeeded in isolating the
same principle, in a pure condition, and found it to be a colorless,
oily liquid, of which two to eight per cent is found in all tobacco.
This substance has been called nicotine; later investigations have
shown it to be one of the most active poisons known. Tobacco owes its
activity entirely to this poison."[B]

[Footnote A: Doctrine and Covenants, 89:8.]

[Footnote B: Wormley, Micro-chemistry of Poisons, 2nd ed., pp. 434,
435.]

The intensely poisonous nature of nicotine is illustrated by a number
of cases on record. One drop placed on the tongue of a cat caused
immediate prostration, and death in seventy-eight seconds. A smaller
drop was placed on the tongue of another cat, which resulted in death
after two minutes and a half. A third cat to which a similar quantity
had been administered was dead after seventy-five seconds. A man who
was accustomed to smoking took a chew of tobacco, and after a quarter
of an hour accidently swallowed the mass. An hour later he became
unconscious and died. In another case, in which an ounce of tobacco
had been swallowed, death resulted in seven hours. In still another
case, one ounce of tobacco was boiled in water, and the solution drunk
as an remedy for constipation. The patient died in three quarters of
an hour.[A] These, and numerous other cases, illustrate the intensely
poisonous nature of tobacco. The evil effects of the repeated use of
small amounts of tobacco, in smoking or chewing are also well
understood.

[Footnote A: Ibid, pp. 436, 437.]

[Sidenote: Joseph Smith probably did not know the poisonous nature of
tobacco in 1833.]

It was in 1828, about five years before Joseph Smith's doctrine with
respect to tobacco was given, that nicotine was obtained in a pure
state. Many years later the chemists and physiologists learned to
understand the dangerous nature of the tobacco poison. It does not
seem probable that Joseph Smith had heard of the discovery of nicotine
in 1833; the discovery was announced in a German scientific journal,
and in those days of few newspapers, scientific news, even of public
interest, was not made generally known as quickly as is the case
today. In fact, Hyrum Smith, the brother of the Prophet, on May 29,
1842, delivered a sermon upon the Word of Wisdom in which he says,
"Tobacco is a nauseous, stinking, abominable thing;"[A] but nothing
worse, thus basing his main objection to it on the revealed word of
the Lord. Had Joseph and his associates been familiar with the
isolation of nicotine and its properties, they would undoubtedly have
mentioned it in sermons especially directed against the use of
tobacco. In any case, at a time when it was but vaguely known that
tobacco contained a poisonous principle, it would have been extremely
hazardous for the reputation of an impostor to have claimed a
revelation from God, stating distinctly the injurious effects of
tobacco.

[Footnote A: The Contributor, vol. iv., p. 13; Improvement Era, Vol.
4. pp. 943-9.]

It should also be noted that Joseph Smith says that when tobacco is
used for bruises and all sick cattle, it should be used with judgment
and skill, thus impressing caution even in the external application of
the herb. This is fully borne out by facts, for it has been found that
"the external application of tobacco to abraded surfaces, and even to
the healthy skin, has been attended with violent symptoms, and even
death."[A]

[Footnote A: Wormley, Micro-chemistry of Poisons, p. 436.]

In the matter of the chemistry and physiological action of tobacco,
then, the Prophet, in 1833, was in full accord with the best knowledge
of 1908. In the emphasis of his doctrine, he even anticipated the
world of science.

"And again, hot drinks are not for the body or belly."[A]

[Footnote A: Doctrine and Covenants, 89:9.]

[Sidenote: The doctrine that tea and coffee are injurious to man is
scientific.]

When this statement was made, in 1833, the meaning of the expression
hot drinks was not clearly understood. Many believed that the only
meaning of the above statement was that drinks that are hot enough to
burn the mouth should not be used. Others, however, claimed for the
doctrine a deeper meaning. To settle the difficulty, appeal was made
to Joseph Smith who explained that tea, coffee and similar drinks were
meant by the expression hot drinks. From that time on, the Church has
taught that tea and coffee should not be used by mankind.[A]

[Footnote A: See The Contributor, vol. iv. p. 13; Improvement Era, vol
4, pp. 943-9.]

In the year 1821, several chemists isolated from coffee a bitter
principle, of peculiar properties, which was named caffein. In 1827,
the same substance was found to occur in tea. Numerous analysis show
that there are between one and two per cent of caffein in coffee, and
between three and six percent in tea. Later investigations have shown
that caffein belongs to the vegetable poisons, and that its poisonous
action is very strong.

Among the medical properties of caffein are the following, "in doses
of three to five grains, it produces a peculiar wakefulness--after a
dose of twelve grains, it produces intense physical restlessness and
mental anxiety. Upon the muscles it acts as a powerful poison--it is
used in medicines as a brain and heart stimulant."[A] Fatal cases of
poisoning are also on record.

[Footnote A: U. S. Dispensatory, 17th ed., pp. 278 and 279.]

Caffein is not in any sense a food, but, as a stimulant, must be
classed with tobacco, opium and other similar substances. Owing to its
action on the heart and circulation, the body becomes heated, and in
that sense a solution of caffein is a "hot drink." The use of tea and
coffee in health is now generally condemned by the best informed
persons in and out of the medical profession. Dr. W. Gilman Thompson
says, "The continuance of the practice of drinking coffee to keep
awake soon results in forming a coffee or tea habit, in which the
individual becomes a slave to the beverage. * * * Muscular tremors are
developed, with nervousness, anxiety, dread of impending evil,
palpitation, heartburn, dyspepsia and insomnia. * * * It produces
great irritability of the whole nervous system and one may even
overexcite the mind."[A] While it is true that one cup of coffee or
tea does not contain enough caffein to injure the system, yet the
continual taking of these small doses results in a weakening of the
whole system, that frequently leads to premature death.

[Footnote A: Practical Dietetics, p. 199.]

The U. S. Consular and Trade Report for January, 1906,[A] warns
against the use of coffee in the following words, "The important
connection between consumption of coffee and epilepsy which deserves
to be known everywhere, serves as a warning to be extremely careful
with coffee made of beans containing caffein, and at any rate,
children should be deprived of it entirely, otherwise their health
will be exposed to great danger."

[Footnote A: Page 249.]

Besides caffein, both tea and coffee contain an astringent known as
tannic acid. In coffee this substance is present only in small
quantity, but in tea from four to twelve per cent occurs. Tannic acid
is the substance found in oak bark, and has the property of making
animal tissues hard--that is, makes leather of them. The habitual tea
drinker subjects the delicate lining of the stomach and intestines to
the action of this powerful drug.

Without going into further details, it is readily seen that the
teachings of Joseph Smith, in 1833, in relation to the value of tea
and coffee in human drinks, harmonizes with the knowledge of today.
Moreover, he was in advance, in the certainty of his expressions, of
the scientists of his day. It is true that caffein had been found in
coffee and tea a few years before the revelation of 1833, but the
physiological action of the drug was not known until many years
afterwards. Besides, as in the case of tobacco, the Church leaders in
speaking against the use of tea and coffee did not mention the
poisonous principle that had recently been discovered in them; thus
revealing their ignorance of the matter.

[Sidenote: The doctrines regarding the values of herbs and fruits
harmonize with recent scientific truths.]

"And again, * * * all wholesome herbs God hath ordained for the
constitution, nature, and use of man. Every herb in the season
thereof, and every fruit in the season thereof; all these to be used
with prudence and thanksgiving."[A]

[Footnote A: Doctrine and Covenants 89:10, 11.]

This doctrine, which seems self-evident now, also evidences the divine
inspiration of the Prophet Joseph. At the time this revelation was
given, food chemistry was not understood; and, in fact, it was not
until about 1860, that the basis upon which rests our knowledge of
food chemistry, was firmly established. We now know that every plant
contains four great classes of compounds: mineral substances, fats,
sugars and starches, and protein, or the flesh-forming elements. We
further know that no plant can live and grow without containing these
groups of nutrients. It is also well understood that these substances
are necessary for the food of the animal body, and that animal tissues
are, themselves, composed of these groups, though in different
proportions. In short, it has long been an established fact of science
that any plant that does not contain a poisonous principle, may by
proper cooking be used as a food for man.

When Joseph Smith wrote, this was a daring suggestion to make, for
there was absolutely no fact aside from popular experience, upon which
to base the conclusion. The qualifying phrase, "all wholesome herbs,"
undoubtedly refers to the existence of classes of plants like coffee,
tea, tobacco, etc., which contain some special principle injurious to
the health.

[Sidenote: The doctrine concerning the use of meats is scientific.]

"Yea, flesh also of beasts and of the fowls of the air, I, the Lord,
have ordained for the use of man with thanksgiving; nevertheless they
are to be used sparingly; and it is pleasing unto me that they should
not be used only in times of winter, or of cold, or of famine."[A]

[Footnote A: Doctrine and Covenants, 89:12, 13.]

The breadth of this doctrine lies in the fact that it is not
absolutely forbidden to eat meat, as in all probability a fanatic,
guided by his own wisdom, might have done; yet it must be observed,
the implication is clear that it is possible for man to live without
meat. Vegetarianism had been taught and practiced long before the days
of Joseph Smith; but there had been no direct, positive proof that
plants contain all the substances necessary for the sustenance of
life. As stated above, it is now known that every class of nutritive
substance found in meat is also found in plants. This is in full
harmony with the implied meaning of Joseph Smith in the statement
regarding the abstaining from meat.

[Sidenote: The distinction between the values of grains is also
scientific.]

"All grain is ordained for the use of man and of beasts, to be the
staff of life. * * * All grain is good for the food of man, as also
the fruit of the vine, that which yieldeth fruit, whether in the
ground or above the ground. Nevertheless, wheat for man, and corn for
the ox, and oats for the horse, and rye for the fowls and for swine,
and for all beasts of the field, and barley for all useful animals,
and for mild drinks, as also other grain."[A]

[Footnote A: Doctrine and Covenants, 89:14, 16 and 17.]

The first part of this teaching, that all grain can be used by man and
beast, corresponds to the earlier statement that all wholesome plants
may be used by man. The latter part respecting the best grain for
certain classes of animals, is of a different nature and merits
special consideration. As already mentioned, all plants and plant
parts contain four great groups of nutritive substances. The relative
proportions of these grains are different in different plants or plant
parts. For instance, wheat contains about 71.9 per cent of starch and
sugar; corn, 70.2 per cent; oats, 59.7 per cent; rye, 72.5 per cent;
and barley, 69.8 per cent. Wheat contains about 11.9 per cent of
protein or the flesh-forming elements; corn, 11.4 per cent; oats, 11.8
per cent; rye, 10.6 per cent; and barley 12.4 per cent.[A] It has
further been demonstrated that a man or beast doing heavy work,
requires a larger proportion of starch and sugar in his dietary than
does one which has less work to do. Likewise, different classes of
animals require different proportions of the various nutrients, not
only through life but at the various periods of their lives. This
principle has been recognized so fully that during the last
thirty-five or forty years the attention of experimenters has been
directed toward the elucidation of laws which would make known the
best combinations of foods for the various classes of farm animals, as
well as for man. It must also be remarked that recent discoveries in
science are showing more deep-seated differences in the composition of
grains, than those here mentioned, as also corresponding differences
in various classes of animals. Science will soon throw more light on
this subject, and in all probability will confirm the views of Joseph
Smith, with respect to the grain best adapted to certain animals.

[Footnote A: The Feeding of Animals, Jordan, p. 424.]

A thoughtful reading of the above quotation clearly shows that Joseph
Smith recognized the fundamental truth of food chemistry; namely, that
while all plants contain the elements necessary for animal growth, yet
the proportions of these elements are so different as to make some
plants better adapted than others to a certain class of animals. That
the "Mormon" prophet should have enunciated this principle from twenty
to thirty years in advance of the scientific world, must excite wonder
in the breast of any person, be he follower or opponent of Joseph
Smith.

The discussion of the important statements made in section 89 of the
book of _Doctrine and Covenants,_ might be elaborated into a volume.
The merest outline has been given here. The physiological teachings of
the prophet concerning work, cleanliness and sleep, might also be
considered with profit.

[Sidenote: Joseph Smith anticipated the world of science in the word
of wisdom.]

To summarize the contents of this chapter: Joseph Smith clearly
recognized and taught the physiological value of alcohol, tobacco,
anticipated the tea and coffee, at a time when scientific world of
science discoveries were just beginning to reveal the active
principles of these commodities. The probability is that he knew
nothing of what the world of science was doing in this direction, at
the time the doctrine was taught. Joseph Smith clearly recognized and
taught the fundamental truths of food chemistry, and the food relation
of vegetable products to man, nearly a generation before scientists
had arrived at the same doctrine. Whence came his knowledge?



THE DESTINY OF EARTH AND MAN.

