Chapter XVIII.

JOSEPH SMITH'S EDUCATION.


[Sidenote: Joseph Smith's early educational opportunities were very
limited.]

Joseph Smith had few educational advantages during his life. His
scientific teachings do not rest upon information gained in schools or
from books. His parents fully appreciated the value of an education,
but the pioneer lives which they led, and their numerous financial
misfortunes, made it impossible for them to realize their desires for
the education of their children. The Prophet's mother writes that when
Joseph was about six years old, Hyrum, the elder brother, was sent to
an academy at Hanover, New Hampshire, and the smaller children to a
common school.[A] It is probable that throughout the wanderings of the
family, the children were given such meager schooling as was possible.
Joseph was a "remarkably quiet, well-disposed child," and his life up
to the age of fourteen was marked only by those trivial circumstances
which are common to childhood.[B]

[Footnote A: History of the Prophet by his Mother, Improvement Era,
Vol. 5, p. 166.]

[Footnote B: Ibid., p. 247.]

A few months after his fourteenth birthday, the future prophet beheld
his first vision. In his autobiography he mentions that at the time
"he was doomed to the necessity of obtaining a scanty maintenance by
his daily labor."[A] This would indicate that at this age he was
spending little or no time in school. During the time that elapsed
between his fourteenth and eighteenth years, there is nothing to show
that the boy was receiving scholastic education. The Prophet says that
he was left to all kinds of temptation, and mingled with all kinds of
society.[B] Nothing is said about the acquirement of book learning.
About the age of nineteen he writes, "As my father's worldly
circumstances were very limited, we were under the necessity of
laboring with our hands, hiring out by day's work and otherwise, as we
could get opportunity. In the month of October, 1825, I hired with an
old gentleman by the name of Josiah Stoal. During the time I was thus
employed, I was put to board with a Mr. Isaac Hale--it was there I
first saw my wife (his daughter), Emma Hale. On the 18th of January,
1827, [when the Prophet was a little more than twenty-one years old]
we were married, while I was yet employed in the service of Mr. Stoal.
Immediately after my marriage, I left Mr. Stoal's and went to my
father's, and farmed with him that season."[C] From his eighteenth to
his twenty-second year, then, there is evidence that he worked as an
ordinary laborer, and attended no school.

[Footnote A: History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 7.]

[Footnote B: Ibid., p. 9.]

[Footnote C: History of the Church, Vol. 1, pp. 16, 17.]

It seems, moreover, that Joseph Smith was not a boy to gather
information from books, for his mother says of him, when he was
eighteen years old, that "he seemed much less inclined to the perusal
of books than any of the rest of our children, but far more given to
meditation and deep study."[A] From the records extant, the conclusion
is justifiable that from his fourteenth to his twenty-second year
Joseph Smith received practically no school education, and did no
extensive reading. What he might have gathered from conversation with
others during that time is unknown to us. However, it is known that
the heavenly messengers who visited him at intervals gave him much
valuable information, which more than compensated for his poor
scholastic advantages.

[Footnote A: History of the Prophet Joseph, Improvement Era, Vol. 5,
p. 257.]

One month before his twenty-second birthday, the golden plates were
delivered to the Prophet, and the next two and a half years he was
engaged with various assistants in translating the Book of Mormon;
though at different times during this period he farmed and did other
manual labor. During this period (twenty-two to twenty-four and a half
years of age), he most certainly attended no school nor gave special
attention to worldly knowledge.

On the 6th of April, 1830, when the Prophet was twenty-four years and
four months old, the Church was organized. The life led by the Prophet
from this time to 1844, when he was assassinated, was not conducive to
the gathering of information, and quiet, deep reflection. During
almost the whole of this period his life was in danger; scores of
times he was arrested on trumped-up charges; the Church was driven
from place to place; he built at least three cities, and two temples;
organized and governed the body of the Church; taught the doctrinal
system accepted by his followers; organized the public ministry of the
Church for spreading the Gospel among all men, wrote his
autobiography; compiled the revelations given him, and made a revision
of parts of the Bible.

[Sidenote: Joseph Smith taught the importance of schools and
education.]

The mistake must not be made, however, of assuming that because the
Prophet's education had been limited, he lacked a due appreciation of
schools and scholastic attainments. On the contrary, at a very early
date in the history of the Church, schools were organized even for the
older men, that they might improve their time and make up in a manner
for the lack of opportunity during their early days. During the winter
of 1832-3, a school of the prophets was organized in Kirtland, Ohio,
and another in Independence, Missouri, at which the elders of the
Church received various instructions. In the discussion relative to
the building of temples, references to schools being held in them were
always made, and, in fact, in the fall of 1835, when a portion of the
Kirtland temple was finished, "schools were opened in the various
apartments." Many "were organized into a school for the purpose of
studying the Hebrew language."[A] The reading of Greek had previously
been begun. In these languages as well as in German, the Prophet
acquired considerable facility. His studies tended, of course, towards
the interpretation of the Bible and the explanation of Gospel truths;
though at times his investigations appeared quite foreign to his
special work, as when, in 1838, he began the methodical study of law.

[Footnote A: Autobiography of P. P. Pratt, p. 140.]

When the city of Nauvoo was chartered, a section was included,
providing for the establishment of a university, to be called the
University of the City of Nauvoo, under the direction of which should
be taught "all matters pertaining to education, from common schools up
to the highest branches of a most liberal collegiate education."[A]

[Footnote A: History of Joseph Smith, George Q. Cannon, pp. 341, 343.]

In numerous revelations did the Lord urge the Prophet and the Church
to gather information from every source, of which the following
quotations are good illustrations: "Teach ye diligently, that you may
be instructed in theory, in principle, of things both in heaven and in
the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which
are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home,
things which are abroad; the wars and perplexities of the nations, and
a knowledge also of countries and kingdoms. Seek ye out of the best
books words of wisdom; seek learning even by study."[A] "Obtain a
knowledge of history, and of countries and of kingdoms, of laws of God
and man."[B] "Study and learn and become acquainted with all good
books, and with languages, tongues and peoples."[C] "It is impossible
for a man to be saved in ignorance."[D] A more comprehensive outline
of education can hardly be imagined. The energetic manner in which the
Church has acted upon these instructions, during its whole history,
need not be recounted here.

[Footnote A: Doctrine and Covenants, 88:78, 79, 118.]

[Footnote B: Ibid., 93:53.]

[Footnote C: Ibid., 90:15.]

[Footnote D: Ibid., 131:6.]

However much the Prophet sought for knowledge, even from books, in his
later life, the fact remains that the evidence in our possession
indicates that, up to the time of the organization of the Church, his
book learning was very slight, and that during the years immediately
following, his time was so fully occupied with the details of the
organization that little or no time was given to education, as
ordinarily understood. These statements are of especial importance, in
view of the fact that all the principles discussed in this volume were
enunciated before the end of the year 1833.

[Sidenote: Though the Prophet had little book learning, the spiritual
and intellectual growth was great.]

The associates of the Prophet are unanimous in saying that his
spiritual and intellectual growth was marvelous, from the time that
the work of the ministry fell upon him. He was transformed from a
humble country lad to a leader among men, whose greatness was felt by
all, whether unlearned or educated, small or great. Of himself the
Prophet said, "I am a rough stone. The sound of the hammer and chisel
was never heard on me until the Lord took me in hand. I desire the
learning and wisdom of heaven alone." Certainly, his whole history
shows that the great learning which he did manifest was acquired in a
manner very different from that followed by the majority of men.




A SUMMARY RESTATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES.

