Chapter V.

THE REIGN OF LAW.


In the seventh book of the _Republic of Plato_[A] occurs the following
passage:

[Footnote A: Golden Treasury edition, pp. 235, 236.]

[Sidenote: The realities of nature are known by their effects.]

"Imagine a number of men living in an underground cavernous chamber,
with an entrance open to the light, extending along the entire length
of the cavern, in which they have been confined, from childhood, with
their legs and necks so shackled, that they are obliged to sit still
and look straight forward, because their chains render it impossible
for them to turn their heads round; and imagine a bright fire burning
some way off, above and behind them, and an elevated roadway passing
between the fire and the prisoners, with a low wall built along it,
like the screens which conjurers put up in front of their audiences,
and above which they exhibit their wonders. Also figure to yourself a
number of persons walking behind the wall, and carrying with them
statues of men and images of other animals, wrought in wood and stone
and all kinds of materials, together with various other articles,
which overtop the wall; and, as you might expect, let some of the
passers-by be talking, and the others silent.

"Let me ask whether persons so confined could have seen anything of
themselves or of each other, beyond the shadows thrown by the fire
upon the part of the cavern facing them? And is not their knowledge of
the things carried past them equally limited? And if they were able to
converse with one another, would they not be in the habit of giving
names to the objects which they saw before them? If their prison house
returned an echo from the part facing them, whenever one of the
passers-by opened his lips, to what could they refer the voice, if not
to the shadow which was passing? Surely such person would hold the
shadows of those manufactured articles to be the only realities."

With reference to our absolute knowledge of the phenomena of nature,
this splendid comparison is as correct today as it was in the days of
Plato, about 400 B. C.; we are only as prisoners in a great cave,
watching shadows of passing objects thrown upon the cavern wall, and
reflecting upon the real natures of the things whose shadows we see.
We know things only by their effects; the essential nature of matter,
ether and energy is far from our understanding.

[Sidenote: The progress of science rests on the law of cause and
effect.]

In early and mediaeval times, the recognition of the fact that nature
in its ultimate form is unknowable, led to many harmful superstitions.
Chief among the fallacies of the early ages was the belief that God at
will could, and did, cause various phenomena to appear in nature,
which were contrary to all human experience. As observed in chapter 4,
a class of men arose who claimed to be in possession of knowledge
which made them also able, at will, to cause various supernatural
manifestations. Thus arose the occult sciences, so called,--alchemy,
astrology, magic, witchcraft, and all other similar abominations of
the intellect. Such beliefs made the logical study of nature
superfluous, for any apparent regularity or law in nature might at any
time be overturned by a person in possession of a formula of the black
art or a properly treated broomstick.

While such ideas prevailed among the majority of men, the rational
study of science could make little progress. In the march of the ages
as the ideas of men were classified, it began to be understood that
the claims of the devotees of the mystical arts not only could not be
substantiated but were in direct opposition to the known operations of
nature. It became clear to the truthseekers, that in nature a given
cause, acting upon any given object, providing all surrounding
conditions be left unchanged, will always produce the same effect.
Thus, coal of a certain quality, brought to a high temperature in the
presence of air, will burn and produce heat; a stick held in water at
the right angle will appear crooked; iron kept in contact with
moisture and air, at the right temperature, will be changed into rust;
sunlight passed through a glass prism will be broken into rainbow
colors; ordinary plants placed in a dark cellar will languish and die.
No matter how often trials are made, the above results are obtained;
and today it is safe to assert that in the material world no relation
of cause and effect, once established, has failed to reappear at the
will of the investigator. As this principle of the constancy in the
relations between cause and effect was established, the element of
chance in natural phenomena, with its attendant arts of magic, had to
disappear. It is now well understood by intelligent persons that the
law of order controls all the elements of nature.

It is true that the cause of any given effect may, itself, be the
effect of other causes, and that the first cause of daily phenomena is
not and probably cannot be understood. It is also true that very
seldom is the mind able to comprehend why certain causes, save the
simpler ones, should produce certain effects. In that respect we are
again nothing more than Plato's cave prisoners, seeing the shadows of
ultimate realities. However, the recognition of the principle of the
invariable relation between cause and effect was a great onward stride
in the intellectual development of the world.

[Sidenote: Laws of nature are man's simplest expression of many
related facts.]

Now, as men began to investigate nature with her forces, according to
the new light, numerous relations of the forces were discovered--in
number far beyond the comprehension of the human mind. Then it was
found necessary to group all facts of a similar nature, and invent, if
possible, some means by which the properties of the whole group might
be stated in language so simple as to reach the understanding. Thus
came the laws of nature.

For instance, men from earliest times observed the heavenly bodies and
the regularity of their motions. Theories of the universe were
invented which should harmonize with the known facts. As new facts
were discovered, the theories had to be changed and extended. First it
was believed that the earth was fixed in mid-space, and sun and stars
were daily carried around it. Hipparchus improved this theory by
placing the earth not exactly in the center of the sun's circle.
Ptolemy, three hundred years later, considered that the sun and moon
move in circles, yearly, around the earth, and the other planets in
circles, whose centers again described circles round the earth.
Copernicus simplified the whole system by teaching that the earth
rotated around its axis, and around the sun. Keppler next showed that
the earth moved around the sun in certain curves termed ellipses.
Finally, Newton hit upon the wide-embracing law of gravitation, which
unifies all the known facts of astronomy.[A] All the earlier laws were
correct, so far as they included all the knowledge of the age in which
they were proposed, but were insufficient to include the new
discoveries.

[Footnote A: See The Grammar of Science, Pearson, pp. 117, 118.]

Laws of nature are, therefore, man's simplest and most comprehensive
expression of his knowledge of certain groups of natural phenomena.
They are man-made, and subject to change as knowledge grows; but, as
they change, they approach or should approach more and more nearly to
the perfect law. Modern science is built upon the assumption that the
relations between cause and effect are invariable, and that these
relations may be grouped to form great natural laws, which express the
modes by which the forces of the universe manifest themselves.

[Sidenote: A miracle is a law not understood.]

In this matter, science is frankly humble, and acknowledges that the
region of the unknown is far greater than that of the known. Forces,
relations and laws may exist as yet unknown to the world of science,
which, used by a human or superhuman being, might to all appearances
change well-established relations of known forces. That would be a
miracle; but a miracle simply means a phenomenon not understood, in
its cause and effect relations. It must also be admitted that men
possess no absolute certainty that though certain forces, brought into
a certain conjunction a thousand times, have produced the same effect,
they will continue to do so. Should a variation occur, however, that
also must be ascribed to an inherent property of the forces or
conditions, or the existence of a law not understood.[A] There can be
no chance in the operations of nature. This is a universe of law and
order.

[Footnote A: The Credentials of Science, the Warrant of Faith, Cooke,
pp. 169, 170.]

[Sidenote: Joseph Smith taught the invariable relation of cause and
effect.]

Were it not for the sake of the completeness of the argument running
through these chapters, it would be unnecessary to call attention to
the fact that Joseph Smith in a very high degree held views similar to
those taught by science relative to cause and effect, and the reign of
law.

From the beginning of his career, the Prophet insisted upon order, or
system, as the first law in the religion or system of philosophy which
he founded.[A] Moreover, the order which he taught was of an
unchangeable nature, corresponding to the invariable relation between
cause and effect. He wrote, "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in
heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings
are predicated; and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by
obedience to that law upon which it is predicated."[B] No text book in
science has a clearer or more positive statement than this, of the
fact that like causes have like effects, like actions like results.
The eternal nature of natural law is further emphasized as follows:

[Footnote A: Doctrine and Covenants, 28:13; 132; 8.]

[Footnote B: Doctrine and Covenants, 130:20, 21.]

"If there be bounds set to the heavens, or to the seas: or to the dry
land, or to the sun, moon or stars; all the times of their
revolutions; all the appointed days, months, and years, and all the
days of their days, months, and years, and all their glories, laws,
and set times, shall be revealed, in the days of the dispensation of
the fullness of times, according to that which was ordained in the
midst of the Council of the Eternal God of all other Gods before this
world was."[A]

[Footnote A: Doctrine and Covenants, 121:30-32.]

Those who may be inclined to believe that this doctrine was taught in
a spiritual sense only, should recall that Joseph Smith taught also
that spirit is only a pure form of matter,[A] so that the principles
of the material world must have their counterparts in the spiritual
world. Besides, in the last quotation reference is made to such
material bodies as sun, moon, and stars. In other places, special
mention is made of the fact that the material universe is controlled
by law. For instance:

[Footnote A: Doctrine and Covenants, 131:7.]

"All kingdoms have a law given: and there are many kingdoms; * * * *
and unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are
certain bounds also and conditions. * * * * And again, verily I say
unto you, he hath given a law unto all things by which they move in
their times and their seasons; and their courses are fixed; even the
courses of the heavens and the earth, which comprehend the earth and
all the planets."[A]

[Footnote A: Doctrine and Covenants, 88:36-33, 42, 43.]

This also is a clear, concise statement of law and its nature, which
is not excelled by the definitions of science. There can be no doubt
from these quotations, as from many others that might be made, that
Joseph Smith based his teachings upon the recognition that law
pervades the universe, and that none can transcend law. In the
material world or in the domain of ether or spirit, like causes
produced like effects--the reign of law is supreme.

[Sidenote: "The law also maketh you free."]

Certainly the claim cannot be made that Joseph Smith anticipated the
world of science in the recognition of this important principle; but
it is a source of marvel that he should so clearly recognize and state
it, at a time when many religious sects and philosophical creeds chose
to assume that natural laws could be set aside easily by mystical
methods that might be acquired by anyone. In some respects, the
scientific test of the divine inspiration of Joseph Smith lies here.
Ignorant and superstitious as his enemies say he was, the mystical
would have attracted him greatly, and he would have played for his own
interest upon the superstitious fears of his followers. Instead, he
taught doctrines absolutely free from mysticism, and built a system of
religion in which the invariable relation of cause and effect is the
cornerstone. Instead of priding himself, to his disciples, upon his
superiority to the laws of nature, he taught distinctly that "the law
also maketh you free."[A] Herein he recognized another great
principle--that freedom consists in the adaptation to law, not in the
opposition to it.

[Footnote A: Doctrine and Covenants, 98:8.]

However, whatever else the Prophet Joseph Smith was, he most certainly
was in full harmony with the scientific principle that the universe is
controlled by law.




THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNIVERSE.

