Chapter II.

THE INDESTRUCTIBILITY OF MATTER.


[Sidenote: Until recent days many believed that matter could be
created or destroyed.]

It was believed by the philosophers of ancient and mediaeval times,
especially by those devoted to the study of alchemy, that it was
possible through mystical powers, often of a supernatural order, to
annihilate matter or to create it from nothing. Men with such powers
transcended all known laws of nature, and became objects of fear,
often of worship to the masses of mankind. Naturally enough, the
systems of religion became colored with the philosophical doctrines of
the times; and it was held to be a fundamental religious truth that
God created the world from nothing. Certainly, God could do what his
creatures, the magicians, were able to do--that part of the reasoning
was sound.

In support of this doctrine, attention was called to some of the
experiences of daily life. A piece of coal placed in a stove, in a
short time disappear--it is annihilated. From the clear air of a
summer's day raindrops start--created out of nothing. A fragment of
gold placed in contact with sufficiently strong acids, disappears--it
is destroyed.

[Sidenote: Matter is eternal, its form only can be changed.]

Towards the end of the eighteenth century, facts and laws of chemistry
were discovered, which enabled scientists to follow in great detail
the changes, visible or invisible, to which matter in its various
forms is subject. Then it was shown that the coal placed in a stove
unites with a portion of the air entering through the drafts, and
becomes an invisible gas, but that, were this gas collected as it
issues from the chimney, it would be found to contain a weight of the
elements of the coal just equal to the weight of the coal used. In a
similar manner it was shown that the raindrops are formed from the
water found in the air, as an invisible vapor. The gold dissolved in
the acid, may be wholly recovered so that every particle is accounted
for. Numerous investigations on this subject were made by the most
skillful experimenters of the age, all of which showed that it is
absolutely impossible to create or destroy the smallest particle of
matter; that the most man can do is to change the form in which matter
exists.

After this truth had been demonstrated, it was a necessary conclusion
that matter is eternal, and that the quantity of matter in the
universe cannot be diminished nor increased. This great
generalization, known as the law of the Persistence of Matter or Mass,
is the foundation stone of modern science. It began to find general
acceptance among men about the time of Joseph Smith's birth, though
many religious sects still hold that God, as the Supreme Ruler, is
able at will to create matter from nothing. The establishment of this
law marked also the final downfall of alchemy and other kindred occult
absurdities.

[Sidenote: Mormonism teaches that all things are material.]

No doctrine taught by Joseph Smith is better understood by his
followers than that matter in its elementary condition is eternal, and
that it can neither be increased nor diminished. As early as May,
1833, the Prophet declared that "the elements are eternal,"[A] and in
a sermon delivered in April, 1844, he said "Element had an existence
from the time God had. The pure principles of element are principles
which can never be destroyed; they may be organized and reorganized,
but not destroyed. They had no beginning, and can have no end."[B]

[Footnote A: Doctrine and Covenants, 93:33.]

[Footnote B: The Contributor, Vol. 4, p. 257.]

It is thus evident that from the beginning of his work, Joseph Smith
was in perfect harmony with the fundamental doctrine of science; and
far in advance of the religious sects of the world, which are, even at
this time, slowly accepting the doctrine of the persistence of matter
in a spiritual as well as in a material sense.

Mormonism has frequently been charged with accepting the doctrine of
materialism. In one sense, the followers of Joseph Smith plead yes to
this charge. In Mormon theology there is no place for immateralism;
i.e. for a God, spirits and angels that are not material. Spirit is
only a refined form of matter. It is beyond the mind of man to
conceive of an immaterial thing. On the other hand, Joseph Smith did
not teach that the kind of tangible matter, which impresses our mortal
senses, is the kind of matter which is associated with heavenly
beings. The distinction between the matter known to man and the spirit
matter is very great; but no greater than is the difference between
the matter of the known elements and that of the universal ether which
forms one of the accepted dogmas of science.

Science knows phenomena only as they are associated with matter;
Mormonism does the same.




Chapter III.

THE INDESTRUCTIBILITY OF ENERGY.


[Sidenote: All forms of energy may be converted into each other.
Energy can not be destroyed.]

It is only when matter is in motion, or in the possession of energy,
that it is able to impress our senses. The law of the
indestructibility and convertibility of energy, is of equal
fundamental value with that of the indestructibility of matter. A
great variety of forces exist in nature, as, for instance,
gravitation, electricity, chemical affinity, heat and light. These
forces may all be made to do work. Energy, in fact, may be defined as
the power of doing work. In early days these forces were supposed to
be distinct and not convertible, one into the other, just as gold and
silver, with our present knowledge, are distinct and not convertible
into other elements.

In the early part of the nineteenth century students of light and heat
began to demonstrate that these two natural forces were different
manifestations of one universal medium. This in turn led to the
thought that possibly these forces, instead of being absolutely
distinct, could be converted one into the other. This idea was
confirmed in various experimental ways. Sir Humphrey Davy, about the
end of the eighteenth century, rubbed together two pieces of ice until
they were nearly melted. Precautions had been taken that no heat could
be abstracted from the outside by the ice. The only tenable conclusion
was that the energy expended in rubbing, had been converted into heat,
which had melted the ice. About the same time, Count Rumford, a
distinguished American, was superintending the boring of a cannon at
the arsenal at Munich, and was forcibly struck with the heating of the
iron due to this process. He, like Davy, believed that the energy of
the boring instruments had been converted into the heat.[A]

[Footnote A: The Conservation of Heat--Stewart, pp. 38, 39.]

From 1843 to 1849, Dr. Joule of Manchester, England, published the
results of experiments on the relation between mechanical energy and
heat. Dr. Joule attached a fixed weight to a string which was passed
over a pulley, while the other end was connected with paddles moving
in water. As the weight descended, the paddles were caused to revolve;
and it was observed that, as the weight fell and the paddles revolved,
the water became warmer and warmer. Dr. Joule found further that for
each foot of fall, the same amount of heat energy was given to the
water. In fact, he determined that when a pound weight falls seven
hundred and seventy two feet it gives out energy enough to raise the
temperature of one pound of water one degree Fahrenheit.[A] This
experiment, frequently repeated, gave the same result and established
largely the law of the convertibility of energy.

[Footnote A: The Conservation of Energy--Stewart, pp. 44, 45. Recent
Advances in Physical Science--Tait, pp. 63, 65.]

About the same time, it was shown that light can be converted into
heat; and later it was proved that electricity may be changed into
heat or light. In all these cases it was found that the amount of
energy changed was exactly equal to the amount of energy produced.

Thus, by countless experiments, it was finally determined that energy
is indestructible; that, when any form of energy disappears, it
reappears immediately in another form. This is the law of the
persistence of force or energy. In more recent days, it has been
suggested that all known forces are variations of a great universal
force, which may or may not be known. The very nature of force or
energy is not understood. In the language of Spencer, "By the
persistence of force, we really mean the persistence of some cause
which transcends our knowledge and conception."[A]

[Footnote A: First Principles, Spencer, 4th ed., p. 200.]

It need hardly be explained that energy cannot exist independently of
matter; and that the law of the persistence of matter is necessary for
the existence of the law of persistence of force.

[Sidenote: Universal intelligence, comparable to universal energy is
indestructible, according to Joseph Smith.]

Joseph Smith was not a scientist; and he made no pretense of solving
the scientific questions of this day. The discussion relative to the
convertibility of various forms of energy was in all probability not
known to him. Still, in his writings is found a doctrine which in all
respects resembles that of the conservation of energy.

Joseph Smith taught, and the Church now teaches, that all space is
filled with a subtle, though material substance of wonderful
properties, by which all natural phenomena are controlled. This
substance is known as the Holy Spirit. Its most important
characteristic is intelligence. "Its inherent properties embrace all
the attributes of intelligence."[A] The property of intelligence is to
the Holy Spirit what energy is to the gross material of our senses.

[Footnote A: Key to Theology, P. P. Pratt, 5th ed., p. 40.]

In one of the generally accepted works of the Church, the energy of
nature is actually said to be the workings of the Holy Spirit. The
passage reads as follows: "Man observes a universal energy in
nature--organization and disorganization succeed each other--the
thunders roll through the heavens; the earth trembles and becomes
broken by earthquakes; fires consume cities and forests; the waters
accumulate, flow over their usual bounds, and cause destruction of
life and property; the worlds perform their revolutions in space with
a velocity and power incomprehensible to man, and he, covered with a
veil of darkness, calls this universal energy, God, when it is the
workings of his Spirit, the obedient agent of his power, the
wonder-working and life-giving principle in all nature."[A]

[Footnote A: Compendium, Richards and Little, 3rd ed., p. 150.]

In short, the writings of the Church clearly indicate that the various
forces of nature, the energy of nature, are only manifestations of the
great, pervading force of intelligence. We do not understand the real
nature of intelligence any better than we understand the true nature
of energy. We only know that by energy or intelligence gross matter is
brought within reach of our senses.

Intelligence or energy was declared by Joseph Smith in May, 1833, to
be eternal: "Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or
made, neither indeed can be."[A] In the sermon already referred to the
Prophet said, "The intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither
will it have an end."

[Footnote A: Doctrine and Covenants, 93:29.]

These quotations, and many others to which attention might be called,
show clearly that Joseph Smith taught the doctrine that the energy of
the universe can in nowise be increased or diminished, though, it may
manifest itself in various forms.

The great Latter-day prophet is thus shown to be in harmony with the
second fundamental law of science. It is not a valid objection to this
conclusion to say that Joseph Smith did not use the accepted terms of
science. Words stand only for ideas; the ideas are essential. The
nomenclature of a science is often different in different lands, and
is often changed as knowledge grows.

It is hardly correct to say that he was in harmony with the law; the
law as stated by the world of science was rather in harmony with him.
Let it be observed that Joseph Smith enunciated the principle of the
conservation of the energy, or intelligence as he called it, of the
universe, in May, 1833, ten years before Dr. Joule published his
famous papers on energy relations, and fifteen or twenty years before
the doctrine was clearly understood and generally accepted by the
learned of the world. Let it be also remembered that the unlearned boy
from the backwoods of New York state, taught with the conviction of
absolute certainty that the doctrine was true, for God had revealed it
to him.

If God did not reveal it to him, where did he learn it, and whence
came the courage to teach it as an eternal truth?




