Chapter 14


The next morning rose mild and bright, with a promise of summer
in the air. The sunlight slanted joyously down Lily’s street,
mellowed the blistered house-front, gilded the paintless railings
of the doorstep, and struck prismatic glories from the panes of her
darkened window.

When such a day coincides with the inner mood there is intoxication
in its breath; and Selden, hastening along the street through the
squalor of its morning confidences, felt himself thrilling with a
youthful sense of adventure. He had cut loose from the familiar
shores of habit, and launched himself on uncharted seas of emotion;
all the old tests and measures were left behind, and his course was
to be shaped by new stars.

That course, for the moment, led merely to Miss Bart’s
boarding-house; but its shabby doorstep had suddenly become the
threshold of the untried. As he approached he looked up at the
triple row of windows, wondering boyishly which one of them
was hers. It was nine o’clock, and the house, being tenanted
by workers, already showed an awakened front to the street. He
remembered afterward having noticed that only one blind was down.
He noticed too that there was a pot of pansies on one of the window
sills, and at once concluded that the window must be hers: it was
inevitable that he should connect her with the one touch of beauty
in the dingy scene.

Nine o’clock was an early hour for a visit, but Selden had passed
beyond all such conventional observances. He only knew that he must
see Lily Bart at once—he had found the word he meant to say to her,
and it could not wait another moment to be said. It was strange
that it had not come to his lips sooner—that he had let her pass
from him the evening before without being able to speak it. But
what did that matter, now that a new day had come? It was not a
word for twilight, but for the morning.

Selden ran eagerly up the steps and pulled the bell; and even in
his state of self-absorption it came as a sharp surprise to him
that the door should open so promptly. It was still more of a
surprise to see, as he entered, that it had been opened by Gerty
Farish—and that behind her, in an agitated blur, several other
figures ominously loomed.

“Lawrence!” Gerty cried in a strange voice, “how could you get
here so quickly?”—and the trembling hand she laid on him seemed
instantly to close about his heart.

He noticed the other faces, vague with fear and conjecture—he saw
the landlady’s imposing bulk sway professionally toward him; but
he shrank back, putting up his hand, while his eyes mechanically
mounted the steep black walnut stairs, up which he was immediately
aware that his cousin was about to lead him.

A voice in the background said that the doctor might be back at any
minute—and that nothing, upstairs, was to be disturbed. Some one
else exclaimed: “It was the greatest mercy—” then Selden felt that
Gerty had taken him gently by the hand, and that they were to be
suffered to go up alone.

In silence they mounted the three flights, and walked along the
passage to a closed door. Gerty opened the door, and Selden went
in after her. Though the blind was down, the irresistible sunlight
poured a tempered golden flood into the room, and in its light
Selden saw a narrow bed along the wall, and on the bed, with
motionless hands and calm unrecognizing face, the semblance of Lily
Bart.

That it was her real self, every pulse in him ardently denied. Her
real self had lain warm on his heart but a few hours earlier—what
had he to do with this estranged and tranquil face which, for the
first time, neither paled nor brightened at his coming?

Gerty, strangely tranquil too, with the conscious self-control of
one who has ministered to much pain, stood by the bed, speaking
gently, as if transmitting a final message.

“The doctor found a bottle of chloral—she had been sleeping badly
for a long time, and she must have taken an overdose by mistake....
There is no doubt of that—no doubt—there will be no question—he has
been very kind. I told him that you and I would like to be left
alone with her—to go over her things before any one else comes. I
know it is what she would have wished.”

Selden was hardly conscious of what she said. He stood looking down
on the sleeping face which seemed to lie like a delicate impalpable
mask over the living lineaments he had known. He felt that the real
Lily was still there, close to him, yet invisible and inaccessible;
and the tenuity of the barrier between them mocked him with a sense
of helplessness. There had never been more than a little impalpable
barrier between them—and yet he had suffered it to keep them apart!
And now, though it seemed slighter and frailer than ever, it had
suddenly hardened to adamant, and he might beat his life out
against it in vain.

He had dropped on his knees beside the bed, but a touch from Gerty
aroused him. He stood up, and as their eyes met he was struck by
the extraordinary light in his cousin’s face.

“You understand what the doctor has gone for? He has promised that
there shall be no trouble—but of course the formalities must be
gone through. And I asked him to give us time to look through her
things first——”

He nodded, and she glanced about the small bare room. “It won’t
take long,” she concluded.

“No—it won’t take long,” he agreed.

She held his hand in hers a moment longer, and then, with a last
look at the bed, moved silently toward the door. On the threshold
she paused to add: “You will find me downstairs if you want me.”

Selden roused himself to detain her. “But why are you going? She
would have wished——”

Gerty shook her head with a smile. “No: this is what she would have
wished——” and as she spoke a light broke through Selden’s stony
misery, and he saw deep into the hidden things of love.

The door closed on Gerty, and he stood alone with the motionless
sleeper on the bed. His impulse was to return to her side, to fall
on his knees, and rest his throbbing head against the peaceful
cheek on the pillow. They had never been at peace together, they
two; and now he felt himself drawn downward into the strange
mysterious depths of her tranquillity.

But he remembered Gerty’s warning words—he knew that, though time
had ceased in this room, its feet were hastening relentlessly
toward the door. Gerty had given him this supreme half hour, and he
must use it as she willed.

He turned and looked about him, sternly compelling himself to
regain his consciousness of outward things. There was very little
furniture in the room. The shabby chest of drawers was spread
with a lace cover, and set out with a few gold-topped boxes and
bottles, a rose-coloured pin-cushion, a glass tray strewn with
tortoise-shell hair-pins—he shrank from the poignant intimacy of
these trifles, and from the blank surface of the toilet-mirror
above them.

These were the only traces of luxury, of that clinging to the
minute observance of personal seemliness, which showed what her
other renunciations must have cost. There was no other token
of her personality about the room, unless it showed itself in
the scrupulous neatness of the scant articles of furniture: a
washing-stand, two chairs, a small writing-desk, and the little
table near the bed. On this table stood the empty bottle and glass,
and from these also he averted his eyes.

The desk was closed, but on its slanting lid lay two letters which
he took up. One bore the address of a bank, and as it was stamped
and sealed, Selden, after a moment’s hesitation, laid it aside. On
the other letter he read Gus Trenor’s name; and the flap of the
envelope was still ungummed.

Temptation leapt on him like the stab of a knife. He staggered
under it, steadying himself against the desk. Why had she been
writing to Trenor—writing, presumably, just after their parting
of the previous evening? The thought unhallowed the memory of
that last hour, made a mock of the word he had come to speak, and
defiled even the reconciling silence upon which it fell. He felt
himself flung back on all the ugly uncertainties from which he
thought he had cast loose forever. After all, what did he know of
her life? Only as much as she had chosen to show him, and measured
by the world’s estimate, how little that was! By what right—the
