letter in his hand seemed to ask—by what right was it he who now
passed into her confidence through the gate which death had left
unbarred? His heart cried out that it was by right of their last
hour together, the hour when she herself had placed the key in
his hand. Yes—but what if the letter to Trenor had been written
afterward?

He put it from him with sudden loathing, and setting his lips,
addressed himself resolutely to what remained of his task. After
all, that task would be easier to perform, now that his personal
stake in it was annulled.

He raised the lid of the desk, and saw within it a cheque-book
and a few packets of bills and letters, arranged with the orderly
precision which characterized all her personal habits. He looked
through the letters first, because it was the most difficult part
of the work. They proved to be few and unimportant, but among them
he found, with a strange commotion of the heart, the note he had
written her the day after the Brys’ entertainment.

“When may I come to you?”—his words overwhelmed him with a
realization of the cowardice which had driven him from her at the
very moment of attainment. Yes—he had always feared his fate, and
he was too honest to disown his cowardice now; for had not all his
old doubts started to life again at the mere sight of Trenor’s name?

He laid the note in his card-case, folding it away carefully, as
something made precious by the fact that she had held it so; then,
growing once more aware of the lapse of time, he continued his
examination of the papers.

To his surprise, he found that all the bills were receipted; there
was not an unpaid account among them. He opened the cheque-book,
and saw that, the very night before, a cheque of ten thousand
dollars from Mrs. Peniston’s executors had been entered in it.
The legacy, then, had been paid sooner than Gerty had led him
to expect. But, turning another page or two, he discovered with
astonishment that, in spite of this recent accession of funds, the
balance had already declined to a few dollars. A rapid glance at
the stubs of the last cheques, all of which bore the date of the
previous day, showed that between four or five hundred dollars of
the legacy had been spent in the settlement of bills, while the
remaining thousands were comprehended in one cheque, made out, at
the same time, to Charles Augustus Trenor.

Selden laid the book aside, and sank into the chair beside the
desk. He leaned his elbows on it, and hid his face in his hands.
The bitter waters of life surged high about him, their sterile
taste was on his lips. Did the cheque to Trenor explain the mystery
or deepen it? At first his mind refused to act—he felt only the
taint of such a transaction between a man like Trenor and a girl
like Lily Bart. Then, gradually, his troubled vision cleared,
old hints and rumours came back to him, and out of the very
insinuations he had feared to probe, he constructed an explanation
of the mystery. It was true, then, that she had taken money from
Trenor; but true also, as the contents of the little desk declared,
that the obligation had been intolerable to her, and that at the
first opportunity she had freed herself from it, though the act
left her face to face with bare unmitigated poverty.

That was all he knew—all he could hope to unravel of the story.
The mute lips on the pillow refused him more than this—unless
indeed they had told him the rest in the kiss they had left upon
his forehead. Yes, he could now read into that farewell all that
his heart craved to find there; he could even draw from it courage
not to accuse himself for having failed to reach the height of his
opportunity.

He saw that all the conditions of life had conspired to keep them
apart; since his very detachment from the external influences which
swayed her had increased his spiritual fastidiousness, and made it
more difficult for him to live and love uncritically. But at least
he HAD loved her—had been willing to stake his future on his faith
in her—and if the moment had been fated to pass from them before
they could seize it, he saw now that, for both, it had been saved
whole out of the ruin of their lives.

It was this moment of love, this fleeting victory over themselves,
which had kept them from atrophy and extinction; which, in her, had
reached out to him in every struggle against the influence of her
surroundings, and in him, had kept alive the faith that now drew
him penitent and reconciled to her side.

He knelt by the bed and bent over her, draining their last moment
to its lees; and in the silence there passed between them the word
which made all clear.


THE END




=Transcriber’s Note=:


  1. I have modernized this text by modernizing the contractions: do
     n’t becomes don’t, etc.

  2. I have retained the British spelling of words like favour and
     colour.

  3. I found and corrected one instance of the name “Gertie,” which I
     changed to “Gerty” to be consistent with rest of the book.

  Linda Ruoff




