CHAPTER IX

THE IDEAL AND THE WAY OF ITS ATTAINMENT


Mr. Stephen questions the possibility of our determining at all what a
state of ideal morality should be. I should contend, on the contrary,
that there would be little disagreement in opinions as to what the ideal
should be, but that rather our chief difficulties must lie in the
determination of the course to be pursued in order to attain to the
ideal. The profligate, it is true, will not be likely to acknowledge
that self-control and faithfulness are parts of an ideal condition if he
thinks that the acknowledgment binds him in any way to faithfulness and
self-control in his own conduct; and the dishonest man will be chary of
admitting that honesty is desirable if his consciousness suggests that
he ought therefore to practise unvarying honesty himself. But the
dishonest man is generally very thoroughly convinced of the desirability
of honor and uprightness in every one else; and the profligate also is
generally both among the loudest in his denunciation of unfaithfulness
in those he feels should be true to him, and sufficiently ready to
acknowledge the social advantages of principles opposite to his own, if
you can but convince him that it is only a matter of pure theory you are
discussing, which will doubtless never be put in practice by society as
a whole, and which in no way interferes with your thorough approval of
his own action. So, too, the cruel, the rough, and the rude, will easily
confess that unselfishness, unfailing kindness, tact, and consideration
in the rest of society, are what the world needs. Did these virtues
exist, there would be no need of the choice between evils now necessary.
That which really troubles us is this choice, the difficulty of
ascertaining just what course is the best, which brings us nearest to
our ideal, assists most effectually in hastening development towards
that goal. For there is no course, under existing conditions, which is
wholly advantageous to society, none which does not involve some evil.
It follows, from this, that it is insufficient to show that any
particular course involves some advantage to some one in order to
demonstrate that it is the right one, as also that it is insufficient to
show that a course involves evil to some one in order to demonstrate
that it is wrong. It is not proved that, because the restraint of any
particular desire or passion is attended with pain to the individual, it
is wrong. The argument has often been, and is still, advanced--seemingly
with the idea that it is conclusive--that the indulgence of physical
passion in youth tends to sobriety and steadiness in later years; and,
with a similar idea apparently, a dramatic critic falls into a rhapsody
over the manner in which the characters in a recent play come out
"purified by the evil" they have wrought or endured.[275] But even if
this argument were scientifically sound, it would not prove the
desirability of self-indulgence, since not the individual alone is to be
considered. The argument is, however, erroneous. With advancing years
comes in general, in any case, a diminution of passion, or at least a
greater admixture of reason; but apart from this, indulgence tends to
increase desire and tendency, except as excess may lead to morbid
conditions, or the disregard of higher instincts to disappointment and
cynicism. When we are told, in another play than the one mentioned
above, and apparently with the idea that the statement is an excuse,
that the hero could find no other outlet for the exuberance of his youth
than the seduction of an innocent girl, we may see no reason to doubt
the assertion, but we may question whether society has not a right,
nevertheless, to suppress a little of such exuberance or turn it into
other channels. The man born with fierce and ungovernable fury in his
disposition may likewise feel a strong propensity to express the
exuberance of his youth in a murder or two; but I see no reason why
society should permit him to do so. The passion of anger is also a
perfectly natural one, and the ungovernable fury which led to murder was
not an exception with our ancestors of the savage plane, but the rule.
Not all natural passion is to be indulged simply because it is natural;
and even the fact that a tendency is good in moderation and under
certain restrictions is no proof that it is good or to be indulged in
immoderation, or without these restrictions. It can have been only by
restriction of the natural savage fury that this fury grew less
prominent in character. The cannibal transported into civilized society
may still have a strong and perfectly natural hunger for my spareribs,
but that is no sufficient reason why he should get them. Jack the Ripper
is endowed, evidently, with a very passionate love for his human
vivisection, and finds it an outlet for an exuberance which also bubbles
out otherwise in many ways; yet I think society will be justified in
putting a peremptory end to that exuberance, when it gets the
opportunity.

Morality is indeed a matter of welfare, and so, of the gratification of
desire and tendency; but neither the present alone, nor the single
individual in preference to all the rest of society, is to be
considered. Effort should be exerted continually for the reduction of
pain to a minimum, in every respect possible, with regard to the
individual and the minority as well as with regard to the majority,
though the greater good and the greater number must always take
precedence. The rule of the majority may be asserted to be moral in that
it is the best possible expedient where there is disagreement of
desires. The necessity for choice between evils is the origin of the
principle of the Greatest Good to the Greatest Number, and this, as has
been said, covers all the ground, _if rightly applied_. But it offers a
temptation to stop with the mere comparison of two sums of individuals
and degrees of happiness for the time being, without taking into the
problem the wider results of a particular choice to society as a whole,
through habit and personal influence. The consideration of these last
important factors has led, on the other hand, to such rules as that of
Kant,--"Act so that the maxims of thy will might be taken as the
principle of universal action"; and this rule, because it goes deeper,
is less likely to lead to error. The moral requirement of continual
effort to find the best method of reducing the evil still remaining, of
recompensing the individual and the minority for the good of which they
are necessarily deprived, needs especial emphasis; for the continual
direction of attention to effort for progress, even where no outward
change is, for the moment, possible, constitutes an inward progress in
character which is ever ready to issue in external progress the instant
opportunity presents itself. Present pain to individuals is the sign of
imperfection in those permitting it and those suffering it, and must
result in increase of tendency in this direction of imperfection unless
it takes place only in spite of the most vigorous effort for its
prevention. Even the reformer must choose that to which he would chiefly
apply his endeavor, with some necessary withdrawal of effort from other
directions. Yet the neglect of any present opportunity of reform or
benefit, though it may sometimes be necessitated for the gain of some
more important future good, is still an outer, and also, especially, an
inner evil, which can be compensated only by a high degree of
superiority in the future good to be obtained. As the man who, perhaps
from the fear of failing in thoroughness, leaves all original work until
middle age, is likely to find his power of originality much deteriorated
by that time, so the man who is cruel to-day, in order to be kind in
some wider respect later on, is likely to find, on the final arrival of
opportunity, if the period through which the unkindness is exercised be
a long one, that his capacity for kindness has diminished. Every neglect
of present opportunity is a loss to character as well as an external
loss. When the present good passed over for the sake of the future
includes the welfare of whole lives, the question of choice and the
postponement of good becomes still graver; when it includes generations,
we need to consider earnestly before we take on ourselves the
responsibility of a choice that shall prefer the future. I cannot agree
with those who believe or practically live out the idea that the present
generation is only or chiefly for the sake of the future generation, the
parents only for the sake of their children, or the individual only for
the sake of society as a whole. We need to remember that the race
includes present and future, and parents and children, and has no
existence outside the individuals that compose it. It is difficult to
reconcile the many conflicting principles; and thus it appears that
morality is not easy, even where earnest desire for it exists, and that
different views with regard to it may be conscientiously held. The
difficulty only increases the duty of continual endeavor to reconcile
the many different conditions of happiness and welfare.

We come thus naturally to a question of the day,--the contest between
the Individualist and the Socialist.

What has already been said makes it sufficiently evident that, if
Individualism is to be maintained at all, it cannot be upheld on the
ground that the doings of the individual are of no importance to
society, and his sins may therefore not be interfered with by society.
In "Social Statics," Mr. Spencer secures freedom for "personal vice" by
turning his principle that a man has a right to seek his own ends as
long as he does not prevent others from the pursuit of their ends, into
the entirely different one, that a man has a right to seek a certain end
if he does not prevent others from seeking the same end.[276] The
argument in this form is applied to drunkenness, but it could as well be
used to prove the moral rightness of murder or any other crime, the sole
condition being that the murderer did not prevent others from committing
the crime also.

Nor is the Individualism less self-contradictory which bases its theory
on the principle that it is the office of civil law to guard the rights
of the individual. What individual? All individuals? If so, then
assuredly it is the duty of the State to see that the laborer is paid a
fair price for his work.

Nor can it be shown, as Hoeffding asserts, that intellectual labor
benefits the whole of society, while manual labor is less valuable
because it is for a few. The intellectual laborer knows well of what
value to him and his ilk is the manual labor which feeds him, clothes
him, and manufactures the thousand and one things necessary for his
comfort, leaving him leisure to pursue his studies with all material
wants provided for. The satisfaction of our material wants is the very
first requisite of life, without which intellectual labor would be an
impossibility.

There are, however, many degrees and shades of Individualism. As
Hoeffding says, Individualism may be identical with Egoism, but it need
not be so. And, moreover, as has been noticed, the adherents of theories
of Egoistic Morals are not necessarily adherents of any theory of
selfishness.

The theories bearing the name of Socialism are also very various,--quite
as much so as those included under the head of Individualism. It is,
therefore, both confusing to consider Socialism without some notice of
the distinction between these various phases of theory, and is likely to
lead to protest from one side or the other. But no single party of
Socialists can be treated exclusively as "the" Socialists; a minority of
the party cannot expect to be regarded as anything but a minority.

Of the tendency to represent the whole of the present order of society
as utterly bad,--a tendency not confined to the Socialist party, but
nevertheless strongly developed in many parts of it,--considerable has
already been said. As Hoeffding remarks, it is difficult to perceive how,
in an utterly corrupt society, any foundation may be found on which to
build the almost flawless society the Socialist proposes to institute.
If the course of evolution has hitherto been propitious to the increase
of evil, it is difficult to find any scientific grounds for a belief
that evolution will now proceed to favor the good. If man, as a being
possessing reason, has hitherto chosen, in increasing degree, injustice
towards his fellow-man, it is scarcely possible for any one who proceeds
upon the supposition of constancy in the action of man as a part of
nature to hope that future events will exhibit exactly opposite
characters. Assuredly, we are far enough from the goal yet, but in order
to demonstrate this fact it is not necessary to prove that we are worse
than any previous age has been. The tendency to lay stress, by every
means, on present evil, in the endeavor to impress its reality and
undesirability upon the mind of society, is comprehensible; and
doubtless, too, as the troubles of the individual are likely to appear
to himself among the hardest possible, so to those on whom the evils of
the age press most severely these are likely to seem greater than the
evils of any other times. But this method of regarding history is not
the less erroneous. "In the age of chivalry men had at least a common
ideal," said a Socialist to me, not long since. But what an ideal! And
unity of purpose is not by any means necessarily a sign of a high plane.
It may, on the contrary, signify stupidity, lack of the power of
independent thought. The first result of thought on any particular
subject is sure to be a division of opinion, although mutual criticism
gradually evolves harmony from the strife, and brings about a degree of
unity again, on a higher plane; for the mutual criticism is sure to have
been of intellectual use. The Socialists themselves have demonstrated
the fact that division of opinion necessarily arises when men begin to
think upon any question, for with the development of their party many
different phases of socialistic theory have appeared. The history of the
division of the Church into sects, and of the mutual criticism of these
sects, has been the history of religious progress.

With some Socialists, again, the already criticised idea of a "return to
nature" plays a conspicuous part. But we have never departed from
nature; we are as much a part of nature, as natural, as we ever were.
Or, if we are to return, who shall tell us at just what point we leave
the "artificial" and arrive at the "natural"? There are no
stopping-places, no stations or pauses, in the scale of evolution. There
is only continual change by inappreciable increments. The theory of
evolution carries with it no significance which could authorize us to
consider that we had arrived at our goal at one point rather than at
another. And, again, if we are to give up the artificial customs of
later development and return to earlier habits, then customs of
altruistic action, as the most distinctive and characteristic of later
forms of conduct, must be chiefly affected. If, however, by a return to
nature is meant the adoption of a simpler mode of life in some classes
in order that a less simple but more healthful one may become possible
in other classes, the question of the desirability of such a change is,
of course, open to discussion; but let us consider it under these terms
then. To designate the proposed mode of life as a return to the natural,
thus making present modes of life artificial, is to smuggle in an
illegitimate assumption against the latter.

It is the habit of a portion of the Socialist party to represent the
laborer as the epitome of all the virtues, the capitalist as his moral
opposite. This view cannot be other than erroneous, considered from any
standpoint. Moral evil cannot affect one part of a closely united
society without affecting the other parts also, though it may assume
different forms in different parts. This should be, in reality, the
Socialist's strongest argument, and is, indeed, one which he constantly
makes use of in other connections. If the steady labor of one class is
often associated with certain virtues, there are many elements of its
surroundings which tend to develop and encourage certain vices also; and
if, on the other hand, excessive wealth is often the condition, as well
as the result, of selfishness, still the relief from material anxieties
may be used, on the other hand, as opportunity for other useful labor,
and leaves room, indeed, for a development of finer intellectual and
moral qualities. To reply that much greater good would accompany other
conditions is irrelevant; for we are not now comparing actualities with
ideals, but one class of people with another under existing
circumstances.

A somewhat similar phase of idea to that just considered is found in the
agitation against machinery. This agitation is not of recent date,
however; it began over two centuries ago, and would, if it had
succeeded, have deprived the world of nearly all the comforts and
conveniences which have, since then, become possible. Doubtless the
abolishment of machinery would temporarily furnish labor to all the
unemployed. Indeed, it has been computed, from facts supplied by the
statistical bureau of Berlin, that it would require about double the
number of inhabitants now on the face of the globe to perform the labor
accomplished by the steam works of the principal civilized lands. But
the increase of the earth's inhabitants depends, to a great extent, on
the favorable or unfavorable circumstances of the environment; and we
cannot suppose otherwise than that the sudden accession of abundant
means of livelihood would cause a very great acceleration of the rate of
increase and so a speedy return of the old problem. Even supposing that
a certain recklessness of sexual indulgence would be done away with
under better circumstances which afforded access to other means of
pleasure than the purely physical, this over-indulgence leads quite as
often to sterility and disease as to excess of offspring. Habit and
opinion not being matters of instantaneous or even rapid change, the new
order of society would very largely depend upon the character and ideas
acquired under the old order, and population must increase with a
rapidity fostered by an immense multiplication of regular marriages, and
by more healthful surroundings for offspring at all ages. Unchecked, as
hitherto, by the excessive mortality due to famine, filth, and neglect,
it must soon arrive at a point where the questions of competition again
present themselves. But machinery is a relative term. Every tool and
device for lightening labor is, in fact, a machine, and takes, by
definition, from the labor of the world. When, therefore, we should find
ourselves face to face with the former conditions, I do not see that any
consistent course would lie before us but the doing away with our more
complicated tools, and, later, with our less complicated ones, and so
on, as the increase of the world's inhabitants brought again and again
the recurrence of questions of competition, until we should arrive, at
length, at that ancient state of things where all transport would be
made by porters, land ploughed by the pointed stick, and clothes--if we
consented to withdraw labor from the cultivation of the earth for the
manufacture of such luxuries--would require for the preparation of each
garment several weeks, months, or even years of work. I do not see where
else the theory of the abolishment of machinery for the sake of
supplying labor to the unemployed can logically and practically lead,
especially as the withdrawal of machinery must mean, in the end, the
withdrawal of those opportunities for cultivating the arts and sciences
which the leisure from merely mechanical pursuits alone can give. Under
more primitive conditions of labor, the ignorance of the masses must
spread more and more, until its widening circle must take in the great
majority of men, as was the case when these primitive conditions
prevailed. In other words, the abolishment of machinery means social
retrogression, and, if affording temporary relief, leaves the race, in
the end, on a lower plane of evolution, with the work of advancement to
its former plane all to do over again.

And this brings us to the consideration of another point, namely, the
agitation against luxury,--an agitation carried on not, like that
against machinery, by only a portion, if a considerable portion, of the
Socialist party, but by that party as a whole. We may inquire, then, as
to what luxury is. The Socialists find considerable trouble in defining
it; they generally content themselves with the word alone, leaving it
undefined or referring, with a general indefiniteness, to "velvets,
jewels, and laces," or "diamonds and silks"; the German Socialists have
sometimes shown particular antipathy to the glace glove; and a society
of English Socialists listened, not long ago, to a lecture in which, as
an example of the reforms proposed by Socialism, it was prophesied that
the evening-dresses of the future would be made of more lasting though
not less delicate and beautiful material. This last would assuredly be
desirable, if it could be carried out; but it remains to be seen in how
far it is practicable. The things which are the most delicate, whether
they be clothing or other articles, are ordinarily likewise the most
perishable; the union of delicacy of texture with endurance is a problem
that can be solved only by gradual improvement if at all; and it is
probable that it can be solved only relatively in some cases and not at
all in others; yet there are few people who will not find delicacy an
attribute of beauty. Few will disagree with M. de Laveleye that beauty
of costume must consist rather in harmony of colors and purity of line
than in the mere costliness of the goods; however, in a large number of
cases, excess of price corresponds to some actual superiority of color,
durability, or texture, in the goods. Doubtless it is true that some
things (M. de Laveleye instances opium) may cost much money and yet be
useless or even harmful; but this very limited assertion cannot, by any
logical method, be converted into an assertion that the price of an
article is an argument against it. Even the extra price demanded and
paid for novelties corresponds to an actual, general desire for variety,
and if this is often carried too far, the fact still remains that the
want is inherent in all human nature, indeed, in all life, and cannot be
entirely disregarded. The proposal of M. de Laveleye to reinstitute a
national dress is, for this reason, a foolish and inartistic one. No two
people are suited to exactly the same costume; and the more society
develops the more the individual shows a desire for individuality in
dress. No nation with a sense of beauty will ever consent to eternal
sameness.

Luxury is relative, as M. de Laveleye himself acknowledges. We might
define it, as he does at one point,[277] by excess of price or labor
expended. In that case, such articles as those African dresses which it
takes several years to manufacture would assuredly come under the head
of luxuries, and must, as such, be condemned from the standpoint of the
tribal plane of advancement; though they are not equal in texture or
taste of ornamentation to many of the cheapest of English goods, within
the reach of all but the very poorest. What are, with Europeans, the
bare necessities, or comforts of lowest grade, represent the extreme of
luxury to the Africans on whose plane our ancestors once stood. Many of
the things which are regarded by the average individual of to-day as
indispensable--every-day comforts--were within the reach of only the
wealthy few, a century ago, and could be had only as rare and choice
articles, to be preserved with the greatest care. The comforts of a
century ago represent, again, the luxuries of a preceding age, and so
on. Almost all products of labor are costly and rare before they can
become cheap and abundant. Had our ancestors entertained a socialistic
prejudice against the luxuries of their age, and resolved, with one
accord, to forego their manufacture as supplying only artificial needs,
we should not have had them to-day; but it is doubtful whether the
social problem would be any nearer solution than it is. The agitation
against machinery, at least, is ill combined with an agitation against
luxury; for every removal of machinery must make luxuries out of what
were, before, mere comforts, and advance the things now regarded as
necessities to the plane of the present comforts, as far as expenditure
of labor is regarded. M. de Laveleye distinguishes between rational and
primitive needs and irrational, "superfluous," or "spurious," ones; and
he defines the rational ones as those which reason asserts and hygiene
determines.[278] But from the merely hygienic point of view, every need
bears with it, by its very existence, a title to some consideration,
health and the gratification of desires being most intimately connected.
Certainly luxury is not necessarily inconsistent with the most healthy
physique, or the longest life. Many of the things ordinarily looked upon
as luxuries present unusually favorable conditions for health. Nor can
the question be decided by arbitrarily pronouncing all desires for
luxury "spurious." To M. de Laveleye and a minority of others they may
appear so; but what right has the individual to the assumption that all
needs beyond his own are spurious? Even the poorer classes of society
would, for the most part, be very glad to possess the luxuries of the
rich, and find them desirable; in other words, those desires which M. de
Laveleye pronounces spurious appertain to very nearly all human beings
who have at all formed a conception of their possibility. The savage
does not desire what we term luxury in as far as he knows nothing of it.
The argument that luxury is wrong or irrational simply because men once
were able to do without it is by no means conclusive. The conditions of
life, the employments of human beings, are far different now from those
of the time when men "lived in houses of osier." "Primitive" the desire
for luxury may not be; but if we attempt to determine what is primitive
in man, we shall meet with excessive difficulties. And again, if we
decide the question on the basis of any assumption against the
non-primitive, we must, in all consistency, exclude, as has already been
said, all higher ethical emotion and the love of art and science; none
of these can be pronounced primitive. Possibly we might define hunger,
thirst, sexual appetite, and the desire for a comfortable degree of
warmth, as the most primitive human needs; and these, indeed, are soon
satisfied; but the man who has no needs beyond these can not represent
the social ideal. The whole history of civilization from century to
century is the history of the formation of new needs and the gradual
satisfaction of these in larger and larger circles, until their objects,
from costly and hardly obtainable rarities, have become articles of
common use. With this course of development, coarseness has decreased,
refinement and taste have become more general. Nor can we, as has before
been stated, divide the human being into his separate desires and
functions, and assume that he can get rid of this or that one without
influencing all. The desires of the human being are of organic growth,
and the desire for luxury has an organic connection with the taste and
refinement with which it has grown. It is impossible that the love of
beauty in general should develop without the appearance of a desire for
beauty in the details of every-day life,--in utensils, clothing,
surroundings of every sort; as it is impossible, also, that this desire
for beauty in particulars should be dispensed with without a
corresponding retrogression in refinement and love of beauty in general.
One of the chief expenses of American entertainments is the profusion of
flowers used in decoration, and often most artistically arranged; and
whatever else may be said on the subject, the pleasure derived from them
can scarcely be termed spurious or irrational. Not all large sums spent
by the rich are given for mere display or for sensuality; they may be
spent for scientific experiments on a large scale, like those of Edison,
for travel, for books, for statuary and fine pictures, for fine
architecture, for rich tapestries and carpets, and even in great measure
for appliances and methods that secure greater cleanliness and more
healthful ways of living altogether. Nor are the appliances of art and
culture as desirable in huge museums or draughty and ill-ventilated
libraries, or anywhere else where the individual is forced into the
noise and numerous other annoyances of a promiscuous crowd, as in his
own home, arranged according to his own peculiarities of taste, and
associated with all the joys of love and domestic freedom. When sympathy
has become so general and so strong that not only men but women also can
find their best intellectual enjoyment in public places, these reasons
will cease to be of any force, but at present they have even moral
force; and since inherent character is a matter of evolution, a
condition of general sympathy and mutual consideration, and even of
universal common decency, must be of slow growth. It may further be
said, in particular, that there is no material more used by artists than
the so-much-decried velvet; again, many people of taste, who otherwise
spend money for little more than the necessities of life, find a
peculiar delight in the delicacy of fine laces, and are willing to
forego many other pleasures in order to possess them. George Eliot's
Dorothea, otherwise simple of habit, content with her plain wool gown,
found a peculiar fascination in the colors of an emerald bracelet, and
numerous persons confess to a similar pleasure in the changing rainbow
of the diamond, or the clear blue of the sapphire. These desires and
pleasures exist; they exist in people of comparative taste; they exist
as the result of human progress; they are not confined to a few
individuals; and they cannot be dismissed with a mere arbitrary
definition of them as "artificial," "superfluous," "irrational," or
"spurious."

The more cultivated Socialist complains of the lack of taste in society;
and an artist who is also a Socialist not long ago expressed his regret
that art was at present "unable to prevent" the wearing of unbecoming
forms of dress, etc. But we trust that this is not a hint that
socialistic government would undertake to decree what forms of dress
should be adopted; and we scarcely think that it could supply taste
itself to all people, or render differences of taste impossible. Taste
is, like everything else, a matter of evolution; it must make its
experiments, and undergo many failures for every step in advance. The
modern average of taste is as much in advance upon the average of our
savage ancestors as the modern average of morals is an advance upon
savage morals. The ideal of taste is, by definition, above the average;
and it may be doubted whether the time will ever come when there will
not be both degrees and differences of taste, and also an aesthetic
superiority of taste among those who devote their lives to art that will
render the average "poor" to them.

If, then, we are to condemn luxury on any tenable scientific grounds, we
must face the fact that it is an organic feature of the progress of
human society in intellectual and moral character, and a part of human
happiness; and we must show, over against these undeniable facts,
outweighing reasons for condemning it. The matter is more difficult than
a superficial Utilitarianism perceives.

The question seems to be one of the relinquishment of certain things on
the part of one class, in order that another may be elevated to a higher
plane. Certainly, no one can deny that the present misery and
degradation in society is a moral wrong, and that it is our duty to
seek some method by which it may be removed as speedily as possible. But
what is the degree of relinquishment which will suffice to raise all the
poor to a plane of comfort? Without defining the tastes for the
refinements or elegancies of life as "spurious," or, except as they are
personally injurious or associated with idleness, as in themselves bad,
we must admit that there are many exaggerations of expenditure for the
mere pleasure of the moment to a very small minority of individuals,
which, in view of the joys the same sums might secure for multitudes,
cannot be justified. But suppose that we do away with the spending of
immense sums for the entertainment of princes and potentates, with the
lavishing of wealth on a single dinner, on a single reception, on
carriages built for the mere purpose of carrying a single millionaire
bride to the church-door, and with the other expenses of this order;
shall we be able, as a result, to supply all the destitute with
comforts? Or to what length must we go, to what grade of luxury must we
descend in our reforms, in order to secure this? It would certainly not
be for the general good that society as a whole should relinquish all
the refinements that it has won in its evolution and be reduced to a
mere bread-and-butter level in the equalizing process. Beyond the
superficial utilitarian comparison of the two classes we have to
consider also the welfare of society as a whole. If we cannot morally
defend the sacrifice of the general good to one class, neither can we
defend its sacrifice to another class.

And here we come again to the population question. It is foolish to
suppose that character, as already formed, at any period, in adults, as
inherited correlative with physical organization, and as further
influenced by the contact of children with parents, husbands with wives,
friends with friends, and classes with classes, could be changed in the
twinkling of an eye. It is foolish to suppose that men would become all
at once, with the accession of comfort, wise, prudent, self-controlled,
and unselfish. On the contrary, those unused to prosperity are generally
the ones who use it least well when their lot is suddenly changed. Many
would not perceive or realize what results their action would have on
the condition of future generations, and many would not care as long as
they themselves escaped those results. We cannot, therefore, conceive
otherwise than that the rate of increase of population would suffer an
immense acceleration, were prosperity to be all at once secured to all
classes. Supposing, then, that the equalization of wealth, or that even
comfort to the poorer classes, were possible without a return to too
primitive a standard of life for all society, would the reform be a
permanent one?

The population question is one that the majority of Socialists
systematically avoid. But however avoided theoretically, it cannot be
avoided when we come to practice; and for this reason practical men are
likely to steer clear of theories that take no account of it. There is a
reason for this almost universal avoidance of the population question by
Socialists; it is, in fact, a question which stands in the way of the
very large majority of socialistic projects. But even the more advanced
of Socialists take but little notice of its importance. At a recent
meeting of the London Fabian Society, a large number present seemed to
agree with a member who argued that population might be left to take its
own course since "there is only a tendency" to too rapid increase.
Naturally, there is only a tendency to increase beyond the food supply,
since beyond this limit comes--death from privation and disease; and
since even beyond the limit of comfort come morbid conditions which
gradually bring death. If the theory of the Fabian in question is not
_laisser faire_, then I do not know what is. But the population question
never has solved itself and never will; it can only be solved by
definite intention.

At the same discussion mentioned above, another debater objected to any
decrease in the size of the families of laborers, on the ground that
such decrease would tend to lower wages and so also to lower the
standard of life. But the payment of higher wages, either on an average
to correspond with an actual average of larger families, or in
particular cases in view of the size of family in these cases, can never
constitute a raising of the standard of life; on the contrary, the wages
would be paid on the old standard for the individual, and competition
would be increased by the actual increase of population. The standard of
life is, and can be, raised only as a higher standard for the individual
is demanded and obtained.

But to these various arguments may be objected by the Socialists that
under socialistic government the whole environment of human society
would be changed, and so the old rules would be of no force. And this
brings us to another point.

A word continually in the mouth of certain of the Socialists is
"environment." Man is what he is, say they, by virtue of his
environment. Change the environment, and he must change. The present bad
condition of things is due to the environment; crime is the effect of
poverty, selfishness of competition; therefore, we have but to introduce
the socialistic form of government in order to do away with poverty and
crime at the same time with competition. The argument is attractive and
seems to solve the question as easily and indisputably as if it were a
mere elementary problem in Geometry. But the solution does not at all
harmonize with the course of analysis followed in this essay. From the
idea of an individual introduced into social conditions where poverty is
absent, it generalizes to the whole of society introduced to a new set
of laws. It forgets, in its definition of environment, that _men
themselves are the most important factor of the environment_, and that,
_in order to_ change the environment, one must change the moral
character of men with respect to each other. The whole argument makes
the mistake of choosing the one of two concomitants as alone cause and
regarding the other as alone effect. It is perfectly true that, if you
can abolish poverty, you will also have abolished crime and sin; and,
without looking farther, the Socialist regards this as conclusive
evidence that the system he proposes is logically demonstrated to be the
right and sure cure for present evil; but it may be added that _it is
quite equally true_ that, if you can abolish crime and sin, you will
have abolished poverty, also; and then it may be further said that
neither can be abolished, as a whole, first, in order that the other may
be gotten rid of through its disappearance. Competition is no more the
cause of selfishness, than selfishness is the cause of competition; the
present legal system, the present form of government is no more the
cause of the evils in society than the other evils in society are the
cause of the defects in the present form of government. Man's nature is
no more the effect of the social environment than the social conditions
are the effect of his nature. Extreme poverty and crime or vice work
reciprocally for each other's increase, or they increase and decrease
with what may be termed oscillations; poverty results in vice and vice
in poverty, or vice in poverty, and poverty again in vice; in the
individual, either may be primary, may precede the other. It is as true
that you must change men's characters in order to change all the outer
evils of the environment as it is that you must change the outer evils
in order to change men's characters. It is as true that you must get rid
of crime and vice in order to get rid of poverty as it is that you must
get rid of poverty in order to get rid of crime and vice. Here is the
new version of the serpent with its tail in its mouth; but here it is
not a symbol of eternity, but of evolution. _There is no one cause of
the evils in society, but all existing things are interdependent
conditions._ There is, therefore, no possibility of getting rid of any
one of them at one stroke, its abolishment to be followed by the
disappearance of the others; as they increase, so they must
decrease,--by reciprocal action, or complex action and reaction.

If we imagine, for a moment, a whole society of savages suddenly
introduced to a set of ideal laws by--we will say--some one individual
from out an ideal society, who proclaims these laws and then returns to
his own land, we shall not be able to imagine such laws remaining in
force for any great length of time. If we suppose our own ancestors of
the stone age introduced to our own laws by some one from out the
present century returning to them as Mark Twain's Yankee returned to the
court of King Arthur, we shall not imagine those laws as very long
binding; and nothing could be truer to facts of psychology than the
gigantic tragedy with which Mr. Clemens' book closes. No set of ideal
laws introduced to an inideal society can be regarded as the
"environment" of that society, which shall render it ideal. The more
democratic a country, the more the passing, even, of a law or measure
depends on the general sentiment; but many laws have been passed and
many measures of government projected which have failed completely in
administration because they were too far in advance of the general moral
status. External morality of institutions and internal morality of
character in society as a union of many individuals can only increase
together, and gradually, by reciprocal action. In other words, the
evolution necessary to the attainment of any ideal condition where
poverty and crime are eliminated must be internal as well as external;
and this is a fact that few Socialists recognize, at least practically,
and that even the Fabians, accepting as they do the theory of evolution,
continually fail to take account of in the application of their
theories. They have indeed received the theory of evolution as regards
external institutions; but, with perhaps a few exceptions, they have not
regarded it in its inner, psychical significance. This is made evident
by the continual recurrence of such references and remarks as we have
criticised, which trace all evil to our "artificial system," refer to
character as bad because "saturated with immoral principles by our
commercial system,"[279] and reckon upon a change in this "artificial
system" which, first accomplished, will cause a revolution in character.
The acknowledgment of the necessity of evolution is, for the most part,
forgotten in practical discussion; and the reason of this forgetfulness
is easily understood from just the fact noticed--that the evolution, the
necessity of which is recognized, is the mere external one of state
institutions. Character is regarded in any case as a dependent, an
effect; and this is in accordance with the old theory of the will as
passive and as determined by the rest of nature, never as the active and
independent factor determining and instituting. Thus, even a Fabian is
likely to look with only half-approval at institutions like the Society
for Ethical Culture, which has for its first object the cultivation of
character; and many Socialists, until very lately the great majority,
have regarded all improvements which did not bear directly towards
Socialism as mere temporizing. The socialistic government was to be
first established, and this would perform all the reforms necessary; or,
rather, evils would disappear of themselves when once it was
established. Fortunately, Socialism is itself undergoing an evolution.

But again, even those Socialists who talk of an evolution up to
"socialistic forms" are continually found representing the ease with
which government might, at present, take over the business of the
nation. This is the natural result of the fact that the evolution
recognized as necessary is only that of institutions, not that of
character. The perception, on the other hand, that character is not, at
present, capable of receiving or administering a socialistic form of
government, is the reason of much of the resistance opposed to a party
which, whatever a very small minority may claim as to theory, is
practically endeavoring to force a system of government upon peoples not
prepared for carrying it out with success. There are few governments, as
yet, where even the democratic idea has sufficiently taken root to
render the people at all used to self-government; and where they exist,
the good they confer is not unmixed. I am not advancing an argument
against democracy; but the defects of human nature which render its
benefits of a mixed character must hinder in an incomparably greater
measure a scheme which would place all power, even to the control of all
wealth, in the hands of the administration; in other words, Socialism,
if introduced to-day, could no more get rid of poverty and crime than
democracy can get rid of them; and the gulf between the old and the new
order being so great a one, the danger attending the new institutions
would be particularly great. As Hoeffding remarks, it is not proved,
because we intrust many things to state-government (with mixed good and
evil) that it would be well to intrust the management of _all_ matters
to it. The Socialists propose to secure the perfection of system by
making the government responsible to the people and the executive
responsible to the government; but in democratic governments this
principle is already carried out. Are we to suppose that the possession
of still greater power and so still larger opportunities for fraud would
afford the people greater security? Or how could the responsibility of
the legislative and administrative functions to the people be still
better secured than it is anywhere at present? The power of the people
might be extended to include interference with both functions. But the
socialistic government must, in any case, be excessively complicated;
even Bellamy, whose government is much simplified by the supposition of
the immediate attainment of an ideal character through the action of the
social "environment," designates the scheme as "very elaborate." The
difficulties of direct interference with the legislative functions in
countries larger than Switzerland (where the referendum is occasionally
resorted to), the difficulties of deciding on evidence before the court
of the whole country in cases where the power of deposition might be
used, the labor of arriving at a general verdict about which there
should be no dispute, the strife and party feeling which must be thus
continually engendered in the contest of opinions as long as men have
not attained to an ideal character, would be likely, if such powers of
national interference were often exercised, to keep the country in a
state of continual uproar; while, on the other hand, if peace were
purchased at the sacrifice of the power of direct interference, the
machinery of state would no more than at present secure the nation from
fraud, which must be greater as the power in the hands of a socialistic
government would be larger. To the man of principle, it would doubtless
appear foolish as well as wrong to sacrifice position, comparative
comfort, and the esteem of fellow-citizens, for mere gain in wealth by
dishonest means; but as long as there are many men by whom temporary
gratification is often preferred even at the sacrifice of more lasting
pleasure, and selfish pleasure is of more account than public esteem, as
long as there are men to whom the element of excitement in crime is an
attraction, as long as women are often unscrupulous and men the slaves
of passion, as long as there are those who find the power to command by
means of wealth more desirable than security in moderation, and as long
as there remain others who will bow down to wealth fraudulently
acquired, as long, too, as there are countries anywhere upon the earth
in which malefactors may find refuge, the chances of fraud under a
socialistic government are large. They must be particularly large where
"inordinate luxury and the hope of it" are abolished; for, leaving out
of account all question as to the morality of luxury, there are
undoubtedly many men who desire as much of it as they can obtain.
Bellamy discreetly supposes his ideal government to be adopted at once
by all nations, thus paying no attention to the obviously very different
degrees of social development represented by those different nations.
But as long as any communication of trade whatever existed with nations
still under the old regime, ingenuity could devise ways of theft, and
foreign lands would constitute a goal for the enjoyment of the spoil.
There are, and will be for very many years yet, plenty of places of
refuge for the clever thief. Moreover, communication and commerce with
other lands not only being necessary but becoming daily more and more
desirable, a law excluding all foreigners would be difficult to
establish; and this being the case, the social equilibrium must be
continually disturbed, and inner character affected by the influx from
other nations.

There is another general objection to socialistic schemes which bears on
the point of their application to present conditions, namely, their
arbitrary nature, the manner in which they would decide summarily many
questions on which society is at present most at variance and different
individuals entertain the most conflicting opinions, the comparative
value of which can be tested only by experiment. This feature of
Socialism is inseparable from the general condition of things. Many
feel, therefore, and feel with reason, that sympathy is not yet
sufficiently general and strong to warrant the entrusting of all
interests of the individual to a majority of his fellow-men. It is even
a question whether free scientific investigation would not be imperilled
if some Socialists had their way. It is not long since that I heard an
"evolutionary" Socialist expressing his opinion emphatically that the
waste of time and energy in the pursuit of ambitions never to be
realized was so undesirable that he questioned whether the individual
ought to be permitted to choose a vocation in which it is believed he
will fail. But the element of interest that causes a man to choose a
given occupation is the very factor which most often results in
efficient labor; and it is the testimony of many that the perseverance
possible through love of their work has prevailed in direct opposition
to the predictions of onlookers. Thousands of men have succeeded against
all expectations. It is by no means those who apparently possess most
ability who succeed best or profit the world most by their work. There
are projects of arbitrariness very similar in sort and nearly as great
in degree in all the Socialistic schemes in which the questions of the
day are furnished with cut and dried answers. It is strange, for
instance, that American advocates of women's right to a free choice of a
vocation have failed to discover with what dexterity Bellamy avoids the
whole question of women's capacity, by the discreetly blind remark that
they are not only inferior to men in strength, but "further disqualified
in special ways" (a formula which the author finds so successful that he
repeats the words in a subsequent essay), while he appears practically
to side with the Conservatives in thought on the matter. The government
of Bellamy provides, furthermore, that one can change his vocation only
up to the age of thirty-five, and even to this date only "under proper
restrictions"; the experience of mankind has shown, however, that a
man's best inspirations may come to him after this age, and lead to a
development of talents heretofore unsuspected even by himself. The "aids
to choice" in a state may be as numerous as you like; but they can never
give a man of thirty the experience and mental development of the man of
thirty-five, thirty-seven, or forty. The assistance which the judgment
of others can give in the choice of a vocation is, for the most part, of
little use to the adult; and whatever the minor advantages of an
elimination of the certain amount of disturbance consequent on changes
of occupation, the harm to society of restriction on efforts in any
direction of useful labor must more than counterbalance these.

The method of newspaper-editing in Bellamy's state is also peculiar. The
people who desire any special interest to be brought before the public
choose an editor, establish a newspaper "reflecting their opinions and
devoted especially to their locality, trade, or profession," and when
the editor fails to give satisfaction in his publications, simply
"remove him." This method would, I fear, scarcely meet the desires of
any editor possessed with a brain, and to whom his profession was
something more than a matter of mere automatism.

Indeed, the whole order of Bellamy's state is of too military and
automatic a character; though it is easy, in a work of fiction, to
represent the members of his industrial army as universally content and
universally virtuous.

It is in consequence of the more or less distinct perception that, for
all these reasons, human nature of the present time is unsuited to the
absolute cooeperation involved in Socialism, that many Individualists
advocate a continuation of the system of competition. From ancient
savagery up to our present half-civilization has been a gradual
evolution, not of government with character as its effect, but of
government and character as cooerdinates, or (if we view them in another
light) as advancing by mutual action and reaction; and our future must
constitute a like gradual evolution (though with continual acceleration
of velocity) of character and government as cooerdinates; the attempt of
individuals or parties to force one of these cooerdinates before the
other must always result in failure. It is true, as Mr. Grant Allen
stated in a lecture before the London Fabians--designed as refutation of
the Individualistic theory that competition is necessary for the best
social evolution--that natural selection favors cooeperation,[280] that
is, that those societies in which the efforts of individuals are most
supplemented by the aid of others, have the best chance of life and
health both as wholes and in their individual units; but this fact does
not do away with the necessity of the evolution of cooeperation
_cooerdinate with character_. "We know now," says another Fabian, "that
in natural selection at the stage of development where the existence of
civilized man is at stake, the units selected from are not individuals
but societies."[281] This, however, we do not know. Natural selection
acts on cell, on individual, and on all the various social units to
which men combine, in their multiplicity of relations. It does not cease
to act on individuals because it acts also on social organizations, any
more than it ceases to act on cells in acting on organisms as wholes; it
is only true that the line of the preservation of the individual and
that of the preservation of the whole of society approach each other
more and more nearly with social progress. The tendency of the whole of
social evolution has been one of increasing cooeperation cooerdinate with
increasing social instinct or sympathy in all its complex relations and
dependences; and with the attainment of the maximum of sympathy we can
not well imagine or suppose anything else than the maximum of
cooeperation. On the other hand, the gradual nature of social evolution
up to this maximum, and the contest of differing opinions, secures a
sufficient experiment, and so the protection of the people from tyranny
under another name; for it is not the emotional nature of man alone
which must grow to greater harmony, it is also his intellectual nature;
as opinions are brought nearer and nearer to each other by mutual
criticism, men become more capable of cooeperation; and this intellectual
agreement represents the line of adjustment or natural selection, since
it is the conclusion reached by means of experience--the common
knowledge bought through the practical application of various
principles. A tribe of savages would be incapable of administration of
the government of our so-called civilized states, as also of obedience
to it:--both because the individual would rebel in opinion and in
emotion at the barriers imposed by it, and because the functions of
administration in the hands of savages would tend to injustice that
would be greater as the sphere of government exceeded that to which the
tribe had been used; and for similar reasons, the present age is
incapable of that maximum of cooeperation in all relations which is
involved in Socialism. Even the aesthetic use of wealth, moderation and
taste in enjoyment, must be learned by degrees; it cannot be infused by
any government. The savage envies, in our more civilized states, chiefly
the opportunities for the gorging of good things and for self-adornment
which they afford; and the savage lack of self-control where alcohol is
concerned, is proverbial; the average of more civilized societies shows
a much greater self-control and moderation in the face of opportunities
of purely sensual gratification, and a much greater love of more
aesthetic and more moral pleasures. Or rather, we should perhaps say, as
before, the sensuality becomes more refined, and is gratified in more
moral ways, through its organization with higher instincts. It is not
among the wealthier classes, who have had the use of wealth, that taste
is poorest; on the contrary, the average of taste is smaller, the outlay
for foolish ornament of all sorts larger in proportion to means, in the
poorer classes; and were these classes to come without change of
character into possession of considerable means of enjoyment, it is to
be suspected that expenditure for tasteless adornments would, in many
cases, and especially among the women, precede and exceed expenditure
for higher things.

And this brings me to a more especial consideration of that very large
portion of the Socialist party who acknowledge no necessity for an
evolution up to Socialism in any sense, but desire a revolution. Bellamy
distinctly denies the necessity of an evolution, and many of his
followers agree with him on this point; but the revolution he believes
in and hopes for is a bloodless and peaceful one. To this conception the
preceding objections sufficiently apply.

A revolution in the ordinary sense of the word is always, however, the
sign of powerful opposition between two parties, of which one may gain
the immediate ascendancy by force; but will surely be exposed,
afterwards, to the long-enduring hatred, opposition, and revenge of a
strong minority, that will make itself felt with an energy greatly
increased by the vindictiveness which naturally follows on war and
defeat. France is still suffering from her revolutions even at this
length of time after their occurrence. Where the people have no vote and
real influence upon the government, and even the expression of opinion
is restricted by law, so that to gain an influence is practically
impossible, a political revolution may take place; but its results, both
immediate and remote, must contain a very large modicum of evil even if
some advance is accomplished by it. A revolution to obtain the
establishment of absolute cooeperation would be self-contradictory, and
the self-contradiction of character implied in it would result in its
failure; it could not happen in a country at all prepared for absolute
cooeperation, or even for a very high degree of cooeperation. A revolution
in any country at the present time would have to reckon with all sorts
of depraved tastes and vicious characters, matters of organization and
inheritance which neither in the individual, nor in the line of descent,
could be gotten rid of in a day; which must, indeed, affect society for
many generations, and before they could be eradicated would do away with
Socialism or destroy its success. Poverty and crime cannot be banished
by any device of mere legislation; only with time and by gradual means
can they be gotten rid of.

Socialism is, then, as a whole, too impetuous, if Individualism is, as a
whole, too reluctant. But Socialism is undergoing an evolution, as has
been said. Arising as the voice of the poor, the oppressed, the
miserable, the hungry, it has made itself heard and has materially
modified public opinion, while it has, at the same time, been itself
modified, according to the universal law of the equilibration of forces.
Forced by necessity practically, and gradually altered by criticism as
to theory, it is coming to give its energies less and less to a
consideration of the final socialistic government which should do away
with the necessity of further reforms because accomplishing an immediate
and universal one, and devoting them more and more to present measures
of reform, many of which are simply liberal measures proposed by
non-Socialists and such as would have had no meaning to the majority of
Socialists of a few years past, or would have been regarded by them as
useless temporizing. In its mutual action and reaction with
Individualism, it will doubtless still more modify and be modified, so
that more and more ground for united action will be won. The cause of
the laborer is the most urgent of our times; but increase of wages will
be of very little use except as it is steadily accompanied by aids to
knowledge and self-direction, aids in the formation of character, in the
use of self and of the means of enjoyment; otherwise, the laborer must
continually defeat his own cause, and renew the old problems.

The education of self-control must begin with the child. The education
of the child is never to be considered by itself; the child is not one
individual and the adult another, neither is there any dividing line
between childhood and maturity; and that which the individual is to
become in later life he must grow towards as a child. The habits which
the man would exercise the child must learn. In Germany, where the
military spirit prevails, implicit obedience to authority is ranked
among the highest virtues, and habits of strict military discipline are
carried into the family as well as exercised in all public relations. In
countries where more democratic ideas are strong, the older methods are
giving way to milder ones. These sometimes degenerate into the opposite
extreme of careless indulgence, with bad results; but taken on the
average, their beneficial influence is seen in the greater alertness,
originality, and openness of the children brought up under them.
Frankness and originality are on the average incompatible with harsh or
stern treatment; the latter is more likely to generate craftiness,
fawning hypocrisy, or an unloving and unlovable rigidity of character;
and any of these qualities is compatible with secret self-indulgence in
any form, wherever this is possible. Only an education in freedom can
teach the use of freedom. The old, hard, religious idea of "breaking the
will" (the natural outcome of a religion based on blind faith, "fear,"
and unquestioning obedience) was a sad blunder; what we need is not less
but more will, with better direction of it. True, the wisdom of
experience must always guide the young; but its guidance, to attain the
best results, should make itself as little felt as authority as
possible, and should withdraw into the background as early as possible.
Not that it should degenerate into slipshod yielding to importunities,
but that it should endeavor to give reasons rather than mere rules of
conduct, to instil principles and ideas rather than laws, and so to
develop the power of self-direction. It is often objected that the young
child is incapable of comprehending principles; but so is the infant
incapable of comprehending speech, and yet it is through the use of
speech to the infant that comprehension is gradually attained; as sounds
are fixed in the receptive memory of the infant, and slowly acquire
meaning, so ethical principles, simply stated, may be communicated, and
will be better and better understood as the child develops. This method
of instruction is, rightly understood, as far from weakness as it is
from tyranny and dogmatism; indeed, no method demands in the instructor
so much care, thought, and patience. It must be judicious and
consistent, never capricious, and its fundamental principle must be the
cultivation of justice through justice, and so of kindness through
kindness. Especially should the young be prepared in the home, by
self-knowledge, for the trials and temptations which menace in the world
outside, through the passions of maturity. To the earnest man or woman,
nothing appears more trivial than the false shame which hinders, even in
the home and between parents and children, the moral discussion of some
of the most important of human relations for good or evil. To the pure
all things are pure; but, unfortunately, it is also true that to the
impure all things are impure. Nothing is more injurious to children than
the morbid curiosity stimulated through the secrecy and deception which
are ordinarily practised, and which inspires them with the sense of a
mystery that is half criminal, half sacred. Curiosity grows under such
tuition, a disproportionate interest is awakened and often comes to be
satisfied from sources outside the home, with an admixture of deplorable
vulgarity, the influence of which is not soon lost. Such a tuition
tends, not to purity of thought, but to impurity, and often directly to
vice. The mystery with which natural, and what may be perfectly moral,
relations is thus invested, is often the source of a fatal attraction to
ignorant youth. What we need to make out of our children is not puppets
of which the world as well as ourselves may pull the wires, but earnest
and self-comprehending men and women, self-reliant and fearless because
life is no strange country filled with unknown shadows and pitfalls, but
a pleasant land, whose dangers, known, may be avoided, and the road
through which leads to a comprehended and desirable goal.

Parental power was once held sacred and beyond interference;
nevertheless the use made of it does not seem to have been always a
sacred one. The Roman law allowed parents to put their children to
death. The modern state has tended, on the other hand, to take away more
and more power from the parents, extending its protection to the
helpless child. And this is well; the child, as well as the adult,
should have the right of protection against abuse. Nevertheless, the
theories which would relegate the whole education and care of the child
to the state must be regarded as too extreme. Whatever disadvantages
there may be in the government of parents, especially at the present day
when the education of women is still so inadequate, there is yet nothing
which the child cannot better miss out of his education than the
influence of parental love, the lack of which no state institution can
ever supply. Granted that parental government is of a most mistaken sort
in some cases, and that it is not perfect in any case, it still remains
true that family affection furnishes one of mankind's greatest joys,
and that the love of the parent should, and even does, on the average,
make the best protection and educator weak and clinging childhood can
have. No one who has at all studied the condition of children in orphan
asylums and other institutions under the care of the state, can have
failed to notice, even in those institutions managed with the greatest
kindness, the immense difference in happiness and attractiveness between
their inmates and the children used to family love and mother's
caresses. The lack of love makes the child unlovable. The fundamental
method of reform lies, not in the withdrawal of all power from parents,
but rather in the better preparation of men, and especially of women, to
fulfil the duties of parentage. Such a preparation must consist,
however, less in any particular study than in such general physical,
intellectual, and moral discipline and education as shall expand all the
powers in health and harmony, thus securing to children a good physical
inheritance and an early guidance both wise and moral. A higher morality
must particularly emphasize the fact that not self alone or even merely
the two parties to a marriage are to be considered; that the welfare of
possible offspring must be regarded; and that, therefore, marriage with
the morally unfit is a crime against future generations as well as
against self, and marriage of the physically unfit, where offspring are
permitted, is equally a wrong. The old idea, encouraged in women, that
it was a good and noble use of life to "marry a man in order to reform
him," is beginning to go out of vogue; and future standards will not
tolerate the present social dogma that, however much of a profligate a
man may have been, whatever associates he may have affected, however he
may have betrayed the innocent and debauched his own moral sense, he is
still fit to mate with any pure and good woman.

The necessity of a better physical and intellectual education for the
mothers of the race, as a preparation for the adequate performance of
their duties, must be, at the present time, especially emphasized. The
task of the mother in the early training of children is one that
requires practical knowledge of the world, broad views, and that power
of judgment which is possible only through mental discipline.
Superstition, narrowness, subjection to tradition and dogma, are
incompatible with efficient motherhood. The education must, then, be
real, no cramming with stale facts and staler theories; it must advance
with the science of the day, and deal with its vital questions.

But the standpoint which regards women only as means to ends outside
themselves, which calculates all the advantages to be permitted them by
the measure alone of their usefulness to husbands or children, is a poor
one. To afford to all individuals the full and free development of
capacity must be the ideal of society. The ancient conceptions which
laid little emphasis practically, whatever they might do theoretically,
upon the woman's right to opportunities for her own sake, which made
meekness and self-abnegation her chief virtues, and fixed its regard
always upon future generations in her case, is one that cannot be
defended from a higher ethical standpoint. If no man lives unto himself
alone, neither should any man, or woman either, be expected to spend his
life merely as a means to others and having no end in himself. Every
human being has a right to a share in the general privileges and
pleasures. For their own sake, and that of society as a whole, as well
as for that of their immediate friends and family, women should share
equally with men the benefits of mental culture, its aesthetic
enjoyments, its consolations and distractions, and the calm and
self-poise bestowed by its broad outlook. To women as well as to men
applies what has already been said of the folly and sin of ignorance of
the world. We have only to look at France in order to perceive the evils
of a system which brings girls to maturity in a condition of seclusion,
ignorance, and dependence, and then suddenly launches them upon society
wholly unprepared to withstand the temptations it presents. The evil
results of a less degree of the same system are visible all over the
world. On the other hand, it is in just that country--America--where
women have had the most freedom, that they are also most capable of
enduring freedom, and that their civilizing influence is most visible.
They are not the less womanly for this liberty, and society is very much
the better for it. Indeed, their attractiveness and the power they wield
through it is not equalled in any other country. "I wonder," writes
George Eliot, "whether the subtle measuring of forces will ever come to
measure the force there would be in one beautiful woman whose mind was
as noble as her face was beautiful--who made a man's passion for her
rush in one current with all the great aims of his life." "It is
terrible--the keen, bright eye of a woman when it has once been turned
with admiration on what is severely true; but then the severely true
rarely comes within its range of vision."

The questions of marriage and prostitution may be reduced to the single
question of the desirability of monogamy. No one can well deny the evils
attending the existence of a class of prostitutes isolated from moral
associations, despised and ill-treated, daily sinking lower and lower
through this isolation, and contaminating, by their influence, those who
come in contact with them. The practical question is, then, would it be
well for society as a whole to assume another attitude, of open
approval, towards prostitution, to admit those who are now outcasts to a
position on a par with faithful wives and pure maidens. This was the
position of Athenian prostitutes, and it existed together with, we may
suppose, comparative chastity on the part of maidens and faithfulness on
the part of wives. These, however, did not take part in the social life
of the men, but lived in seclusion in their homes; it would be
impossible to accord a similar position to prostitutes in modern society
unless with the practical surrender of any demand or expectancy of
faithfulness on the part of wives, or of chastity on the part of
maidens. Even in France, where the position of prostitutes most nearly
approximates the Athenian, a very distinct dividing-line is drawn
between the _demi-monde_ and the rest of society; and, indeed, special
precautions are taken to secure the chastity of girls. In like manner,
purity might perhaps still be secured in girls, after the admission of
prostitutes to a position of equality with other women, by a convent
education and the greatest watchfulness; but the lack of self-dependence
would be likely to be followed, as it now so often is in France, only in
far greater degree, by excesses after the attainment of comparative
self-direction with marriage. The profligate soon tires of the
prostitute, and desires higher game; unbridled license begets morbid
passion; the sense of honor is blunted; the pure cease to be safe except
as far as they are able, by self-control and self-defence, to protect
themselves; and for such self-poise only an education of freedom, of
knowledge of the world and of self, can prepare. Nor could even such a
system of seclusion as we have imagined exist for any length of time
side by side with the full acceptance of prostitution as perfectly
honorable and right; the two things are self-contradictory and
incompatible; in France, faithfulness is not less desired of wives than
in other countries. Indeed, the majority of men in civilized countries
would never consent to a system of general promiscuity; they desire
women, that is, a large number of women, a sufficient number to supply
them with wives, to remain pure, whatever liberty they demand for
themselves. The whole progress of society has been in the direction of
monogamy, and the reason of this is obvious: as reason and taste
develop, man ceases to be satisfied with the mere enjoyments of the
animal; he develops higher powers and instincts which also demand their
satisfaction; these powers, too, are not separate entities, but are
organized with the more primitive capacities and the whole organization
becomes another through their appearance. As the social instinct grows,
and intellect comes to take a higher place, the mere or chiefly physical
passion felt between the sexes of lower species becomes the higher human
love, an organized instinct in which all the moral and intellectual
desires, the highest aims and emotions of the individual are fused to a
whole. Moreover, momentary pleasure becomes, with social progress,
indeed with all evolution, less and less the ruling power; man, above
all creatures, comes to demand enduring sources of satisfaction.
Faithfulness in love is as necessary to perfect satisfaction as is
faithfulness in friendship; and the long as well as the close
companionship of congenial natures is now, and must more and more
become, the spring of our highest human joys. Disappointment in marriage
may incline the individual to doubt, by a universalization from his own
case,--to which disappointment is prone,--whether life-long love and
faithfulness are possible; but he still must feel that this is the
ideal. It has been said that men are naturally polygamous, women
monogamous; but this statement is obviously erroneous, since men by no
means favor general polygamy; even the savage is capable of jealousy,
and men have continually used the superior power they have possessed in
law and public opinion to emphasize the exclusive claim they have upon
the women they take to wife. It is only true that, having also had the
power in their hands of refusing a like faithfulness to that which they
demand from women, they have used this power to their own advantage.
Women desire faithful love on the part of men quite as much as men
desire it on the part of women; and women are quite as capable of
physical excesses and of fickleness as are men, when the restraints of
public opinion and social law are once broken over.

A condition of promiscuity is impossible in an ideal society, and can
never be the goal towards which we tend. Men would not submit to it in
the women they loved; and if it is not possible for wives, then we have
left us only the alternative of prostitution in its present form,
increasingly worse in character as the ideal of faithfulness is more
universally demanded and more completely carried out in wives, and the
necessary cooerdinate social ostracism and disgrace of the prostitute
increases. But this also cannot assuredly be our ideal; the increasing
misery of the class of prostitutes is not a thing to be sought. The
whole theory which tolerates prostitution is, in fact, illogical and
only devised as a prop for the selfishness of men, who are content to
take their pleasure at the expense of so much misery. The same thing
cannot be, as some one has said, at once right for the man to demand and
infamous for the woman to permit. Where the act is one to which both
sexes are necessary, it must, if it be right at all, be right for both,
and if it is wrong, then wrong for both. And this would remain true even
if it were proved that, because of greater strength or for any other
reason, the sexual passion of men ought not to be restrained; for, the
responsibility of the prostitute's misery is thus laid at the door of
men; if the women who ply this traffic are prompted by no passion, but
only compelled by destitution, then the blame of their unhappy
compulsion to such a traffic rests more than ever on the heads of those
who furnish the demand to which their supply answers. In any case, the
man is an accessory before the fact to a thing which he acknowledges
wrong on the part of its performer.

But the plea that passion is stronger in the man for an act which dates
back to the point in evolution where sexual propagation first began, and
which has been performed equally by both sexes through all the range of
species up to man, and even equally by both sexes of the human species
except during the comparatively short period of higher civilization, is
absurd. The difference between the sexes in degree of sexual
gratification is, _among those who transmit their instincts to
offspring_, not great even under civilization. There is probably more
excess in marriage than outside it. But apart from this fact, the fact
of cross-heredity is to be taken into consideration. The sexual is no
more than any other instinct a separate part of the individual
character; it is organically interwoven with all other instincts and
tendencies; and it is scarcely supposable that thus fused with the rest
of character, it would not be subject, as all other traits, to
cross-inheritance from father to daughter as well as from mother to
son,--that the father's life would not, in many cases, affect his
daughter's propensities, and the mother's life her son's. This _a
priori_ reasoning is supported by facts of observation, among which
those of pathology and criminology are naturally the most marked. Man is
an animal; but, as we have said before, he is not a beast, nor does he
need to imitate the beasts. He has his own social organization and must
determine his own moral laws. The old theory, that any restraint at all
of sexual passion is a crime against nature, and likely to result in
great physical evil, is now exploded. Even if it were true that some
evil to the individual was always the result of any restraint, the good
of the individual is not the absolute criterion of right, and cannot
stand against the claim of society as a whole; the unrestrained
indulgence of sexual passion could no more be justified on this ground,
and because of the fact that it is a natural instinct, than the absolute
indulgence of anger can be justified because anger is a natural passion,
and its expression doubtless a great satisfaction and relief to the
individual. But very many medical men, and among them such men as
Professor Krafft-Ebbing, the German authority on nervous diseases, are
now denying that self-restraint has such evil results as have been
attributed to it. Krafft-Ebbing says, on the contrary, that while
physical excess is very often the precursor of harm, self-restraint is
seldom so, except in cases of abnormal and morbid appetite.[282]

In other countries than the United States and England, the plea of
"poetry" or "romance" is often heard in defence of prostitution, and as
an excuse for the seduction of pure women. But if this is poetry, which
must so end in the bitter misery, the shame, degradation, despair, and
even often the utter destruction of its heroines, then, in the name of
pity, let us have less of poetry and more of common humanity. To a man
of anything but selfish instincts, "poetry" or "romance" could never be
an excuse for connivance at such misery, either by direct act or in any
way by influence. Nor is the poetry or romance of the highest order, in
any case. There is no romance so powerful, no poetry so thrilling, nor
any passion so strong, as that to which all the springs of intellectual
aspiration and moral aim converge, and which draws its sweetness and
force from a purity tainted by no degradation of ideals, galled by no
bitter and humiliating recollections, checked by no self-consciousness
of concealment and deceit. Compared with such a feeling, the romance of
the "man of the world" is tame and flat, his poetry but the doggerel
jingle of the third-rate variety-show. Physical passion the human being
shares with every dog and other brute down to nearly the lowest forms of
animal life; love is as truly of higher species as the aesthetic sense of
the artist is of higher nature than the delight of the savage in gauds.
The old idea that strong emotion of any kind was incompatible with
perfect morality has already been sufficiently discussed. But this
delusion has been the excuse of many a life of profound selfishness. It
has led to the theory that the artistic nature must necessarily be
unrestrained in the gratification of its impulses, and has furnished the
libertine with a fine sense of kinship with the poet through the
imitation of his sins. Perhaps the poetry of the lives of Robert and
Elizabeth Barrett Browning has been to the world as great a
gratification and of as high worth as any that they ever wrote on paper.
It has dispelled once and forever the false theory of the necessities of
the artistic temperament, and has enabled us to perceive the higher
beauty of enduring love.

It is often urged in defence of the sexual sins of the poet or the
musician, that they are natural to his temperament and that, moreover,
he must be acquainted with all phases of life. But why is it not also
urged, then, that he ought to be at liberty to give way to ungoverned
fury, if he has inherited a tendency in that direction, or that he is
justified in committing murder, arson, and all the other crimes in the
catalogue for the sake of the experience and the greater power of
portrayal thus gained? If the excuse suffices for one crime against the
welfare of human beings, it should suffice also for others. Dickens
might possibly have been able to draw the character of Bill Sykes, to
depict his crime and the succeeding emotions with greater power and
faithfulness, had he himself experienced all that which he wished to
portray; nevertheless, society cannot concede that he would have been
justified in killing for the sake of his art; and neither can it
concede, from a higher ethical standpoint, that any other act in direct
opposition to the general welfare is justifiable for the sake of art. It
may be possible for the artist, by torturing a slave to death, to paint
a more realistic picture of dying agony; but however glorious the art,
the man of finer sense and stronger sympathies must be revolted by it.
Society can even better miss a little of its art than take it at the
price of human misery.

But it is to be questioned whether the artist does not lose as much as
he gains, or even more, by an immoral license of any sort. True, the
artist must know human nature; but the best portrayers of criminal
characters have not themselves been criminals; and if ever we should
have a murderer-poet, we should in all probability feel the lack, in his
verse, of various things, among these of the higher realism which
comprehends higher as well as lower types. It is impossible to be merely
the spectator of one's own life even if one is an artist; and especially
is this true where passion is concerned. The emotions one feels, the
acts one performs, must mould one's character, one's thought, opinion,
the mental world in which one lives, and so one's creative genius.
Nature is by no means all dunghill or reptile-haunted swamp, or even
common kitchen; she has also her seas and mountains, and skies, her
fields and woods, and even her sunny gardens and dainty parlors. The
snow-mountain glowing under the flush of dawn is as real as the reeking
dunghill; but the power to appreciate and portray the one may be lost by
too close association with the other, as the fine sense of smell is
dulled by sojourning in foul odors. To the rake, the character of the
self-controlled and virtuous becomes incomprehensible and chimerical;
and his attempts to represent it are likely to be tinged with an
atmosphere of unreality. Of this we have much evidence in literature. To
raise oneself to the higher standard in practice and comprehension
requires an effort; but it is comparatively easy to allow oneself to
sink to a level for which generations of one's ancestors has prepared
innate if latent tendencies. On the other hand, though we desire to know
men and things through art, we desire to keep with us through its aid,
above all, that which most pleases us in the actual world--the beautiful
in form, coloring, and idea, in nature outside man and in man himself;
the good, if it is the truly good, and not cant or hypocrisy, is also
the beautiful, and the loss of the power to portray it is a large one.
And beyond the more easily definable loss which we have noticed, there
is a still further one, felt in a subtle tone, a shade, an atmosphere;
and which, if closely knit with our moral perceptions, is still an
aesthetic as well as a moral one. The evolution of morality, could,
indeed, no more take place without leaving its impress on art than
without leaving it on humor. The higher sense of humor, in very
proportion to its keenness, experiences a revulsion at the grotesque and
gross vulgarity which passes for humor among the savage and
half-civilized; and with time, the immoral comes to revolt too much to
permit of aesthetic enjoyment. Had Dickens been a murderer himself,
instead of the tender-hearted man he was, the world would doubtless have
lost in every way aesthetically as well as morally by the fact. The old
theory of the total emancipation of art from all claims of morality
cannot be maintained from even the aesthetic standpoint, and certainly
not from the ethical standpoint. Art has every right to be non-moral (if
that which delights innocently is ever anything but positively moral),
but it has none to be immoral,--to use the mighty power it possesses in
the cause of evil of any sort.

Nor is it even true that all nature belongs to art. In all its history,
sculpture has never, except in a few isolated cases, reproduced the
forms of the withered and decrepit. The painter of the extreme realistic
school may occasionally portray the scenes of the dissecting-room, but
pictures of sores and ulcers are left to adorn the pages of medical
works or patent-medicine advertisements. There are moral sores and
ulcers as little suited to artistic literature, and belonging properly
to works on social healing alone. The depiction of evil in due
proportion and with such limitations belongs to the accurate
representation of human character. But let its portrayal include no sin
against man; let not the artist dip his hands in the dunghill, for
humanity's sake and also for his art's sake; lest his picture reek of
it, and we find the offal mixed with the colors.

The cant and superstition with which marriage has often been invested
has doubtless been the source of the rebellion of many vigorous and
original minds from the old morality; the morality founded on tradition
and not on reason and sympathy has always this disadvantage.
Undoubtedly, the sale of human flesh for gold or any other sordid
consideration, is evil, whether done under the sanction of the
marriage-law or without it. Undoubtedly also, the marriage-rite performs
no miracle or magic spell, as the superstition of the past has imagined.
Nevertheless, it is of importance as a civil contract, a public
acknowledgment, which furnishes data to the state, and places it in a
position to protect any injured party, and to fix the responsibility for
the maintenance and education of offspring. Considering the number of
individuals whose welfare is seriously concerned in these most intimate
relations of life, with all their passions, the state cannot relinquish
this right of arbitration, which should especially be employed for the
protection of the weaker individuals concerned--the wife and children.
Unfortunately, it has, as yet, too often been used rather in securing
the power of tyranny and abuse than in protecting. This fact is
perceptible even in modern law, as, for instance, in the unequal
divorce-laws of England, and in the fact that wife-beaters are often
treated with great leniency by English magistrates, while the man who
abuses his mistress is liable to relatively severe punishment as having
no especial power over the latter. It is, undoubtedly, the result of
such laws, together with other evils incidental to the average of
marriages under the present conditions of human character, that on some
sides a theory has grown up in favor of the total abolition of marriage.
But neither in its general application, nor in this particular instance,
is the Anarchistic conception which finds the source of all evil in law,
scientifically justifiable. The conditions of the evil lie in human
nature itself, in the incompleteness of its evolution; of the present
stage the injustice of present law is a part. The remedy lies,
therefore, as far as the law is concerned, in its correction, not in its
abolishment.

The ideal of love is enduring faithfulness. But when that ideal is not
only unfulfilled, but marriage brings, instead of happiness, only
misery, shall the bond be indissoluble, difficult, or easy to loose?

In countries where women are wholly dependent upon men, perfect facility
of divorce means substantially the power of repudiation on the part of
men. As long as women are incapable of efficient self-support, the
advantage of very easy divorce lies largely on the side of the husband.
Marriage concerns, in any case, the welfare, not of one person alone but
that of husband, wife, and children, and society as a whole must place
some restrictions on the selfish action of the individual which may be
to the lasting disadvantage of all others concerned. But as society
advances, as the education and social independence of women increase,
too great stringency becomes undesirable, its advantages continually
diminish in comparison with its disadvantages. Forced family relations
where all the affection that might render them for the good of those
thus related is lacking, are obviously in themselves undesirable, and in
most cases where wife and children can be provided for independently of
such relations, an evil to be avoided. Assuredly, it is undesirable that
the moral should be tied indissolubly, or practically so, to the
immoral,--that a mother, for instance, should not only be forced to
bring forth children to a father whose evil qualities they may inherit,
but be compelled to endure the further ruin of their character through
his influence, besides bearing the personal agony of the enforced
companionship with a man whose principles she can but despise. But all
character is at present faulty; and a desire for perfection in husband
or wife therefore certain to disappointment; hence, the relinquishment
of all divorce-restrictions whatsoever is too likely to lead to
promiscuity; and unless such appears desirable to society, neither
public opinion nor state-law can place the power of repudiation in the
hands of individuals. It is a choice of evils; the state must take human
nature as it finds it, and deal with it on this basis. It has sometimes
been proposed to make some substitution for the old form of marriage,
as, for instance, by the adoption of a period of probation, of two,
three, or five years' marriage before the signing of the final
life-contract; by this method, it was proposed to obviate the necessity
for divorce. As far as this last proposal is concerned, it may be
remarked that applications for divorce are by no means always made in
the earlier period of married life, and that, furthermore, any such
arrangement would offer the very best opportunities for the unscrupulous
libertine.

But beyond this, it may be repeated that, as Hoeffding has said, it is
not in the nature of love worthy the name to calculate the possibility
of its own ending, and that the highest form of love is enduring.
Enduring relation must, then, form the ideal on which we must fix our
eyes, even while failing to attain it; divorce, while given in cases
where union seems no longer desirable, must be looked upon as indicating
a failure of marriage to fulfil its end. The influence of an ideal held
in mind is the continual moulding of reality to a form more nearly
resembling it. But to descend to a form of contract which starts with
the assumption of separation as possible or probable is to lose sight of
the ideal, to relinquish it from imagination, and to do away with its
influence upon public opinion, and so upon the evolution of institutions
and habits. We certainly need better divorce-laws and the wider
recognition of the desirability of divorce in many cases, but not the
practical acceptance of an ideal of promiscuity.

The plan of such short contracts could never be carried out practically
for any length of time, in any modern civilized society. Even if adopted
for a time, it would speedily be abolished. Man naturally desires and
takes means of enforcing, at first with the lower means of compulsion,
then with the higher through the sympathies themselves, faithfulness in
woman; woman also, and equally, desires faithfulness in man, but is not
able to secure it. The gradual growth of woman's social independence
must, however, place her more and more in a position to know of the life
of men and to enforce the faithfulness she desires; that is, to punish
unfaithfulness with the same penalties of disability for marriage by
which men have hitherto enforced faithfulness in women. We may easily
perceive that this is the direction of development. In countries where
women are wholly dependent upon men, the character of a suitor in any
respect is a thing little inquired into, the chief object of the
parents, who ordinarily have the most to say about the matter, being to
secure a husband for the girl at any cost. With the progress of society,
women become less and less ready to accept the known drunkard or the
confessed libertine, and it is only the seclusion of women and their
consequent ignorance of the lives of men that makes marriage, at
present, still comparatively easy to the discreet and clever profligate.
The cooerdinate increase of regard for purity in wives with the
aggravation of the character of prostitution, supposed above for the
sake of the discussion, is possible only up to a certain point, as an
oscillation in one direction resistance to which is continually
accumulating, and must result in reaction in the opposite direction. The
two principles are mutually contradictory, incompatible, and impossible
as enduring factors in the same society. The growth of a more widely
diffused and stronger sentiment against prostitution and in favor of
faithfulness has, indeed, as yet led chiefly to the greater exclusion of
prostitutes from association with the rest of society, and made
profligacy more and more secret; but, at the same time, the gradually
increasing sympathy has formed an accumulating resistance which is
rapidly taking shape in the realization that the prostitute is not more
guilty in furnishing the supply than is the man whose demand makes
self-profanation a source of income, that the misery of prostitution is
immoral, and that the only remedy is prevention. There is no alternative
to this remedy that progress can realize except, as has been shown,
general promiscuity. It is best, then, that we should make up our minds
between these two and act accordingly; for the action of every
individual tells, for good or ill, upon society as a whole. What is the
ideal? I think the answer is plain; no man who has any conception of the
higher joys of love which is also friendship, intellectual
companionship, can hesitate; and if this is so, then duty is plain also.
No man has a right to deplore the evil by word who encourages it in any
way by his act.

It is sometimes averred by those who oppose the economic independence
and educational equality of women with men, that women can mingle with
the world on a plane of equality with men only at the sacrifice of all
the chivalry and admiration which men now give to women. But this
objection opposes every step of women's progress, from the harem
upwards, and every step has proved its falseness. True, in the lands
where women are freest, they are less favored with insincere and fulsome
compliments, with vows and protestations which, when put to the test,
mean nothing, or worse than nothing. The case is, however, far otherwise
with the attentions which mark sincere regard, and the consideration
paid by physical strength to comparative weakness. It would, indeed, be
peculiar if higher intellectual powers, a clearer insight into the
"severely true," the cultivation of that nobility of character which
results from self-knowledge through knowledge of others and the habit of
self-reliance, should render women less attractive. The pioneers in any
cause need to be the hardier individuals, and so are often those who
please little aesthetically; and the kicks and scoffs of the world may
take from the disposition what little grace it at first possessed; but
this does not prove the moral rightness of the kicks and scoffs, or the
moral culpability of those who dare to adhere to their purpose in spite
of them. In the countries where excessive difficulties are placed in the
way of women's work in the higher professions (there are very few placed
in the way of her overwork in other directions), these have resulted
naturally in the suppression of effort on the part of the majority of
the more finely constituted and more sensitive, and have left the field
to the hardier and less fine; but in the United States, where women are
freest in every way, they have lost neither in natural grace nor in the
attention and regard of men; on the contrary, they have gained in both,
and they have, furthermore, left the mark of their refining influence on
the whole civilization of the country. As long as women are weaker than
men physically, a higher moral standard must have regard for this
weakness. When, through a more healthful life, women become more nearly
equal to men in endurance, certain forms of attention will be less
necessary, and will, doubtless, fall off somewhat, only to make room for
a higher plane of mutual helpfulness. Yet I doubt whether the time will
ever come when the grace and beauty of women, the associations of love
and the memories of family affection, will not stir men of finer fibre
to peculiar kindness, repaid as the appreciation of women can well
repay.

There is another protest--which comes especially from the party that
most exclaims against the evils of competition--against the
"superstitious" respect for age. The reason is, obviously, that age
tends by nature to conservatism. But the evils of the struggle for
existence are not those alone of outward conditions; these are often far
less hard than the bitter spirit of mental antagonism that sears and
saddens the heart. Youth is daring and originative; middle age is less
venturesome, but it possesses, on the other hand, a wider range of
experience. Between youth and youth, or youth and middle age, the battle
is more equal. But age no longer possesses the power to cope with the
world physically or mentally; it is fixed in habit, and apt to follow
one accustomed round of thought; we are certainly not likely to convince
it by violence. It has borne its share of violence and has done its part
in the battle. It has advanced with its generation, though it may not be
able to advance any longer with ours. Our ideal should certainly be that
of forbearance, not of intolerance towards it.

Modern opinion is becoming dissatisfied with the old methods of dealing
with criminals--with the methods which continually return the criminal
to society not bettered by incarceration, and ready to commit all manner
of crimes again. Both the protection of society and the welfare of the
criminal would be better served by a course of discipline that should
only then give him back to society when he is fitted to live in harmony
with it and to enjoy the advantages conferred by such harmony. Recent
experiments in reformatories have demonstrated the immense advantage of
methods which attempt something like this. Among the improved
reformatories for children, many of them without walls, bolts, or bars,
some have sent out cured from eighty to eighty-five per cent of the
offenders committed to them. The Elmira reformatory deals especially
with offenders sentenced for their first state's prison offence, and its
method is at once eminently humane and remarkably successful. Offenders
may be sent to it at the discretion of the judges. It contains three
grades. Members of the first of these wear better clothing, eat better
food, enjoy various special privileges, and are used, to some extent, as
officers and monitors for the other grades. Members of the second grade
are less well provided for and honored than those of the first; and
members of the third grade are worst clothed and fed, and have the
fewest privileges. Every man who enters the prison is submitted to a
minute examination as to his antecedents, his mental, moral, and
physical condition and capabilities. He is then placed in the second
grade, from which he may go up or down, according to his work and
conduct. Eight hours' work a day are required, and compulsory school is
held in the evening, at which the common English branches are taught,
and elementary instruction given in Law, Political Economy, Ethics, etc.
Discussion and thought on the subjects taught are encouraged, and
everything possible is done to awaken interest. "Perfect" work and
conduct for six months--the standard of "perfection" is high--and a mark
of 75 in a scale of 100 in the school secure a man advance into the next
higher grade; and the same standard maintained for six months in the
highest grade entitle a man to release on parole; so that the term of
imprisonment need not exceed a year. The man must be willing,
industrious, good-tempered, obedient, energetic, who gets release in
this time. Work is found for every man released; he is closely watched
for six months more, and if his conduct does not keep up the standard
required, he is returned to the reformatory and must begin over again;
if, on the other hand, his conduct and work, an attested report of which
must be handed in each month, is satisfactory for these six months, he
is honorably discharged. The obdurate malefactors serve out their full
sentence, as they would in state's prison. Of those who go out from the
institution, eighty per cent return to society reformed; and the
superintendent is of the opinion that this percentage could still be
raised were the time of detention made indeterminate and wholly
dependent upon reform. All prison reformers are coming to recognize the
desirability of such indeterminate sentences. The work of the men at
Elmira pays over two-thirds of the expenses of the institution, and even
if we consider only dollars and cents, this method of dealing with crime
is evidently the cheapest; for under the old method we have to take into
account the expenses of the later crimes of the men released without
improvement of character. The method of parole of first offenders, newly
introduced into France, and in use to some extent in other countries
also, seems to have rather less to recommend it, except in special
cases; since the moral, intellectual, and industrial discipline of the
reformatory are lacking.

In all such reformatory work it may be remarked that hard labor and
stringent discipline, as well as consistent kindness, are found
absolutely necessary; and it is to be noted that the disinclination of
criminals for labor and regularity of life is one of the greatest
obstacles in the way of their reform.[283] Judge Green quotes from Mr.
Hough on this point: "Those who are in control of penal institutions
meet with no more pernicious influence than that exerted by certain
well-meaning but mistaken philanthropists who are impelled by kindly
hearts to slop over with sentiment. No criminal is so hard to reach as
the one who fancies himself injured or has a grievance against society.
Aside from treatment that compels him to feel resentment, there is no
one thing that will so quickly bring this feeling as to have some
tender-hearted, benevolent person tell him that they think his penalty
is far more severe than his offence warrants, especially now that he has
promised to pray regularly and abandon his wicked ways."[284] In
connection with this point, we may notice Bellamy's theory of crime as
Atavism, to be treated in the hospitals. Whether or not we regard crime
as disease, a distinction must be drawn between the disease that may be
regarded as physical weakness and that which does not necessarily imply
such weakness, though it may imply some physical defect in the sense
that the psychical characteristic has always its physical cooerdinate.
We may call the places where our criminals are treated prisons, or we
may call them hospitals; but the name will not alter the fact that
crime, and even the crime the tendency to which manifests itself early
in life and is most incorrigible, needs, for the most part, a wholly
different treatment from that pursued with the sick or the insane.
Discipline and labor may come into play in the insane asylum, and
medicine and hygiene in the prison; but the methods are, nevertheless,
widely separated, and need to be so in order to attain any success.
Bellamy's conception of the character of the criminal by nature--such as
he imagines as alone existing under the conditions of his ideal
state--as rarely untruthful, does not at all accord with the facts of
Psychology and Criminology. Total unreliability is one of the chief
characteristics of the criminal by nature. He lies even where there is
nothing to be gained by lying and often much to be lost; he lies
apparently for the mere pleasure of lying; or he is crafty and cunning,
and the smallest gain suffices to furnish him with a motive for
falsehood. In mankind, as a whole, the love of truth, one of the latest
developments of the moral sense, is likewise one of those earliest lost
in any moral deterioration; and to suppose men, as a rule, strictly
truthful and yet capable of committing crimes of any sort, especially in
a general ideal state of society and morals, is to suppose a
psychological contradiction. Moreover, the antipathy of the criminal to
undergoing the penalty of his crime would still remain as long as the
discipline and labor of the places for criminal treatment were not
abolished; and even the restrictions of incarceration would render the
penalty disagreeable, since liberty is always preferable to confinement.
And if we consider the indefinite sentence, which all prison reformers
now regard as the first condition of the successful treatment of crime,
to be introduced, the reasons for pleading "Not Guilty" would by no
means be removed. But I doubt whether a society of high moral
development would sanction the doubling of the penalty which Bellamy
conceives, as the punishment of simply a lie to escape it.

The question of capital punishment is more difficult than at first
glance appears. One of the arguments often advanced in opposition to
this form of punishment is that the fear of it is no preventive of the
crime of murder (for which alone, in times of peace, it is still imposed
in civilized countries), since murder still takes place. But the
argument in this form is practically worthless; we might as well say
that art exhibitions do nothing to form taste, since many people who
visit them are still lacking in aesthetic feeling. The fact that men have
gone away from public executions and committed murder is more to the
purpose, as an indication that the influence of the spectacle is
probably a bad one. As to the private execution within prison-walls, it
is difficult to suppose that the mere knowledge of it could arouse a
desire for blood, as the sight of it may be imagined to do. If we
abandon capital punishment on this ground merely, ought we not, in
consistency, to do away with all representations of violent death on the
stage and all description of it in fiction, since these things must
affect the imagination full as vividly. The gladiatorial shows of Rome
were doubtless undesirable from a humanitarian point of view, not only
in themselves, but also in their results; and it might be undesirable
for most individuals to accustom themselves to the spectacle of the
butchering of their meat; but, whether or not we agree with the
vegetarians as to the social significance and influence of the use of
animal-food (necessarily, of course, we must concede that every fact has
an influence of some sort, and in some degree, upon the mind), it can
scarcely be claimed that the mere knowledge that beeves are slaughtered
somewhere is likely to influence the mind to such an extent as to lead
to a morbid desire to imitate the deed; nor, the stimulating excitement
of the actual spectacle of execution lacking, is it likely that the mere
knowledge of its actuality should incite to the taking of human life. On
the contrary, it appears far more likely that the would-be murderer
should connect the thought of it with the possibilities of his own
future in case of detection and arrest, and that he should, thus, be
rather deterred from crime by it.

The vital questions appear to be whether we have a right thus to
sacrifice life, and whether the evil which the murderer brings upon
society may not be better prevented in some other way. Leaving out of
consideration, for a moment, a point which will be considered later, the
two questions will be seen to resolve themselves into one. If I should
perceive an innocent man about to be murdered by a villain, who was on
the point of plunging his knife into his victim's heart, and I had in my
hand at the time a loaded revolver, my duty would be plain. I should
have no choice as to the responsibility for one man's life; only the
choice would be left me as to which life I would be responsible for;
and to spare the murderer would be to make myself an accomplice in the
murder. The responsibility lies with every society to do the utmost in
its power to prevent the murder of citizens who are, in the majority of
cases, better men than their murderer; and the life, even, of the
murderer cannot stand out against the life of better men. If, then, the
death sentence is the best preventive of murder, and society refuses to
inflict it nevertheless, it makes itself the accomplice of the murderer
as much as is the man who stands by and permits the knife to be plunged
into the victim's heart, rather than shoot down its wielder. It is not
mercy that spares the guilty to sacrifice the innocent. If, then, we
must be responsible for the death of any man, let it be for that of the
murderer rather than for that of his victims. It is easy enough to say,
as do some on this point, that it should never become a principle of
society to do evil in order that good may come; but as long as there are
conflicting conditions in society, there can be no choice of absolute
good; the only choice is between lesser and greater evils. Forgetting
this, and looking only on the one side of the question on which their
sympathy has especially been excited, reformers are sometimes guilty of
choosing the greater evil in order that a lesser good may come. It is,
therefore, not sufficient to brand capital punishment "a relic of
barbarism," in order to prove that it should be abolished.

The problem of prevention of murder includes various elements: it
includes the question of the possible repetition of the crime by the
individual on trial, the question of his influence by precept and
example, and that of his possible propagation of offspring who may
inherit his evil propensities; and it also includes the question of the
check of fear in other would-be murderers.

It has been claimed that imprisonment for life would act as an effectual
preventive in all these respects. There may be, however, various
objections to this penalty. In the first place, an unconditional
life-sentence without hope of pardon is difficult to establish,
especially in democratic countries; and its justice is doubtful, in case
it were possible. Even if sentences of this sort were to be passed, pity
would be likely to interfere later with their execution. And then the
momentous question arises as to whether it would always be well-directed
pity. The men in whom the right of pardon is vested are not always wise
in their use of it, and in democratic countries they are guided to a
considerable extent by the will of importunate portions of society which
is often still less wise. The sentimentality which now vents itself in
loading down violent criminals with flowers, fruit, gifts of all sorts,
letters, photographs, commiserations for their "misfortune," and even
offers of marriage, is likely to stand in the way of the safety of
society in case the murderer lives. This sentimentality, which in many
countries exalts the criminal into a hero, and in France turns the
police court into a fashionable place of amusement, were it not to be
followed by the dread ending which the sterner members of society exact,
and were the hope of pardon still open, might invest arrest with even
some attractions to the murderer, who is frequently a hero in his own
eyes. The prominence of a desire for notoriety is evident in criminals
of the Jack-the-Ripper and other types. The sentimentality which is
unable to distinguish between a legitimate mercy, and the mercy to the
individual which amounts to the worst of cruelty to many others, is,
indeed, a continual danger to society and a hindrance to useful reforms.

Again, if the criminal be condemned to life-imprisonment, there is
always the possibility of his escape to be considered, and the fact that
he will probably stick at nothing to accomplish his escape. The dangers
of ultimate success may not be so large; our prisons are nowadays
strongly built, the warders and other officers are very seldom open to
bribes, and the proportion of escapes is extremely small. Nevertheless,
the hopelessness of a life-sentence must constitute a strong motive for
the stimulation of effort and ingenuity; and it can scarcely be hoped
that a man who has not before hesitated at murder, and who has no
greater penalty to fear in case of any number of repetitions of the
crime, will hesitate when his liberty and all it means to him of freedom
from irksome discipline and restraint of vice, is at stake. And in case
of escape society has to fear, not only repetitions of the crime, but
also the numberless and complex workings of the criminal's influence on
others, and the propagation of offspring who may inherit his evil
propensities.

And, furthermore, if the sentence of life-imprisonment is carried out,
the murderer's influence on the other tenants of the prison is to be
considered, in case he is not kept in solitary confinement. The
preservation of a large number of desperate criminals, in contact with
the less corrupt ones whose reform is being attempted, has many
objections. Criminals have more than once stated that they learned their
worst principles from companions in prison, and many of our prisons and
many of our reformatories have been called mere schools of vice.
Moreover, in maintaining our desperate criminals, we are spending large
sums for their comfort while hundreds of better men are left to starve,
and thousands are more poorly clothed and fed.

The fact that murder has not increased in some countries where the
death-sentence has been abolished may be admitted as evidence in the
matter, but cannot be regarded, alone, as conclusive. For, first, that
which is for the general good in one country may not be so in another,
the national temperament, form of government, and general habits of
which are different. And, furthermore, it may be said that, although
statistics undoubtedly must have some meaning in all cases, the
complication of social conditions renders it often difficult to say just
what the significance may be in the particular case. In the diminution
of murders, other circumstances may have been at work which would have
lessened the number even if the death-sentence had not been abolished.
At least, experiments with regard to the abolition of the death-penalty
have been too few to render any categorical assertion on the subject
possible.

But some of the above-stated objections to the abolition of capital
punishment might be removed by the provision of separate prisons for
malefactors condemned to life-imprisonment, with separate wards
according to the moral condition of the prisoners, little communication
being allowed between even those in the same ward, or communication only
under supervision, and such instruction being given as would enable the
individual to occupy the hours not devoted to labor in study, reading,
or other mental recreation.

Green, in his book on crime, calls attention to the very undesirable
vindictiveness sometimes aroused, by sentence of death, in the minds of
the condemned and of his friends, and notices the general evil of the
feeling in the minds of criminals that the state is their deadly foe,
defiance of the laws being thus raised to the plane of legitimate
warfare upon an enemy. The Hon. John J. Wheeler, in a paper quoted by
Green, lays especial stress on the desirability of convincing the
criminal that not revenge but the protection of society is aimed at in
state-punishment.

Again, the question may be asked whether the sentimental
tendency to regard the criminal as a hero is not fostered by the
death-sentence--whether the pity aroused at so extreme a fate would not
be inclined to take a less harmful form if the treatment of the criminal
were at once firm and humane but less sensational. Doubtless, the glory
of crime and half its attractiveness for a large class of morbid
criminals would be departed, if we could come to regard the latter with
commiseration as of a lower and abnormal type of humanity and to treat
them as such. But it must be remembered that society, as a whole, is yet
far from so scientific a conception; and that combined firmness and
kindness of treatment is difficult to secure, both in prison-officials
and in those officers who have the power of pardon at present placed in
their hands. We need obviously many reforms in our system of sentence
and pardon, as well as in the management of our prisons. We need more
men like Mr. Brockway of Elmira, Mr. Wardwell of Virginia, and those
other modern reformers of prison-life whose office is to them a matter
of humanity and not merely of business. And especially, we need more
firmness in society as a whole; sympathy and mercy may be evils in the
path of human progress when they deteriorate into a weakness which
sacrifices the innocent in a mistaken humanity towards the guilty. In
order to be well directed, sympathy must consider all men, and not the
individual alone; only then is it an unmitigated good.

But as for the argument noticed above with regard to the employment of
large sums of money for the maintenance of the criminal classes while
the class of honest laborers is yet in destitution, it cannot be
considered, on close inspection, as of great weight. Certainly it would
not be well to maintain the criminal in luxury while other reforms were
waiting. But if we act on the principle of deferring all less important
reforms until all the more important ones are accomplished, we shall be
in danger of not reforming at all. Any reform that is well-timed and
possible is important; for the complication of social relations makes
all reforms of weight in their wider significance. No reforms can or
should be made in a lump; improvement must come from all sides and
little by little; sympathy must be consistent and influence social
conditions in every direction gradually as it gradually increases. It is
the superficial Utilitarianism which bids us wait such a reform as this,
though possible, for another,--the same sort of Utilitarianism which
advocates the introduction of the Spartan custom of preserving only
well-formed and vigorous infants, and advises the administration of
painless poisons to those hopelessly ill and suffering. All these things
have their relation to character, and, therefore, to other social evils,
or reforms.

And here we are brought finally to the consideration of the point
hitherto left out of account,--a point which bears, however, a strong
argument; namely, the fact of the possible condemnation of innocent men
to death. Even since the limitation of capital punishment to cases of
murder the innocent have been hung or guillotined in mistake for the
guilty. And for such mistakes there is no reparation; the grave never
gives up its dead. Men have sometimes been discovered to be innocent in
spite of the strongest evidence against them; human observation is
defective, human memory fallible, human character--especially such as
often appears in evidence against the murderer--by no means always
strictly honorable and honest. Even confessions of guilt have sometimes
been proved false. As with regard to other propositions to place the
power of the life or death of individuals in the hands of their fellow
men, the question presents itself as to whether the use of so great
power is not dangerous. And this appears to me the decisive point of our
inquiry.

Societies are being formed for the abolition of capital punishment, and
feeling is growing strong in its favor. Let us hope, however, that the
reformers will adopt a policy stringent and judicious as well as
merciful;--that they will not forget that, in order to render the
preservation of the murderer harmless to society we need other reforms
in law and prison management.

In general, it may be said of all questions, that the conflict between
the principles of justice and mercy, known to theological Ethics,
resolves itself, from a higher point of view, into the question of
justice only. The mercy which is not justice, is either mercy to one at
the expense of others, or mercy that spares the offender in one respect
to his own greater disadvantage in another. The ideal character is thus
at once gentle and strong.

We have followed the development of altruism from egoism up to the point
where the thought of punishment ensuing upon the non-performance of duty
ceases to play a large part in the motive to action, the reward of the
pleasure of others and of their gratitude and love forming a complex
motive. But beyond even the incentives of love there lies still a higher
motive which, in cases of conflict, must figure as the highest morally.
In an ideal state, the social sanction could not conflict with duty; but
until we reach such a state, the independence of moral motive must be
observed, the moral man must do what appears to him right, in spite of
public opinion. The course has its dangers, and the principle must be
carried out with caution, the questions involving such a course be
carefully considered from all sides and in all lights. But when this has
been done, the sense of duty remains supreme. In the ideal man, the
consciousness of duty performed should constitute the strongest
pleasure, the consciousness of failure in duty the severest pain. This
is the solution of the problem Ibsen gives us in "Rosmersholm"; society
has not advanced from savagery by permitting all pleasures which the
individual desires; nor can it advance further towards the ideal by
permitting the individual to choose those pleasures which the future
shall regard as evidence of our present semi-barbarous state, since they
are pleasures inimical to the peace of others and the general good of
society; as in the past, so in the present and future, the harmony
between pleasure and duty (that is between the conflicting pleasures of
individuals) can be attained only by habit which shall bring the desires
of the individual into harmony with duty. Thus only can all desires, the
happiness of all individuals, attain to harmony,--to "full" equilibrium.

And this leads me to remark that we have reason to doubt the moral
conviction of very many who protest against the "immoral" and
"superstitious" restriction of personal pleasure in certain directions.
Were such individuals morally convinced, were duty to their fellow men
really uppermost in their minds, they would not choose darkness and
secrecy for their deeds, but after careful and thorough statement of
their opinions and reasons would show the earnestness of their belief by
open act. The man whose moral conviction is to him the highest duty does
not fear public opinion, but dares to follow that which seems to him
right, in the face of slander; therefore, we suspect the man who hides
his deeds, of seeking his own pleasure and not that of society as a
whole.

    "Conscience is harder than our enemies,
    Knows more, accuses with more nicety,
    Nor needs to question Rumor if we fall
    Below the perfect level of our thought.
    I fear no outward arbiter,"

says Don Silva in "The Spanish Gypsy."

But for our encouragement, let us contemplate the heroic characters
which progress has developed. From these we may take hope and courage,
in these we may find the best results of the moral evolution of our
race, and the promise of the better future which man alone can work out
by ever-renewed effort. The love of such characters, and even the
knowledge that they exist, is the highest joy of human association, a
joy which the present age may feel in a degree that no former age has
known; and herein lies the greater beauty of the present time over all
others. The thought of such characters can sustain us even in our own
self-doubt. What man has done, man can do. Nay, he shall do more, much
more.

The question as to the final destruction of the human race, whether by
sudden catastrophe or slow decay, can little affect happiness, at
present, or for very many ages to come. As yet, evolution is in the
direction of a greater harmony that means continually greater pleasure
to life. We have not reached our maximum, we are evolving upwards
towards it. The pessimist is fond of making much of the final end of our
planet; but the healthy and successful will be happy in spite of future
ages, and the extent and degree of happiness will continue to increase
for such an immense period of time that there is no reason for
considering the destruction of our race as exerting any important
influence on ethical theory. The loss of our faith in individual
immortality is a far greater source of present pain. It leaves death a
harder sorrow;--but it lends life new meaning. The good we strive for
lies no longer in a world of dreams on the other side the grave; it is
brought down to earth and waits to be realized by human hands, through
human labor. We are called on to forsake the finer egoism that centred
all its care on self-salvation, for a love of our own kind that shall
triumph over death, and leave its impress on the joy of generations to
come. There is something lost in the dissolution of the old faith to us
who were reared in it. The hope of restitution, to the individual, from
supernatural cause, here or hereafter, is forever done away with. There
is no restitution. In our favorite novel, when the doors are closed and
the lights extinguished, that some unspeakable sorrow may hide itself in
darkness and silence, we can always turn back the leaves till we are
again in the midst of light and music and dancing, and the heart for
which the tragic knife is pitilessly sharpening in the hand of Destiny,
is yet untouched. But in the book of Reality, there is no turning back;
the pages are burned before our eyes as we read. Sooner or later, we all
of us reach the point where that which made life most worth living has
passed away from us forever. There is no help save the knowledge of the
fact, that shall make us all draw closer in sympathy and by mutual
kindness render loss less bitter. As we accept the Truth, and bow our
head to the Inevitable, we may learn a less narrow happiness for this
life and for the Hereafter, from the great pioneers of Scientific Doubt
and pure Humanitarianism, one of whom has written:--

    "Oh, may I join the choir invisible
    Of those immortal dead who live again
    In minds made better by their presence; live
    In pulses stirred to generosity,
    In deeds of daring rectitude, in scorn
    For miserable aims that end with self,
    In thoughts sublime that pierce the night like stars,
    And with their mild persistence urge man's search
    To vaster issues.
                  So to live is heaven:
    To make undying music in the world,
    Breathing as beauteous order that controls
    With growing sway the growing life of man.

    *....*....*....*

                    This is life to come,
    Which martyred men have made more glorious
    For us who strive to follow. May I reach
    That purest heaven, be to other souls
    The cup of strength in some great agony,
    Enkindle generous ardor, feed pure love,
    Beget the smiles that have no cruelty,--
    Be the sweet presence of a good diffused,
    And in diffusion ever more intense.
    So shall I join the choir invisible,
    Whose music is the gladness of the world."

FOOTNOTES:

[275] It should be said, in justice to the play in question, that the
idea of purification by evil was evidently not present to its author.

[276] See Part I. p. 33, this book; "Social Statics," 87-89.

[277] "Le Luxe," p. 2.

[278] "Le Luxe," p. 12.

[279] "Fabian Essays in Socialism," pp. 27, 145, etc.

[280] I have used the word here as elsewhere in its more general, not in
its specific, technical sense.

[281] "Fabian Essays," p. 57.

[282] See "Jahrbuecher fuer Psychiatrie," 1889, "Ueber Neurosen und
Psychosen durch sexuelle Abstinenz."

[283] See essay by Charles Dudley Warner in the "North American Review"
for April, 1885.

[284] S. M. Green: "Crime," Art. III. Chap. V.




Works on Philosophy

PUBLISHED BY

MACMILLAN & CO.


ETHICS.--METAPHYSICS.--LOGIC.--PSYCHOLOGY.

ARISTOTLE: Outlines of the Philosophy of Aristotle. Compiled by EDWIN
WALLACE, M.A. Third edition enlarged. _Pitt Press Series._ 16mo. $1.10,
_net_.

BACON: Novum Organon and Advancement of Learning. Edited with notes by
J. DEVEY, M.A. _Bohn Library._ $1.50, _net_.

---- Novum Organon. Translated by G. W. KITCHIN, M.A. 8vo. _Bohn
Library._ $2.50, _net_.

BALFOUR (A. J.): A Defence of Philosophic Doubt. An Essay on the
Foundations of Belief. 8vo. $3.50, _net_.

BAX. WORKS BY E. BELFORT BAX:

A Manual of the History of Philosophy, for the Use of Students. _Bohn
Library._ $1.50, _net_.

The Problem of Reality. 12mo. 90 cents.

BIRKS. WORKS BY THOMAS R. BIRKS:

First Principles of Moral Science. 12mo. $2.50.

Modern Utilitarianism; or, the Systems of Paley, Bentham, and Mill
Examined and Compared. 12mo. $2.00.

Modern Physical Fatalism and the Doctrine of Evolution. Including an
examination of Herbert Spencer's "First Principles." 12mo. $2.00.

BOOLE (G.): A Treatise on the Calculus of Finite Differences. Third
edition, 12mo. $2.60, _net_.

BOSANQUET. WORKS BY BERNARD BOSANQUET, M.A.:

Logic; or, the Morphology of Knowledge. 2 vols. $5.25, _net_.

The History of AEsthetics. _The Library of Philosophy._ 8vo. $2.75,
_net_.

BURNET (J.): Early Greek Philosophy. 8vo. $2.50, _net_.

CAIRD (E.): The Critical Philosophy of Emmanuel Kant. 2 vols. 8vo.
$7.50, _net_.

Essays on Literature and Philosophy. 2 vols. $3.00.

CALDERWOOD. WORKS BY HENRY CALDERWOOD, LL.D.:

A Handbook of Moral Philosophy. Fourteenth edition. 12mo. $1.50, _net_.

The Relations of Mind and Brain. Third edition. 8vo. $4.00.

CLIFFORD. WORKS BY WILLIAM KINGDON CLIFFORD:

Lectures and Essays. Edited by LESLIE STEPHEN and F. POLLOCK, with an
Introduction. New edition. $2.50.

Seeing and Thinking. With Diagrams. _Nature Series._ $1.50.

COMTE'S Philosophy of the Sciences, being an Exposition of the
Principles of the _Cours de Philosophie Positive_. By G. H. LEWES,
author of "The Life of Goethe," "Biographical History of Philosophy,"
etc. _Bohn Library._ $1.50, _net_.

DEVEY (J.): Logic; or, the Science of Inference. A Systematic View of
the Principles of Evidence and the Methods of Inference in the Various
Departments of Human Knowledge. A Popular Manual. With Index. _Bohn
Library._ $1.50, _net_.

ERDMANN (J. E.): A History of Philosophy. English translation edited by
WILLISTON S. HOUGH, Professor of Philosophy in the University of
Minnesota. _The Library of Philosophy._ 3 vols. 8vo. $10.50, _net_.

---- An Outline of Erdmann's History of Philosophy. By HENRY C. KING,
Professor of Philosophy in Oberlin College. 30 cents.

FOWLER (T.): The Elements of Logic, Deductive and Inductive. 16mo.
$1.75, _net_.

---- Progressive Morality. An Essay in Ethics. 12mo. $1.50.

FOWLER (T.) and WILSON (J. M.): The Principles of Morals. 8vo.

    PART I. (Introductory Chapters.) $1.25.
    II. (Being the Body of the Work.) $2.75.

GREEN (T. H.): Prolegomena to Ethics. Edited by A. C. BRADLEY, M.A.
Third edition. 8vo. $3.25, _net_.

HARTMANN (E. VON): Philosophy of the Unconscious. Speculative Results
accorded to the Inductive Method of Physical Science. Translated in
English by W. C. COUPLAND, M.A. 3 vols. 8vo. $7.50, _net_.

HEGEL: Logic. Translated from the Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical
Sciences. With Prolegomena by W. WALLACE, M.A. 2 vols. 8vo.

    VOL. I. Prolegomena. [_New edition in preparation._]
    II. Translation. New edition. $2.50, _net_.

HEGEL: Lectures on the Philosophy of History. Translated by J. SIBREE,
M.A. _Bohn Library._ $1.50, _net_.

HOeFFDING (Prof. H.): Outlines of Psychology. Translated by M. G.
LOWNDES. 12mo. $1.50, _net_.

JARDINE (R.): The Elements of the Psychology of Cognition. Second
edition, revised. 12mo. $1.50, _net_.

JEVONS. WORKS BY W. STANLEY JEVONS.

The Principles of Science. A Treatise on Logic and Scientific Method.
12mo. $2.75, _net_.

Elementary Lessons in Logic: Deductive and Inductive. With copious
Questions and Examples, and a Vocabulary of Logical Terms. New edition.
18mo. 40 cents, _net_.

Studies in Deductive Logic. A Manual for Students. Second edition. 12mo.
1.60, _net_.

Pure Logic; and other Minor Works. Edited by ROBERT ADAMSON, M.A.,
LL.D., and HARRIET A. JEVONS. Preface by Prof. ADAMSON. 8vo. $2.50,
_net_.

KANT: Critique of the Pure Reason. Translated into English by F. MAX
MUeLLER. With an Introduction by LUDWIG NOIRE. 2 vols. 8vo. $8.00.

---- The Translation. Complete. Sold separately. $3.50.

---- Kant's Critical Philosophy for English Readers. By JOHN P. MAHAFFY,
D.D., and JOHN H. BERNARD, B.D. A new and complete edition.

VOL. I. The Kritik of the Pure Reason Explained and Defended. $1.75,
_net_.

II. Translation of the Prolegomena. With Notes and Appendices. $1.50,
_net_.

---- Critique of Judgment. Translated by J. H. BERNARD. 8vo. $3.50.

---- Critique of Pure Reason. Translated by J. M. D. MEIKLEJOHN. _Bohn
Library._ $1.50, _net_.

---- Prolegomena and Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science.
Translated, with Biography and Memoir, by E. BELFORT BAX. _Bohn
Library._ $1.50, _net_.

---- The Philosophy of Kant. As contained in Extracts from his own
Writings. Selected and translated by JOHN WATSON, LL.D. $1.75, _net_.

KEYNES (J. N.): Studies and Exercises in Formal Logic. 12mo. $2.75,
_net_.

KING (Prof. H. C.): An Outline of Erdmann's History of Philosophy. By
HENRY C. KING, Professor of Philosophy, Oberlin College. 30 cents.

LAURIE (S. S.): The Institutes of Education, comprising a Rational
Introduction to Psychology. 16mo. $1.00.

LEIBNITZ: Critique of Locke. New Essays on the Understanding. By the
Author of the System of Pre-established Harmony. Translated from the
French by ALFRED G. LANGLEY, A.M. 12mo. [_In the press._]

LIBRARY OF PHILOSOPHY (THE): Edited by J. H. MUIRHEAD, M.A.

A History of Philosophy. By JOHANN EDUARD ERDMANN, Professor of
Philosophy, University of Halle. English translation edited by WILLISTON
S. HOUGH, Ph.M., Professor of Philosophy, University of Minnesota. 3
vols. Large 8vo. $10.50, _net_.

Development of Theology. In Germany since Kant, and Great Britain since
1825. By OTTO PFLEIDERER, D.D., Professor of Theology in the University
of Berlin. Translated, under the author's supervision, by J. FREDERICK
SMITH. Large 8vo. $2.75, _net_.

The History of AEsthetics. By B. BOSANQUET, M.A., Author of "Logic; or,
the Morphology of Knowledge"; Translator of Lotze's "System of
Philosophy." $2.75, _net_.

LOCKE: Philosophical Works. With Preliminary Discourse, Analysis of
Locke's Doctrine of Ideas, Notes by J. A. St. John, Index, and Portrait
of the Author. _Bohn Library._ 2 vols., each 1.00, _net_.

LOTZE'S SYSTEM OF PHILOSOPHY.

