CHAPTER V

EGOISM AND ALTRUISM IN EVOLUTION


Carneri, in consistency with his scepticism as to feeling in animals,
remarks that, with man, the struggle for happiness is added to the
struggle for existence. Wallace and others regard man as comparatively
withdrawn from the struggle for existence and the operation of natural
selection. Much depends on definition in any statement; but it may be
repeated that the analogy of nervous organization does not permit us to
suppose the absence of pleasure and pain in many species, and that man
is no exception to the rule that the disharmonious is the unstable, and
doomed, by its nature, to destruction.

However, analogy does not, as we have seen, carry us far in deciding
upon the presence or absence of consciousness, or in determining the
exact nature of the ends it posits even where we may suppose it to be
present and conscious of ends. If, then, we apply the terms "egoism" and
"altruism" to the action of plants or even of other animal species,
meaning, by these terms, that, in the action referred to, such ends are
sought and willed as render human conduct what we call altruistic, we
may be falling into error. However, in considering egoism and altruism
in their relations to human development, it may be useful to note their
prototypes, as far as external form is concerned, in life on lower
planes, without making any assumption as to the internal meaning of
these prototypes, except in so far as, in special instances, we may be
warranted by further particular examination of facts.

It is evident that the action of animals is of a sort that has as its
immediate and most prominent result their own protection and
preservation, and that they show themselves generally hostile to other
kinds and even, in many cases, if not hostile, at least indifferent,
under most circumstances, to their own kind. Yet a certain amount of
mutual support may occasionally be observed even among lower species.
One of the forms of such aid most common in the whole range of animal
species is the care of the parent animal for its offspring. This care is
more usual on the part of the female than on that of the male, and where
it is exercised it is not the exception, but rather the rule, that the
mother will sacrifice life itself in the defence of her young. Such care
and self-sacrifice, especially marked in mammals and birds, are too well
known to need illustration here.

Mutual aid between the sexes is not so common or so strongly marked as
the care of parent animals for their young. There is often no
companionship at all between the sexes, and even at the time of mating
male and female may show themselves hostile to each other. It often
happens with certain _Epeiridae_ the males of whom are smaller than the
females, that, after copulation or sometimes even before, the female
seizes upon the male and makes a meal of him. Sometimes, also, during
the battle of two males for the possession of a female, the latter
throws her web about both and devours them.[141] Female deer wandering
in the company of a male have been observed to watch with indifference
the contest of the latter with some newly arrived male, and on his death
to lick the wounds of their new suitor and follow him as they before
followed his predecessor. The relations of male and female among the
birds, especially among some sorts of birds, have, on the other hand,
often been made the theme of the poet.

But mutual aid among the animals is not confined to the relations of
parents and offspring, and male and female. Whether or not we explain
the societies of animals as merely huge families, as some authors are
inclined to do, the fact of the association remains, and it continues to
be true that, in this association, much mutual assistance is given. In
this connection, however, may be cited the experiments of Lubbock,
showing the exceeding irregularity and apparent caprice with which such
assistance is rendered among even such creatures as the ants, with whom
organization is generally regarded as having arrived at an unusual
degree of development. Lubbock found that, wherever a regular battle was
in progress, the ants gave aid to each other, but that where a single
ant was attacked by an enemy, the others of the nest generally took no
part in the matter. In many cases, they passed by wounded or helpless
members of their own colony, leaving them to perish where a very small
amount of help would have saved them. In some cases, they cared for the
slightly wounded; but those who were severely wounded they threw from
the nest. In their hostility to their enemies, they were merciless and
more persistent than in their help of friends.[142] Lubbock, arguing
from such facts as these, differs in opinion from Grote, who regards it
as necessary to the maintenance of any society that some moral feeling
should exist. Indeed, that which Carneri asserts with regard to the care
of offspring might be claimed in this case, namely, that the assistance
reaches exactly so far as is necessary for the preservation of species.
The implication is that all this apparent altruism is mere automatism.

In support of a view similar to this, Benno Scheitz quotes the following
case,[143] "which Dr. Altum relates from his own experience": "'In the
Gens d'Armes Market in Berlin, I saw several larks and a robin in a
cage; the former cowered sorrowfully, with somewhat roughened feathers,
in a corner, but the robin was in full activity. It ran to the food-cup,
seized as many ant-larvae as it could grasp in its bill, and hastened
with these to the nearest lark. The latter, however, did not honor the
solicitous robin and its food with as much as a look. But scarcely had
the robin offered its disdained food than it let this fall and hastened
after fresh food, offered this, let it fall, fetched fresh again,--only
to begin the same performance anew. As long as I watched this
interesting spectacle, the robin was thus employed, and very soon the
greater portion of the ant-larvae had been carried from the food-vessel
and lay scattered before the different larks. And what was here the
motive of the redbreast in permitting itself no nourishment (I did not
see that it ate a single one of the ant-larvae itself), but carrying it
all to its fellow-prisoners,--sympathy and love for the larks, who
disdained all food, and who could have taken the same food for
themselves, in the same manner, and with exactly the same amount of
trouble? The redbreast had been caught and carried away from its young;
the impulse to feed was strongly awakened and had before been strongly
active, but not satisfied; the bird was obliged, therefore, to continue
to bring food, although there was no longer anything to feed.'" The care
which female animals of many species, when deprived of their young,
often show for the young of other animals of the same or other species
that come in their way is well known. Among domestic animals, the cat
appears particularly susceptible in this respect, though comparisons
here are perhaps scarcely fair, since, of all domestic animals that are
habitually deprived of their young, the cat is about the only one that
has the chance of coming in contact with young animals near the size of
its own kind. The cat has been known to adopt young rats, chickens,
puppies, ducks, and will generally, during the time of suckling, take up
readily with kittens of another litter. Galton, in his "Inquiry into
Human Faculty," mentions that the records of many nations have legends
like that of Romulus and Remus, these being surprisingly confirmed by
General Sleeman's narrative of six cases where children were nurtured
for many years by wolves, in Oude. The working ants of certain species
show as great care for the slave-larvae robbed from other nests as do
many parent animals for their own offspring. Again, the care for their
eggs shown by many animals who give no care to their young may be cited
as evidence in favor of the theory of automatism. In the vegetable world
also, similar protection is afforded flower and fruit, the most
wonderful instances of such protection being, perhaps, those of the
insectivorous plants.

But to all these arguments in favor of automatism may be answered: (1)
that functions which are preserved and inherited must evidently be, not
only in animals and plants, but also and equally in man, such as favor
the preservation of the species; those which do not so favor it must
perish with the individuals or species to which they belong; (2) that it
cannot, indeed, be assumed that a result which has never come within the
experience of the species can be willed as an end, although, with the
species, function securing results which, from a human point of view,
might be regarded as ends, may be preserved; but (3) that, as far as we
assume the existence of consciousness at all in any species or
individual, we must assume pleasure and pain, pleasure in customary
function, pain in its hindrance; and (4) that, as far as we can assume
memory, we may also feel authorized to assume that a remembered action
may be associated with remembered results that come within the
experience of the animal, some phases of which may thus become, as
combined with pleasure or pain, ends to seek or consequences to avoid.
There is no reason to be given why care for the young should be more
pleasurable than care for eggs; the one may be as pleasurable to some
species as the other is to other species. If we assume consciousness in
Dr. Altum's robin, we may assume pleasure in the care of its young and
also, as a possibility, pleasure in the results of such care, the
preservation and prosperity of the young; whether the consciousness of
the robin includes abstract concepts of preservation and prosperity, is
another question. The human mother, too, is wont to be peculiarly tender
to children in general, but we do not for that reason infer that her
kindness towards them is mere automatism. There is no necessary
opposition between reason and instinct, and certainly none between
emotion and instinct. To the very functions from which we derive the
most pleasure we are impelled by an irresistible innate tendency. In any
particular case, it may be very difficult to determine the amount of
reasoning power possessed by the animal, the exact relation of ends to
means in its consciousness; but it may be remarked that there are human
mothers who reason little with regard to the preservation of the species
or other so-called ends secured by the care they give their offspring;
the care is spontaneous, but may not be the less a matter of warm
affection. It appears strange, therefore, that exactly that constancy
and strength of tendency, with need of satisfaction by other channels if
the usual ones fail, which we use as proof of extreme mother-tenderness
in the case of human beings should, in the case of other species, be
turned into an argument to disprove the existence of this feeling.

It is sometimes argued that the feeling of the parent animal in the care
of its young is, in any case, merely one of pleasure in the activity,
and has no connection with the good of the offspring. In such a case as
that of the robin, where the effects of the care come within the
experience of the mother, this is a mere arbitrary assumption, although
direct proof of the contrary may be impossible. Naturally, in the case
of an animal which cares for its eggs, but never comes in contact with
the offspring that are hatched from them, it would be impossible to
suppose any affection for the offspring as such; their existence does
not come within the range of the animal's experience. With regard to an
animal whose connection with its young is constant, the theory that
pleasure in their care has no reference to their welfare, has no
evidence to support it and is unjustifiable. If we cannot directly
disprove it, we have, at least, the evidence of many facts unfavorable
to it. The distress manifested not only by many mammals (who might be
supposed to find physical discomfort merely in the absence of the means
of relief of the milk-glands), but also by other animals and notably
birds, in the loss of their young and even in any danger that threatens
them,--the indescribably mournful sounds at deprivation, the after
depression, and the capacity for self-sacrifice in their defence, would
lead us naturally, from an unprejudiced standpoint, to a belief in
something very like what we term mother-love in human beings. From
Letourneau's "Sociology based upon Ethnography,"[144] I quote the
following: "A female wren, observed by Montagu, spent sixteen hours a
day in looking for food for her little ones. At Delft, when there was a
fire raging, a female white stork, not being able to carry away her
young ones, allowed herself to be burnt with them.... J. J. Hayes tells
us of a female white bear forgetting the Esquimaux dogs, the huntsmen,
and her own wounds, in order to hide her own little bear with her body,
to lick her and to protect her. In Central Africa, a female elephant,
all covered and pierced with javelins, hurled at her by the escort of
black men attending upon Livingstone, was all the while protecting her
young one with her trunk which her own large body enabled her to
cover.... In Sumatra, a female orang-outang, pursued with her little one
by Captain Hall and wounded by a gunshot, threw her infant on to the
highest branches of the tree on to which she had climbed, and continued,
until she died, exhorting her young one to escape. In Brazil, Sphix saw
a female of the stentor niger who, wounded by a gunshot, collected her
last remaining strength to throw her young one on to one of the branches
close by; when she had performed this last act of duty, she fell from
the tree and died." In Romanes' "Animal Intelligence," occurs the
following quotation from Dr. Franklin:[145] "'I have known two parrots,'
said he, 'which had lived together four years, when the female became
weak and her legs swelled. These were symptoms of gout, a disease to
which all birds of this family are very subject in England. It became
impossible for her to descend from the perch, or to take her food as
formerly, but the male was most assiduous in carrying it to her in his
beak. He continued feeding her in this manner during four months, but
the infirmities of his companion increased from day to day, so that at
last she was unable to support herself on the perch. She remained at the
bottom of the cage, making, from time to time, ineffectual efforts to
regain the perch. The male was always near her, and with all his
strength aided the attempts of his dear better half. Seizing the poor
invalid by the beak or the upper part of the wing, he tried to raise
her, and renewed his efforts several times. His constancy, his gestures,
and his continued solicitude, all showed in this affectionate bird the
most ardent desire to relieve the sufferings and assist the weakness of
his companion. But the scene became still more interesting when the
female was dying. Her unhappy spouse moved around her incessantly, his
attention and tender cares redoubled. He even tried to open her beak to
give her some nourishment. He ran to her, then returned with a troubled
and agitated look. At intervals, he uttered the most plaintive cries;
then, with his eyes fixed on her, kept a mournful silence. At length his
companion breathed her last; from that moment he pined away, and died in
the course of a few weeks.'"

Moreover, care of animals for other animals shows itself often where
neither the relation of parent to offspring, nor the relation of sex,
nor even that of species, furnishes the basis. Aside from the friendship
and self-sacrifice of domestic animals for man, friendships, under
domestication, between individuals of all manner of ordinarily most
hostile species are reported. Such friendship is not at all infrequent
between dog and cat. In the family of a relative of my own were once a
quail and cat who were most devoted to each other. They would spend
hours playing together, and were often left alone together for long
periods. The cat never manifested any tendency to regard the bird in the
light of food; she seemed, however, well aware of the danger it might be
under from other cats, and invariably drove these away when they
endeavored to approach the house. This cat was also friendly to a tame
robin which preceded the quail as pet in the same family.

And furthermore, assistance is frequently given spontaneously where
there has been no association before the act. There are a number of
instances on record, and supported by good authority, where dogs have
brought suffering individuals of their own kind to places where they had
themselves received aid. Romanes cites from Mr. Oswald Fitch the story
of a domestic cat who "was observed to take out some fish-bones from the
house to the garden, and, being followed, was seen to have placed them
in front of a miserably thin and evidently hungry stranger cat, who was
devouring them; not satisfied with that, our cat returned, procured a
fresh supply, and repeated its charitable offer, which was apparently as
gratefully accepted. This act of benevolence over, our cat returned to
its customary dining-place, the scullery, and ate its own dinner off the
remainder of the bones."[146] Romanes says further: "An almost precisely
similar case has been independently communicated to me by Dr. Allen
Thomson, F.R.S. The only difference was that Dr. Thomson's cat drew the
attention of the cook to the famishing stranger outside by pulling her
dress and leading her to the place. When the cook supplied the hungry
cat with some food, the other one paraded round and round while the meal
was being discussed, purring loudly." "Mr. H. A. Macpherson writes me
that in 1876 he had an old male cat and a kitten aged a few months. The
cat, who had long been a favorite, was jealous of the kitten and 'showed
considerable aversion to it.' One day the floor of a room in the
basement of the house was taken up in order to repair some pipes. The
day after the boards had been replaced, the cat 'entered the kitchen (he
lived almost wholly on the drawing-room floor above), rubbed against the
cook, and mewed without ceasing until he had engaged her attention. He
then, by running to and fro, drew her to the room in which the work had
taken place. The servant was puzzled until she heard a faint mew from
beneath her feet. On the boards being lifted, the kitten emerged safe
and sound, though half-starved. The cat watched the proceedings with the
greatest interest until the kitten was released; but, on ascertaining
that it was safe, he at once left the room, without evincing any
pleasure at its return. Nor did he subsequently become really friendly
with it.'"

I cite still one other instance of animal affection from Romanes: "One
of a shooting-party under a banian tree killed a female monkey, and
carried it to his tent, which was soon surrounded by forty or fifty of
the tribe, who made a great noise and seemed disposed to attack the
aggressor. They retreated when he presented his fowling-piece, the
dreadful effect of which they had witnessed, and appeared perfectly to
understand. The head of the troop, however, stood his ground, chattering
furiously; the sportsman, who perhaps felt some little degree of
compunction for having killed one of the family, did not like to fire at
the creature, and nothing short of firing would suffice to drive him
off. At length he came to the door of the tent, and finding threats of
no avail, began a lamentable moaning and by the most expressive gesture
seemed to beg for the dead body. It was given him; he took it
sorrowfully in his arms and bore it away to his expecting companions.
They who were witnesses of this extraordinary scene resolved never again
to fire at one of the monkey race."[147]

As to the changeable and capricious appearance of the assistance
rendered in animal associations, by one member to another, it may be
said that any being of a different species who could look into our towns
and cities might easily find as great problems of caprice here as among
the ants and bees. We, too, leave our fellows to perish unaided; we,
too, kill off, by neglect and hard usage, often not only or chiefly our
drones, but even some of our most industrious, useful members of
society. With us, too, there is very often greater hostility towards
enemies than kindness towards friends. Many savage tribes, that we
certainly concede to be endowed with intelligence, could learn of the
ants, rather than teach them, with regard to the duties of mutual aid.
With regard to other species than his own, even so-called civilized man
is often eminently selfish and cruel. Among the savages the most extreme
cruelty is often shown. Bain, in an essay entitled "Is there Such a
Thing as Pure Malevolence?" cites from a book, "Siberian Pictures,"
together with mention of the pleasure shown by onlookers in the drowning
of a man, an instance where boys seemed to find a genuine and peculiar
delight in slowly roasting a dog to death.[148] And Bruce describes in
his travels the feasts of the Abyssinians, where the flesh was cut from
an ox alive and bellowing with pain. But our police courts frequently
bear witness to the possibility of the most wanton cruelty performed by
people within our own most enlightened societies, although we may claim
that cruelty is not so general in civilized societies. I personally have
known of a case where, a horse becoming suddenly ill and falling upon
the road, it was prodded by its owner with a pitchfork until it died of
its wounds; and of another case where a man fastened to a tree a
harmless kitten that had wandered into his yard, and deliberately stoned
it to death. Surely we have very little right to criticise the slaughter
of animals by other species, while we ourselves name the taking of life
"sport." Our criticism of the play of the cat with the mouse as "cruel"
is humorous--if there can be any humor connected with cruelty--as long
as we ourselves find delight in the prolonged struggle of the trout and
the torture of the fox-chase. Perhaps the cat may be under the
impression that the mouse takes pleasure in being played with; certainly
we can believe that this is possible, when beings who claim to possess
so much higher intelligence can gravely assert that the fox enjoys the
chase.

Amongst so-called civilized human beings, too, the care of parents for
offspring is by no means universal, and mothers are known whom not even
the fear of the law can hinder from sacrificing their children by the
slow torture of starvation for the gain of a few pounds or for even
simple relief from the trouble of their rearing. The reports of the
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children show that not
strangers but parents are the most frequent sinners against the child.
Nor is infanticide and neglect confined to the poorer classes. I repeat,
if a being of some other species enabled to obtain only such external
knowledge of us as we have of other species, some being beholding us,
for instance, from distant planets, should endeavor to form a theory of
our inner egoism and altruism, of sentiment and motive, he might be as
puzzled as we are when we study the conduct of bees and ants. Even the
helplessness of the ant species, _Polyergus rufescens_, at which we
often wonder as stupidity, has its parallel in some of the former
slave-owners of the southern states of North America, who live in the
utmost poverty and ignorance because they have lost the habits of
industry and consider work beneath them. Mother-love is certainly the
rule amongst us; but it is not more constant or self-sacrificing than
with some other species, though it, in general, accompanies the child
farther in his career. This rule is not, however, universal. Human
mothers of a lower type, who show fondness for their children when they
are little, often exhibit little or none for them after they have grown
out of arms.

It is claimed that altruism was, in its origin, egoism. Everything
depends, in theory on this point, on our definition of the terms
"origin" and "altruism." If we regard the life of animals in general or
the life of any particular species as having been non-social before it
was social, and as having become social through increase of numbers, the
"chance" association which arose naturally in this way being favored by
natural selection, we must assume function fundamentally advantageous to
self without regard to the results to other beings to have been primary,
whether or not we call this function egoism. With regard to animal life
in general, we cannot avoid adopting some such view as this, since we
find few species forming lasting bonds of association, a large number
forming only exceedingly short ones, and some forming none at all, and
since we must furthermore suppose a scarcity of living individuals to
have preceded their multiplicity. Moreover, we cannot suppose
consciousness to have been absent, in the case of many of the animal
species, during the whole of this development. And where there is
consciousness, pleasure must be a concomitant along the line of
development, and customary forms of action come to present ends, whether
or not the individual has the abstract concept of "ends."

But we need to remember that even the human race has not yet arrived at
perfection, and that even moral altruism (for not all altruism is
necessarily moral) is not yet absolutely attained in any species. Our
ordinary use of the term is progressive; that which is altruistic at one
period of history is often looked upon, at a later period, as merely a
higher form of egoism. This fact should be borne in mind when, in Ethics
or Political Economy, we inquire whether man was, in the beginning,
altruistic. What do we mean here by "altruism," and what by "beginning"?
A similar criticism may be made on the rather more usual question as to
whether man was, in the beginning, social; what is the beginning of our
species, and what degree of association is necessary in order that the
individuals associating may be termed "social"? The question is a
difficult one to answer from any point of view. While the majority of
human beings, even the most savage, show some degree of gregariousness,
there appear to be some tribes that are even less social in their habits
than the most of our ape-cousins. Mr. Dalton says of the savages of
Inner Borneo that they live in the most perfect state of nature, do not
cultivate the earth or live in huts, do not eat either rice or salt, and
do not associate with each other, but wander like wild animals in the
forest. "The sexes meet in the jungle, or the man carries away a woman
from some campong. When the children are old enough to shift for
themselves, they usually separate, neither one afterwards thinking of
the other."[149]

As to just what form the development of altruism from egoism may have
assumed in the case of any particular species, or how the individuals of
the species may first have been led to association, the state of science
does not, at present, enable us to say. Most authors, indeed, incline to
class all social development as having its origin in some one form of
family relation. Rolph, for instance, refers it to the necessary
association of the sexes, at certain times, for the purpose of
copulation. Others regard the care of the female for its young as the
primary form from which all social organization has developed. Inasmuch,
however, as the line of ascent from primitive protoplasm to man cannot
be regarded as straight, but has very many branches, it is quite
conceivable that the development may have taken place in different ways
in different branches or different species; and the very various forms
which social organization shows in different species is direct evidence
in favor of such a supposition. Thus it is not, for instance, in some
species, the mother animal, but the male, who cares for the young, and
again, in other cases, affectionate relations of the sexes are not a
prominent feature of the social structure. The attitude of a swarm of
bees towards the queen, her progeny, and the drones, presents aspects
entirely different from those of ant-nests or human tribal or state
organization. In some species where the female exhibits considerable
care and concern for her eggs or offspring, there is no especial
friendliness between the sexes, and in other cases, where no care is
given to offspring, there is still apparently some degree of
friendliness, or at least of physical attraction, between male and
female. It is not only conceivable that the habit of association may
have been developed by different means in different species, but it is
also conceivable that, in some cases, several forms of family relation
may have assisted equally, and in other cases have united, even if not
in equal measure, in producing the result. The association of parent
with offspring, for instance, is in most cases impossible without some
degree of association between the offspring.

However we may suppose social relations to have originated in the case
of any particular species, whether through the sexual or the parental
relations or through both combined, and whether we trace these relations
themselves back, in the one instance, to the original union of the sexes
in the individual, and propagation as self-division, in the other to the
unity of mother and offspring before the individual life commences, or
whether we simply begin with some non-hostile contact of individuals as
already existent, it is evident that, with increasing competition,
cooeperation must be to the advantage of those cooeperating. Those
individuals whose single strength is supplemented by the aid of others
must succeed best in the struggle for existence. Moreover, with the
exercise of altruistic forms of action, we must suppose pleasure in its
exercise to increase, in so far as we suppose any consciousness at all
in the animal performing the action. The greater the degree of exercise,
the greater the pleasure connected with the action, and the more readily
the organism will respond to conditions permitting its accomplishment;
while repetition, again, must increase tendency to repetition. This is
true not only of exactly the same form of action, but also of similar
forms, that is, of forms having some like elements. The conditions of
action are never exactly the same; the environment is continually
changing; but the animal tends to choose, among possible forms of
action, that which corresponds most nearly to most exercised and
pleasurable forms.

At just what period we are to regard the altruistic forms of action as
becoming in spirit altruistic depends, as has already been said, on our
definition of the degree of disinterested feeling necessary to altruism
proper, aside from our theories of the existence and form of
consciousness in the case of any particular species at any particular
point of development. In the case of even disinterested human action,
the altruism is not generally, or at least in very many cases, wholly
unmixed with _any_ thought of self, though this thought may not hold
first place. If self-sacrifice be the test of altruistic feeling, then
we must suppose the latter to exist, in some relations, even far down in
the scale of being. In this case, just as in other cases where choice is
necessary, the stronger tendency conquers even with the result of pain
of disappointment in some other direction. The case of altruistic action
is hence not unique in this respect, and it might perhaps be argued that
such self-sacrifice would therefore be possible without any
consideration or consciousness of the good accruing to others through
its performance. But if we analyze the development of any habit, we find
that the pleasure of the act speedily connects itself with all the
constant results of the act that come within the experience of the
performer of the act and are recognized as its results. Any result at
first unpleasant must, if it is constant, either lead to the
discontinuance of the act or else, with time, lose much of its quality
of unpleasantness. Either the expected pain of this one factor is
sufficient to counterbalance the pleasure awaited in the act, and a
repetition of the act is thus avoided, or, as in all other cases of
habitual experience, the pain or discomfort gradually diminishes, until,
if the habit be long enough continued, pleasure takes its place. The
pleasure of others must be a constant result of action that secures
their welfare, and if this result comes within the conscious experience
of the performer of the action, we can scarcely avoid supposing that,
even if his action is in the beginning purely selfish, the pleasure of
those benefited must come in time to play a part in the pleasure of the
performer. The part it plays will not be, in the beginning, naturally, a
very important one, but its importance will increase with time. If this
is true in a measure even of the individual, it is doubly true of the
species. Wherever, therefore, we may suppose the existence of sufficient
intelligence for the inference of pleasure from its outer signs in
others, it must be admitted to be possible and even probable that
constant habits of self-sacrifice and helpfulness to others will be
accompanied by some measure of altruistic feeling. And even if we
suppose an insufficiency of intelligence for such inference, it is still
possible and even probable that the constant symptoms of pleasure in
others will come to be a part of the conditions of the pleasure of the
individual or the species in whom habits of self-sacrifice have become
constant, although their inner significance is not recognized. It may be
objected that, if actual altruistic feeling were present in animals
which show a certain amount of helpfulness towards others of their
kind, this altruism would not desert these others at the very time of
their greatest need or when any great peril to self is involved, or that
it would show itself in many other acts than just those which, as in the
case of the ants, secure the preservation of a society, or in that of
some other species give a certain protection to the female during
breeding time. The argument is wholly inconclusive, and has already been
answered. The action of natural selection in the preservation of those
forms of tendency that secure the preservation of the species does not
annul the action of the will or render the presence of strong emotion in
the direction of the tendency thus preserved impossible; on the
contrary, we must suppose all tendency, in man equally with other animal
species, to be the result of natural selection. And in man, too,
altruism that is sufficient for some degree of sacrifice is insufficient
for a greater. In man, as in other species, altruistic feeling and
altruistic action vary according to the particular directions in which
habit in the species and in the individual has been cultivated. Men and
women who are not kind to each other will frequently be kind to little
children. The average Englishman is kind to his dog in spite of his
total indifference to the pain inflicted on the very nearly if not quite
as intelligent fox; and he will grow indignant to the verge of tears
over abuse of a horse, while he will regard the like abuse with little
or no emotion when it is inflicted on a miserable donkey. I doubt if the
average Englishman would shoot horses or dogs, even if they were good
for food and useless otherwise, and abounded wild in Great Britain. But
this is merely because association and habit have made him acquainted
with the capacity of feeling in the horse and dog, and have accustomed
him to humane treatment of them.

An argument sometimes advanced against the theory of a derivation of
altruism from egoism is that such altruism has no premises or reasons;
if, say the advocates of this argument, a man performs an apparently
altruistic act to-day from selfish motives, and performs the same act
to-morrow without calculation of the benefit to self to be gained from
it,--if such a change were possible,--then this man must simply have
forgotten his motives for the act. But this is not altruism proper. Such
action is the result of a logical confusion, but it can never be
altruism. Altruism proper has a motive, and this motive is the desire to
do good to others. With regard to this argument it may simply be said
that it is wholly untenable from any evolutionist standpoint; it
destroys at once the possibility of any moral progress. Intended to
defend altruism and moral principle in general from what is designated
as degradation, it is itself degrading in its denial of the
compatibility of natural and moral advance. It posits the assertion that
nothing can ever become that which it was not from the beginning, an
assertion utterly inconsistent with any theory of growth, whether
evolutional or otherwise. It is contradictory, too, of the directly
observed every-day facts of individual experience. The ends with which
we perform our acts, and the same acts, certainly change from day to
day. The adult would have reason for shame were the ends with which he
performs certain acts the same with those with which he performed those
same acts when he was a child. The emotions with which we regard life
and its various relations alter every day. If the change from egoism to
altruism could be pronounced logical confusion, then all mental
evolution must constitute an increase of intellectual disorder, a
continuous progress towards less instead of greater intelligence. Where
is the beginning of feeling and what was feeling in the beginning? Of
what nature were the motives of our ape-like progenitors, and of what
nature the first motive that appeared in the universe? and how have we
ever arrived at the possession of other motives than these? What a
confusion worse confounded must be our present motives, and of what a
chaos of thought and emotion must the human intellect consist! The
origin of any such argument as this, intended to disprove the theory of
a derivation of altruism from egoism, is probably in the failure to
distinguish the fact that both altruism and egoism, as we know them, are
comparative, not absolute. Naturally, absolute altruism could not
develop immediately from absolute egoism, that is, the one could not
change immediately into the other. But there are very few human beings
in whom some degree of altruism does not exist; and all we may note
directly of change of motive in ourselves, as well as all we ever could
note of change in external action in other species, is gradual increase
in this direction. In the individual case it is quite possible for
change to take place in the opposite direction of the development of
greater egoism.

In connection with the discussion of the development of motives, we may
inquire what is the final end of action; I refer not to the ideal end
but the actual end, although the two are not always distinguished in the
answer to this question. The confusion of the two generally arises from
forgetfulness of the fact that an end is the part of the result of an
act particularly willed by the performer. The concept is again a
teleological one, although often advanced, in some form, by persons of
materialistic views. Thus some authors, looking at the process of
evolution as continual survival of the fittest, and observing that
natural selection thus tends continually towards health, so that the
action of existing species is, in a large and ever increasing measure,
favorable to health, assert that the latter is the end of action.
Others, in like manner and from similar premises, argue that the
preservation of the species is the end of action; or sometimes the
logical inaccuracy involved in making health or the preservation of
species the universal end of action is partly concealed by giving the
assertion the form that one or the other of these is "the end attained"
by action. To these statements may be answered: The health of the
individual, although it sometimes appears as the end willed, is by no
means the constant and universal end, but, on the contrary, rather an
infrequent end. As to the preservation of the species, the concept has
never been heard of by a majority of human beings, and a thing cannot be
an end to those who have not heard of it. It is doubtful, moreover,
whether even those to whom it is familiar often, if ever, make it the
end of action. With regard to pleasure, it has already been said that
special calculation of the pleasure to accrue to self is by no means a
necessary part of the motive to action. Attention may again be called to
the fact that it is not the future pleasure that decides the will to
action in the case of struggle of conflicting tendencies, but that it is
the more pleasurable representation, and that it is present pleasure
which decides in any case. Or, rather, it is not the pleasure, the
feeling alone, that decides, for feeling is never found alone; it is
always combined with thought-images. The strength of pleasurable feeling
is the "tone" in which the intensity of the function manifests itself,
and according to which it tends to further expression in action. In the
imagination of action and its results, or the thought of it, reflection
may linger especially on any one of its elements,--on any part of the
action or its results as inferred from the analogy of past experience;
the pleasure to self is not necessarily the element on which the mind
lays stress, and the pleasure to others may be the element with which
thought is particularly occupied and which turns the scale of choice;
just as, also, in the actual action and its results, the pleasure in
pleasure or benefit accruing to others may more than counterbalance the
pain which some other inevitable phase of the action or its results
brings with it.

Much that has been said of the development of egoism from altruism still
holds true of the individual, even if the idea of a progress in altruism
through heredity be surrendered. The consideration of the question of
heredity is, however, necessary to any complete or wide-reaching theory
of moral progress. Hitherto, the actuality of the inheritance of
altruistic tendency has been assumed on the strength of previous
considerations with regard to heredity in general, according to which we
could not conceive all the multifarious differences which appear in all
the species and varieties of animal nature to have been present in
simplest primal organisms, or all the differences of the different
species and varieties which have arisen through sexual propagation from
common ancestors to have been present as inherent potentialities in the
germ-plasm, as such, of their common ancestors, and so cannot consider
the lesser variations which go to make up the larger ones as due merely
to the germ-plasm. It remains for us to examine the facts more
particularly with respect to this special form of tendency. Stephen
says: "An unreasoning animal can only adapt itself to new circumstances,
except within a very narrow range, by acquiring a new organization; or,
in other words, by becoming a different animal. Its habits and instincts
may therefore remain fixed through countless generations. But man, by
accumulating experiences, can virtually alter both his faculties and his
surroundings without altering his organization. When this accumulation
extends beyond the individual, it implies a social development, and
explains the enormous changes wrought within historical times, and which
define the difference between the savage and the civilized man."[150]
"Briefly, society exists as it exists in virtue of this organization,
which is as real as the organization of any material instrument, though
it depends upon habits and instincts instead of arrangements of tangible
and visible objects."[151] "Children, no doubt, start with infinitely
varying aptitudes for moral culture, as they start with stomachs of
varying strength of digestion; but, in every case, the action of the
social medium is an essential factor of the result."[152] Now, in the
first place, objection may be made to the term "unreasoning animal," in
that, whatever we may think with regard to inorganic matter and
plant-life or even with regard to the lower forms of animal-life, the
whole theory of evolution is opposed to the supposition that reason
suddenly arises in man; and in that we have, moreover, in the case of
many of the higher species, very conclusive evidence of the presence of
some degree of reason. Mr. Stephen does not elsewhere make any positive
assertion of the entire absence of reason in animals; yet to his remark
that "It may be that germs of this capacity [_i.e._ the capacity to
learn by experience and impart this knowledge to others] are to be found
in the lower animals" he adds, "but we shall make no sensible error if
we regard it, as it has always been regarded, as the exclusive
prerogative of humanity."[153] That is, we make no sensible error if we
regard the progress of other animal species than our own to be wholly
"organic," that of our own species, on the other hand, to be wholly an
accumulation of common knowledge. The division between man and the rest
of the animal kingdom is thus made a very distinct and absolute line. It
may be noticed, second, that the third quotation of the three cited
consecutively above contains a very different statement from that of the
first quotation. And it may be said, third, that the second quotation,
while seeming to bear out the first, is in reality a contradiction of
it, since it makes social organization dependent upon "habits" and
"instincts."

Exactly what is it that is meant by the alteration of organization which
is pronounced unnecessary to the "virtual" alteration of human
faculties? From the modern spiritualistic, the materialistic, the
positivistic, or any modern standpoint at all, it is difficult to
perceive how mental alteration can be supposed without the assumption of
an exactly corresponding physiological change. In view of the
exceedingly minute structure of the nervous system, which is chiefly
affected by such change, we may suppose this change to be so fine as to
be imperceptible to sense-perception, but, since it must, in any case,
be exactly cooerdinate with the psychical change, I fail to see how we
can scientifically regard the one and at the same time ignore the other
and pronounce it of no significance. And if we suppose any fixation of
psychical alteration, we cannot avoid likewise supposing an exactly
cooerdinate fixation of physiological alteration. Of course the question
remains as to the extent to which fixation takes place in either case,
and this question we have yet to consider. The weakness of Mr. Stephen's
position lies in his assumption of fixation on the one side and his
denial of it on the other.

How far are the moral qualities acquired in one generation inherited by
the next? Inasmuch as all development is by inappreciable increments,
all change of organization gradual, or, in psychical terms, inasmuch as
character varies only slowly from the grooves of established habit,
there is a general truth in the statement that all habit prominent
enough to be noticed as such can generally be traced farther back than
the next generation only. Nevertheless, here are a few cases for the
Weismannites:--

"Gall speaks of a Russian family in which the father and grandfather had
died prematurely, the victims of taste for strong drink. The grandson,
at the age of five, manifested the same liking in the highest degree."

"Trelat, in his work 'Folie Lucide,' states that a lady of regular life
and economical habits was subject to fits of uncontrollable dipsomania.
Loathing her state, she called herself a miserable drunkard, and mixed
the most disgusting substances with her wine, but all in vain; the
passion was stronger than her will. The mother and the uncle of this
lady had also been subject to dipsomania."

"Charles X----, son of an eccentric and intemperate father, manifested
instincts of great cruelty from infancy. He was sent at an early age to
various schools, but was expelled from them all. Being forced to enlist
in the army, he sold his uniform for drink and only escaped a sentence
of death on the testimony of physicians, who declared that he was the
victim of an irresistible appetite. He was placed under restraint, and
died of general paralysis."

"A man belonging to the educated class, and charged with important
functions, succeeded for a long time in concealing his alcoholic habits
from the eyes of the public; his family were the only sufferers by it.
He had five children, only one of whom lived to maturity. Instincts of
cruelty were manifested in this child, and from an early age its sole
delight was to torture animals in every conceivable way. He was sent to
school, but could not learn. In the proportions of the head he
presented the character of microcephalism, and in the field of
intellectual acquisition he could only reach a certain low stage, beyond
which further progress was impossible. At the age of nineteen he had to
be sent to an asylum for the insane."

"A man of an excellent family of laboring people was early addicted to
drink, and died of chronic alcoholism, leaving seven children. The first
two of these died, at an early age, of convulsions. The third became
insane at twenty-two, and died an idiot. The fourth, after various
attempts at suicide, fell into the lowest grade of idiocy. The fifth, of
passionate and misanthropic temper, broke off all relations with his
family. His sister suffers from nervous disorder, which chiefly takes
the form of hysteria, with intermittent attacks of insanity. The
seventh, a very intelligent workman, but of nervous temperament, freely
gives expression to the gloomiest forebodings as to his intellectual
future."

"Dr. Morel gives the history of a family living in the Vosges, in which
the great-grandfather was a drunkard, and died from the effects of
intoxication; and the grandfather, subject to the same passion, died a
maniac. He had a son far more sober than himself, but subject to
hypochondria and of homicidal tendencies; the son of this latter was
stupid, idiotic. Here we see, in the first generation, alcoholic excess;
in the second, hereditary dipsomania; in the third, hypochondria; and in
the fourth, idiocy and probable extinction of the race."[154]

It is the general testimony of authorities that mental disease may thus
appear in one generation as general tendency to excess, in another as
homicidal mania, in another as microcephalism, etc. Here we have
examples of the hereditary character of what we recognize as nervous
disease, which yet has its moral as well as its intellectual side. There
are few who do not recognize the power of the parent, through injury to
his own health, to affect the health of his children; and yet that which
we call disease is not more physical than that which we call moral
characteristic. However, the physical side of that which we call normal
moral characteristic is more withdrawn from observation; that which is
recognized as mental disease forms, in this respect, a link between what
we term ill-health and mental characteristic. The physical features of
what we term ill-health attract our attention especially because of the
weakness and incapacity or the distinct physical pain involved; the
physical side of insanity comes also more or less distinctly to our
notice, but the physical accompaniments of normal characteristic attract
less attention. And yet all these three conditions have each a psychical
and each a physiological side. It is therefore difficult to understand
how the possibility of the inheritance of ill-health from want or excess
can be acknowledged and yet the possibility of the inheritance of
psychical characteristic acquired by the parent be doubted; the latter
has its organic side as much as the former. And no better illustration
of this fact can be found than in just such cases as those above cited,
where that which appears in the first place as mere excess, that is,
moral characteristic as we ordinarily term it, takes finally the form of
microcephalism, idiocy, or insanity.

Man's early existence as an individual is distinguished by the length of
duration of a condition of helplessness, at the beginning of which,
beyond the fundamental so-called organic action, only a few simple
activities manifest themselves. The human being is born with almost
everything to acquire, and the earlier years, during which habits are
slowly accumulating, appear peculiarly adaptive or formative. The human
child is peculiarly susceptible, as regards mental and moral
acquirements, to the nature of his surroundings. But this fact does not
necessarily mean any more than what Stephen asserts in the last of the
three quotations above cited, namely, that the social medium is an
essential factor of the result; it does not necessarily exclude the
inheritance of moral or immoral tendency acquired under civilization or
even by near ancestors. Even in cases of the inheritance of the most
extreme passion for alcohol, we cannot suppose that the taste would ever
have manifested itself, had alcohol never come within the reach of the
inheriting individual. The young kitten that has never tasted meat will
snatch at a piece as soon as it scents it; but we cannot suppose that
the evidently inherited taste for flesh would ever appear, did flesh
never come within the range of its sense-perception. Since a suitable
environment must always be conceived as essential to the development
even of the most inveterate inherited qualities, and since man's mental
and especially his moral superiority has been developed in connection
with social conditions, it is conceivable that, these conditions
failing, his mental and moral development may show a lack cooerdinate
with the degree of such failure. And here is an answer to those who, in
contesting the theory of any moral inheritance, state their views in the
final form that if any inheritance at all can be claimed, it can only be
as a certain degree of readiness in responding to the conditions of
civilization; _no_ inheritance can ever be anything more than this; the
existence, to a sufficient degree, of complementary conditions in the
environment is always necessary to the development of tendency. It is,
therefore, conceivable that the child of civilized parents of a higher
type of morality, if carried off, in infancy, by savages, might fail to
exhibit the high character of its parents, just as it is conceivable and
more than probable that it would fail to exhibit their higher
intellectual gifts. It is also conceivable that the child of moral
parentage may inherit the capacity of high moral development and yet
fall into crime, if circumstances afford him no education save that of
association with hardened criminals. We might only with reason expect to
find, in the case of the supposed child abducted by savages, a certain
mental acuteness applied to savage affairs and some greater degree of
humane feeling, dominated, however, by savage conceptions; as also
greater ease in the acquirement of civilized ideas and customs in case
of a return to higher surroundings before maturity; and we might only
expect to find, in the case of the child brought up among criminals, a
greater degree of that primitive honor and faithfulness which may exist
among criminals. Modern reformatories have testified to the possibility
of the redemption of a large number of criminals from their evil life,
but they have shown, nevertheless, that there is a lust of cupidity, a
love of meanness, and an animality from which rescue is almost if not
quite impossible. The reaction of men whose past opportunities have been
about equal, upon effort for their reform, exhibits also very different
degrees of readiness. The testimony of reformatories for the young is
especially of worth on this point; and I once heard Mrs. Mary A.
Livermore, whose interest in reformatories and prisons is well known,
describe the faces of many of the children to be found in a certain
institution of this sort, as bearing fearful witness to the fact that
they had been "mortgaged to the devil before they were born." I remember
a number of cases cited by the matron of a certain orphan asylum showing
that children taken from their home at too early an age to have learned
the sins of their parents by imitation may yet repeat those sins. Out of
three children of the same parents, the one of whom was a drunkard and
prostitute, the other a thief, one developed, at a very early age, a
tendency to dishonesty, another an extreme morbid eroticism, and the
third child appeared to have escaped the evil inheritance; but he was
still very young when I last heard of him. The two children did not
exhibit these evil traits at their entrance to the home, but developed
them later.

And here it may be noticed that the fact of the unformed character of
the infant does not prove that the tendencies which make their
appearance in later life are wholly the result of the environment. It
has been remarked by biologists and pathologists that inherited
characteristics tend to appear at an age corresponding to that at which
they appeared in the progenitor. The caterpillar does not undergo
metamorphosis with a less regularity because it is not, in the
beginning, a butterfly, and the beard does not the less appear in the
adult human male because he was not born bearded. Diseases of the brain
often develop, for several generations, at nearly the same age, and
there seems to be no reason why we should not suppose the like to be
true in the case of many normal characteristics. Ribot cites from
Voltaire the following case: "'I have with my own eyes,' he writes,
'seen a suicide that is worthy of the attention of physicians. A
thoughtful professional man, of mature age, of regular habits, having no
strong passions, and beyond the reach of want, committed suicide on the
17th of October, 1769, leaving behind him, addressed to the council of
his native city, an apology for his voluntary death, which it was not
thought advisable to publish, lest men should be encouraged to quit a
life whereof so much evil is spoken. So far there is nothing
extraordinary, since instances of this kind are everywhere to be found;
but here is the astonishing feature of the case: his father and his
brother had committed suicide at the same age as himself. What hidden
disposition of mind, what sympathy, what concurrence of physical laws,
caused this father and his two sons to perish by their own hand and by
the same form of death, just when they had acquired the same year of
their age?'"[155] Ribot continues:--

"Since Voltaire's day, the history of mental disease has registered a
great number of similar facts. They abound in Gall, Esquirol, Moreau of
Tours, and in all the writers on insanity. Esquirol knew a family in
which the grandmother, mother, daughter, and grandson, committed
suicide. 'A father of taciturn disposition,' says Falret, 'had five
sons. The eldest, at the age of forty, threw himself out of a
third-story window; the second strangled himself at the age of
thirty-five; the third threw himself out of a window; the fourth shot
himself; a cousin of theirs drowned himself for a trifling cause. In the
Oroten family, the oldest in Teneriffe, two sisters were affected with
suicidal mania, and their brother, grandfather, and two uncles, put an
end to their own lives.'... The point which excited Voltaire's surprise,
viz. the heredity of suicide at a definite age, has been often noticed:
'M. L----, a monomaniac,' says Moreau of Tours, 'put an end to his life
at the age of thirty. His son had hardly attained the same age when he
was attacked with the same monomania, and made two attempts at suicide.
Another man, in the prime of life, fell into a melancholy state and
drowned himself; his son, of good constitution, wealthy, and the father
of two gifted children, drowned himself at the same age. A wine-taster
who had made a mistake as to the quality of a wine threw himself into
the water in a fit of desperation. He was rescued, but afterwards
accomplished his purpose. The physician who had attended him ascertained
that this man's father and one of his brothers had committed suicide at
the same age and in the same way.'...

"A woman named Olhaven fell ill of a serious disorder, which obliged her
to wean her daughter, six weeks old. This complaint of the mother began
by an irresistible desire to kill her child. This purpose was discovered
in season to prevent it. She was next seized with a violent fever which
utterly blotted the fact from her memory, and she afterwards proved a
most devoted mother to her daughter. This daughter, become a mother in
her turn, took two children to nurse. For some days she had suffered
from fatigue and from 'movements in the stomach,' when one evening as
she was in her room with the infants, one of them on her lap, she was
suddenly seized by a strong desire to cut its throat. Alarmed by the
horrible temptation, she ran from the spot with the knife in her hand,
and sought in singing, dancing, and sleep, a refuge from the thoughts
that haunted her. Hardly had she fallen asleep when she started up, her
mind filled with the same idea, which now was irresistible. She was,
however, controlled, and in a measure calmed. The homicidal delirium
recurred, and finally gave way, only after many remedies had been
employed."

These are only a few out of the many instances that might be given of
recurrence, at the same age or under the stimulation of similar
conditions, of so-called pathological states. Science has hitherto given
more study to such cases than to the inheritance of healthful
conditions, though the line between healthful mental conditions and
mental disease is very difficult to draw, and the assumption that all
suicides are more insane than many of the people who are regarded as
sane is unwarranted; of course if one starts with the premise that
suicide is always a symptom of insanity, then the conclusion follows
naturally that all suicides are insane; but this is a mere argument in a
circle. As far as the inheritance of healthy or normal mental
characteristics is concerned, we do know at least, from general
observation, that a child often exhibits, as it develops, more and more
rather than less and less the characteristics of some progenitor; and
this, moreover, in many cases where the possibility of imitation is
excluded. Observations might possibly be made here in a line with former
reflections on man's adaptability and Haeckel's theory of the prenatal
existence of the individual as repeating the history of his species. In
the case of postnatal as well as in that of prenatal existence, the
action of the environment can no more be left out of account than can
that of heredity; and the influence of favorable or of unfavorable
conditions at corresponding periods of development may explain the
exaggerated growth or, on the other hand, the dwarfed character or
non-appearance of tendencies associated in their development with these
periods. But at present such observations can be little more than
speculation. We may at least say, however, that Mr. Leslie Stephen's
statement of the case, namely, that children "start with infinitely
varying capacities" but that the environment of civilization is that
which finally makes them what they become morally and mentally, should
rather be reversed; for it is rather true that children are born into
the world on about the same level mentally and morally (for we observe
but little difference in the faculties of new-born babes), but that they
by no means react, in development, upon the same or a similar
environment in a similar manner. The case of the Athenian baby, whose
probable equality with the modern infant is used by Mr. Stephen as an
argument that the human race has made no progress as far as innate
qualities are concerned, would therefore scarcely be a case in point,
even if it were capable of proof,--as it is not. But it cannot be called
a case in point in any sense, the English baby with which Mr. Stephen
compares the Athenian infant not being of Athenian descent. Any
comparison of this sort, to be of worth in the discussion of the element
of heredity in human progress, must be between the baby of the primitive
savage Briton and the modern British infant. The Athenians arrived at a
high degree of social development; but the very fact that neither their
civilization nor even that of Rome was acquired by the less civilized
races who were their conquerors is rather testimony in favor of the
theory of the hereditary, organic character of the habits and capacities
acquired in the course of civilization. Nor have the Athenians
transmitted their type unmixed; there is no pure Athenian or Greek race
at the present day with which we could compare the ancient Greeks, even
if we desired to affirm so great an independence of circumstances as
would assure to such a race the unimpaired faculties of their ancestors
in spite of all the changes in their environment which history records.
Not only the environment was changed and mixed; the stock, also, of that
race which once regarded all strangers as barbarians became equally
impure. And assuredly the comparison of the "average child of to-day"
with an Archimedes or a Themistocles is anything but a fair one.[156]
Taken with the qualification of the predicate which Mr. Stephen
cautiously introduces in asserting that the innate qualities of the
average modern child are not "radically" superior to those of the
greatest ancients, it leads us to suspect that Mr. Stephen is not,
himself, very thoroughly convinced of what he attempts to prove. We may
agree with Mr. Stephen that "If Homer or Plato had been born amongst the
Hottentots, they could no more have composed the 'Iliad' or the
'Dialogues' than Beethoven could have composed his music, however fine
his ear or delicate his organization, in the days when the only musical
instrument was the tom-tom"[157]; for certainly no one can reach the
same heights under an unfavorable environment that he might have
attained under a favorable one; and that Homer could have expressed, in
the ruder poetry which he might still have composed among Hottentots,
the sentiments of the "Iliad," or Beethoven have produced his sonatas
with the assistance of the tom-tom (provided that remained the only
instrument after the appearance of an individual of such musical
capacity as a Beethoven), cannot be conceived. But it is also
inconceivable that a Beethoven, a Homer, or a Plato, could be born among
the Hottentots, if "to be born among them" means to be born of their
stock.

In order to make any direct comparison between the capacities of the
descendants of civilized parents and those of uncivilized progenitors,
we ought to be able to compare average results obtained in savage
infants removed, in earliest infancy, to the advantages of civilization,
with the average mental and moral acquirements of individuals born under
those influences. We need to compare averages, I say, and not one or two
individual cases alone; for, in order to assert the organic and
hereditary character of human progress up to and under civilization, we
are by no means compelled to prove a like advance in all parts of a
nation or people, or even advance at all in every part. It is
conceivable, and wholly in accordance with the general course of
evolution, that types should remain stationary while other types are
advancing, that lower types should continue to exist side by side with
higher ones that have developed out of them, and even that, in some
lines of descent, retrogression should take place while the species or a
society as a whole is progressing. But our data for comparison of
averages are not, by any means, as satisfactory as could be wished; for
nowhere are the direct descendants of uncivilized races given equal
advantages with those of the descendants of peoples already civilized.
Galton's comparison of the negro with the white man is, for this reason,
too extreme in its conclusions as to the hereditary character of
intellect. Yet some general facts may be noted. And perhaps no better
field for comparison is afforded us than the United States, where the
white population is not the mere offshoot and tributary of a nation the
great majority of whose better representatives inhabit a distant land,
but an independent and successful nation, and where the negro race,
while yet untutored, was suddenly endowed with a liberty nominally as
great as that of the white man, together with a part in the government
and a right to state education. This liberty may be, indeed is, in many
parts of the South, a mere pretence, though even there toleration is
gradually being acquired; but in the North the negro is treated on very
nearly the same footing with the white man, the indignities offered him
having their origin, for the most part, with former slave-holders, not
with the born and bred Northerner. Negro children have free access to
the northern schools, where they may often be seen sitting side by side
with white children; and the best of American universities are open to
negro students. If, then, the average of opinion, even in the North,
maintains a certain amount of condescension towards the African, this
condescension is no greater in degree than that maintained by the
aristocracy of Europe towards the so-called lower (not the lowest)
classes, and in spite of which many have risen to prominence from those
classes. Indeed, the measure of condescension is rather less than the
average manifested by master to underling in many European countries not
so democratic as England; it would compare favorably with the attitude
of the petty German officials to the ordinary citizen of the less
well-to-do classes. It may mean discouragement, but there is no reason
why it should, in all cases, mean failure. Yet, as a fact, very few of
pure negro blood have risen to any prominence whatever, and the average
of intelligence appears comparatively low; the large majority of those
who have risen to eminence have had some admixture of the blood of the
white race. The American Indian appears to be more capable of
cultivation; but he has enjoyed fewer advantages than the negro. The
Indian children at the schools provided for them do not, however, appear
to exhibit the degree of intelligence possessed by white children. On
the other hand, the mixture of white and Indian blood seems to produce,
sometimes, rather more than the average of intelligence. The writer is
acquainted with two cases of this kind. The first was that of the
daughter of an ignorant Indian father, who lived entirely by hunting and
fishing, and of an almost as ignorant white mother. The child, who had
at first no advantages save those afforded by a primitive district
school, nevertheless early developed an insatiable love of study,
gained access to a higher school, and finally to what was, in her time,
the highest school for women in the country. Here she did housework,
during a course of four years, in order partly to pay her expenses,
supplying the remaining sum for tuition afterwards out of her earnings
as a teacher. By clothing herself, summer and winter, in cheap prints,
she also saved enough to buy the time of a sister who had been bound
out, assisted in the education of the rest of the family, and taught a
school whose excellence is remembered and praised to this day. But the
Indian is commonly supposed to be of higher stock than the African
negro; he certainly exhibits, even in his uncivilized state, a cunning,
a courage, and a persistence, of a higher type than that of the African;
and the superiority of a mixture between this alert type and the
intelligence of the white man is thus explained. I repeat, though the
subtle results of many minute accumulating influences of individual
environment must undoubtedly be taken into consideration in our judgment
of different races, the difference of opportunity does not seem to
account fully for the great difference of attainment.

It must be noticed, too, that, in comparing the negro with the white man
in the United States, we have not compared a wholly savage people with a
civilized one; for the negro has been, for several generations, in
contact with civilization, and must have gained something from this
contact. It is to be greatly doubted whether the infants of those
Siberians of whose pleasure in the suffering of other beings an instance
was given above would, even under the best of influences, develop into
individuals of much real benevolence. The average child of civilized
society is somewhat callous to the sufferings of animals, partly because
he does not realize the reality of those sufferings; yet I have seen
lost kittens tenderly cared for by ragged little street urchins; and I
have more than once heard small boys, playing in the gutter, exclaim at
the beating of a donkey or a horse. The child repeats, perhaps, to some
extent, the history of his race's origin in savagery. Yet it is to be
seriously doubted whether the children of the savages described as
delighting in cutting their meat from living animals would attain, even
under the most careful training, the average spontaneous humanity of the
lad of civilized progenitors, or would ever become truly humane men and
women. It is conceivable that superior mental and moral capacity may
remain comparatively undeveloped, proper environment lacking, but we
begin to see the fallacy of concluding, from such cases, the
non-hereditary character of capacity when we suppose such cases as those
above, of the rearing of savage infants under civilization. It must be
added of the very isolated cases--of which much is often made--in which
the children of civilized parents have been stolen by savages, at an
early age, (1) that it is not, and cannot be, maintained that all the
descendants of civilized progenitors are endowed with superior mental
and moral tendency; and (2) that such instances are too few in number to
furnish, alone, the basis of any theory. The evidence furnished us by
the general results of neglect in the midst of civilization is more to
the point; but, even in these cases, it must be shown that the children
came of good parentage in order that the evidence may be admitted as
telling against the theory of heredity. Every breeder of animals counts
with the greatest confidence upon the action of the laws of heredity;
and no reason can be given why these laws should not work in the case of
man, why he should be the one species exempt from them. It is impossible
to cross the dog with the wolf without perceiving the result of the
crossing, in the mental as well as the physical characteristics of the
offspring; and the dog does not differ more from the wolf than does
civilized man, in the most advanced nations, from the savage. Even his
physical characteristics, the contour of the head and face especially,
the form of the features as well as the expression, are different and
imply a higher type.

And, in discussing lower types in the midst of civilization, we cannot
do better than give some consideration to Dugdale's remarkable book on
the Jukes, which has already been mentioned. In this book is traced the
history of five hundred and forty persons belonging to seven generations
of descendants of five sisters, there being much intermarrying among
them. Out of two hundred and fifty-two Juke women, whose history is
traced, thirty-three were illegitimate, eighteen were mothers of
bastards before marriage, twelve the mothers of bastards after marriage,
fifty-three were prostitutes (the cases of eight being unascertained),
thirteen were barren, eleven kept brothels, thirty-seven had syphilis,
forty-five received, at some time, outdoor relief, the total number of
years amounting to two hundred and forty-two, twenty-four received
almshouse relief, the time reaching a total of thirty-five years, and
sixteen were committed for crimes for a total of one and three-fourths
years, the number of offences being twenty-four. Out of two hundred and
twenty-five Juke men, forty-nine were illegitimate, twenty were
prostitutes, one kept a brothel, fourteen were afflicted with syphilis,
fifty received outdoor relief, the time being, in total, two hundred and
seventy years, twenty-nine were in the almshouse for a total of
forty-six years, and thirty-three were committed for crime for a total
of eighty-nine and a half years, the number of offences being
fifty-nine. The lines with which the Jukes cohabited or intermarried
were naturally of a low moral type, but they do not show nearly as high
a percentage of crime and pauperism; thus among the marriageable women
of the Jukes, we find the percentage of harlotry to be 52.40, among
those of the intermarrying or cohabiting lines only 41.76. Of the stock
of Ada Juke, known to the police as "Margaret, the mother of criminals,"
nine offenders were sent to prison for a total of sixty years, their
crimes constituting fifty-four per cent of all the crimes against
property recorded of the Jukes, and including burglary, grand larceny,
and highway robbery; besides one murder and three attempts at rape.
Dugdale thus describes his first acquaintance with the "Jukes." "In
July, 1874, the New York Prison Association having deputed me to visit
thirteen of the county jails of this state and report thereupon, I made
a tour of inspection in pursuance of that appointment. No specially
striking cases of criminal careers, traceable through several
generations, presented themselves till ---- County was reached. Here,
however, were found six persons, under four family names, who turned out
to be blood relations in some degree. The oldest, a man of forty-five,
was waiting trial for receiving stolen goods; his daughter, aged
eighteen, held as witness against him; her uncle, aged forty-two,
burglary in the first degree; the illegitimate daughter of the latter's
wife, aged twelve years, upon which child the latter had attempted rape,
to be sent to the reformatory for vagrancy; and two brothers in another
branch of the family, aged respectively nineteen and fourteen, accused
of an assault with intent to kill, they having maliciously pushed a
child over a high cliff and nearly killed him. Upon trial, the oldest
was acquitted, though the goods stolen were found in his house, his
previous good character saving him; the guilt belonged to his
brother-in-law, the man aged forty-two above-mentioned, who was living
in the house. This brother-in-law is an illegitimate child, an habitual
criminal, and the son of an unpunished and cautious thief. He had two
brothers and one sister, all of whom are thieves, the sister being the
contriver of crime, they its executors. The daughter of this woman, the
girl aged eighteen above-mentioned, testified, at the trial which
resulted in convicting her uncle and procuring his sentence for twenty
years to state prison, that she was forced to join him in his last
foray, that he had loaded her with the booty and beat her on the journey
home, over two miles, because she lagged under the load. When this girl
was released, her family in jail, and thus left without a home, she was
forced to make her lodging in a brothel on the outskirts of the city.
Next morning she applied to the judge to be recommitted to prison 'for
protection' against certain specified carnal outrages required of her
and submitted to. She has since been sent to the house of refuge. Of the
two boys, one was discharged by the grand jury; the other was tried and
received five years' imprisonment in Sing Sing.

"These six persons belonged to a long lineage, reaching back to the
early colonists, and had intermarried so slightly with the emigrant
population of the Old World that they may be called a strictly American
family. They had lived in the same locality for generations, and were so
despised by the respectable community that their family name _had come
to be used generically as a term of reproach_.

"That this was deserved became manifest on slight inquiry. It was found
that out of twenty-nine males, in ages ranging from fifteen to
seventy-five, the immediate blood-relations of these six persons,
seventeen of them were criminals, or fifty-eight per cent; while fifteen
were convicted of some degree of offence, and received seventy-one years
of sentence.... The crimes and misdemeanors they committed were assault
and battery, assault with intent to kill, murder, attempt at rape, petit
larceny, grand larceny, burglary, forgery, cruelty to animals."

But this book of Dugdale's, which traces so clearly and thoroughly long
lines of criminal descent, makes manifest, also, the influence of
environment. We find, for instance, in the line of the illegitimate
posterity of Ada Juke, generation five, the case of a male descendant,
who was sentenced to Sing Sing for three years at the age of twenty-two,
but who, leaving prison at the expiration of his sentence, abandoned
crime and settled down to steady employment. A second case is that of
another male descendant of Ada, who assisted his brother in burglary at
the age of twelve, and served probably some thirteen or fourteen years
in prison, but later reformed and took to stone-quarrying, having
learned, says Dugdale, industrious habits in prison. A brother of this
man, who had also served sentences in jail for assault and battery, and
a term of two years at Sing Sing for burglary (the term beginning at the
age of twenty-two), moved at the age of thirty-one into the same county
as his brother, and went into the business of quarrying. A female
descendant in the illegitimate line of Ada, generation five, who seems
to have followed a dissolute life up to the age of fifteen, at this
point married a German, a "steady, industrious, plodding man," and
settled down into a reputable woman. In the legitimate line of Ada,
again, generation five, we find the case of a girl "said to have been
born in the poorhouse," who "was adopted out from there into a wealthy
family, and is doing well." In all these cases, the reform was the
result of contact, during the earlier period of life, with new elements
inducing industry and sobriety. Such cases might lead us to doubt the
conclusions we should otherwise feel justified in drawing with regard to
the action of heredity, and must certainly render us cautious not to
impute the whole character of the individual to heredity alone. But the
complicated nature of _all_ social relations should restrain us from
laying all stress upon any one element in those relations, in any case.
Here, again, we recur to the conception of conditions and results in
distinction from that of cause and effect. If statistics such as these
of the Jukes included minute and careful statements as to mental and
physical characteristics and resemblances, they would undeniably be much
more reliable basis for conclusions as to the hereditary nature of
character. Nevertheless, incomplete though this evidence be, it is by no
means such that it can be logically disregarded. It is to be said of
such cases of reform and respectability as those noticed under favorable
influences (1) that we are not informed as to its exact extent and
motive and have no means of knowing what these were; (2) that, if
reversion to ancestral types is possible in the sense of deterioration,
there is no reason why it should not be possible in the opposite sense
also,--no reason why better characters should not, through, perhaps,
some favorable prenatal influence at exactly the right period of
development, occasionally crop out in a line of general baseness;[158]
and (3) that the admixture of a strain of somewhat better blood may
produce, or some especial crossing be favorable to, the development of
higher character in a part, though not necessarily all, of the
offspring. "When the domestic pig and the wild boar or the wolf and the
dog are crossed," says Ribot,[159] "some of the progeny inherit the
savage, and others the domestic instincts. Similar facts have been
observed by Girou in the crossing of different races of dogs and cats."
We know quite well that the same law governs the transmission of
character in human beings. In a family of children, some will inherit
the characteristics of the father, some those of the mother. Mr. Jenkins
of the Bureau of Police of Brooklyn, N.Y., related to me a case that had
come under his notice. Of a family consisting of father, mother, two
sons, and a daughter, the mother was a hard-working, honest washerwoman,
while the father was depraved in his tendencies; and of the three
children the daughter resembled the mother in character, the sons, on
the other hand, their father. One of the sons was sentenced to prison
for a bad case of burglary, and was shot while attempting to escape; and
on the same day on which his picture was removed from the rogues'
gallery, his brother's was hung in its place, the latter having, with
calm deliberation and preparation, murdered a girl with whom he had some
relation. A similar case is recorded by Gall, where the mother
represented the good, the father the evil stock, and of five children
three were condemned to severe penalties for thieving, the other two
lived correct lives. It is to be noticed that, of the three cases of
better character among the Jukes cited above, the two reformed
characters were brothers. It is by no means proved by these cases that
all or a majority of the Jukes were capable, even under the best of
influences, of a like betterment of character. On the contrary: the
general characteristics of extreme licentiousness attaching to the whole
family, on which Dugdale lays special stress,--a licentiousness
extending even to cohabitation and marriage with the negroes at a time
when the latter were yet in slavery and regarded as little more than
animals,--as well as the exceeding viciousness and inhumanity exhibited
in some of the crimes (witness the attempted rape on the niece of twelve
and the pushing of the child over the cliff), show a tendency of
character much below the average. Nor was the prison discipline which
accomplished the reform of the two brothers the only opportunity of
steady industry, or the prison the only reformatory environment
afforded. Dugdale mentions an "extensive employer of labor, located near
the original settlement of the Jukes," who "employs several members of
it," treating them "with firmness and unvaryingly scrupulous fairness,"
interposing his authority and checking them in incipient crime. He acts
as their banker and, as school trustee, arranges, "where widows depend
upon their boys for support, that they shall work for him and go to
school alternate weeks." If, indeed, the family is located, as it seems
to be, in the rather sparsely settled districts of northern New York, it
is scarcely likely to suffer great isolation, as it might in the midst
of a city, or to be excluded from means of honest livelihood. Dugdale
mentions, indeed, that this employer "has not taken up this work as a
'mission,' but strictly as a business man, who, finding himself placed
where he must employ the rude laborers of his locality, deals with them
on the sound and healthy basis of commercial contract, honestly carried
out and rigidly enforced." Unfortunately, Dugdale does not furnish us
with any exact information as to the result of this very humane course
of treatment. We can only revert to his remark that, though the Jukes
had lived in this neighborhood for generations where work was evidently
not lacking nor kind and judicious treatment absent, their name was used
generically, by the reputable community, as a term of reproach.

We have already noticed some inconsistencies in Stephen's theory of
human progress as merely that of an accumulation of knowledge. But he
practically contradicts, elsewhere in his work, this view of
advancement. On page 201 of the "Science of Ethics," he says distinctly:
"As men become more intellectual, sympathetic, and so forth, they gain
fresh sensibilities, which are not simple judgments of consequences
hitherto improved, but as direct, imperative, and substantial as any of
the primitive sensibilities." Even if this statement were meant to apply
to the individual alone, a great difficulty must lie in the way of any
theory that sensibilities so inherent, sensibilities "as direct,
imperative, and substantial as any of the primitive sensibilities," will
not affect the character of descendants through inheritance, in the same
manner as these primitive sensibilities are acknowledged to affect it.
But elsewhere Stephen remarks: "An instinct grows and decays not on
account of its effects on the individual, but on account of its effects
upon the race. The animal which, on the whole, is better adapted for
continuing its species, will have an advantage in the struggle, even
though it may not be so well adapted for pursuing its own happiness." He
is careful to use the word "happiness" here, but the division under
which the sentence appears is headed, "Social and Individual Utility,"
and he distinctly states, on the preceding page, that the social
instincts may be a disadvantage to the individual in the struggle for
existence. He writes, in this connection: "The process by which the
correlation of pernicious and painful states is worked out is one which,
by its very nature, must take a number of generations. Races survive in
virtue of the completeness of this correlation."[160] This is Darwinism
applied to humanity; and, surely, since the human race has existed in
the social state for very many generations, we must suppose, according
to the theory thus stated, continuous organic advance, even if we did
not consider the passage in connection with the assertion of the gain,
with increasing intelligence and sympathy, of sensibilities as direct,
imperative, and substantial as any primitive ones. Again Mr. Stephen
writes: "It is true, generally, that each man has certain capacities for
moral as for every other kind of development, and capacities which vary
from the top to the bottom of the scale. No process of education or
discipline _whatever_ would convert a Judas Iscariot into a Paul or
John."[161] Then education, the environment of civilization, is not the
only factor in the production of character. Nor is it, according to Mr.
Stephen's own words, the only important factor. If capacities vary from
the top to the bottom of the scale, then surely this variation cannot be
an unimportant element of development. As a matter of fact, Mr. Stephen
himself lays especial stress upon inherited characteristic as the basis
of character. He says, for example: "The character is determined for
each individual by its original constitution, though the character is
modified as the reason acts.... But, after all, we start with a certain
balance of feeling, with certain fixed relations between our various
instincts; and, however these may change afterwards, our character is so
far determined from the start. Again, it is plain that this varies
greatly with different peoples and gives rise to different types."[162]
Surely the formation of types at least cannot be a matter of the
individual alone. Furthermore, Mr. Stephen distinctly asserts a growth
of intelligence in the savage--which we cannot suppose to stop short
with the beginning of civilization--while he especially emphasizes the
fact that the emotions develop concomitantly with the intellect. He says
also: "We assume an organic change to occur--no matter how--in certain
individuals of a species, and that change to be inherited by their
descendants; and thus two competing varieties to arise, one of which may
be supplanted by the other, or each of which may supplant the other in a
certain part of the common domain. Some such process is clearly
occurring in the case of human variations. Everywhere we see a
competition between different races, and the more savage vanishing under
the approach of the more civilized. Certain races seem to possess
enormous expansive powers, whilst others remain limited within fixed
regions or are slowly passing out of existence. So far as human
development supposes an organic change in the individual [?], we may
suppose that this process is actually going on and that, for example,
the white man may be slowly pushing savage races out of existence. I do
not ask whether this is the fact, because for my purpose it is
irrelevant. We are considering the changes which take place without such
organic development, not as denying the existence of organic
developments, but simply because they are so slow and their influence so
gradual that they do not come within our sphere. They belong, as
astronomers say, to the secular, not to the periodic changes. Confining
ourselves, therefore, to the changes which are, in my phrase, products
of the 'social factor,' and which assume the constancy of the individual
organism,"[163] etc. The passage is of importance as acknowledging the
reality of organic progress; but it is full of the self-contradictions
which we have already noticed. It starts with the Darwinian assumption
that organic change occurring in _individuals_ is directly inheritable
by their descendants; this assumption, having done its office, however,
is discarded, and we are told that any organic change cannot be that of
individuals but must be that of societies, or at least that it must be
of such sort that we have not only no need to consider it with regard to
the individual life, but even no need to consider it in the study of the
whole development of a society under civilization, or rather that we
have no need to study it at all as soon as we have the "social medium"
to fall back upon for an explanation of progress; and finally, in direct
contradiction to the assumption first made, a constancy of the
individual organism is asserted. This assertion is also in direct
contradiction to the assertion before noticed that character is
determined by original constitution and that original capacity differs
"infinitely"[164] in different individuals. We are indebted to Mr.
Stephen for a very minute analysis of the influence of even smallest
details of circumstance upon character; surely, while we are thus
emphasizing the delicacy of nervous organization that answers, with the
sensibility of a gold-leaf electroscope, to the slightest variations in
the environment, we cannot logically leave out of account the results of
such variation in inheritance because these, too, are minute. And surely
we cannot conceive that an organism so sensitive to the influence of
environment is yet so inflexible and unalterable as far as the
transmission of its changes to offspring is concerned. On any sound
physiological theory, we cannot avoid supposing that all these minute
changes in character which Stephen refers to the action of the social
environment are accompanied by exact physiological equivalents. Then
either these changes of organization are not inheritable,--in which case
the organism does not propagate itself but something different from
itself, and we have no alternative but to resort to some such theory as
that of Weismann,--or else these changes are inheritable (subject, of
course, to all the variations which individual circumstances of
development must induce), in which case their inheritance must be of
quite as much importance as their origin to any theory of social
progress. As we have said, Weismann has gradually come to admit _some_
influence of the environment on the germ-plasm. We can indeed conceive
of the representation of all previous development of the species in the
individual, and of the determination of the degree of importance
assumed, in the organism, by any particular acquirement or tendency by
the coincidence of circumstance, but we can scarcely conceive logically
of a propagation of organization that does not represent all the
influences which have made that organization what it is. Even from
Stephen's standpoint, it is difficult to understand how the organization
of society, which he admits to be no organization on the plane of the
higher animal, but of a much lower type, can be of so much importance in
the advance of mankind, its variations the condition of progress, and
yet the much more interdependent organization of the animal body be
supposed to remain constant and take no part in this progress. It is
difficult to comprehend how so much stress can be laid on the mere
external influence of the units of society on each other, and, at the
same time, the far more intimate and direct influence of parents on
their offspring can be deemed of so little importance as to warrant our
disregarding it altogether. It is especially difficult to understand how
it is that heredity can be disregarded, not merely in its influence on
the individual or even on the generation, but in all its manifold,
intricate, and prolonged workings since man first extended family life
to tribal organization; and this, too, in spite of the acknowledgment
that progress through heredity is real if slow. It is strange that there
should always be a tendency to draw a distinct line between social man
and all the rest of the animal kingdom, as if, when society began, all
former laws ceased from operation. Thus it is sometimes said that
natural selection no longer acts on the individual because it acts on
societies as wholes also; as well say that it cannot act on inner
organization because it acts on the organism as a whole. As a matter of
fact, it affects society through individuals, and the individual
through, or rather in, his organization. If it is true, as Stephen
asserts, that change of social tissue is primary and fundamental to all
external social change, it is not the less true that change of
individual organization is fundamental to all change of external action.
No theory of development which goes beyond the individual life and
considers the progress of society as a whole can scientifically
disregard the element of heredity in this progress.

FOOTNOTES:

[141] I am indebted for these facts to Dr. Auguste Forel.

[142] "Ants, Wasps, and Bees," Chap. V.

[143] "Zur psychologischen Wuerdigung der darwin'schen Theorie."

[144] Pp. 141, 142, translation by Henry M. Trollope.

[145] Eng. ed. Internat. Scientific Ser., p. 276; quoted from "The
Zooelogist."

[146] "Mental Evolution in Animals," p. 345; cited from an article in
"Nature," 1883.

[147] "Animal Intelligence," p. 472.

[148] "Mind," Vol. VIII.

[149] Lubbock: "The Origin of Civilisation," pp. 9, 10.

[150] "The Science of Ethics," pp. 103, 104.

[151] Ibid. p. 109.

[152] "The Science of Ethics," p. 419.

[153] Ibid. p. 103.

[154] Ribot: "Heredity." Here we have examples which show that disease,
as well as healthful organization and function, are subject to
variation; and it may occur to us to wonder that no one has thought of
referring these variations to some supernatural interference or special
inner spontaneity; that theories which assume some transcendental agency
or some spontaneously acting vital principle as the cause of normal,
healthful variation have yet either left the variations of disease out
of consideration or else simply referred them to influence of the
environment. The reason for this, as far as transcendental interference
is concerned, is evident; any theory of teleology in such cases must
point to malevolent not benevolent design.

[155] "Heredity," pp. 124, 125. Quoted from the "Dictionnaire
Philosophique," article "Caton."

[156] "The Science of Ethics," pp. 102, 103.

[157] "The Science of Ethics," p. 107.

[158] See previous observations on this subject, p. 408.

[159] "Heredity," Engl. trans., p. 84.

[160] "The Science of Ethics," pp. 91, 92.

[161] Ibid., p. 432. The italics are mine.

[162] Ibid., pp. 72, 73.

[163] P. 121.

[164] See above, p. 400.




