Part III. of the "Principles of Ethics" is occupied with practical
considerations concerning "The Ethics of Individual Life," under the
headings "Activity," "Rest," "Nutrition," "Stimulation," "Culture,"
"Amusements," "Marriage," "Parenthood." Of the general ethical relation
of the individual to society, Spencer says:--"Integration being the
primary process of evolution, we may expect that the aggregate of
conceptions constituting ethics enlarges at the same time that its
components acquire heterogeneity, definiteness, and that kind of
cohesion which system gives to them. As fulfilling this expectation, we
may first note that while drawing within its range of judgment numerous
actions of men towards one another which at first were not recognized as
right or wrong, it finally takes into its sphere the various divisions
of private conduct--those actions of each individual which directly
concern himself only, and in but remote ways concern his fellows."

Ethics has been commonly regarded as merely a system of interdicts on
certain kinds of acts which men would like to do and of injunctions to
perform certain acts which they would like not to do. It says nothing
about the great mass of acts constituting normal life, though these have
their ethical aspect. The pleasurable has been too often regarded as
outside the legitimate sphere of ethical approval, where not directly
the rightful subject of ethical disapproval. But pleasure is an
accompaniment of vitality, and furthers the vital activities; and if the
general happiness is to be the aim of action, then the happiness of each
unit is a fit aim; and there is unquestionably "a division of ethics
which yields sanction to all the normal actions of individual life,
while it forbids the abnormal ones." There is an altruistic as well as
an egoistic justification of the care for self, since the health of
descendants and the ability to provide for offspring is directly
concerned; and since such care is needful to exclude the risk of
becoming a burden to others. And there is a further positive
justification of egoism which results from the obligation to expend some
effort for others, and to become, as far as possible, a source of social
pleasure to others.

It will be seen, from the above analysis, that the chapter appended to
Part I. still speaks of an ultimate state of complete adjustment to
social life[52]; this chapter was, however, published from the original
MS. without alteration. Some passages in Part II. seem to involve the
same idea of a possible complete attainment of the ethical end,[53] but
Part III. closes with reference to "an approximately complete adjustment
of the nature to the life which has to be led."

FOOTNOTES:

[38] Spencer elsewhere says "due exercise," _vide_ p. 76.

[39] Essay on "Morals and Moral Sentiment."

[40] P. 105.

[41] _Vide_ "Principles of Psychology."

[42] P. 104.

[43] Pp. 104,105.

[44] Pp. 108, 109.

[45] Pp. 134, 148.

[46] P. 147.

[47] Pp. 202, 203.

[48] P. 231.

[49] See pp. 71, 193.

[50] Pp. 258, 259.

[51] As the "revision" of the theoretical part of this book chiefly
consists, like its abridgment, in the elimination of the references to
Divine Will and other earlier views held before acquaintance with
Darwin's theory of life, there is nothing in the book, in distinction
from Mr. Spencer's other later works, that needs especially to be
considered here.

[52] See, for instance, _supra_, p. 70.

[53] See _supra_, p. 75.




JOHN FISKE


As Herbert Spencer's closest follower, John Fiske deserves to stand next
him in order of analysis. Fiske accepts, though evidently with
reluctance, what he terms "the terrible theory" of evolution, which
establishes the fact of man's consanguinity with dumb beasts. In his
book on "The Destiny of Man" (1884), he sets forth his theory of the
evolution of society as foreshowing man's final destiny. With regard to
the beginnings of psychical development in the course of evolution, he
thus expresses himself: "At length there came a wonderful
moment;--silent and unnoticed, even as the day of the Lord which cometh
like a thief in the night, there arrived that wonderful moment at which
psychical changes began to be of more use than physical changes to the
brute ancestor of man. Through further ages of ceaseless struggle the
profitable variations in this creature occurred oftener and oftener in
the brain, and less often in other parts of the organism, until bye and
bye the size of his brain had been doubled and its complexity of
structure increased a thousandfold, while in other respects his
appearance was not so very different from that of his brother apes....
No fact in nature is fraught with deeper meaning than this two-sided
fact of the extreme physical similarity and enormous psychical
divergence between man and the group of animals to which he traces his
pedigree. It shows that when humanity began to be evolved, an entirely
new chapter in the history of the universe was opened. Henceforth the
life of the nascent soul came to be first in importance, and the bodily
life became subordinated to it. Henceforth it appeared that the process
of zooelogical change had come to an end, and a process of psychological
change was to take its place. Henceforth along this supreme line there
was to be no further evolution of new species through physical
variation, but through the accumulation of psychical variations one
particular species was to be indefinitely perfected.... Henceforth, in
short, the dominant aspect of evolution was to be, not the genesis of
species, but the progress of civilization.... In the deadly struggle for
existence, which has raged throughout countless aeons of time, the whole
creation has been groaning and travailing together in order to bring
forth that last consummate specimen of God's handiwork, the Human Soul."

And further, of the genesis of this Human Soul: "With the growth of the
higher centres, the capacities of action become so various and
indeterminate that definite direction is not given to them until after
birth." By the increase of cerebral surface, infancy, which is the
period of plasticity, is prolonged, Man becomes teachable, and though
inherited tendencies and aptitudes still form the foundations of
character, yet the career of the individual is no longer wholly
predetermined by the careers of its ancestors, but individual experience
comes to count as an enormous factor in modifying the career of mankind
from generation to generation.

The psychical development of humanity since its earlier stages has been
largely due to the reaction of individuals upon one another in those
various relations which we characterize as social.

Foreshadowings of social relations occur in the animal world.
Rudimentary moral sentiments are also clearly discernible in the highest
members of various mammalian orders and in all but the lowest members of
our own order. But in respect of definiteness and permanence, the
relations between animals in a state of gregariousness fall far short of
the relations between individuals in the rudest human society. The
primordial unit of human society is the family, the establishment of
which was made necessary and took place through the lengthening of
infancy. When childhood had come to extend over a period of ten or a
dozen years, a period which would have been doubled where several
children were born in succession to the same parents, the relationships
between father and mother, brothers and sisters, must have become firmly
knit; thus the family came into existence, and the way was opened for
the growth of sympathies and ethical feelings. The rudimentary form of
the ethical feelings was that of the transient affection of a female
bird or mammal for its young. First given a definite direction through
the genesis of the primitive human family, the development of altruism
has yet scarcely kept pace with the general development of intelligence;
the advance of civilized man in justice and kindness has been less
marked than his advance in quick intelligence. But the creative energy
which has been thus at work through the bygone eternity is not going to
become quiescent to-morrow; the psychical development of man is
destined to go on in the future as it has in the past. And from the
"Origin of Man," when thoroughly comprehended, we may catch some
glimpses of his destiny.

The earlier condition of things was a state of universal warfare, on
account of the limitation of the food-supply. This warfare was checked
by the beginnings of industrial civilization, which made it possible for
a vastly greater population to live upon a given area, and in many ways
favored social compactness. A new basis of political combination was now
furnished by territorial continuity and by community of occupation. The
supply of food was no longer strictly limited, for it could be
indefinitely increased by peaceful industry; and, moreover, in the free
exchange of the products of labor, it ceased to be true that one man's
interest was opposed to another's. Men did not, it is true, at once
recognize this fact, but have done so only gradually. When the clan had
grown into the state, and the state into the empire, in which many
states were brought together in pacific relations, the recognized sphere
of moral obligation became enlarged, until at length it comprehended all
mankind. The coalescence of groups of men into larger and larger
political aggregates has been the chief work of civilization; and the
chief obstacle to such coalescence has been warfare. Great political
bodies have arisen in three ways. The first, conquest without
incorporation, proved itself suicidal. The second way was conquest with
incorporation, but without representation; and this lacking, the
government retrograded and gradually became a despotism. The third
method, federation, has been the policy of the English government. The
advantage of the habit of self-government has been shown in England's
wide conquest and colonization. The federative method of political
union, pacific in its very conception, is assuming an unquestionable
sway and destined to become universal; the progress of the race will be,
as it has been, with the gradual elimination of warfare.

In a race of inferior animals, any maladjustment is quickly removed by
natural selection. But in man there is a wide interval between the
highest and lowest degree of completeness which are compatible with
maintenance of life; in all grades of civilization above the lowest,
there are so many kinds of superiorities which severally enable men to
survive, notwithstanding accompanying inferiorities, that natural
selection cannot, by itself, rectify any particular unfitness. Hence,
the action of natural selection upon man has long since been essentially
diminished through the operation of social conditions. Therefore the
wicked flourish. Vice is but slowly eliminated, because mankind has so
many other qualities, besides the bad ones, which enable it, in spite of
them, to subsist and achieve progress.

The fundamental difference between civilized man and the savage lies in
the representative power, the imagination, by which men comprehend
pleasure and pain in others. Use and disuse, in place of natural
selection, have come to be paramount with man; and though the ethical
emotions are still too feeble, they will be more and more strengthened
by use, while the manifestation of selfish and hateful feelings will be
more and more weakened by disuse. Man is slowly passing from a primitive
social state, in which he was little better than a brute, toward an
ultimate social state, in which his character shall have become so
transformed that nothing of the brute can be detected in it. The
"original sin" of theology is the brute inheritance, which is being
gradually eliminated; and the message of Christianity: "Blessed are the
meek, for they shall inherit the earth" will be realized in the state of
universal peace towards which mankind is tending. Strife and Sorrow
shall disappear. Peace and Love shall reign supreme. The goal of
evolution is the perfecting of man, whereby we see, more than ever, that
he is the chief object of divine care, the fruition of that creative
energy which is manifested throughout the knowable universe.

We know soul only in connection with body. Yet nothing could be more
grossly unscientific than the famous remark of Cabanis that the brain
secretes thought as the liver secretes bile; the molecular movements of
the brain and the phenomena of thought and feeling are merely
concomitants related in some unknown way. It is not even correct to say
that thought goes on in the brain. He who regards man as the consummate
fruition of creative energy and the chief object of divine care, is
almost irresistibly driven to the belief that the soul's career is not
completed with the life upon the earth. Difficulties to this theory he
will meet; yet the alternative view contains difficulties at least as
great; nor is there any problem in the simplest and most exact
departments of science which does not speedily lead us to a
transcendental problem that we can neither solve nor elude. A broad
common sense argument has often to be called in, where keen-edged
metaphysical analysis has confessed itself baffled. The doctrine of
evolution does not allow us to take the atheistic view of the position
of man; the Darwinian theory, properly understood, replaces as much
teleology as it destroys. In the Titanic events of the development of
worlds from the nebular mist and their after-destruction, we may find no
signs of purpose, or even of a dramatic tendency; but on the earth we do
find distinct indications of a dramatic tendency; though doubtless not
of purpose in the limited human sense. Are we to regard the Creator's
work as like that of a child, who builds houses out of blocks just for
the pleasure of knocking them down again? On such a view the riddle of
the universe becomes a riddle without a meaning. "I can see no
insuperable difficulty in the notion that at some period in the
evolution of humanity this divine spark [the soul] may have acquired
sufficient concentration and steadiness to survive the wreck of material
forms and endure forever. Such a crowning wonder seems to me no more
than the fit climax to a creative work that has been ineffably beautiful
and marvellous in all its myriad stages."

Fiske gives some further definition of social evolution in man, in his
"Cosmic Philosophy" (1874). He there denies the incompatibility of
free-will with causation, saying that "it is the doctrine of
lawlessness, and not the causationist doctrine, which is incompatible
with liberty and destructive of responsibility."[54]

He further postulates heterogeneity of the environment as "the chief
proximate determining cause of social progress," and defines such
evolution as "a continuous establishment of psychical relations within
the community, in conformity to physical and psychical relations arising
in the environment, during which both the community and the environment
pass from a state of relatively indefinite, incoherent homogeneity to a
state of relatively definite, coherent heterogeneity; and during which
the constituent units of the community become ever more distinctly
individual."[55] "The progress of a community, as of an organism, is a
process of _adaptation_--the continuous establishment of inner relations
in conformity to outer relations. If we contemplate material
civilization under its widest aspect, we discover its legitimate aim to
be the attainment and maintenance of an equilibrium between the wants
of men and the outward means of satisfying them. And while approaching
this goal, society is ever acquiring in its economic structure both
greater heterogeneity and greater specialization. It is not only that
agriculture, manufactures, commerce, legislation, the acts of the ruler,
the judge, and the physician, have, since ancient times, grown
immeasurably multiform, both in their processes and in their appliances;
but it is also that this specialization has resulted in the greatly
increased ability of society to adapt itself to the emergencies by which
it is now beset."[56] Religion, too, is adjustment; form after form has
been outgrown and perished, yet the life of Christianity, incorporated
in ever higher forms, is continually renewed. The omission of the moral
feeling, as a factor, from Comte's interpretation of the progress of
society, is a fatal defect, since moral and social progress depend more
on feelings than on ideas. As Wallace shows, tribes which combined for
mutual help and protection, restrained appetite by foresight, and felt
sympathy, would have an advantage in the struggle for existence.

"As surely as the astronomer can predict the future state of the
heavens, the sociologist can foresee that the process of adaptation must
go on until, in a remote future, it comes to an end in proximate
equilibrium. The increasing interdependence of human interests must
eventually go far to realize the dream of the philosophic poet, of a
Parliament of Man, a Federation of the World.

"'When the kindly earth shall slumber, lapt in universal law,' and when
the desires of each individual shall be in proximate equilibrium with
the means of satisfying them and with the simultaneous desires of all
surrounding individuals."[57]

FOOTNOTES:

[54] Vol. II. p. 189.

[55] Ibid. p. 223, 224.

[56] Vol. II. p. 212.

[57] Ibid. pp. 227, 228.




W. H. ROLPH

"BIOLOGICAL PROBLEMS" ("Biologische Probleme," 1884)


For what purpose are we in the world? asks the philosopher, and lays,
with this question, the foundation for later errors. In the effort to
rescue from destruction the theory of a creative intelligence, teleology
has adapted itself to many forms of scientific theory, not excepting
that of evolution. It reads into evolution progress towards what is, in
one way or another, assumed to be an end. But we really know, in the
universe, nothing but continuity, eternal change according to natural
law, and so only _causae efficientes_, never _causae finales_; and organic
development as well as processes in inorganic nature are to be explained
in this manner. The assumption that the result of a process is an end
towards which the process was directed is unwarranted. The question of
science is not: Wherefore is any creature in the world? but: What is he?
What is his actual aim, that is, his endeavor?

In the answer to this question, all philosophical schools have something
in common. Happiness, in one form or another, is acknowledged to be the
"end" of life in this sense. A follower of the utilitarian school may
define happiness as the "sublime feeling that one has taken part in the
continuous improvement of humanity, and the increase of human
happiness," but his words are less a definition of the concept than a
designation of the way in which happiness is to be arrived at. The
"sublime feeling" can be represented only as a feeling of happiness, of
joy. The religious theory, too, which represents the joys of religion on
earth and in heaven, as compensating for the evils of this life, makes
happiness the end of life, though in a different manner. Spencer is
right in declaring that happiness, however it may be defined, always
means, in the end, a greater amount of pleasure than of pain. At this
point, however, the harmony of the schools ceases. The question as to
the method by which this surplus of pleasure is to be obtained is
answered in different ways. All say, indeed, by seeking good and
avoiding evil. But opinion is divided as to what is good and what is
evil.

Rolph here introduces a long criticism of the different schools. Against
utilitarianism he urges that, in so far as it makes the happiness of the
greatest number its principle, it asserts the right of the majority over
a minority, and so advocates, by implication, an absolute subjection to
authority.

Our whole moral education has for its aim to give the young as high a
conception as possible of the happiness which springs from virtue and,
on the other hand, to decry the pleasure which may result from forbidden
acts. We seek, in this manner, to diminish the inward struggle and bring
about the right result. He who has grown up under good influences
escapes many temptations to which a man of less moral education falls a
prey. According to Wallock, who makes the degree of inner struggle the
measure of virtue, the man of better education in this case, the more
moral man, must have less merit than the less moral man. Wallock thus
founders on the rock which Kant so skilfully avoids; according to the
former, the man whose lusts have been mastered by education could never
equal the man of evil instincts, and the chastity of a Magdalen must be
regarded as more moral than that of a pure woman.

Spencer's theory, that the conduct of the higher animals is better
adjusted to ends than that of lower species, is erroneous; the lower
animals are exactly as well organized for the ends of their existence as
are the higher animals for theirs; the tapeworm is relatively just as
perfect as the human being, in comparison with whom he possesses many
superior qualities. The common judgment that the human being is superior
does not accord with the real adjustment of things, but with our human
conception of the ideal end of organization, our anthropocentric idea of
the aim of life. We foolishly believe that the tapeworm and every other
animal has the same end as the human being, and rank the animals
according to this principle, instead of tracing the different
genealogical branches to a like height and then comparing them. Not the
fitness for ends, but the kind and multiplicity of the ends for which
there is fitness, determine our judgment; and the ends by which we judge
are those of our own life. We judge subjectively and absolutely instead
of objectively and relatively. We are ever unconsciously influenced by
the conception that nature, in creating the tapeworm, merely made a
false step and a step backwards in her way towards the creation of man.
That all animals are adapted, some in a greater, some in a less degree,
to the ends of their existence, is proved by the simple fact of their
existence, that is, of their survival in the struggle for existence; but
which are in a higher, and which are in a less degree so adapted, is, in
the individual instance, extremely difficult to determine. In any
attempt at such an estimate, we must meet with peculiar difficulties,
resulting from the fact that we judge of the adaptation to ends with
less certainty the further from us any animal is in its organization. A
comparison such as Spencer institutes is possible only with respect to
like functions of similar organs in closely related forms.

The assertion that increase of ability for self-preservation leads to
better care for the young, and makes of such care a duty, is likewise
erroneous. For, up to the highly organized class of the crustacea, we
have no example of care for the young. In the struggle for existence,
the species which survive must be such as not only are in themselves
best fitted for survival, but as also bring forth best fitted progeny.
Nor has Spencer made clear on what ground natural process is to be
regarded as identical with duty. In truth he has succeeded in showing
only that care for the young is wide-spread in the animal kingdom, from
which fact naturally follows that it is a quality which tends to the
preservation of species.

It cannot be conceded that such a perfection as Spencer pictures, where
each shall fulfil all the functions of his own life in the most perfect
and complete manner without interfering with a like freedom in others,
is possible. The assertion involves the extension to all living beings
of that ideal principle of equal claims which Spencer repudiates with
regard to man,--showing that not all men are capable of a like degree of
happiness and that individuals desire, moreover, pleasure differing in
quality. Furthermore, a world of beings which, like the animals and many
plants, can support life only by means of organic material, must, in
order to exist, destroy organic life, either animal or vegetable. The
theory does not even hold with regard to individuals of the same
species; Spencer himself acknowledges the truth of the principles of
Malthus and of Darwin, according to which, even with the lowest rate of
increase, a struggle of competition must soon arise between individuals
of the same species.

Nor does Spencer's proof of the fundamental character of altruism hold,
on investigation. He demonstrates that through the animal species up to
man, there is less and less self-sacrifice of the mother animal in
giving birth to offspring. But this physical sacrifice is not altruism;
altruism lies in conscious care for the young after birth, and this is
not lessened, but increased, the higher we ascend.

That morality is but greater adjustment of acts to ends cannot be
admitted. If, in ordinary speech, the word good refers to greatest
adjustment to ends, whatever the ends may be, that is no proof that it
must have the same significance in Ethics. A good shot may be a good one
in that it hits the mark; but what if it kill a man? The acts of
criminals may be as well adjusted to their ends and as easy to predict
as those of a good man. Spencer's theory would lead, consistently
carried out, to the principle that the means justify the end, an
assertion that is even more dangerous than its opposite. The fact is,
that in Ethics it is the nature of the end which is of importance.

Spencer endeavors to show that only normal exercise of function is
favorable to life, and so moral;--that excess and deprivation are both
injurious. It is not true, however, that excess is always injurious;
within certain bounds it is made up for by reserves in the animal
organism. Or, if Spencer should answer to this objection, that his
"normal" is not to be represented by a sharp line, difficult to keep to,
but by a broad road within which excess is safe, such a representation
would both burden his theory with two dividing-lines, and moreover would
not save it. For he has not deemed it necessary to treat the concept
"normal" to an exact definition, and we find him using it in his later
deductions in an entirely new sense--not as equilibrium between capacity
of function and its exercise, but in the ideal significance of a harmony
between the claims of the individual on the one side, and those of the
environment on the other. This normal is nowhere actually to be found
and cannot, from the nature of things, be arrived at. By addition of
this significance, the word normal becomes indefinite in meaning, and is
used, now in one sense, now in the other. Normal exercise of function
has, however, nothing to do with the claims of the environment, which
generally demands, indeed, a deviation from the normal.

Nor is Spencer's analysis of the beginning of the process of
food-seizure, adduced in support of the theory that happiness and
morality are commensurable, confirmed by facts. According to this
theory, the process of food-taking begins with the contact of animal and
food, in which act the commencement of diffusion of food in the body of
the animal causes a pleasure which leads to the seizure of its prey and
the further act of devouring it. The theory might hold of the lowest
organisms, but could not be true of any animal furnished with an
impenetrable shell or skin. Nor would the seizure follow with sufficient
promptness if it were left to the action of the pleasure caused by
diffusion. Moreover, we should expect to find, according to this theory,
a much more general and finer development of the organ of taste among
the animals,--to find it as a special organ on the lowest planes of
animal life; it is, on the contrary, the latest of the special senses to
develop. It is the reaction on the sense of touch, the lowest and most
general of the special senses, which causes the seizure of nourishment.
We must, therefore, deny that pleasure is the motive to the seizure of
food, and so, too, reject the conclusion that it is the motive to every
other act.

Besides arguing that normal function brings pleasure, Spencer has
attempted to prove that all pleasure has its spring in normal function,
and is therefore moral. Could he succeed in so doing, hedonism would be
proved. For since all schools agree in regarding happiness as the end of
life, and since all these, in common, acknowledge happiness to be an
excess of pleasure over pain, enjoyment might be regarded as the
absolute guide. But if, as Spencer acknowledges, pleasure and morality
are only in a perfectly adapted society commensurate, then in only such
a society can pleasure be the criterion; and since we do not live in a
perfectly adapted society, the theory is not applicable to us, and if
practicably applied would be fatal to society.

Against Spencer's theory of the final spontaneity of morality, many
objections may be urged, among others especially the one that such a
morality ceases to be morality at all, virtue being possible, as Kant
has demonstrated, only where a certain conquest of desire is achieved.
Such a morality is, moreover, unattainable, an extravagant fancy.


THE PROBLEM OF FOOD-TAKING

Rolph thinks Spencer's theory awakes the conjecture that it was not
first arrived at through investigation, but rests upon a preconceived
opinion, as do to a greater or less extent all theories on this subject.
It seems as if the author had first attached himself to that theory
which best accorded with his scientific bias, and then tried whether
this theory might be proved or supported by facts of biology and
psychology. One might surmise, from the very skilful, but often too
artificial argument, that the author pursued the following train of
thought. Pleasure, and indeed the greatest possible pleasure, is the end
of endeavor in the organic world, that is, the psychical cause of
endeavor. May it not also be the physical cause?

Rolph answers this question with a denial, and endeavors to show that
the taking of food has its cause in the insatiability of all organic
substance. The theory of Spontaneous Generation contains nothing
impossible or improbable; is, on the contrary, a necessary logical
assumption not to be disproved by the mere result of experiment under
conditions of the laboratory. It is easy to imagine that organic
elements, which are to be found in great quantities in inorganic nature,
may come together by chance, or rather in the natural order of things,
to the formation of protoplasm.

The movement of these masses of protoplasm seems, at first glance, to
set the law of gravitation at defiance, but we may answer that an
ascending balloon might seem, to an uninstructed observer, to do the
same, although its movement is merely the natural result of that force;
it is not necessary, therefore, to assume a free inner motive, the soul,
as the cause of the one motion or the other. The first assimilation of
food has its beginning in the process of endosmose and exosmose, in
which the protoplasm, as in general the denser fluid, increases in
volume, taking up more than it gives out; the process occurring, in
detail, according to the special relations of attraction in the parts.
The organism always takes up the greatest amount possible under the
circumstances, exactly as, in the inorganic world, water takes up the
greatest amount possible of salt or any other soluble substance; the
growth of a crystal, and the oxidation of iron are illustrations of the
same principle. Of the limit of this capacity to take up new matter into
the organism we know nothing; all recent experiments go to show that the
organism is capable, under propitious circumstances, of an enormous
receptivity, such as, under natural conditions, it never reaches. The
lower animals feed continually, and their whole lives are passed in this
employment. In plants the tendency is seen still more clearly.
Experiments with electric, violet, and ultra-violet light show an
enormous growth in plants exposed to its action. But this can be only an
indirect growth, namely, the exorbitant acceleration of organic change
and assimilation. This fact is proved by experiments turning on increase
of warmth in soil; from which is seen to result an unusual development
of that part of the plant to which growth is especially directed at the
time. When the warmth of an incubator is increased, the animal organ
especially engaged in development at the time is affected in like
manner. So that we may assume that the organism is capable of responding
to every demand that nature makes upon it under normal conditions; and
since the greatest possible assimilation under the existing conditions
is thus removed from the control of the creature, the latter appears
practically insatiable. This insatiability must appear to the observer
an inner impulse of the organism, an effort towards increase of
nourishment. It may be called mechanical hunger in distinction from
psychical hunger, of which it is the basis. It is not necessary to take
into consideration, in the question as to the degree of assimilation
possible, the amount of excretion of substance by the organism; we must,
on the contrary, assert that this is dependent upon the amount of
assimilation. The measure of growth depends, therefore, on the degree of
assimilation of new material. This degree, however, like the degree to
which the matter may be dissolved in a liquid in the case of inorganic
matter, is especially affected by light and warmth. The creature which
comes into existence in the sun will experience a decrease of organic
change when placed in the shade; and the creature which comes into
existence in the shade will experience an increase of such change under
the influence of the sun, a decrease again with a return to the shade.
This decrease means hunger,--harm. Experiments with zooespores throw an
interesting light upon these relations. They show that the zooespores,
although suited to very different degrees of light, all shun darkness.
Although when in the light they soon come to rest, divide, and copulate,
they remain, in the darkness, in a state of continual unrest and motion.
They grow so thin "that they almost excite pity" (Strassburger), and
finally perish of hunger. Only such zooespores as are distinguished by
sex and copulate come to rest, or those of such sorts as prey upon
others. It is easy to perceive that the unrest of the zooespores in the
darkness springs from lack of nourishment, from hunger; they seek
feverishly for the light, without which assimilation follows with
insufficient energy to satisfy need and render life possible. In
darkness, copulation alone can do this; copulation takes, then, the
place of normal nourishment.

Or let us consider the case of an organism which has originated in the
shade. Heat, as we know, increases chemical change, in inorganic as well
as organic matter; it hastens the disintegration of certain compounds,
and alone renders it possible in many cases. In general, we may assert
that increase of temperature within certain limits increases
assimilation; that is, capacity to assimilate. Therefore, if an animal
is placed in the sun, its capacity, that is, its need, to assimilate is
increased, although assimilation is much more energetic than before.
Need to assimilate or hunger is, therefore, dependent upon the supply of
food, although, doubtless, also on other conditions, especially those of
light and temperature. If this is true, the hunger of a simple organism
that assimilates energetically must be more intense than that of one
which assimilates slowly, in spite of the consumption of an enormous
quantity of food in the case of the former. Botanists know (Sachs,
"Lehrbuch der Botanik," p. 613) "that growth may be so hastened by too
high a temperature that assimilation (especially under scanty light)
does not suffice to provide the necessary material for it. The
transpiration of the leaves may be so increased that the roots cannot
repair the loss. And on the other hand, a too low temperature of the
soil may so diminish the action of the roots that even a small loss by
transpiration cannot be repaired."

At what stage of organization psychical hunger is added to mechanical
hunger, or whether it may be identified with it, we cannot say. In any
case, the former appears exceedingly early, for excitations of hunger
may be observed in creatures very low in the scale of being. Certainly
hunger is never absent where there is movement.

Hunger, a sense of pain, is, therefore, the first impulse to action.[58]

With a like effort in the attempt to obtain food, that organism will be
best nourished which commands the best means of obtaining and preparing
its food,--the best apparatus for the seizure and grinding of food, and
the best salivary gland. And finally, greater surface of skin, of lungs,
of gills, or of intestines, causes greater capacity for assimilation,
and since this surface is increased by cell-division or propagation, the
capacity of the organism for assimilation grows with its capacity of
propagation.[59] Protoplasm is never entirely homogeneous, and we must
suppose some difference even in the beginning; such difference is,
indeed, fundamental through the very composition of protoplasm from the
four fundamental elements, and this or that other element. These
different elements must be held together by forces of attraction, and
the direction of these forces must have some common centre represented
by some differentiation of the protoplasm, whether as clearer spot, or
as nucleus. This spontaneously generated organism, neither animal nor
plant, is nourished, as we have seen, by diffusion, by the
transformation of inorganic into organic substance. The lowest organisms
possess no definite organs for taking food; they manifest, however,
phenomena of movement which are exactly like those of the animal
organism, for they appear unconditioned and hence voluntary. Locomotion
is, in the lowest animal forms, the only means of obtaining nourishment.
The amoeba surrounds and takes in whatever is by chance met with.
Animals a little higher in the scale swim about and seek their food; or,
remaining in one place, they cause, by means of cilia, a movement of the
water towards a certain part of the body, a sort of mouth where the
protoplasm is open and can take up the prey in the same manner as does
the amoeba. Ascending the scale of life, we find more and more
complicated apparatus for the seizure of food, for its preparation and
digestion, and the beginning of a nervous system, first as the
differentiation of certain muscle-cells, then in connection with a
special sense, that of hearing. If we assume any pleasure to be
connected with the earliest acts of assimilation, it must be that of the
satisfaction of a want, the stilling of pain in the form of hunger.


THE PROBLEM OF PERFECTIBILITY

In the earliest forms of propagation, the younger organism is a true
copy of that from which it springs, the trifling differences being due,
as Schmankewicz has shown, to outer influences. The differences of male,
female, worker, and soldier are due to such outer influences. The
differences in the younger organism, where propagation takes place
through copulation, may be explained by the mixture of types, through
which, by action and reaction, some qualities are intensified, while
some others become latent or are entirely destroyed. To these mutual
influences are to be added such as come from without, especially those
of warmth, and of quantity and quality of food. Under too great an
increase in temperature, the young organism may even be destroyed, the
process of assimilation not being able to keep pace with it. Those
variations which have led to the development of existing forms, that is,
which were favorable to life, are chiefly such as could be brought about
by relative or absolute increase of assimilation. This is true of
mental, as well as of physical, qualities.

It is a fact established without doubt, that the most common and most
widely distributed species show the greatest variability, and that those
species, on the contrary, which are now rare, although they were,
perhaps, at earlier periods, the most common and extremely variable,
vary, at the present date, the least of all. Following Darwin, one
generally draws the conclusion that the severity of the struggle for
existence favors the formation of varieties. For, it is said, the most
common species fight the severest battle with one another, while the
scanty representatives of rarer species come the least into competition
and continue unchanged. But this theory is, in two ways, erroneous. In
the first place, no attention is paid to the fact that a rare species
may be exposed to a severe struggle against another species for the same
nourishment, while a common species may, on the other hand, be exposed
to no such struggle, and, supporting life from a generous supply of
food, be subjected to but slight pressure. The conception of the
Darwinians means nothing more or less than that the individuals of a
species vary the more, the less favorable the conditions of nourishment;
and this cannot be conceded. Again, the fact is to be taken into
consideration, that the species at present common must have passed
through a favorable period in which food was so plentiful that it not
only afforded an abundance to individuals past the dangers of infancy
and youth, but allowed, in addition, the existence of an ever-increasing
number of individuals. And it is this period of increase, of abundance,
not a period of struggle, which has developed the variations we now have
before our eyes. In the same manner one must conclude, with regard to
the rarer species, that the formerly existing numerous varieties were
destroyed during the period of decline, that is, of overpowering
pressure. We have abundant proof of this in the fact that domesticated
species, which are carefully tended and fed, and so wholly withdrawn
from the struggle for existence, vary enormously, and produce the most
wonderful monstrosities.

To what direct causes the appearance of a variety is due, is a question
as yet unanswered. But Weismann's investigations have shown us that
climate plays a large part in their development. Embryology teaches us,
moreover, that the development of the young organism does not take place
with the same uniformity in all organs, but that, on the contrary, in
one period one organ, in another, another, undergoes a more rapid
growth, which may be influenced by variations in food or temperature.
Through such variations the development of monstrosities is explained.
We know that influences of nourishment are operative in the development
of the larvae of bees to workers or to queens, and we can easily conceive
that other organs besides the sexual are subject to these influences.
The field in which such influences may be operative is, indeed,
boundless.

All these considerations lead us to the conclusion that variability in
general, but especially that variability resulting in a so-called
improvement of the varieties producing it, is an accompaniment of
prosperous conditions. This is a conclusion not yet reached in zooelogy,
although botanists long ago recognized, in abundance of food, the most
essential condition for the development of variations.

Darwinism fails to account for any need of nourishment beyond that
necessary for the maintenance of the _status quo_ of life. According to
Darwin, the animal can acquire only sufficient for the repair of loss.
The struggle for existence is, therefore, according to him, a struggle
of self-defence, and its results could be, at the best, only the
maintenance of species in their present position or, in a less favorable
case, their decline, and finally their destruction. But this view is
wholly false. The animal acquires not only enough to repair loss, but
much more. How could the first amoeba have propagated itself, if it
consumed no more than it needed for mere self-maintenance, and how could
evolution have taken place? We have seen that, even in the inorganic
world, there is not an equality of loss and repair, but that, in osmose,
the denser fluid takes up more than it gives, while the fluid that is
less dense loses more than it receives, and the mutual exchange reaches
the maximum possible under the existing circumstances. It is this
characteristic which renders the involuntary and forced tendency of the
organism to satiation independent of the amount of waste; this
mechanical hunger is the spring of the insatiability of organisms, and
explains to us their increase in number, the process of increasing
perfection, and individual development. Without it, an eternity would
not have sufficed for evolution; we should still have only a world of
primitive amoebae.

This theory of development is, then, the opposite of that ordinarily
assumed. The latter asserts that increase of growth demands increase of
nourishment, whereas this asserts the fact that increase of nourishment
determines growth. The struggle for existence is not a struggle for the
mere necessaries to maintain life, but a struggle for increase of
acquisition, increase of life; it is not a struggle of defence, but an
attack which only under certain circumstances becomes a defence. The
rule with which we advise our friends is, "Forward! strive to better
yourself!" though we may endeavor, in hypocritical spirit, to persuade
to contentment those who come into competition with our interests.

The chief points, therefore, in which this theory differs from that of
Darwin, are as follows:--

"The struggle for existence is really a struggle for increase of
nourishment, of life; and independent of the supply of the moment, it
goes on at all times, hence even in a state of abundance.

"Limitation of supply by competition leads to fixation of the species
and, in the end, to its decrease and disappearance.

"Sickness, climate, and direct enemies are the destructive agencies, and
must secure more propitious conditions for survivors, the stronger their
effect.

"Only under conditions of prosperity can the survivors propagate
largely, and perfect themselves, separating into varieties and species.

"The increase and differentiation of the organic world shows us that
conditions of prosperity have been the rule, those of want the
exception."

Rolph's extremely interesting chapter on Propagation traces the sexual
instinct to the "mechanical hunger." The earliest example which may be
adduced in support of this theory is that of the zooespores which, by
copulation, sustain life for a time under the unfavorable conditions of
darkness, the thinner male representing, as does also the spermatozooen,
the seeking individual suffering from want, the female representing a
means of sustenance. The sex of the young organism is in like manner
referred by Rolph to conditions of nourishment during development. We
now come to the chapter on


ANIMAL OR NATURAL ETHICS

The existence of morality presupposes the existence of commandments of
duty, and of an authority. Among animals, as well as among human beings,
we find recognized authority and can discern the principles of action
which constitute the duty of any particular animal. Authority among the
lower animals is based on might, which is, indeed, the universal source
of authority, without which no authority can exist. Personal authority
is but a particular form of the authority of circumstances; and to this
authority every creature must be subject. It consists of two factors:
the outer authority of the environment, and the inner authority of
impulse. Duty is obedience to authority. The duty of the organism
consists in action that corresponds to these two authorities, following
the direction given as the resultant of the mixture of the two
components. That is, that manner of life is right or moral which renders
the life of the organism the fullest possible under the circumstances.
The unreasoning organism is unconsciously drawn to seek this maximum,
while the reasoning being seeks it through reflection. The impulse to
happiness includes, therefore, for the reasoning being, the impulse to
morality; or, ideally expressed, the relative morality equals the
relative happiness; morality and happiness are the same thing.

An authority without the means of enforcing itself is a
self-contradiction. The means by which nature makes its authority felt
is organic excitation. In proportion to its strength, an excitation
produces sensation, in case it is not too weak to make itself felt at
all. Every excitation has a definite significance and may come from
without or within. Pleasant excitations are always, primarily, the
feeling of the stilling of pain, though there are pains, such as, for
instance, that of a wound, the toothache, headache, an aching corn,
which have no corresponding feeling of pleasure. Nor is pleasure the
only offspring of pain, since pain may bring forth pain. Pleasure
depends, in its character as pleasure as well as in its strength, on the
feeling preceding it in the organism; that is, its quality is the
result, not of the degree of organic excitation, but of the order of
succession of the feelings. For this reason, the same feeling which
brings pleasure to one individual may bring pain to another.

This whole deduction is at variance with Spencer's theory that
pleasurable excitations are favorable to life, painful ones injurious.
And since observation is in direct opposition to his assertion, his
followers have been obliged to supplement it with the conception that
pain is gradually weeded out by natural selection. On the contrary, we
need pain at every instant, since it is the impulse to action;
persistence in the same condition through lack of excitation, must
result in death; pleasure can never originate action, it can only cause
persistence in action already begun. The fact has been too often
overlooked, that the motive and the "end" of an action are by no means
the same. The motive is pain, and the end is either simply the stilling
of pain or an additional positive pleasure. There are, therefore, many
actions which are directed to no concrete positive end, but only to the
purely negative end of escape from pain without consideration of the
further results; a striking example of such action is suicide. Even
where positive pleasure appears as an end, it is never in itself the
motive to action. In order to become a motive, it must first be
transformed into an excitation, into desire for pleasure; and this
desire for a definite or an indefinite pleasure is, in its essence,
pain--the pain of the absence of pleasure.[60]

The pleasure sought may be one already known through experience, or it
may be one not yet experienced. In the latter case, the desire is
awakened by instruction or reflection, or else induced by instinct. But
the motive is always the same, namely, a seeking after pleasure, hence a
feeling of pain.

This view furnishes us with a psychical explanation of the association
of ideas, the mysterious so-called transferrence of the feeling of
pleasure from the end to the means. Pleasure begins as soon as we have
begun the action which will bring us with certainty to the end desired,
and this pleasure may reach such a degree of strength at some point of
the process as to conquer the desire for the real end, hem further
action, and dispose to continuance at the point reached. The action of
the miser may be thus explained.

The objection that, if pain is the motive, the organism is nothing but a
bundle of pains, is by no means valid, for it overlooks the fact that
pain remains, in an immense number of cases, below the threshold of
consciousness; as in the case of organic action, where it is rhythmic.
The same is true of reflex action. To any close observer of the lower
organisms, it seems most probable that these possess consciousness (see
Wundt, "Physiologische Psychologie"), nor is it by any means proved that
the plants do not possess it likewise. It is certainly remarkable that
exactly the lowest plants, which stand so near the animals in the
phenomena of their life, exhibit movements closely resembling those of
animals. And it is, moreover, a fact that automatic and reflex actions
increase with the degree of organization, and are most numerous in human
beings. With increased exercise, one chain of movements after the other
is withdrawn from consciousness; and through this removal from
consciousness action gains in certainty and rapidity, and in energy
also, since the part of the force which was before lost in inducing
consciousness is now released. Such removal from consciousness is,
therefore, a benefit to the organism, as an adaptation to the increased
demands of circumstances. Movements which thus become unconscious are
each and every one of them movements which have but one definite end and
an interruption of which either kills or seriously injures the organism,
or at least brings disorder into its life for the time being. An easily
excited consciousness would be an exceeding danger to the animal.
Conscious action is directed to the attainment of variable ends by means
which are also variable. It cannot, therefore, astonish us that
consciousness disappeared in plants after the loss of free motion.

By the regular exercise of certain actions or of trains of thought,
either through necessity or by habit certain tracks are worn or taken
possession of, so that the whole process, from the excitation to the
action resulting upon it, takes place with such rapidity that we are no
longer conscious of its separate phases and so of the growth of the
result.

The first commandment of animal ethics is, therefore: "Flee pain"; and
closely associated with it is a second commandment furnished by the
insatiability of the organism, the impulse to happiness, to increase of
life. The principle of Spencer's ethics, according to which normal
living is right living, would result in stagnation. Right living
consists, on the contrary, in progress, in passing beyond the normal. No
educator would hesitate for an instant to pronounce the continuance of a
pupil upon a present normal immoral, and to oppose it with all his
powers. From day to day the developing organism advances the line of its
normal activity. And as in the individual, so in the species: every new
generation exceeds in a certain measure the activity of the last. Not
rest, but motion, constitutes the normal; not rest, but motion, is
happiness, and the spring of happiness. Not that being which has no
wants, but that which develops and satisfies the greatest possible
number of wants, is the happiest, leads the most pleasurable life. When
we apply these principles to the animals, we reach the conception that
all such as lead a solitary life live morally when they endeavor, with
all their powers, to better their own condition. That they injure plants
and other animals in so doing need not trouble us, since they are forced
to do so in order to maintain life. The principle on which animal life
is based is hence preeminently egoistic and acknowledges no other right
than that of might. Spencer, in speaking of altruism on the lowest plane
of animal life, makes the fundamental and quite fatal mistake that he
does not first sharply and distinctly define egoism. Had he done this,
he would certainly have found that, for egoism, as for altruism, the
criterion of consciousness, of will, is indispensable. In his definition
of altruism as consisting in those acts which in any way benefit others,
he does nothing less than get rid of egoism altogether, since there are
no acts which do not, in the end, benefit others than the performer. The
greater number of the young brought forth by lowest organisms serve as
food for other species, and hence the parent animal, in bringing forth
such numbers, favors these species rather than her own flesh and blood.
The fly would act altruistically, according to Spencer's definition, in
being caught in the net of the spider.

A creature which gets its food, as do many of the lower species, without
exertion of its own, does not act egoistically, nor does the animal
which, in the natural course of its growth, brings forth young by
spontaneous division; but that animal may do so which acquires its food
by means of any voluntary actions, however insignificant, or which
voluntarily protects and cares for its young; and such voluntary action
increases rather than decreases with greater organization. Real egoism
begins with the voluntary acquisition of food, a process continued in
the forced excretion of the young. But since this action benefits the
second generation, we may regard it as the connecting link between
egoism and altruism. It is not purely altruistic; altruism proper begins
with the nourishment and care of the young. And to what degree we have a
right to consider even this as really altruistic can be determined only
by further investigation. The emptying of the milk-glands is combined
with pleasure; it may therefore be regarded as primarily egoistic, and
furnishes us with a further example of the development of altruism from
egoism. Altruism increases, not only with higher organization, but also
with a higher development of social life.

The beginnings of society are to be found in the family life of animals;
the most primitive form of this is the temporary, voluntary association
of male and female among the higher species; that is, the anthropoids
and vertebrates. On this merely temporary association follows, as a
higher stage, the lasting family union, which exists among comparatively
few animals. The so-called "states" of the animals are, in their most
typical instances, nothing but families living in a condition of
polyandry.

Closer association gives opportunity for a misuse of the powers and aims
of the individual, before impossible. Examples of this are the theft of
honey from one hive of bees by the workers of another, and the carrying
off of the young by wasps and ants, as also the slaughter of the drones.
Since the robber of yesterday may be the robbed of to-day, such acts are
harmful to individuals, to the family, and to the species. They diminish
the degree of life, and are opposed to animal ethics. The association of
male and female, since only temporary, affords little opportunity for
immorality, and the duties of parents to their young are, for the most
part, faithfully performed. In striking contrast to the natural morality
of wild animals is the immorality of domestic animals, which give
themselves up to every sort of vice when not restrained. The moral
conditions of any associated animals not under control, whether in
zooelogical gardens, in the town, or in the country, is, in fact,
monstrous. Immorality increases with the closer association of animals.
The closer the contact and the looser the bond between the individuals
of a species, the greater the opportunity for immorality, and the worse
the resulting habits. The careless life of pleasure led by animals that
live in solitude, is interfered with, in a state of association, by
certain duties. How far the performance of such duties springs from a
concealed pleasure, or from instinct, or follows upon the command of
authority, we, unfortunately, cannot say. The limitation of
gratification signifies, however, decrease of pleasure. The needs of
different animals differ according to differing organization; higher
organization means greater and more complicated desire, the satisfaction
of which is often impossible, but it means also the attainment of
capacity for greater pleasure in form and intensity. Hence even the
partly attained pleasure of the higher animals is, in intensity as well
as in fulness, much greater than the completely attained pleasure of the
lower animals.


HUMANE ETHICS

Rolph contests Lubbock's theory that the early type of man lived in a
condition of sexual promiscuity, and gives as a reason for his opinion
the "strict" monogamy of those animals which are most closely related to
man. The customs of such animals should have as much weight, as
evidence, as those of any of the present tribes of savages, since these
tribes are as old as civilized races, and their customs cannot,
therefore, be unhesitatingly regarded as primary ones.

The real needs of men, those the gratification of which is indispensable
to the maintenance of life, are few. By experience, and by experience
alone, can man learn that present gratification may mean future pain,
and so be withheld from such gratification; for only disinclination to
one form of pleasure can induce inclination to another form. In the
simplicity of primitive social conditions and the uniform character of
action under such conditions, rules of experience must have been early
formed, which, inherited by succeeding generations, became the rules of
conduct.[61] With the development of authority,--first the paternal
authority, then that of the family, and finally that of the elders of
the tribe,--the possibility of establishing rules of action, and
inducing morality, increased. The very nomination of elders, to which
primitive authority may almost everywhere be traced, shows how great was
the respect for experience.

Spencer remarks, in one place in his "Data of Ethics," that human beings
first banded themselves together because they found it more advantageous
to cooeperate. This is only conditionally true. Before human beings could
find association advantageous, they must have accumulated experience of
it. That they did this by their own inclination is certainly not true.
Wherever we find two solitary beings coming together by chance, enmity
is the first feeling excited, and war the result. Everything new,
everything unknown, causes aversion, and this aversion must lead to
misunderstandings and war the more surely because each of the opponents
feels himself disturbed in his supposed right to limitless possession.
Human beings must first have warred with one another before they came to
the knowledge, not that social life, that is, mutual forbearance, was
more advantageous, but that more closely associated individuals gained
in power against a common enemy by their association. Man did not choose
society, but was, on the contrary, forced into it, for good or evil,
through increase of his kind. The discovery of the first tools must have
had an immense influence upon increase in the number of individuals,
which was before limited by struggle with wild animals, and by the
restriction of food to fruit. We must conclude that, under such
circumstances, a lasting contract was inevitable, and that, with it,
vices suddenly appeared which had before existed only potentially, as
predisposition. War or theft must have followed the mutual limitation of
rights, but against this disturbance of the peace other members of the
society must have banded themselves together. The weaker must soon have
been driven from their possessions by the stronger, and must then have
united for the purpose of obtaining, by association, what they were
unable to acquire otherwise. The growing children settled near their
parents, with whom they entered into a family union, in which the father
represented the authority. In this arrangement is the germ of civil
order,--of the ideas of right and wrong. Inner conflicts can at first
scarcely have occurred, since the possessions of the family were in
common, and a conception of theft between members of the family could
not exist. Furthermore, there was scarcely anything worth stealing, for
the implements must have been so primitive that each individual could
easily manufacture them for himself. Only women could have been, in the
beginning, an object of conflict, and for avoidance of this conflict
laws and customs arose, which are, to our modern minds, inexplicable.
Real polyandry may doubtless be explained by the idea of the common
right of possession among brothers; it has, in most cases, this
significance. It is extended, indeed, later, to more distant relatives,
and gains finally a solemn significance, the presentation of the wife,
or of one of a number of wives, being a symbol of fraternity by which
the guest is honored.

With the manufacture of better tools and weapons, temptation to theft
was increased, and authority began to be directed inwards to the society
itself, since inner conflict injured the family in its contests with
outer enemies. What is true of the family in this connection, is true of
the tribe. A joint egoism of the society as a whole must thus have been
developed, as soon as the first step of association was taken. The
earliest law is always negative, a prohibition, not a positive command.

War had its good as well as its evil side, since it made different
peoples acquainted and gave them knowledge of each other's tools,
weapons, and customs. War was, at first, the only means by which peoples
learned to know each other. The establishment of peace led to the union
of different peoples, or at least to peaceful intercourse by exchange,
which united the tribes by common interests, corrected ideas, and
tempered customs.

The egoistic impulses, the feeling of unconditional right to possession,
are the impulses with which the child is born; morality is not inborn,
but must be developed by education, as is shown by the example of such
children as are neglected in education.[62] Or, if there is anything
innate in the direction of morality, it is merely a certain inherited
predisposition acquired in the course of the thousands of years of
social intercourse, which makes it easier for us to respond to
education. If this is not so, and the impulse to morality is innate, why
has it required so many centuries for man to make the simple connection
of ideas, that what is just towards one man is just towards another. In
this feeling of justice, acquired through an extension of egoism, is the
root of all virtue. It is the spring of sympathy or benevolence, which
can be developed only where the feeling of the like rights of others is
strong.

But an unconsidered over-estimate of this feeling is the source of
Spencer's Utopia, as it is of that of present socialism. We have seen
that authority is a primary and necessary factor of society. Authority,
virtue, and duty are interdependent, and must be of about the same
antiquity. From all compulsion imposed by authority, the creature, by
its nature, attempts to escape, and the feeling which prompts this
attempt has been falsely called the instinct of freedom. Authority
exceeds its bounds, where it issues commands not demanded by the general
conditions existing in the society. But though these conditions may
demand a limitation of personal freedom, their requirements must,
nevertheless, in general, be enforced.

Natural and Humane Ethics may thus be at variance in some things; may in
others, coincide. There is no necessary conflict and no necessary
agreement between them; therefore the theological theory of an absolute
contradiction between them is false, as is also the teleological theory
of their coincidence. The latter theory, not being able to deny that the
moral and the natural do not always coincide under present
circumstances, endeavors to avoid the difficulty by calling these
conditions abnormal. The theory falls into two errors: in the first
place, it ignores the fact that we have our organs, not _for_ use but
_by_ use; and that our inherited characteristics may be regarded as an
adjustment to the conditions of our ancestors, but not an adjustment to
our own; and in the second place, there are no abnormal conditions.
There are new or changed conditions, but either there are no abnormal
ones, or all are abnormal.

But although increase of life means also increase of desire, although
the organism is insatiable, yet there is, as we have seen, an increase
of happiness, both in quantity and quality, with higher organization.
The absolute amount is increased, but not the relative amount, the
amount realizable in proportion to desire.

Want does not lead to improvement, as Darwin maintains, and the
individual cannot be just or sympathetic in a condition of want. The
freer he is from the direct care of the acquirement of necessities, the
more manifold capabilities will he develop, and the greater will be his
happiness.

The task which authority must set itself, in order to secure greater
justice in society, and so greater happiness, is twofold, a positive and
a negative task. The positive task consists in such an education of the
young as will enable them by their own effort to advance towards their
individual ideal of happiness, and in the inculcation of such an ideal
as corresponds to their individual talents and means, and is attainable
under the existing circumstances. The negative task, already implied in
the positive one, is the imposition of necessary restrictions in the
means used for the attainment of happiness. Within the limits set by
justice, the individual has a natural right to seek his own pleasure,
and for each individual an attainable maximum may be reckoned. This is
not saying, however, that the individual has a just claim to this
maximum, in case he cannot, or will not, be sufficiently energetic to
gain it by his own efforts. It is an error of modern times to suppose
that the realization of happiness rests in any other hand than that of
the individual himself--that the state can make and decree happiness.
Happiness cannot be secured by means of decrees, by a division of goods,
or by gifts. Division is always unjust, since it leaves out of
consideration that individuality of character which is the only measure
of sensibility to pleasure. The negative part of the task is to be
accomplished less by inculcation of many special virtues than by the
continual direction of the attention to the fundamental virtue of
justice. The positive task is to be accomplished by the most thorough
education of the intelligence of the individual, through which he shall
learn to inquire the reason of moral precepts, to judge for himself, and
then to act on the decision he arrives at. We have seen that the ethical
education of the present time tends to reduce inner struggle, rendering
the results of wrong-doing as repellant as possible. One in whom has
been instilled a very terrible conception of the sufferings resulting,
in the present and future life, from wrong-doing, will perhaps
automatically avoid the evil; and the means for a moral education seem
thus attained. However, it is not so; for when the individual accustoms
himself to being directed in action, not by his own carefully won
experience, but by feelings instilled by others, concerning the ethical
character of which his own insight does not, and cannot, afford him any
explanation, he opens the way to every chance influence, and becomes the
plaything of unknown forces; while he at the same time divests himself
of that personal responsibility without which no society can exist. The
true ideal of education is such as sharpens the judgment and accustoms
the individual to consider his action from all sides, in the
consciousness of personal responsibility. Only through such action is
man the possessor of freedom. He who acts without reflection, from
unreliable emotion, is not free. The freest possible decision is that
which is reached as the result of such a careful consideration of all
the single components of reflection that no one of them exceeds in its
influence its real worth. The ideal of education is not, therefore, the
production of spontaneous decision and action, but of reasoning,
conscious action. That this principle is the only right one is shown by
our former observations, according to which, as society develops, more
and more actions are the result of reflection. And in case a state of
moral perfection is attainable, it can be arrived at only as each member
of the society acts from perfect reflection, not from impulse or
instinct. In attempting social improvement, we must take example by the
chemist, who does not attempt a chemical combination by force but
endeavors to attain the conditions under which the elements will unite,
through their own inner laws, to the desired, homogeneous body. This is
a wearisome process; but it is the shortest and swiftest, for it leads
us to the desired end.

The single virtues cannot be regarded as ideal principles. They
contradict each other, and whether the one or the other should have the
preference depends on the individual case and can be decided only by
reflection. The formulation of these general rules of conduct under the
name of virtues has, practically, only the advantage of reducing the
numberless possibilities of action to a few; but such principles can
never be exhaustive. Wherever the individual forgets this fact and is
led to regard virtue as an end, instead of as the means to an innocent
happiness, virtue ceases to be virtue and becomes its opposite. Thus
thrift becomes avarice, generosity extravagance, courage foolhardiness,
openness want of consideration, gentleness weakness, and chastity
celibacy. The single virtues are only abstractions from special
circumstances generalized to an ideal of action. But in practical life,
we have to do with individual cases whose conditions are by no means
ideal, and cannot be treated as ideal. We must act, in each case, for
the relative best, not for absolute good; and what is best for one sex
or in one society may not be best for the other sex or in another
society. A compromise between idealism and realism is everywhere
necessary; and such a compromise is made, despite all fine words to the
contrary, by every one,--by one only more openly or consciously than
another. It is comforting to remark that mankind shows itself, and
always has shown itself, instinctively taking the road to the attainment
of the end.

Through an extension of relations, authority, at first represented by a
single individual, the head of the family or tribe, reaches the point of
development where the one ruler is unable to rule all parts, and decide
all questions, alone, so that he is obliged to call in help. He
naturally chooses men near to him, with whose character he is
acquainted. But there arises, by this division of authority, the danger
of its misuse to the disadvantage of the ruler himself. Since despotic
government depends on might alone, and the voice of the people has no
influence, every person in any way related to the ruler represents a
danger. Nevertheless, the establishment of new powers to assist the
ruler was the starting-point of constitutional government. For by this
division of power the ruler rendered it impossible for himself to govern
without help from others, and opened the way to a contract of compromise
with the people. The influence of individuals upon the state spread,
thus, to the people itself. Self-government, pure parliamentarism, is
the ultimate end to be reached by the process.

We have seen that neither pleasure, nor utility, nor virtue, nor,
finally, religion, can be regarded as the absolute means, but only as
the relative means to the attainment of happiness. Both the hedonist and
the utilitarian need to correct and further define their principle, as
well in respect to the end to be attained, as in respect to the means
proposed. Their principles are not to be rejected, but fanaticism is to
be condemned. Principles may have exceptions; but fanaticism recognizes
no exceptions.

As to man's final end. Though he has attained to the power of shaping,
to some extent, his own environment and means of existence, yet he does
not occupy an exceptional position in the animal kingdom, and must cease
to exist unless he submits to adapt himself. It has been almost the rule
that the highest animals of an epoch have later died out and been
replaced by some new aristocracy, developed from somewhat lower forms.
It is to be supposed that man, also, will be destroyed, whether by a new
ice-age or by a period of heat. By the very fact of his supremacy, he
disturbs the primal equilibrium, and originates conditions which, even
now, press hard upon single lands and may easily become dangerous to all
civilization. Destruction may also threaten mankind morally, for the
development of morality hitherto gives no surety of its continuance.
Every advancement brings with it some evil, every virtue contains the
germs of some vice. Modern humanity has given us an unreasoning
soft-heartedness, with an extravagant malady of forgiveness which is
nothing less than immorality itself, since it on the one hand undermines
the general sense of justice, while on the other it prompts and
encourages wrong-doing.

FOOTNOTES:

[58] For further arguments in support of this assertion, see
"Biologische Probleme," pp. 64-66, etc.

[59] Und da diese Flaeche durch Zelltheilung oder Fortpflanzung
vergroessert wird, so waechst die Aufnahmefaehigkeit des Organismus mit der
Fortpflanzungsfaehigkeit desselben (p. 67).

[60] Und diese Begierde... ist ihrem innersten Kerne nach, eine Unlust,
ein Leid: das Leid des Entbehrens des Genusses (p. 176).

[61] Bei der Binfachheit der primitiven socialen Verhaeltnisse und der
Einfoermigkeit der Lebenstaetigkeit muessen sich bald Erfahrungsregeln
gebildet haben, die nun durch Vererbung uebertragen und damit zu
Lebensregeln vertieft wurden (p. 195).

[62] Compare _supra_, p. 100, note.




ALFRED BARRATT


Alfred Barratt's "Physical Ethics" (1869) deals with First Principles,
"Pure," as distinguished from "Applied," Ethics, the aim of the science,
as stated by the author, being "to try to establish the first principle
which is the condition of further progress. If we can establish a
principle _a priori_, and then verify its universality by an appeal to
mental phenomena and to philosophical theories, its existence as a fact
will be made certain; if, in addition to this, we can connect it with
laws still more general and with the family of natural sciences, it will
be no longer a fact, but become a scientific law, a section of the
universal code; and the title of this essay will be justified."

_Part First_ of "Physical Ethics" is occupied with the statement of
axioms, definitions, and propositions "derived from general experience."
They are as follows:--

"_Axiom 1._--Actions, like objects, are capable of being classified
according to their properties, and of being measured by a definite
standard.

"_Obs._--This axiom merely means that the qualities of actions, like
those of objects, are fixed and constant, so that the same action has
always the same properties and moral value, and, under the same
circumstances, always produces the same effect.... It follows from this
axiom that it is possible to act so as to attain a definite object, and
thus a general end of action may be arrived at....

"_Axiom 2._--The end of action (being some common property or effect) is
a possible object of knowledge.

"_Axiom 3._--We are capable of being affected by any external object
only through our faculties, or (in other words) as a part of our
consciousness.

"_Axiom 4._--Faculties are known only by their action, or (in other
words) so far as they are portions of our consciousness.

"_Axiom 5._--The sphere of action lies in the adaptation of 'inner' to
'outer' sequences, of faculties to the laws of nature.

"_Axiom 6._--The constitution of man and other animal beings is an
organism consisting of a number of parts, each having its appropriate
function, and the end of each part results from the performance of its
function.

"_Axiom 7._--Approbation is the standard whereby we judge of the moral
value of actions, and is the universal mark of the due performance of a
function and of the attainment of an end."


DEFINITIONS

"1. Good is the object of moral approbation. The highest good is,
therefore, the ultimate object of such approbation, the end of action.

"2. Pleasure is that state of consciousness which follows upon the
unimpeded performance (as such) of its function, by one or more of the
parts of our organism."


PROPOSITION I

"The Good is relative to our faculties. For no object can affect us
except through our faculties (Axiom 3); but to be known by us is to
affect us;

"Therefore, nothing can be known except through our faculties, or (in
other words) except in relation to our faculties;

"But the Good, or End of Action, is a possible object of knowledge
(Axiom 2);

"Hence the Good is relative to our faculties.

"_Corollary 1._--The highest good of man at any time is relative to his
faculties at that time.

"_Corollary 2._--Since ideas derive their elements from experience, the
idea of perfect Good, or God, can only be an idealization of humanity.


PROPOSITION II

"The Good is a state of Consciousness. For, the Good is a possible
object of knowledge (Axiom 2); but all objects of knowledge are states
of consciousness;

"Hence the Good is a state of Consciousness. Or, the Good exists (or is
capable of being known) only by affecting our faculties, or, in other
words, only as an affection of our faculties (Proposition I);

"But an affection of our faculties is a state of consciousness;

"Hence the Good exists only as a state of consciousness.

"_Obs._--... To speak of anything existent external to our
consciousness, is, as we saw, a pure hypothesis, incapable of proof,
perfectly unintelligible and void of utility. When, therefore, we make
use of the ordinary dualistic phraseology, we must remember that the two
worlds there distinguished are merely two divisions of the universe of
self considered as distinct for convenience of language, but differing
only as two classes comprehended under a common genus.


PROPOSITION III

"The Good is relative to circumstances. For, the Good is determined by,
and therefore lies in action (Axioms 7, 6, Obs.); but Action is relative
to circumstances (Axiom 5). Hence the Good is relative to circumstances.


PROPOSITION IV

"The Good depends upon the adaptation of faculties to circumstances.

"For, the Good is identical with the end (Def.); which results from the
performance of function by each part of the organism (Axiom 6).

"But the function of each part is its adaptation to circumstances
(Axioms 5, 6): Hence the Good depends upon the adaptation of faculties
to circumstances.

"_Corollary._--Since man is an organism composed of parts (Axiom 6), the
whole good of man is the sum of the goods of his parts, and therefore
depends upon the adaptation of all his parts to their corresponding
circumstances.


PROPOSITION V

"The Good is Pleasure.

"For the good results from the due performance of functions (Prop. IV);
but the Good is a state of consciousness (Prop. II), therefore the Good
is the state of consciousness which results from the due performance of
functions (as such). Hence (by Definition), the Good is Pleasure.

"_Obs._--By our definitions of Good and Pleasure it was evident that
they were coextensive, being both marks of the same thing; to prove
their identity it was necessary to show that Good is a state of
consciousness."

Of these propositions Barratt says that I and II are perhaps the most
important, since they assert the impossibility of Transcendentalism.

_Part Second_ of "Physical Ethics" is a "Verification by Special
Experience."


THE ORIGIN OF THE MORAL SENSE

The assumption of a moral sense has already been made in the definition
of Good as the object of Approbation.

Our previous reasoning would lead us nevertheless to guess that this
sense is not, in its nature, a simple and indecomposable faculty. How,
then, did this sense arise, and what is its nature and composition?

In the lowest animal organization, there are merely vague and indefinite
states of consciousness corresponding to the undeveloped state of
physical function. With the development and specialization of advancing
evolution arises Perception; by which likeness and unlikeness among
sensations are distinguished, and classification is begun.

"At first only the most obvious resemblances are noticed, but as
experience progresses, wider and wider classes ever tend to be formed,
till at last we arrive at those highest ideas which are coextensive with
experience. These, though the last in order of birth, become the
starting-points of science--just as men formed the idea of stones
falling long before they discovered the law of attraction, yet by that
law they afterwards 'explain' the former fact. Thus we trace the whole
of Perception or Knowledge to this power of comparison and noting
likenesses, and this we see to be coincident with the organization of
consciousness into central meeting-places or ganglia, in which different
sensations are presented to a common tribunal and so compared together.
We see, therefore, that Perception does not originate consciousness; it
only organizes and develops it. We cannot, therefore, agree with Mr.
Herbert Spencer, who will not allow consciousness to the lowest
animals."[63]

The process of perception or Knowledge works, not only on states of
consciousness themselves, but on the changes from one state to another,
or, in other words, on relations. Thus results, on the one hand,
recognition of objects; on the other, argument and reasoning, for the
most abstruse reasoning is nothing more than a classification of
relations.

"We have now, therefore, two distinct divisions of Consciousness:
_Sensation_, which as before consists only of pleasure and pain, though
now of different kinds; and _Perception_, which classifies states of
consciousness and their relations, and is therefore concerned only with
change. Knowledge, therefore, has originally no other object than
different pleasures and pains, but eventually it attends so much to the
differences and resemblances that it ceases to remember the pleasure or
pain; in its absorption in the relation it well-nigh forgets the things
related. This process is furthered by the fact that, as the medium gets
more extended, each part of it has less average effect upon the
organism: the primary pleasures and pains being spread over a larger
surface are less intense, and so obtrude themselves less. This is
exemplified by the common observation that sensation and perception tend
to exclude each other.... Nevertheless pleasure and pain ever remain
indissolubly connected with consciousness, though their presence is
often unheeded, and only the more violent forms force themselves on the
attention.

"What is true of these simple forms of consciousness, is true of their
later development. The relation of sensation to perception is the same
as that between the faculties of which these are respectively the germs,
emotion and intellect. For emotion is associated sensations of pleasure
and pain; and intellect is associated perceptions of change and
relation. Hence by their very nature these are at once mutually
exclusive and inseparable. A strong emotion drives out reason, and much
reasoning chills emotion.... Yet we can give _some_ reason for any
emotion; and we feel some emotion in working a mathematical problem....
In every intentional act it is evident that both are involved; the end
being given by emotion, the means by reasoning. Reasoning can give no
end, it can only arrange, elicit, suggest; emotion can give no means,
for it cannot classify or observe relations. In the building up,
therefore, of any moral faculty, both these elements must take a part.
Hence it will be well to trace, a little more closely, their mode of
formation, and their connection with muscular activity.

"When in the course of experience a certain sequence of sensation
frequently recurs, the consciousness becomes habituated to it, and the
return of the first sensation is followed by an idea or associative
image of the others.... Hence the idea of pleasure or pain not actually
felt comes to be associated with objects, which, if placed in certain
different positions, would effect us in the way imagined.... Pleasure
may thus be associated through a train of ideas of any length.... After
a time this process becomes organic, the intermediate terms are lost,
and pleasure is _directly_ connected with sensations and ideas that are
in themselves not distinctly pleasurable.

"Now by various trains of association, various pleasures and pains are
connected with the same object. These different combinations of
pleasures and pains, some of which arise, before reasoning, by
unintentional association, but the higher of which are the results of
automatization of reasoning, form the different emotions....

"Action in its origin is simply the correlative of sensation.
Contractility and irritability are the two general properties of vital
tissue, or rather are two sides of one fundamental property which is
also known under the name of sensibility--the power of contraction under
irritation, or of expressing impressed force. Irritability means merely
the phenomena of consciousness, the development of which we have
hitherto been tracing, though we have been throughout obliged to express
ourselves in the language of the inner, and not of the outer
experience.... This internal development we have already examined; we
must now turn to the obverse external development which takes its origin
in contractility.

"The connection between these two fundamental properties is exceedingly
intimate, that of ultimate identity or at any rate inseparability. For
not only is contraction universally the result of irritation, but the
only evidence that we have of irritation is the contraction which
follows, and in their early stages the two represent one and the same
process. When, however, the expression, in action, of force impressed
in sensation, becomes indirect and immediate, the name of irritability
is given to the _immediate_, internal results of its impression, while
contractility expresses the action _ultimately_ expressed. Hence the
seat of irritability is preeminently the nervous system, while
contractility, or the _vis musculosa_, is the name of the special
property of the muscular tissue.

"Considering them however in their origin, they together represent a
certain form of the transmission of force.... Some kinds of impressed
force are followed by movements of retraction and withdrawal, others by
such as secure a continuance of the impression. These two kinds of
contraction are the phenomena and external marks of pain and pleasure
respectively. Hence the tissue acts so as to secure pleasure and avoid
pain by a law as truly physical and natural as that whereby a needle
turns to the pole, or a tree to the light.... Hence, the law of
Self-Conservation, or of the direction of Action, is merely another mode
of expressing the fundamental property of animal tissue, which we have
every reason to believe is derived from the more elementary physical
properties of matter. The course of action is just as dependent on
physical laws as that of a stone which falls to the ground. The belief
in external consciousness makes no difference either way; the earliest
phenomena of such consciousness are those of pleasure and pain,
therefore we can suppose it to exist only as pleasure and pain. In the
one case we say that action aims at, or naturally results in, the
phenomena of pleasure; in the other case that it aims at the actual
consciousness of pleasure.

"The expression of impressed force, or the connection of action and
sensation, is at first in the unorganized tissue direct and immediate,
without the agency of nervous communication, or to return again to the
ordinary psychological language, is unintentional or involuntary.... The
earliest modification is due to association, whereby secondary
sensations, or (as they are called later when they become perceived)
ideas are produced. These manifest themselves as weaker repetitions of
the primary pleasures and pains, and, therefore, are naturally followed
by like results.... The process is this: the force originally impressed
by the first sensation, instead of being all expressed in action, is
partly induced by habituation into an internal channel, and so
transformed into the kind of force which generally impresses the second
kind of sensation, and this now produces its appropriate action. Hence
part of the original force has undergone two transformations instead of
one; the immediate antecedent of action being the force produced by
association, or in other words, the associated pleasure. This is the
rudiment of _motive_, which, however, is not generally called by that
name till it is _perceived_. The same process may go on through two or
more links of association; the first transformed force being again
transformed internally instead of expressed, and the second again in its
turn, until eventually a transformation is reached which finds its
easiest way of escape in action; the immediate motive power being that
transformation of force, or that associated pleasure, which immediately
precedes the action. Actions of this kind constitute the lower phenomena
of instinct: and we see therefore that they may depend on any number of
links of unperceived, or, as we say, unconscious reasoning; and that
their motive is also 'unconscious.' These actions stand half way between
Reflex and Voluntary Actions....

"We now come to the third and last development of associated action.
Here not only is each associated idea perceived, but the change, in each
case, is also a fresh centre of association; whereby similar changes are
connected with it, and it is referred to a class. Hence the whole train
is perceived, not only by the classification of each of its parts with
similar previous sensations, but by the classification of each of its
sequences with previous like sequences: in other words, it is now a
chain of reasoning from the past to the present. That associated
pleasure from which this reasoned train commences is now called the
_motive_ (though really the immediate motive power lies in the last
transformation which directly precedes the active expression) and the
series of ideas intervening between this and the action is called the
_means_. Hence the motive associates the means, and the motive power is
transmitted through them till it is finally expressed in the action
which is appropriate to the attainment of the pleasurable state whose
idea is its source. This association of means with ends is at first
sight opposed to the natural direction, which is from antecedent to
consequent; but when a line of nervous connection is formed, a current
may be transmitted indifferently in either direction. An effect may lead
us to think of its cause, as easily as a cause associates its effect.
By the sequence of action and sensation, a connection is established
between their ideas, which is independent of the order of excitation.
This last kind of action is that which we call voluntary, and the series
of classified ideas and relations which lead to it is called Reasoning.
If at any point the current is attracted in two or more directions by
different trains of association, deliberation is the result; and the
eventual victory of one and the consequent transmission of the force
along it is entitled Will.

"We have therefore distinguished four kinds of action: _Reflex Action_,
which is purely physical and independent of association, and which is
the last link in all the derived varieties; _Lower Instinctive Action_,
which is caused by the first introduction of association, and is hardly
to be distinguished in its phenomena from the last;... _Higher
Instinctive Action_, which involves perception of qualities or
objects;... and finally, _Voluntary_ or _Intentional Action_, such as we
find it in man.... Though we have separated these classes from each
other for clearness of description, there is no distinct line to be
drawn anywhere between them. Each fades insensibly into the next....
Evolution, we must remember, does not advance by stages; these are
merely marks that we make ourselves, like the constellations in
astronomy, for convenience of study.

"Finally, we must remark that the last two kinds of Action ever tend to
relapse into the second, which subjectively is a mere form of the first.
Association of all kinds tends to become organic. By this we mean that,
as the connection becomes more definitely marked and easy, the perpetual
radiation which occurs as the current passes the different points on its
path, disappears; and the whole current passes unimpaired. First, the
radiation caused by the changes disappears, and reasoning becomes
instinct, as in doing a mathematical example from mere memory of the
different steps. Secondly, the radiation from the different nervous
centres also disappears, and the current which ends in action becomes
not only unreasoning but unperceived, as in walking or reading aloud
while thinking of something else....

"Long habituation has two effects: it increases the number of trains
connected with each object, and also the length of each. If we suppose
the simpler emotions to have, by this time, become organic or apparently
simple states of consciousness, a continuance of association tends to
connect them together in bundles, as they themselves were originally
bundles of elementary pleasures and pains. Hence the emotions become
organized in their turn so as to form higher emotions, and eventually,
when association has completed its work,... this organization ends in
one supreme emotion, which is the head of the emotional or sensitive
side of the consciousness....

"Turning next to the second effect of prolonged habituation, we find
that, with objects or actions with which pleasure was at first
associated and which so were called pleasurable, further association
often connects a subsequent pain which increased experience has shown
always to follow upon the immediate pleasure. This pain often more than
counterbalances the preceding pleasure; hence when it is taken into the
emotion, that emotion becomes one no longer of appetition but of
aversion, and the object or action is remembered as one not to be sought
after but avoided. It cannot, however, be called painful, because it
causes immediate pleasure, so a new name has to be invented, and it is
called Bad, or Evil. Similarly, many things which are immediately
associated with pain are found to be eventually followed by pleasure
which more than counterbalances the pain, and as this experience becomes
consolidated by the power of association, they attract rather than
repel, and for a name whereby to distinguish them, are called Good; so
that Good and Evil are correlative terms like Pleasure and Pain, and
mean respectively the greatest total Pleasure, and the greatest total
Pain. Now this experience when once acquired is never lost, but by
virtue of hereditary transmission descends from parents to children.
But, as in the case of the simpler emotions, only the results survive,
and not the means whereby they were arrived at; so that, in a short
time, the words Good and Evil come to be quite separated from Pleasant
and Painful; nay, as might be expected from their origin, they tend to
acquire exactly opposite meanings; for Pleasure and Pain come to signify
only immediate pleasure and pain; and the final reckoning is often
considerably at variance with the first item; as in a race the man who
leads for the first lap seldom wins in the end....

"This, then, is the origin of the Moral Sense.... The Moral Sense,
therefore, is merely one of the emotions," though the last of all in the
order of evolution; it can only claim a life of some two or three
centuries; and there are even some who still doubt its existence. "Man
at any rate is the only animal who possesses it in its latest
development; for even in horses and dogs we cannot believe that it has
passed the intentional or conscious stage.... Good, with them, has no
artificial meaning; it is simply identical with the greatest pleasure."

Only by complete and perfect obedience to all emotions can perfect
freedom from regret be obtained in the gratification of all desire. Man
is at present passion's slave, because he is so only in part; "for the
cause of repentance is never the attainment of some pleasure, but always
the non-attainment of more: not the satisfaction of one desire, but the
inability to satisfy all. The highest virtue, therefore, consists in
being led, not by one desire, but by all; in the complete organization
of the Moral Nature."


OF THE SOCIAL RELATION OF THE INDIVIDUAL

When we assert the end of Action to be Pleasure, do we mean the pleasure
of the individual, or universal happiness? "Good has been shown to
follow immediately on the adaptation of an organism to circumstances; it
is evident that external objects can affect it only in so far as they
form part of these circumstances. Hence it follows that the pleasure and
pain of others can come in only incidentally; from the fact that each
man is not an isolated unit, but a member of society. But further, this
social medium itself is, after all, nothing but a part of the individual
affected by it; it is one division of that primary side of his nature,
by which the other side, the emotional, the intellectual, the moral, is
being continually moulded and fashioned; and even if we take the
narrower meaning of self, the pleasures and pains of others cannot
possibly affect a man's actions or emotions except in so far as they
become a part of his. If man aims at pleasure merely by the physical law
of action, that pleasure must evidently be ultimately his own; and
whether it be or be not preceded by phenomena which he calls the
pleasures and pains of others, is a question not of principle but of
detail, just as the force of a pound weight is unaltered whether it be
composed of lead or of feathers, or whether it act directly or through
pulleys.

"The principle, therefore, is clear enough, that the happiness of others
can have only an indirect influence upon the good of each individual.
But it is equally clear that this direct influence must be of no mean
extent, and that it is now our duty to trace its history." Here follows
a scheme of the development of the state from the family, which last was
necessitated by the helplessness of infancy, and from which arose the
habit of human association. We have no evidence from history or science
that mankind has not always existed in a state of society; there is no
warrant for assuming an earlier condition of isolation. "Hence to the
human race the earliest Good was inseparably bound up with what we now
call the Family Virtues."[64] The state, thus originated, developed as a
social organism, with ever greater integration, heterogeneity, and
complexity of parts, and "the End or Good of each individual became
largely modified by the extension of the medium to which his actions had
to be adapted"; man became a member, not only of the family but of the
state, and the conceptions of his nature and duty became wider, "so that
at last the more perfectly each attains his own interest, and the more
pleasure he gathers to his own store, the more certainly does he secure
the universal happiness of mankind." If a man aims, as Spinoza remarks,
at doing real good to himself, he will be sure to do most good to
others.


THE UNSELFISH EMOTIONS

Under this head is traced the genesis of sympathy through representation
of the pains and pleasures of others and interpretation of them by
individual experience in the same environment; and the genesis of
benevolence, the active side of sympathy, through habit associated with
the ideas of the pleasures and pains of others. Love is defined as
"originally the association of many pleasures with one individual." From
the wider experience of man as a member of a state is developed justice
or the sense of equality of right, patriotism, etc. All these feelings
are hereditary.


OF THE RELATION OF MAN TO NATURE

This portion of the book treats of the gradual development of knowledge
to wider and wider generalization; of the extension of sympathy from man
to the animal world also; of the universality of consciousness, which
exists in the inanimate as well as the animate world; of the perfection
of morality through the perfection of knowledge, since "knowledge moulds
emotion, and absolute virtue is nothing but absolute correspondence with
nature in action resulting from thought"; and of the evolution of
religion, through knowledge, to a religion of knowledge of the real
universe or of humanity.


OF THE WILL

Under this heading the metaphysical doctrine of freedom of the will is
combated as a contradiction of the laws of Cause and Effect. Praise and
blame, reward and punishment, are desirable because of their effect on
action.


OF OBLIGATION

Barratt defines obligation as a "violent motive." Paley says: "If a man
finds the pleasure of sin to exceed the remorse of conscience, of which
he alone is the judge, the moral-instinct man, so far as I can
understand, has nothing more to offer." What, then, asks Barratt, has he
himself to offer if a man finds the pleasure of sin to exceed the pain
entailed by disobedience to the external command? It may, indeed, be the
fact that particular kinds of motive only come from particular sources,
but unless we can prove that those coming from a command are always the
strongest, we cannot claim for them a position such as that implied by
the word obligation, of being the highest or most universal motives. In
a contest between two motives, it is not the kind but the quantity which
decides. For if two pleasures or pains be equal, what does it matter
where they came from? And if they be not equal, the greater, whatever
its source, will always be the stronger motive.

"Hence obligation is nothing more than a 'violent motive.' Prudence and
duty are both the following of the greatest pleasure; but so far as in
ordinary language we make a distinction between them, the pleasure aimed
at in prudence is proximate and only slightly greater than the pain,
whereas in duty it is not only very considerably greater, but the
greatness is further glorified by a dim aureole of magnificent
generalities and the halo of an unfathomable future....

"And as the result of a motive is in no way dependent on its external
source, so neither is it influenced by its mode of internal operation. A
motive may be strong either by its own natural force as a large excess
of associated pleasure in one direction, or by the facility artificially
given to its expression by the long-continued custom, either in
ourselves or in our fathers, of acting in a certain way on certain
occasions. In other words, the strength of a motive is not absolute, it
is relative to the habits and predispositions of our organisms; but the
strongest motive, whatever its kind, prevails in all cases.

"Obligation is often, again, confounded with compulsion: but submission
to physical force is not morally an act at all, because its [Greek:
arche] or immediate antecedent is external to us, and therefore
independent of our moral laws."


OF PLEASURES THAT ARE CALLED BAD

"We saw that Good differs from Pleasure simply by a widening of the
field of calculation; whereby the pleasure of the moment is often found
to entail future pain greater than itself (allowance being made for
perspective), and is therefore condemned as Bad. When, therefore, we
speak of Pleasure as opposed to Good, we always mean the pleasure of the
moment; or very often by a still further narrowing of the term, sensual
as opposed to intellectual pleasures."

FOOTNOTES:

[63] Pp. 39, 40.

[64] P. 73.




LESLIE STEPHEN

"THE SCIENCE OF ETHICS" (1882)


While with regard to the matter of Ethics,--the general classifications
of right and wrong conduct,--moralists are almost unanimous, with regard
to its form,--the essence and criterion of right and wrong,--there is
great disagreement. All widely spread opinions deserve respect by their
mere existence; they are phenomena to be accounted for. On the subject
of morals, as on all other subjects, opinions gradually modify and
approach each other; but a perfect agreement will probably not be
arrived at.

Leaving aside metaphysical questions, however, we may be able to find,
as in physical science, some constants or ultimate elements which,
though they, according to the metaphysician's view, require further
analysis, yet constitute, within their sphere, scientific knowledge
independent of metaphysics. The follower of Hegel means, in all
probability, precisely the same thing as the follower of Hume, when he
says that a mother loves her child; though, when they come to reflect
upon certain ulterior imports of the phrases used, they may come to
different conclusions. The formula remains the same; for all purposes of
conduct it evokes the same impressions, sentiments, and sensible images,
and it therefore represents a stage at which all theories must coincide,
though they start, or profess to start, from the most opposite bases.
"Mothers love their children" is not unconditionally true; some mothers
do not love their children; but the statement is of worth as
approximating scientific truth. It may be well to attempt to ascertain
in how far it may be rendered scientific.

In the physical sciences, the statements of laws arrived at by the labor
of generations are ideal statements, in which a mass of modifying
circumstances are disregarded for the sake of simplification. Even in
these sciences, the power of prediction is small. Of the complicated
conditions of human action we have even less accurate knowledge than of
those of physical phenomena, though this does not lead us, any more than
in the physical sciences, to suppose that prediction would not be
possible if we knew the conditions. So far as man is a thing or an
animal, it is comparatively easy to determine his conduct. Given a
starving dog and a lump of meat in contact, you can predict the result.
But to determine the behavior of a human being with a glass of water
presented to his lips, you must be able to calculate the action of human
motive and to unravel the tangled skein of thought and feeling in its
variation in the individual under consideration. Moreover, much of the
life of the individual is ruled, not by conscious motive, but by
automatic habit, acquired through education. The prediction of action in
society as a unit is not less difficult than the prediction of
individual action, for if individual differences neutralize each other,
so that a certain uniformity in the influence of circumstances is shown
by statistics, it is not the less difficult to predict what these
uniformities will be. Society as an organism, not a mere aggregate,
presents, in the interaction of more complicated conditions, greater
difficulties than does the individual as such; and it may be said that
prediction of the course of history, even in general terms and for a
brief period, would require an intellect as much superior to that of
Socrates as the intellect of Socrates is superior to that of an ape.

And yet mankind does possess knowledge of conduct, which does not differ
in kind from scientific knowledge; there is, in fact, but one kind of
knowledge, which passes into scientific knowledge as it becomes more
definite and articulate. The knowledge that mankind possesses consists
in what we have thus far taken for granted, that under the same
circumstances of outward environment and inward character, human conduct
does not change. Of society, as of an organism, we cannot say _a priori_
that it is so and could not have been otherwise; we can only show, _a
posteriori_, how different parts mutually imply each other, so that,
given the whole, we can see that any particular part could not have been
otherwise. Our gain from such knowledge is the recognition that there
may be discoverable laws of growth essentially relevant to our
investigation of conduct. So long as reasoning was conducted upon the
tacit assumption that social phenomena can be satisfactorily explained
by studying their constituent elements separately, attention was
diverted from the important principles of the interrelation of parts to
the whole. The theory of evolution brings out the fact that every
organism, whether social or individual, represents the product of an
indefinite series of adjustments between it and its environment. Every
race or society is part of a larger system, product of the continuous
play of a number of forces constantly shifting with an effort towards
general equilibrium, so that every permanent property represents, not an
accidental similarity, but a correspondence between the organism and
some permanent conditions of life. To solve the problem of existence by
calculation is an impossibility; but our own lives are working it out;
the evolution of history is the solution of our problem. And when we
fully recognize that a problem is being solved, we have only to gain
some appreciation of its general nature and conditions, in order to
reach some important, though limited, conclusions, which may fairly be
called scientific, as to the meaning of the answer. These conclusions
are not scientific in the sense of giving us quantitative and precise
formulae, but they may be so far scientific as to be certain and
reliable.

Thus we may be able to show how a given set of instincts corresponds to
certain permanent conditions under which they were developed, and
(returning to the problem of differing theories of morals with which we
started) to show what is the cause of differing opinions. Our
investigations of the problem of morality have nothing to do, in the
first instance, with moral principles which are, or profess to be,
deduced from pure logic, independent of any particular fact; they deal
with actual moral sentiments as historical facts. The word moral, as
used in our considerations, does not, therefore, refer to an ideal moral
code, but to the one actually existing in the case considered.

Ethical speculation, as thus understood, must be concerned with
psychological inquiries--inquiries in regions where the vague doctrines
of common sense have not yet crystallized into scientific coherence; we
must therefore proceed with caution.

The contention between materialist and idealist is irrelevant to our
discussion. The fact that mechanical processes underlie all mental
process does not make the latter the less a fact; nor can the mechanical
statement ever supersede the psychological statement. The proposition
that hunger makes men eat will express truth, whatever material
implications are involved in the statement.

Conduct is determined by feeling; we fly from pain, we seek pleasure;
life is a continuous struggle to minimize suffering and lay a firm grasp
upon happiness. "Good" means everything that favors happiness, and "bad"
everything that is conducive to misery; nor can any other intelligible
meaning be assigned to the words. The difficulty of proving these
propositions lies in the fact that they are primary doctrines, for proof
of which we must appeal to the direct testimony of consciousness. But
critics oppose, not so much the propositions themselves, as certain
supposed implications. By pain and pleasure is here meant every
conceivable form of agreeable or disagreeable feeling. The assertion
that conduct is determined by pain and pleasure is not meant as a denial
that it is also, in some sense, determined by the reason; but a state of
consciousness which is neither painful or pleasurable cannot be an
object of desire or aversion. The reason is often contrasted with the
feelings in its determination of conduct, the reasonable man being
defined as one who, instead of being the slave of immediate impulse, is
capable of adapting means to ends and following, thus, courses of
conduct not in themselves agreeable but promising a greater total of
happiness. The fact is, however, that all happiness that determines the
will is future; conduct is determined, in every case, not by a future
feeling of pleasure, which, as future, does not yet exist, but by
present feeling. It is therefore more accurate to say that conduct is
determined by the pleasantest judgment than to say that it is determined
by the judgment of what is pleasantest. The intention of the agent is
defined by the foreseen consequences of his conduct; his end is defined
by that part of the foreseen consequences which he actually desires; and
the end defines the motive, that is, the feeling, which actually
determines conduct. The pleasantest end is adopted because the foretaste
of the pleasure is itself pleasurable. The intellect and the emotions
are in reality related as form and substance, and cannot be divided.

In the action of pain and pleasure, it seems to be an obvious fact that
pain, as pain, represents tension, that is, a state of feeling from
which there is a tendency to change; pleasure represents equilibrium, or
a state in which there is a tendency to persist. The worm writhes on the
hook, and the mind may be said to writhe under a painful emotion in the
effort to writhe into some more tolerable position. In the act of
choice, each mode of action is tried ideally, and the individual settles
into that which is, on the whole, the easiest. The analogy which
naturally offers itself and seems to give the best account of the facts
is the mechanical principle of least resistance. It is not, perhaps,
superfluous to remark that the volition may exercise a very small
influence, even when the limiting conditions are in a great part ideal.
The more painful is not necessarily the less permanent condition. It is
one in which there is an additional chance against permanence. Terror
sets up so disturbed a condition that the mind cannot settle into any
definite course. We can no more alter arbitrarily the circumstances of
our microcosm than those of the external world. It is as difficult to
avoid brooding in vain regret as to evade a physical constraint.

Reason and feeling are bound together in inseparable unity. But reason,
whatever its nature, is the faculty which enables us to act with a view
to the distant and the future. A great part of conduct is automatic; it
is either not determined by conscious motives, or it is determined by
motives which, though they rise for a moment to the surface of
consciousness, are forgotten as soon as felt. Of our conscious conduct,
again, part may be called instinctive and part reasonable. These modes
of action pass into each other by imperceptible degrees. The instinctive
may be converted into reasoned as the consequences become manifest, and
the reasoned become instinctive as the consequences are left out of
account. So, again, the instinctive action becomes automatic when it is
performed without leaving any trace upon consciousness. It may still be
voluntary in the sense that the agent may be able to refrain from it if
his attention happens to be aroused. Habitual actions pass through all
these gradations. When the reason is called into action, it is not in
virtue of a purely logical operation that it conquers if it does so; it
is in virtue of the fact that it reveals a new set of forces ready to
spring into action to the necessary degree.

We may be said to feel by signs as well as to reason by signs. The sight
of a red flag may deter us from crossing a rifle range without calling
up to our imagination all the effects of a bullet traversing the body.
If the motive which prompts us to run the risk be strong, it may be
necessary to convert a greater volume of latent, into active emotion;
and as we frequently fail to do this, we often run risks which we should
avoid were the consequences distinctly contemplated.

The development of the whole nature implies a development of both the
emotional and the intellectual nature; new sensibilities imply new
sentiments; and increased range of thought is associated with an equal
growth in complexity and variety of emotion. The more reasonable being
acts with emotion, but his emotions have more complex and refined
methods. The reasonable man is a better mirror of the world without him,
his conduct shows a better adaptation to ends and a greater logical
consistency in its parts; more harmony of action between the different
instincts. The important question is not solved by these facts. We may
still ask: How is the relation between the different instincts, the
influence exerted by each member of the federation, determined?

We start with certain fixed relations between our various instincts; and
however these may change afterwards, our character is so far determined
from the start. Again, it is plain that this inherited balance varies
greatly with different peoples and gives rise to different types. In one
man the sensual passions have a greater relative importance than in his
neighbor, and so forth. And the question arises, whether we can
determine which of these types is most reasonable.

In the construction of the bow, we may suppose that, from rude
beginnings, through discovery of better and better forms as adapted to
ends in view in its construction, a form of bow would finally be reached
which would represent the maximum of efficiency. This bow may be called
the typical bow. As exquisitely adapted to its purpose, it arouses in us
aesthetic satisfaction. Like the bow, every organism represents the
solution of a problem, as well as a set of data for a new problem. As
the bow is felt out, so the animal is always feeling itself out. The
problem which it solves is how to hold its own against the surrounding
pressure and the active competition of innumerable rivals. Though we
cannot apply an _a priori_ method, cannot define the materials of which
men are made or the end which they have to fulfil, we can determine to
some extent their typical excellence. Recognizing the general nature of
the great problem which is being worked out, we can discover what is
implied in some of the results. The process of evolution must be, at
every moment, a process of discovering a maximum of efficiency; though
the conditions are always varying slowly, and an absolute maximum is
inconceivable. At every point of the process, there is a certain
determinate direction along which development must take place. The form
which represents this direction is the typical form, any deviation from
which is a defect. It is conceivable that the highest efficiency in
different departments of conduct may imply consistent conditions. The
greatest philosopher may also be the greatest athlete and the greatest
poet. It is equally clear that there is no necessary connection. What,
then, is the relative value of different kinds of efficiency? A complete
answer to the question might bring out the fact, which seems on other
grounds probable, that it is an advantage to a race to include a great
variety of different types. It is enough, however, to say that, in
speaking of a type, the assertion is not intended, that there is one
special type conformity to which is a condition of efficiency, but that
evolution is always the working out of a problem, the solution of which
implies the attainment of certain general qualities.

We have changed our point of view from the consideration of pain and
pleasure to that of the conditions of existence. The fact is simply,
that the constants in one problem are variables in the other. Given a
certain character, the agent does what gives him pleasure. But if we ask
how he comes to have that character, the only mode of answering is by
referring to the conditions of existence. His character must be such as
to fit him for the struggle for existence. There must therefore be a
correlation between painful and pernicious actions on the one hand, and
pleasurable and temporal on the other. The useful in the sense of the
pleasure-giving must approximately coincide with the useful in the sense
of the life-preserving. All conduct may be considered as a set of
habits, to each of which there is a corresponding instinct--the word
habit being used to designate any mode of conduct, automatic or
voluntary, which may be brought under a general rule, instinct denoting
all conscious impulses to action, whether including more or less
reasoned choice, and whether innate or acquired. Habits graduate from
the essential processes which constitute life rather than maintain it,
and which are, for the most part, automatic, to the most superficial and
transitory. In order that the proposition "This habit is a bad one" may
have any real meaning, we must assume that the organism can exist
without it. A habit cannot be removed as one takes off a coat, as has
been too often assumed; the whole character of the man is affected by
its removal.

A capacity is essential if it is essential under normal conditions of
environment. The quality which makes a race survive may not always be a
source of advantage to every individual, or even to the average
individual. Since the animal which is better adapted for continuing its
species will have an advantage in the struggle, even though it may not
be so well adapted for pursuing its own happiness, an instinct grows and
decays not on account of its effects on the individual, but on account
of its effects upon the race. The qualities of the individual and those
of the race mutually imply each other, since the individual can no more
be considered apart from society than the apple can be considered apart
from the tree on which it grows. It remains true, however, that certain
qualities of the apple may vary whilst the relation to the tree remains
approximately the same, as also that the individual may vary in his
qualities to some extent, his relation to society remaining
approximately constant; and qualities thus variable may be regarded as,
in so far, independent of society.

Social development takes place without corresponding change of
individual organization. We cannot interpret the changes from savage
life arrived at in present civilization, as representing an essential,
great, or corresponding difference in the innate faculties of the
civilized man from those of the savage, but must regard them rather as
representing the accumulation of mental and material wealth. The child,
learning, with the words of his language, their implicit meanings, has
his feelings modified by them, is thus a philosopher and metaphysician
in the cradle by the associations given him, and is educated from
infancy by the necessity of conforming his activities to those of the
surrounding mass. All organization implies uniformities of conduct, and
therefore continuous discipline. Society is an organism in this sense,
not in any mystical sense. It is not an organism with a single centre of
consciousness.

An organization implies organs; and these are to be found in the various
organizations, political, religious, etc., by which, through a greater
or less division of labor, certain special functions are relegated to
particular associations. We thus have not only to go beyond the
individual and refer to the organs in order to determine the "law" or
form of any instinct developed through the social factor, but we have
also to classify the various social instincts by reference to the
complex structure of society, which implies a distribution into mutually
dependent organs. Moreover, such organs, though primarily directed to a
specific end, acquire a vitality independent of any special end, become
organs discharging a complex function, and imply the existence of a
correspondingly complex set of instincts. We come really to love an
organization because it supplies us with a means of cultivating certain
emotions and of enjoying the society of our fellows; it would be an
entirely inadequate account of the facts if we regarded it simply as the
means of attaining that pleasure which has given the pretext for its
formation.

The organs of society are not, however, distinct from each other as the
physical organs are distinct; the same individuals may be members of
various organizations. The race is not, in fact, analogous to the higher
organism, which forms a whole separated from all similar wholes, but to
an organism of the lower type, which consists of mutually connected
parts spreading independently in dependence upon external conditions,
and capable of indefinite extension, not of united growth. We may
consider the race, thus, as forming social tissue, rather than
constituting an organism. The tissue is built up of men, as the tissue
of physiology is said to be built up of cells. The laws of growth and
vitality of the organs of society are always relative to the underlying
properties of the tissue; although, in particular cases, the more
civilized race may be supplanted by the less civilized, we may assume
that these accidental and contingent advantages will be eliminated on
the average, and the general tendency will be to the predominance of
those races which have intrinsically the strongest tissue. Not the state
as such, and (as we have seen) not the individual, is the unit of
evolution; the state may develop when the external pressure is little or
nothing; the social tissue is that primary unit upon which the process
of social evolution impinges. The family is not, itself, a mode of
organization cooerdinate with other social organs, but rather represents
the immediate and primitive relation which holds men together. It is
quite possible to suppose men living together without any political and
social organization; but some association between the sexes, however
temporary and casual, and some protection of infants by parents, are
absolutely necessary to the continuance of the race beyond a single
generation. A change in family associations implies a corresponding
change of vast importance in the intimate structure of society itself,
in the social tissue. The state may make a marriage law, but it cannot
create or modify the family tie beyond certain narrow limits. It can
bestow privileges upon some one kind of association, but it cannot
originate it, cannot enforce fidelity and chastity.

The social tissue is its own end, or depends upon the whole system of
instincts possessed by man as a social and rational creature.

The development of society as an organic structure implies the
development of customs in the race, and habits in the individuals
forming it. There must be certain rules of conduct which are observed by
all, in order that corresponding rules may be observed by each.

Custom in the civilized society may be distinguished from positive law.
In primitive states, the distinction is imperceptible. The authority of
law itself must rest upon custom,--the custom of obedience. But physical
force alone, or the dread of its application, cannot produce obedience;
the application of such force is so little essential that a state of
society is conceivable, in which it should disappear altogether; men
might be willing to obey their rulers simply from respect and affection.
The power of applying coercion in case of need must no doubt increase as
the strength of the social bond increases; but that bond is also the
stronger, in proportion as the need of applying it becomes less. The
whole social structure, then, must rest, in the last resort, upon the
existence of certain organic customs, which cannot be explained from
without. They depend, for their force and vitality, upon the instincts
of the individual as modified by the social factor; they correspond to a
given state of the social tissue. A legal sanction may be added to any
custom whatever, and thus it may seem that a state can make its own
constitution and define its own organic laws; in reality, however, the
power of making a certain constitution presupposes a readiness to act
together and accept certain rules as binding, and thus implies a whole
set of established customs, essential to the life of the society and
giving rise to special types of character in its members. Every law of
conduct more or less affects the character of the persons subject to it,
so long as it is enforced; and necessarily, every variation in the
character more or less affects the sentiments from which the external
law derives its force. The correspondence, however, is not so intimate
that one mode of statement can always be rendered into the other. For
laws, indeed elaborate codes, are developed without seriously affecting
the general character of the underlying customs, and in the same way
instincts may vary widely without producing any normal change in the
external order, though they affect the mode in which it works. The
essence of any law is in the mutual pressure of the different parts of
the social structure. Any association with a given end will have laws
determined with reference to that end. When we pass, however, from the
organ to the tissue, we still have an organic structure with certain
rules of conduct and corresponding instincts, but we no longer have a
definite end or a fixed material. The material, that is, is to be
regarded as developing and determining the development of the subsidiary
organs. And since the most efficient society normally survives, we may
inversely infer from the survival of a society that it has developed the
properties on which its efficiency depends. The actual laws existing at
any period may not represent the greatest degree of efficiency possible;
but they must be an approximate statement of the essential conditions.

The moral law, as applicable to all members of a society, defines some
of the most important qualities of the social tissue. It is as
independent of the legislature as are the movements of the planets. This
is true whether you resolve morality into reason or make it dependent
upon utility. The action of any set of people can no more change the
nature of facts than that of logical necessities. This is, however,
fully true only of morality as it ought to be in correspondence with
facts. Actual morality corresponds to men's theories about facts, and it
may, therefore, deviate from what the code would be if they were
incapable of error. But it is plain that, though it varies, it must vary
within incomparably narrower limits than other systems of law, because
its variation is determined by far more general conditions; it maintains
itself, so to speak, by the direct action of the organic instincts. The
doctrines of the greatest moral teacher, though somewhat in advance of
prevailing standards, are successful only in proportion as they are
congenial to existing sentiments, give articulate shape to thoughts
already obscurely present in the social medium. Like Socrates, the
reformer must be something of a midwife. Morality grows, and is not
made; that is, it is the fruit of a gradual evolution of the organic
instinct continued through many generations. The ordinary mind resists
any change in principles instilled into it from birth; the great masses
are sluggish in movement.

The moral law has to be expressed in the form: "Be this," not "Do this."
The existence of a character such that variations of circumstances will
cause no deviation from morality is the only security for morals. The
legislator is forced to classify conduct by its objective
manifestations. But the cunning of the man who desires to evade the code
can still devise innumerable methods of accomplishing his end
indirectly. Law permits what it does not prohibit, and is, therefore, in
danger of producing hypocrisy instead of virtue.

The process by which the moral law (or rather, the law of conduct which
includes, but is not coincident with the moral law) is developed, is a
process of generalization. It corresponds to a vast induction carried on
by the race as organized in society. Beginning with modes of conduct
which are seen to be bad, society gradually perceives that the ultimate
principle of classification must be by the primary feelings, that rules
of conduct must be expressed in terms of character, and other rules
which concern the application of these to more special cases must take a
subordinate position and be regarded as only of conditional value. All
these rules must necessarily correspond, within very narrow limits, to a
statement of the conditions of vitality of the tissue which they
characterize. In an ideal state of society, every general principle
would also be recognized in every particular rule. This is a result a
gradual approximation to which, rather than its actual attainment, must
be anticipated.

Morality implies action for the good of others in some sense. Society
may be regarded both as an aggregate and as an organism. There are
certain qualities which we may suppose to vary in the individual without
necessarily involving a change in the social structure. How is the
general rule, as distinguished from other rules, deduced from the
general principle of social vitality?

The law of nature has but one precept, "Be strong." But when we regard
the individual in his relations to society, the law takes on different
forms. This may be expressed by saying that the law "Be strong," has two
main branches, "Be prudent" and "Be virtuous," the first applying to
cases in which the individual is primarily affected, the other to those
in which the units are affected through society and the social factor
must be taken into account.

To find a classification of the virtues that will not run into infinite
detail or be a simple affirmation of the general principle, the internal
development of moral character under its emotional and intellectual
aspects may furnish a sufficient method. The general formula of primary
individual virtues is: "Be strong." The condition of vitality of the
individual as a complex of instincts, is expressed by the formula: "Be
temperate." And the class of virtues referring to the conditions of
intellectual efficiency, has the general rule: "Be truthful."

_Ceteris paribus_, an increase of individual energy is an advantage to
society; and, as a matter of fact, we find that civilized society
differs conspicuously from the ruder in stimulating more vigorously and
systematically the various energies of its members. The most conspicuous
virtue of this class is the virtue of courage. In more primitive
conditions, courage, as necessary to the preservation of society, is
regarded as a virtue in itself; later, some mixture of judgment and
reason is required in its exercise; and finally, since it may be
combined with other anti-social qualities, it is not approved in the
same manner as the more directly social virtues. Courage is now regarded
merely as one manifestation of a character which is fitted for all the
requirements of social existence.

The courage of the bulldog is blind instinct. Where such an instinct
exists, the animal survives by reason of it, not because he forms any
conscious judgment of its advantages. It seems necessary to suppose that
races owed their survival to military prowess when reflection was still
in the most rudimentary stage. The utility of courage must have been a
very obvious discovery as soon as reflection became possible; but the
quality must have existed, in some degree, before it could be
discovered, although the existence of a distinct moral sentiment
doubtless implies some reflection. Moreover, the instincts which imply a
perception of utility must themselves comply with the conditions of
existence, must themselves be useful. Increased intelligence might act
to the disadvantage of the race by increasing selfish cowardice through
a keener perception of personal, as distinct from social, risk; but this
cannot be true ultimately, since we perceive that intelligent races have
an advantage; we may suppose that those races are most successful in
which a perception of the vitality of courage goes along with an
increase of courage. This principle must be regarded, therefore, as
working, not only through the less conscious instinct of the lower
races, but also upon the judgments of a highly civilized society. The
like is true, _mutatis mutandis_, of other qualities (such as industry,
energy, and so forth) which belong to the same class.

The estimate of courage differs with respect to the two sexes, as does
also that of chastity. The historical explanation is simple; courage was
necessary in men in early social stages, to race-preservation; to women,
on the other hand, has been given, from early times, a class of social
functions not requiring courage. The estimate, once fixed, survives even
when some of its early conditions disappear. The savage acquired his
wife by knocking her down; to him the ideal feminine character must
have included readiness to be knocked down, or at least unreadiness to
strike again; and, as some of the forms of marriage recall the early
system, so in the sentiments with which it is regarded there may still
linger something of the early instinct associated with striking and
being struck.

The virtues of chastity and temperance occupy an intermediate position
between the virtues of strength and the directly social virtues. Some of
them are a part of the prudential, and others of the directly moral
code. Temperance is primarily prudential, but the sexual and parental
instincts concern the most intimate structure of society. Our
instinctive classification of temperance as higher than courage has good
reason; the classification of it as a personal virtue cannot be
maintained. A man whose vice injures only himself in the first place,
becomes incapable of benefiting others. As we condemn the man whose
character is bad, whether external circumstances do, or do not, give him
an opportunity of displaying it, so we object logically to the man who
is destroying his social qualities, whether the immediate effect of his
conduct tells upon himself or upon others. Another element, an
instinctive disgust at sensuality, seems to precede judgment upon
intemperance, with a strength not to be accounted for by a mere summing
up of consequences. The human hog revolts us as the smell of the sty
turns our stomach. The justification of the instinct is not that it
implies a judgment of what is useful, but rather that it is a useful
judgment. As men become more intellectual, sympathetic, and so forth,
they gain fresh sensibilities, which are not simple judgments of
consequences but as direct, imperative, and substantial, as any of the
primitive sensibilities. To get rid of the sensibility you must lower
the whole tone of the character. Asceticism, which has arisen chiefly at
times of great indulgence, may have been of use if only as a
demonstration of the possibility of conquering the prevailing passions.
In a similar manner, we may think a great reformer, a Howard for
example, admirable, though he neglects duties which must be performed in
the ordinary case. We thus admit that the general moral code of
benevolence prescribes different conduct according to a man's
opportunities and talents.

Truth is a virtue of slow growth; the savage, like the child, is unable
to distinguish clearly the difference between imagination, hypothesis,
and historical statement. The perception of the utility of truth first
takes the external form: "Lie not," which corresponds approximately but
not perfectly to the internal rule: "Be trustworthy." The internal rule,
as such, is the higher; the external may have exceptions.

We come, at last, to the directly social virtues of justice and
benevolence. So far as truth and temperance are strictly virtuous, they
may be classed, the one under justice, the other under benevolence.
There is no real conflict between justice and benevolence; so far as a
man is really benevolent, he will not wish to benefit some to the injury
of others. Justice seems to consist in the application to conduct of the
principle of sufficient reason.

It is not safe to infer altruistic intention merely from altruistic
consequences. The sexual appetite appears to be the most selfish of
impulses, in that it prompts to conduct often ruinous to its objects. On
the other hand, it is the root of all social virtues. We cannot be sure
that the hen who covers her chicks regards them as more than comfortable
furniture in the nest. Altruism begins with the capability of benevolent
intention; where the conferring of pleasure upon others becomes a
possible motive. The generation of pleasure in others' happiness has
been traced to association; but, though the pleasant association
doubtless prepares the way for the higher sentiment, the latter is
something more.

It is true that all conduct is egoistic, in the sense that all conduct
has its source in the pain and pleasure of the doer; but there is great
difference between conduct that regards human beings as mere means to
personal pleasure and that which takes into account their feelings as
sentient beings. Sympathy springs from the primary intellectual power of
representation. I cannot properly know a man without knowledge of his
thoughts and feelings. Cruelty is, in many cases, simple insensibility,
incapacity for projecting ourselves into the position of other beings.
We may desire the pain of others when it is useful as a deterrent, or
secures our own safety; yet to think about other beings is, in general,
to stimulate our sympathies, our sensibility being thus quickened by the
same power which implies intellectual progress.

To believe in the existence of sentient beings is to take into account
their feelings, to believe that they have feelings, which may persist
when I am not aware of them. A real belief, again, implies that, at the
moment of belief, I have representative sensations or emotions
corresponding to those which imply the actual presence of the object. To
take sentience into account is to sympathize, to feel with. The only
condition necessary for the sympathy to exist, and to be capable,
therefore, of becoming a motive, is that I should really believe in the
object, and hence have representative feelings. Systematically to ignore
these relations is to act as I should act if I were an egoist in the
extremest sense and held that there were no consciousness in the world
except my own. But really to carry out this principle is to be an idiot;
for an essential part of the world as interesting to me is constituted
by the feelings of other conscious agents, and I can ignore their
existence only at the cost of losing all the intelligence which
distinguishes me from the lower animals. It is true that this vicarious
sympathy, this pain at another's pain, may result in our simply getting
rid of our own pain by going away from the sufferer, removing him, or
dismissing him from our mind; as a fact, these methods are often
pursued. But in many cases, such a course is impossible without the
renunciation, at the same time, of many pleasures. If a man is to live
with his friends, he must share their joys and sorrows; the choice is
not between a particular pain and its absence, but involves the whole
question of the renunciation of companionship. Emotions are inevitable,
whether sympathetic or not, in proportion, not simply to the pain and
pleasure at the moment, but to the intensity and degree in which they
form part of the world of the individual,--the world constituted, not by
mere sensations, but by the whole system of thoughts and emotions
sustained by the framework of perception. The existence of pure
malignity must, it is true, be admitted; it may be partly explained as
love of the "sensational," the novel; the full explanation must be left
to the psychologist. Sympathy is the natural and fundamental fact. If
intellectual progress carried with it inferior sociability, it would
tend to be eliminated; the world would be to the stupid; it must carry
with it something which counterbalances the anti-social tendency. Reason
is that which enables a human being to take account of future, as well
as present pleasures. The working of the instincts or feelings, which
dictates conduct, approximately coincides with the prevision as to the
maximum of happiness obtainable by the agent; normally, it is prudent
to be virtuous; and the sympathetic motives, so to speak, always develop
within the framework provided by the other motives. To become reasonable
is to act on general principles, and to act consistently; and this
includes the condition that a statement of the real cause of my action
should equally assign the reason of my action. The law which my feelings
actually follow must coincide with the principle which commends itself
to my reason. In order, then, that a being provided with the social
instincts should act reasonably it is necessary that he should take that
course of conduct which gives the greatest chances of happiness to the
organization of which he forms a part. As the pain or pleasure in
another's pain or pleasure is direct, so the end willed is willed as
pleasurable to the subject, and the statement that altruism involves the
contradiction of aiming at something else than the real end--the
pleasure of the subject--in order to secure that end, is erroneous. The
fact probably is that the mind "flickers," taking into consideration
various consistent and mutually dependent ends, some of which may be
primarily egoistic, some altruistic. The physician is not benevolent
enough to cure me unless he expects a fee; but he may act also out of
sympathy; he need not be always thinking of his fee. Our sympathies
would be stifled, if it were not for the cooeperation of motives of a
different kind.

Altruism is the faculty essentially necessary to moral conduct; but the
altruistic sentiment is not to be identified with morality. The
elementary sympathy must be regulated and disciplined, in order that it
may give rise to true morality. Virtues, for instance, which belong to
the type of truthfulness and justice, generally imply a severe restraint
of the immediate sympathetic impulses.

We recognize the internal motive as desirable, and recognize a
difference between the man who acts only from prudential motives and the
one who acts from moral motives. We consider the latter meritorious,
that is, that he has a certain claim upon society, inasmuch as he has
done for nothing what another man will only do for pay, or has refrained
from action from which a less moral man can be restrained only by
coercion. Wherever society finds sacrifice of the individual necessary,
it pays for it in terms of merit. Merit is the value put upon virtue; it
is a function of the social forces, by which our characters are moulded.

Every character is developed under circumstances, and depends upon
mutual adjustment with these; we cannot disentangle the two factors.
Upon the power to infer future action the science of Ethics depends. The
action of the individual is not a matter of chance; in this sense it is
caused. But the instinct from which the action springs is not something
external to the man, which moves him; there is not the man plus the
instinct; the whole man, including the instinct, acts in a certain way,
in which he would not act if he did not possess the instinct. We are
accustomed to say that a man has inherited certain qualities; but the
man is not one thing and the inherited qualities another; the whole man
is inherited. Merit implies effort. This does not mean that effort,
taken absolutely, is the measure of merit. Such an assumption would lead
to our excusing men for the very qualities that make them wicked,--the
murderer because of his spiteful disposition, for instance. The man is
most meritorious who is virtuous with the least effort--provided always
that he has the normal passions of a man. By these, however, since they
are morally neutral, he is accessible to temptation and to a certain
struggle.

Conscience appears, historically, as a development of simpler instincts;
it is not a primary or a separate faculty; material morality makes its
appearance long before the conscious recognition of a moral law. The
existence of conscience is undeniable. Yet moralists are much given to
exaggerate the sorrow which it actually excites. In almost every case,
the pain which we feel for a bad act is complex, and due only in part to
our conviction that we have broken the moral law. If we regard
conscience as a separate faculty judging of action by some inherent
power, we have to attribute to it reason and feeling. It is not a
primary attribute of the agent (to borrow Spinoza's language), but a
mode of the attributes.

There is, indeed, a sensibility which seems to have as good a claim as
any to be regarded as elementary, and which is clearly concerned in most
of our moral judgments: the sense of shame. This is excited by the
consciousness of the judgment of others. It operates, however, not only
in cases of a breach of morality; but often more strongly even in cases
not concerned directly with morality; and may even operate against the
moral code. But the variation is clearly not indefinite. Social
development implies the development of a certain type of character,
which includes, as essential, certain moral qualities; the
consciousness of the code and of the condemnation of certain classes of
acts, which it would cause, is implied in the sense of shame. The sense
is closely connected with the instinctive disgust before noticed. It
seems to have especial reference to decency and indecency. The value of
the sense of decency cannot be measured by a consideration of a
particular set of bad consequences from indecent actions other than the
shock to decency; we must consider the whole difference between a state
of society which does, and one which does not, possess it; it is an
essential symptom of refinement and delicacy. Again, the judgments of
conscience may be compared to aesthetic judgments. The difference between
the aesthetic and other pleasures depends upon the form of gratification,
not upon the instincts gratified, and seems to correspond to the
difference between work and play. The artist may appeal to our moral
emotions, giving us imaginary ideals; but emotion at the contemplation
of such types is in the aesthetic phase when we simply enjoy their
contemplation, and it passes into the practical phase as soon as it
begins to have a definite relation to the conduct of our lives. Only in
so far as the moral law has become internal, is the delight in heroic or
benevolent energy spontaneous; in so far, we may speak of the existence
of a moral, as of an aesthetic, sense. A man of fine moral sensibility
may, indeed, like the artist, perceive finer moral discords than can be
measured by formulae; and may thus supply a more delicate test. But the
complex problem of a difference in moral judgment may yet be solved
approximately by reference to the test of social welfare; the highest
type is that which is best fitted for the conditions of social welfare.
The collective experience of the race is always progressing towards a
more accurate solution of the problem.

The utilitarian theory, which makes happiness the criterion of morals,
coincides approximately with the evolutionist theory which makes health
of the society the criterion; for, as we have seen, health and happiness
approximately coincide. The utilitarian theory fails, however, in one or
two respects. It gets rid, as much as possible, of _a priori_ truths,
and rejects intuitions; it bases its argument on the assumption that all
knowledge is empirical and the ethical problem to be solved by a summing
up of the consequences of action. It thus neglects the truth which is
implied by evolution,--that the organism itself is solving the problem;
it neglects the instinctive sense generated by social evolution.
Moreover, it considers society as an aggregate of similar individuals,
taking little account of the variability of human desire. And, further,
the utilitarian theory lays its stress upon morality as extrinsic;
according to it, love of morality for its own sake, as love of the means
to the end, must be as unreasonable as the miser's love for his gold.
Association, in this sense, means illusion; and the more reasonable we
become, the more we should deliver ourselves from the bondage of such
errors; the theory fails just at the point where true morality begins.
Furthermore, in substituting the external rule: "Do this," for "Be
this," it seems to fall into the error of expediency. Though lying is
assumed to be, on the whole, detrimental to happiness, truth is
maintained to be desirable only where it contributes to happiness. The
utilitarian destroys, to some extent, the force of the objection to this
by asserting the danger of trusting ourselves. The force of this
objection is only seen, however, when it is applied, not to the
external, but to the internal code; we instinctively feel the danger to
character in the lie, and hesitate to trust human nature in the
establishment of such a precedent, just as we object to permitting the
taking of life even in cases where prolonged life means prolonged
misery, because we cannot trust human nature with the decision as to
life and death. We make binding laws of morality, and leave it to the
man of exceptional qualities to break them; for the generality of
mankind, the stricter code is safer.

What is the sanction of morality? Why should a man be virtuous? The
answer depends upon the answer to the previous question: What is it to
be virtuous? If, for example, virtue means all such conduct as promotes
happiness, the motives to virtuous conduct must be all such motives as
impel a man to aim at increasing the sum of happiness. These motives
constitute the sanction, and the sanction may be defined either as an
intrinsic, or as an extrinsic, sanction; that is, it may be argued
either that virtuous conduct leads to consequences which are desirable
to every man, whether he be or be not virtuous; or, on the other hand,
that virtuous conduct as such, and irrespectively of any future
consequences, makes the agent happier. The problem is, thus, to find a
scientific basis for the art of conduct. The "sanction" must supply the
motive power by which individuals are to be made virtuous. This is, for
the practical moralist, the culminating point of all ethical inquiry.
Now there is, by our theory, a necessary and immediate relation between
social vitality and morality. But it does not follow that there is the
same intimate connection in the individual case. The sacrifice of some
of its members may be essential to the welfare of the society itself.

We have, then, to answer three questions: first, whether the virtuous
man, as such, is happier than the vicious; second, whether it is worth
while, on prudential grounds, for the vicious man to acquire the
virtuous character; and third, whether it can be worth while, in the
same sense, for the vicious man to observe the moral law.

If any man outside the pulpit were to ask himself what were the main
conditions of happiness, the answer would certainly include health as
the first, most essential, most sufficient condition. But the whole
process of nature, upon the evolutionist doctrine, implies a correlation
between the painful and the pernicious, and thus the elaboration of
types in which this problem is solved by an ever-increasing efficiency
and complexity of organization. Hence we may infer that the typical or
ideal character, at any given stage of development, the organization
which, as we may say, represents the true line of advance, corresponds
to a maximum of vitality. It seems, again, that this typical form, as
the healthiest, must represent not only the strongest type--that is, the
type most capable of resisting unfavorable influences--but also the
happiest type; for every deviation from it affords a strong presumption,
not merely of liability to the destructive processes which are
distinctly morbid, but also to a diminished efficiency under normal
conditions. However, the typical man, though he is, on this theory, the
virtuous man, is also much more than is generally understood by that
name. Happiness is the reward offered, not for virtue alone, but for
conformity to the law of nature, "Be strong." Beauty, strength,
intellectual vigor, aesthetic sensibility, prudence, industry, and so
forth, are all implied in the best type, and are, so far, conducive to
happiness. If virtue be taken in the narrower sense as implying chiefly
the negative quality of habitual abstinence from forbidden actions,
there is no reason to suppose that it coincides with happiness. You can
raise a presumption that moral excellence coincides closely with a happy
nature only when you extend "moral" to include all admirable qualities.
It is chiefly practical reasons which cause an attempted evasion of this
conclusion; the practical moralist holds that the non-social qualities
may be left to take care of themselves, but that stress must be laid
upon the social qualities as the more important, in order to obtain them
in society.

Sympathetic motives may lead to self-sacrifice; but this is also true of
selfish motives; gin is a more potent source of imprudence, even in a
moderate sense, than family affection; and the sympathetic motives have
on their side the far greater intrinsic advantage, that they promote
ends more permanent, far richer in interest, and giving a proper
employment to all the faculties of our nature, besides the intrinsic
advantages that spring from friendly relations with the society of which
we form a part. It is, however, true that higher activity of any sort
may cause pain in an uncongenial medium, and that, hence, the man who is
morally in advance of his age may suffer through his morality; every
reformer who breaks with the world, though for the world's good, must
expect much pain. "Be good if you would be happy," seems to be the
verdict even of worldly prudence; but it adds in an emphatic aside, "Be
not too good." We must acknowledge that excessive virtue cannot be
recommended to the selfish person upon grounds intelligible to him.
There is, however, a general advantage in possessing more varied
possibilities of enjoyment, and in being on the side of the strongest
forces, those of progress.

Extreme self-sacrifice is sometimes demanded of a man by his moral
principles. Is the sacrifice worth making? Would Regulus have suffered,
from remorse, pain worse than death, had he chosen life at the cost of
honor, or would he have found, as many do, that remorse is amongst the
passions most easily lived down? To these questions can only be answered
that morality must often involve pain, but that the virtuous man
nevertheless chooses it.

We must thus conclude, leaving one great difficulty unsolved; and this
is because this difficulty is intrinsically insoluble; there is no
absolute coincidence between virtue and happiness. The scientific
moralist has to do with facts; beyond these he cannot go. From the
scientific point of view, we may hold that evolution implies progress,
and that progress implies a solution of many discords and an extirpation
of many evils; but there is no reason for supposing that all evil will
be extirpated and perfect harmony attained. New sensibilities bring with
them new dangers; even sympathy, when not guided by knowledge, may lead
to rash changes productive of evil as well as good. To improve, whether
for the race or the individual, whether in knowledge or in sympathy, is
to be put in a position where a new set of experiments has to be tried,
and experience to be bought at the price of pain.

It is true that beyond the science lies the art; we must incite the
intrinsic motives to good through the pressure of the social factor. A
certain disadvantage to the individual cannot form a reason for our not
endeavoring to make him moral as far as possible; the good of society as
a whole is involved; and even the man who is himself immoral sees the
advantage of living in a moral medium, and would prefer that the world
at large should not be guided by his own principles.




B. CARNERI


Carneri begins his book on "Morality and Darwinism" ("Sittlichkeit und
Darwinismus," 1871), with the rejection of the older Spiritualism in
favor of Idealism, on the ground that modern investigation has made it
impossible for philosophy to assume any foundation but one sanctioned by
science; and with a rejection of dualism in favor of monism, on the
ground that the investigations of Wundt and others have shown the
psychical and the physical to be identical.

Instinct is defined by Carneri as thought upon the standpoint of mere
sensation, but following the laws of the same logic as governs conscious
thought. There is, thus, according to his view, no exception to be taken
to the conception which represents instinct as the action of mental
force, the difference between it and human reason as one of degree only.
It is nevertheless a confusion which ascribes reason to the animals.
Even their intelligence is one-sided, since it does not reach
self-consciousness, and it is not to be regarded as an unqualified
improvement upon instinct, since the latter loses both in intensity and
in certainty of action when it no longer governs undisturbed by other
influences: only such animals as are endowed with intelligence
ever eat of injurious food. In human beings instinct has almost
disappeared;--almost, we say, since savages do many things in an
instinctive manner, and even civilized men at times perform acts which,
on account of the exceeding rapidity of their execution, cannot be
regarded as the results of reflection. Instinct may be compared to
polarity in magnetism, according to which opposites are attracted.
Instinct was evolved by natural selection. But intelligence and judgment
are doubtless also to be found even far down in the scale of species.
The brute consciousness is, nevertheless, only a transition-stage, in
which the individual is still lost in the species; and, as such, it is
not to be confused with human reason. Consciousness in the brutes is
purely subjective, a consciousness "fuer sich"; while in human beings it
is consciousness "an und fuer sich," consciousness that becomes
subject-object through the concepts developed by language.

Man is as unconditionally subject to the law of causality, psychically
and physically, as the merest atom. There is no such thing as chance;
but in this very fact lies a consolation. In the concept of
individualization in its broadest sense, is included the conception of
freedom, and in the very nature of man there is an indestructible
impulse to freedom; his being, as self-conscious, is identical with the
latter impulse. This increases with increasing civilization, and has
finally become the problem by the solution of which alone man can attain
to self-satisfaction. It is true that the power of choice is
inconsistent with the law of causality; but in the manner in which the
man, as a thinking being, takes his stand over against the species, he
becomes a person, an individuality. As one of the species, he shares the
characteristics of the species, is an expression of the species-idea,
and his action is determined outwardly by things; but it is so
determined only mediately by means of thought, of concepts; these are
the immediate determinants. Hence, man's relation to things is a
different one according to the grade of his knowledge. In so far as this
is adequate, that is, corresponds to the truth of actuality, his
relation is an active one; in so far as it is, on the contrary,
inadequate, the relation is a passive one.

Character is inborn and can never be effaced but only clarified, though
this least through the bitter experience of the results of action. As
the horse loses his sure-footedness after one fall, and falls again more
easily, so we lose, through many a deed, the motive furnished by the
consciousness of never having committed it, and have a greater tendency
to repeat it. If an act has bad results, it is more likely that an
attempt to avoid these results by cunning will be made at later
opportunities for the act, than that the act itself will be avoided.
And even if it were to be avoided, such avoidance would not constitute
an improvement of the character; the latter would but hide itself under
a mask to reappear at the first prospect of exemption from punishment.
That which alone can modify character is a considerable extension of
knowledge. For, since all things influence us only in proportion to the
worth we attribute to them, their power over us must differ according to
the correctness or incorrectness of our judgment. Therefore, the more we
regard things in the light of their actual worth and hence also in their
relations to each other, the more our character, beholding in these
relations the general as the true, will incline to avoid extremes in
action. A preponderantly sensual character remains such through life;
but there is no doubt that a careful education, which makes it
acquainted with nobler principles and develops a sensibility to true
beauty, may ennoble it; while, if the education is, on the contrary,
neglected, it must sink deeper and deeper into the mire of coarseness
and vulgarity.

Character is the sum of its "affections," that is, of all
states and motions of the disposition. These are divisible into
"passions,"--included under selfishness, which is the general,
all-embracing passion,--and the active conditions of existence. These
two divisions are also identical with pain and pleasure, passion with
pain, and activity with pleasure. All desires have their root in the
primary instinct of self-preservation and self-propagation, the instinct
of self-propagation being only the racial form of the instinct of
self-preservation. The instinct of self-propagation is the highest of
all the passions, yet, as Spinoza says, every form of love which
recognizes another cause than mental freedom is easily turned to
hate,--if it is not already a sort of madness, nourished rather by
discord than concord. The various forms of family love, the love of
country, and friendship, noble sisters of love in the narrower sense,
result in desirable activity only as they exist in the form of concepts.
Civilization is nothing but the struggle of inadequate and adequate
concepts, in which, as in the struggle for existence in nature, only
that is triumphant which, instead of assuming a position of separation,
makes the general and the conditions of existence its own; so that
charity in the widest sense of the term is, of all humane feelings, that
to which the palm has been given. In this feeling, the dialectic
movement of the concept "man" is completed and perfected, the single
man, instead of perishing in the struggle of all against all, first
working his way upward out of his species and then taking up, in his own
being, the whole of mankind through the medium of benevolence. By this
evolution he raises himself to the level of the general. Far higher than
that confused sympathy which, in lending temporary aid to one, brings
lasting harm to many, is this adequate concept; true benevolence is
founded upon the clearest reasoning, and is the activity of the mind's
fullest power. The discord which self-consciousness has caused in man
can be done away with only by the greatest possible clarification of
self-consciousness: man returns mentally to the bosom of the universal,
when every living thing causes him to exclaim in the words of the Indian
philosopher: "Behold thyself."

Ethics ranks higher than morals, the latter merely comprising a
collection of particular rules of conduct which, as particular, bear the
stamp of the individual, the non-universal. The details of morality
change according to epochs and peoples. This change has been regarded as
an argument that there is no absolute but only relative good. But the
concept of the Good is, like the concept of the Beautiful, the fruit of
education; that is, it is the product of mind, which, through its own
evolution, arrives at Knowledge. When we do away with all concessions to
one-sided, extravagant desires, abstain from placing mind above the
universal law of causality, and are content with the facts made known to
us by science, we perceive that the absolute True, Beautiful, and Good,
bears the character of the Universal. In this universal character it has
always finally found expression in human life, and in this character it
will always find expression. The idea which reaches perfect expression
in the dialectic movement of these three concepts, the True, the
Beautiful, and the Good, has come into existence by the mediation of the
self-individualizing self-consciousness, just as the evolution on the
earth, which reaches its completion in man, is the outcome of the first
chemical process. Not only have the two one law,--(mind is only in so
far realized[65] as nature is expressed through it, and the actuality of
nature is its expression in mind) but both are, in fact, one, the
succession in their development on the earth being a succession only in
relation to the earth, and for us in this respect. Although to our
notion of time, thousands of millions of years lie between the two,
their separation does not represent a second for the universe and its
eternity, for the comprehension of which it must be disregarded.

The good man is he who does good for its own sake, without effort, not
out of momentary caprice, but out of perfect knowledge and conviction.
He is free, since he acts out of his own character, the law of nature
appearing as the law of his own mind; freedom lies in the absence of
discord and strife in the mind. The good man has strength of soul, just
as the man who lifts a weight without effort, not he who lifts it only
with the greatest effort, possesses strength of body.

There is no absolute Evil in contrast to the absolute Good. Evil is
negative. The perfection of man is identical with the attainment of
absolute Good through evolution.

Morality knows nothing of either reward or punishment; for it there are
only causes and effects. This truth, on which morality is based, lends
to the freedom out of which its activity proceeds a deeper worth. The
eternal laws of mind point the way by which mankind has to proceed; it
is the same way by which man has become man and by which he must
proceed, even if he did not will to advance thus. In the struggle for
existence, which knows only victory or destruction, progress is a
necessity of nature, but it is less painful and more rapid the more
clearly these laws come to be perceived by consciousness. Yet, however
clear they may be, it is only by a tireless endeavor which shrinks from
no sacrifice, that progress takes place. The end which morality has in
view is distant, for it is high; but only with its attainment will
mankind fully deserve its name when "struggle has been transformed to
labor, when no insignia are recognized but those of right, no weapon
used but intelligence, no banner raised but that of civilization."

In the volume, "Man the 'End' of Man" ("Der Mensch als Selbstzweck,"
1877), "a positive criticism of Hartmann's Philosophy of the
Unconscious," Carneri defines instinct as no form of real thought,
nothing dependent upon perception, but merely an inherited, mechanical
dexterity dependent upon sensation. For the assumption that thought is
the source of instinct must lead us naturally, on account of the
existence of the latter where the centralizing organ of thought is
absent, to the theory that thought is universal in nature; that is, we
shall arrive at a theory of atom-souls. It is evident here that not
Carneri's definition of instinct so much as his conception of thought
is changed from the one adopted in "Sittlichkeit und Darwinismus,"
thought being now limited, as it was not in the former book, to
self-conscious mental activity, assumed to be dependent upon nervous
centralization in the brain. In this book also, the author defines the
idea as something having mental existence, though not, he says, in any
metaphysical sense. His idealism is not of such sort that he recognizes
any other way to the attainment of ideas than that of science; and to
him "the service of the materialist who gives us information concerning
the function of the smallest nerve-fibres is of more worth than that of
the idealist who originates a whole philosophical system." The work of
philosophy lies in the rejection of all that is contrary to science, and
the clarification of ideals.

The will may be defined, not as a definite, separate power, but as the
self-conscious impulse to action resulting from excitation. Any other
definition is inconsistent with the theory of evolution, according to
which that individuation which is the first condition of the struggle
for existence, is nevertheless but the expression of all previously
existing oppositions. To make of the will or of the impulse to
self-preservation anything separate and individual, is as childish as to
personify death. The individual is totality as unity. Darwinism teaches
us, not that the world together with man has been created according to
any teleological principle, but that it has developed by virtue of
motion. The human being moves by virtue of reciprocal action and
reaction with the world. Yet only by virtue of his unity as feeling does
he think and will. Individuality is that which stamps all our activity
with the mark of the ego, which causes us to recognize every impulse
that moves in us as our impulse, to call all our willing ours. The
psychical, the summation of functions to which we give this name,
reaches consummation in the clarification of feeling to consciousness,
in which the desire of an action or of abstinence from an action appears
to us as our will. As thought is based on perception, so will is based
on impulse; and since thought and will appear as the two highest
opposites of feeling, and this, according to our definition, springs
from sensation by way of perception, the will, including action and
abstinence from action, arises out of the general sensitivity. The
progress of science authorizes the expectation that the close relation
of sensitivity to simple reaction will one day be discovered.

The conceptions of teleology are groundless. The so-called "ends" of
nature have the peculiarity that they are according to the means. It
does not rain in order that there may be vegetation, but vegetation
exists because it is conditioned by the rain. Only with thinking man, in
his struggle for existence, arises the concept of ends; man has not
attained to civilization by help of a friend; rather has he wrung
civilization from nature as an enemy; compelled by it to the exertion of
his whole strength, and growing in cunning by exercise, he has learned
to use the weaknesses of his foe to his own advantage. To want he owes
the greatest things that he has accomplished. By way of labor alone can
victory over nature be achieved and salvation won.

The standpoint of faith is childlike. Faith does not reason, and may not
do so if it wishes to remain faith. The child can comprehend nature and
man's relation to it only by the language of faith, and there are large
classes of people who, for a long time, will be accessible to no other
language but this. But faith must decrease in the same ratio as mankind
outgrows intellectual childhood. In the same measure, the worth of the
philosophical solution of certain problems must increase; and among the
most important of these problems must be reckoned that of bridging the
chasm between the individual and the world, which has grown wider with
the awakening of consciousness. It lies in the nature of self-conscious
thought to reach out beyond itself, just as it lies in the nature of
sense-perception to regard this "beyond" as the world to come. Hence the
endless longing which seeks the ruler of the world to come, and despairs
without him; until the supposed right to a future life is perceived to
be the right to the Only Whole, and an end is set in the attainment of
this whole. For the thinking man an aimless life has no meaning; there
is only one means of bridging the chasm; namely, that mankind shall set
itself an end.

A final destruction of life upon the earth must surely come, whether it
be in the shape of a sudden catastrophe or as the result of a slow
process. But such an end can no more be regarded as the "end" in the
philosophical sense than death can be regarded, in the same sense, as
the "end" of the individual life. By the development of ideas, which are
concepts of reason in distinction from concepts of the understanding, we
arrive at a notion of the ideal as end.

In the ethical ideal, there is contained more than the empiricist can
offer. The enthusiasm with which the true artist starves for his art, or
the martyr perishes for his conviction, can never be fully explained
from the empirical standpoint. One does not even need to be an idealist
in order to act thus; but the materialist or the realist who possesses
true love of beauty and a heart framed for great deeds, merely deceives
himself when he refuses to acknowledge the All-embracing which therein
overwhelms him. Sociology and the History of Civilization can only point
out how man has attained to the ideas of the Beautiful and the Good;
what these are and wherefore their influence is so powerful,--the real
worth of the Beautiful and the Good,--thought by concepts alone can
show.

The Idea of Man, as he has already developed and may yet develop, is, as
far as our knowledge reaches, the highest of human thoughts. We are
therefore formulating no metaphysical theory in personifying mankind,
and pointing out that the perfecting of which it is capable is the great
end which it has set itself. We know, by our knowledge of human nature,
that mankind will always endeavor to be happy, and that it will approach
nearer perfection the more real and general its happiness becomes.

The particular rules of morality may and must change; but the highest
principle of all morality is changeless. From the purest moral feeling
came Schiller's words: "Live with thy generation, but be not its
creature; serve thy contemporaries, but in that which they need, not
that which they prize. Without having shared their guilt, share with
noble resignation their punishments, and yield thyself freely to the
yoke which they both illy could do without and illy bear. By the
steadfast courage with which thou refusest their pleasure, thou shalt
prove to them that it is not cowardice which causes thy submission." In
these three sentences there lies a whole system of ethics.

In the will to good, indivisible from a feeling of freedom, of which no
power on earth can rob us, lies true happiness.

For mind, as for matter, the law of the indestructibility of force, of
work, is true. That which appears as force or energy is motion; every
impulse to motion is motion, and only in so far as it appears, can the
quantity of motion, force, energy, increase or diminish; as a matter of
fact, it always remains the same. But just as the activity and force of
matter increase with its differentiation, so the activity and energy of
the mind increase with intelligence. It is through intelligence that we
come to a comprehension of the distinction between good and evil, and
through intelligence that we are able to increase social prosperity, and
so morality.

There are no innate, primary human rights; there are only acquired
rights which man has gained for himself in the process of development.

If we were to express negatively the end which mankind sets itself, we
should define it as the greatest possible reduction of pain. Conscious
existence is accompanied by a feeling of pleasure; but the general
progress heedlessly overrides the individual being, and we therefore
have to erect barriers against the stream which thus turns pleasure into
pain.

Pain and pleasure are relative to the individual. Every sensation is
pleasurable as long as it does not exceed in strength a certain limit
corresponding, in each case, to the nature of the individual. Since,
however, every sensation becomes, by perception, feeling, thought
appears as a modifying factor in all pain which does not arise from too
extreme physical injury. The manner in which our perceptions,
thought-images, are formed, the store of thought-images and concepts
which we possess, and hence our thought-capacity, combined with the
extent and clearness of our knowledge, are decisive not only with
respect to the avoidance of pain and attainment of pleasure, but also
with respect to our attitude towards pain and pleasure in general; every
pain and every pleasure has, in the last analysis, such worth alone as
we attribute to it. The universalization of true education, the increase
of intelligence, is, therefore, the means by which man's lot may be
bettered.

Through the conditions of the earth's atmosphere, man has grown to be
the glorious creature that he is. If we gradually give him, by
education, an advantageous love of life and pleasure therein, and at the
same time do not neglect the cultivation of ethical principles, virtue
will become, with the increase of happiness, a necessity.

If intelligence is to bear the fruit which we thus demand of it, its
nature must be such as not only to be nourished by actual life, but also
to uplift by its increase the whole man. And this is, in fact, the case;
where it is not so, we have to do with a one-sided development such as
existing circumstances often condition, but which cannot be regarded as
normal. This point of view is the necessary consequence of the unity
which we postulate of man. If thought and will have their origin in
feeling, and if will clarifies itself through the clarification of
thought, then all advance in thought leads, in general, to an advance in
feeling, and true intelligence is inseparable from true love. We use the
word "love" here, as designating intelligence in its highest sense, and
declare, moreover, that we would desire to see this meaning alone
attached to love. Over against the conception of love which we find in
Hartmann and Schopenhauer, we place the conception of Spinoza, who
designates it as a free, reasonable activity, and says of it as
distinguished from passion that "the love of both man and wife has for
its cause, not a pleasing exterior merely, but especially freedom of
soul."

If we regard intelligence and love in their highest antithesis, the one
appears as the appropriative, the other as the self-devoting conception
of things. But since we form a conception of things and make them our
own only in proportion to our intelligence, our attitude towards them
must be according to this measure; and since there is no action without
reaction, intelligence must be broadened by love as well as love
clarified by intelligence. The highest of all is intelligence; but it is
love that first lends it creative power; without love it cannot create,
but only destroy. Everything great and noble that man can point out as
his work is due to love--love of mankind, love of country, love of
knowledge, love of art, love of labor in general. If the devotion is
deficient in purity, determined by extraneous motives, the work will
bear marks of the deficiency. The reason why the power of love is so
much greater than every other power is that its all-embracing, boundless
character reacts upon it as a feeling of eternity, enabling it to
undertake all things, as if it might conquer even death. Life,
considered in its parts, is cheerless; but love, regarding it in its
totality, points out to it the way of salvation through itself. Love is
the concrete element which exalts the abstraction of Intelligence to
incarnate Idea; therefore is love the idealizing principle from which
intelligence draws belief in its own aims. And if one questions whence
comes the conception of immortality, impossible to be won from
experience, love must confess itself guilty of originating it, being
unable, to exist without this self-delusion.

Carneri thus places himself in direct opposition to Schopenhauer's and
Hartmann's notion of love, which, he says, "falls like a deep shadow
over their whole conception of the world"; and he pleads in favor of a
standpoint which shall make self-perfection the aim of existence for
woman as for man. He propounds a theory of education for woman which,
according to his own statement, places him at one in spirit with Mill;
but he avers that he cannot follow the latter in his more extreme views,
which, he says, were evidently assumed by Mill only in view of the
strength of the enemy with which he had to contend. The book ends with
the following paragraph:--

"We do not run after ideals; hence no plan floats before us, according
to which the world should be shaped anew. He who understands how to read
the book of History knows that, in no one place does the identity of
form and content come more clearly into view than in others, and that,
with every new content, there is always a new form also. The modern
state has by no means outlived itself yet, and those who endeavor to do
away with it know not what they are about. Instead of thinking upon a
new form, let us devote our care to the clarification of the content. No
one deceives himself as to the suffering in the world; but he deceives
himself who thinks that he alone can bring about a better condition.
Only the action of all can better things. Therefore, that which remains
for us to do can be summed up in these few words: _Let us make every
effort possible to place every one in a position to help himself._ This
is the only ethical conception of universal reform. Let us prize
knowledge above all things, and let us show that we so prize it by
increasing it and diffusing it as much as lies in our power; let us
prize it above all things, and prove that we do so by using it for the
good of mankind. By knowledge we have become human beings, because
knowledge has brought us to a comprehension of the Beautiful and the
Good. It is knowledge that sets life an end in the attainment of the
Good, and knowledge that glorifies our path to that end. Let us educate
for ourselves wives that shall not merely dimly feel what we think, but
such as will bring to the execution of our will a clear understanding.
Let us educate for ourselves wives who, fired by the same feelings as
our own, will unite their efforts with ours in the education of a
generation that shall take _morally_ the stand upon which the science of
the century finds itself. Let us seek true happiness if we would find
virtue. It is to no wisdom, but it is likewise to no foolishness that we
owe the existence of the world. Man can be foolish; but he can also be
wise; and if he is wise, then the world too is wisely arranged."

Carneri begins his "First Principles of Ethics" ("Grundlegung der
Ethik," 1881) with an investigation of the origin of primary concepts
and our knowledge through these. In order to bring light into our
conception, we must first of all learn the way to the concept; for then
only can we see how the concept completes itself in the judgment, and
becomes, in reasoning, the criterion of its own worth.

The problem which first presents itself to us is that of Life in
general. The problem is inseparable from that of corporeality. If we
follow phenomena to their last conceivable reduction, we finally pass
from the perception of mass to the concept of matter; but further than
this we cannot go. At least, we can perceive only material things, and
that which we call the spiritual in distinction from the corporeal has
always something corporeal as its basis; and if we do not wish to
dispense with the reliable guidance of experience, we shall not overleap
this barrier. Science cannot reckon with supernatural factors.

What matter _is_ we cannot know; that it exists, however, that the
phenomena of nature are no empty seeming, sensation, as the felt result
of the mutual relation between us and the outer world, testifies.
Sensation is the basis of our self-consciousness, of the only full and
irrefutable certainty that we possess. As to what true Being or
Existence is, there is disagreement; but there can be none regarding the
fact that we are conscious of our sensations; and upon this
consciousness rests the postulate of the materiality[66] of all
existence. In order to assert the materiality of all phenomena, we are
forced to distinguish between a corporeal and a non-corporeal action of
matter; matter operates mentally when its division or differentiation
proceeds so far that the resulting phenomena can no longer be perceived
by the senses, but only conceived by thought. The indivisibility of mind
from corporeality follows directly from this definition of the mental
side of nature. We distinguish between the two only for convenience'
sake. The newer Psychology knows nothing of Sensuality in the old sense
of the word, since the basis of all psychical effects is physical.

For matter operating mentally, as for matter operating corporeally,
there are no specific energies; it is, as Wundt expresses it,
functionally indifferent. The differing results of a high
differentiation of centralized organisms arise in accordance with the
changing combinations of elementary parts and nerve activities. These
results are not, however, to be regarded as the mere effects of matter,
but as phenomena of the same, in fact, as the consummation and crown of
the whole evolution of nature. Even in the sense-organs we see the
differentiation of matter advance beyond the sphere of sense-perception.
Therefore, in distinguishing between mind and matter, we are still in
the realm of the natural, and follow the path of experience, if by
experience is understood not alone immediate experience, but also the
conclusions which directly or by strict analogy may be drawn from it.

The theory of an atom-soul and the theory of an organizing principle
must be abandoned as teleological, and so inconsistent with the facts of
evolution. The theory which holds force to be a transcendental
existence, a something outside of matter, must also be rejected. With
the endless divisibility is given an endless motion, inward or outward;
the endlessly divisible matter exists in endless motion, or what is the
same, the endless motion is the endlessly divided matter. Hence motion,
like matter, can never diminish; only the form of its appearance
changes.

The order in nature cannot be used as the basis of a teleological
argument; what we call order of nature is necessity as distinguished
from chance. For example, the statement that the life of the earth
requires the alternation of day and night means merely that, since day
and night alternate upon the earth, only such beings could arise and
continue in existence thereon as flourish under this alternation.

The first appearance of protoplasm introduces no strictly new thing, but
only a new form of matter with life-motion; and the formation of germs
is only a further step of the process. The most important characteristic
of all life is sensation. This is the form in which, in all living
things, that which in the rest of nature we call reaction, appears. That
it is so easy for us to say in the same breath, the animal possesses
sensation; and, by this particular excitation we produce in him this
particular sensation, has its reason in the fact that the animal is not
only capable of sensation, but is, moreover, continually in a state of
sensation. By the fact of its continual reaction upon sensation, it
keeps itself alive. Hence the two concepts coincide, so to speak;
sensation is to life what divisibility is to matter. We express with
these words more than a similitude, since all sensation is based upon
motion, is, indeed, motion, and every motion may be reduced to a
division or differentiation in the broadest sense of the word. All
further distinctions, as, for instance, with respect to the mode of
sensation (which belongs, without doubt, to plants as well as to
animals), we leave unnoticed; all differences in the forms of life are
but those of degree, though they may be wide differences of degree; they
are to be ascribed to the influence of outer circumstances.

Sensation develops in the direction of least resistance. In the animal
world, we have to distinguish between outer and inner factors, with the
latter of which a new element seems to be introduced. The difference
between the two is not, however, one of essence, since the will, too, is
determined by outward circumstance. The inner factors of evolution are
comprised in the germ, from which the individual is produced; while the
environment constitutes the outer factors. The individual enters the
world with a certain reserve quantity of force, which represents his
power of resistance to outside forces, and he passes the more rapidly
from youth to age the more rapidly this force is consumed. This
accumulation of force is, therefore, identical with the impulse to
self-preservation, which, as modified by various inner and outer
excitations, manifests itself in various forms. But he who, as
unimpassioned thinker, desires progress, desires also retrogression; he
who desires youth desires age, since the two concepts are correlative
and the one includes the other; old age, and finally death, must come to
our planet as a whole, as well as to the human individual. The original
tendencies of the total character determine, for the most part, the
manner in which the individual sustains the struggle for existence; yet
the environment is in no less degree active in this determination. Not
less important than the manner of reaction is the differing
susceptibility to particular kinds of excitation; the character
resulting from the mutual action and reaction of individual and world
depends upon the manner in which the individual adapts himself to
circumstances, ennobles and disciplines himself.

In idealism, as long as it remains within proper bounds, there is
certainly truth; he who derides it, derides himself. But realism has
also its truth, as long as it does not misjudge the worth of concepts,
by which alone we clearly recognize what things are to us, what their
relations to us are, and so how we have to deal with them. Concrete
concepts inform us as to what is true and what is not true in phenomena.
There is no greater mistake than to suppose that what things are in
themselves, not what they are for us, is of importance to us; as if we
could have an interest in that which things are not for us. The decisive
point is the fact that, not things as they appear to us, but their
rightly conceived appearance, their appearance as understood by adequate
concepts, is the beginning and end of knowledge. Hence the true student
of nature can no more do without the concept than the true philosopher
can leave material perception out of account. Stiff-necked Materialism
is as one-sided as old-time Metaphysics; the one has no meaning for its
form, the other no form for its content; the one is a corpse, the other
a ghost, and each strives in vain to attain the warmth of life. Natural
Science and Philosophy must tread different paths, in so far as division
of labor requires them to do so; but they labor at the two sides of one
whole. Nature is not a machine, but life in its fullest form, and the
task set us is to understand her as she is, not to patch together a
nature out of disconnected scraps.

Carneri adopts the definition given by Claude Bernard, to whom life is
neither a principle nor a result, but a conflict. To the chemical
synthesis, from which protoplasm results, is added, through mechanical
integration, morphological synthesis, to whose special form inherited
characteristics are related as elements. Through the conflict within
living forms, and between these and the rest of the world, motion,
attaining to the character of function, appears as continuous
consumption. Destruction and renewal are inseparable correlative
concepts. This fact is contained in the concept of the conservation of
force, work, and motion. We may distinguish between (1) latent life,
such as that accumulated in the germ, (2) the merely oscillating
plant-life, and (3) free animal life. With this distinction, we place
ourselves upon the standpoint of the individual, for whom there is both
beginning and end, and to whom renewal is subordinated to destruction;
for consumption, death is the characteristic of living in distinction
from non-living matter. If, therefore, we regard life as identical with
death, we merely assert that we consider death identical with life, and
that, in the broader sense of the word, for the universe as a whole,
there is no death. That which Claude Bernard designates as Construction
is the differentiation and division of labor arising in the process of
integration. The cell constitutes the first integration of protoplasm.
In it, motion takes place in a particular form, organizes according to
this form, causes division and synthesis, and impresses features of
character that, by their action and reaction with the environment,
either effect their own destruction, or else maintain their existence,
propagate themselves, become fixed, and undergo further evolution. In
this manner species arise and vary: and the more primitive the form, the
more variable it is; the more advanced, the more fixed. Hence the
invariable character of the germ-cells. In bone-formation, it is clearly
shown that special structure begins very early,--in the cell, namely;
but it is preserved only where it is aided by the necessary action and
reaction. Autonomic in itself, life submits itself to the general laws
of evolution.[67] As the direction of motion is determined for whole
groups of cells by the direction of the motion of the protoplasm in the
single cells, so organic function is determined by the grouping of the
irritable, contractile, sensible cells. From the first origin of life up
to its most perfect development, everything is formed at the cost of
other forms. If life is, therefore, to be conceived as a conflict, it is
a conflict as wide as the universe itself, and we say, with Claude
Bernard, that "life may be characterized, but not defined."

Everything that has sensation lives. As life depends upon particular
combinations of particular elements, so sensation is the characteristic
mark of such combinations, and a higher form of that simple reaction
common to nature in general. Reaction has its reason in the motion
arising from the endless divisibility of matter, through which the most
different combinations and reactions are produced. Since we have before
us, in our contemplation of corporeal nature, not abstract matter in
general, but some sixty or more special chemical elements, we must, in
thinking of atoms, have in mind atoms of these particular elements, and
not atoms of abstract matter in general; of such atoms of matter in
general, or, if one will, of primordial matter, we can know only that
they would in general attract and repel. Only by degrees can a
particular reaction of the elements have been developed; and since our
known elements have particular different reactions, they must be the
product of different combinations. Sensation is due to certain
combinations of these elements; when the combinations no longer exist,
the atoms of these elements still react according to their
characteristic method as atoms of particular elements, but the sensation
dependent on their peculiar combinations is destroyed. The atom as such
is devoid of sensation, and we may convert our earlier proposition,
making it read: Only that which lives is sensible. We know quite well
how much of this course of reasoning is of hypothetic nature; but the
strictest consistency cannot be denied it. The method which explains
life by the assumption of sensible atoms is a much shorter and easier
one; but is it not likewise a method of greater risk? And is there no
danger that, in rejecting a method by which all changes in phenomena are
referred to functions of combinations of elements, we may seek, in
matter itself, something that is not matter? The above theory of life,
also, takes its departure from the assumption that all was, originally,
in the formation of the world, living in the broader sense of the word.
But here we are concerned with life in the narrower sense of the word,
as distinguished from what we call dead nature.

Soul is, therefore, according to our definition, equivalent to animal
life, in contrast to the life of the plant. The significance of the
distinction lies in the intermediation of the general organic unity, not
in a qualitative division. The elements are the same; only their
connection is different, and that which distinguishes the animal is a
centralization of the organs. In referring to the possession of soul by
the animal, we simply point out the independent manner in which, by
reason of sensation, its impulses govern, and develop, through the
scale, up to consciousness and will. Of course the gradations are very
numerous, inasmuch as the functions of the soul are determined by the
development of the organism. The difference between animals whose
sensation attains clear consciousness and such as do not attain to more
than a mechanical action, does not concern us, as long as we regard the
psychical phenomena in their most general form. Every animal possesses
soul; we avoid the expression "_a_ soul," as giving the soul the
significance of something by itself. In like manner, we do not say that
_a_ life, but that life belongs to the animal. The chief condition
necessary to soul as to life consists in union to a whole, and soul
represents the gradation by which life lifts itself to the plane where
it becomes a mirror of the world.

Sensation, as centralized in the brain, becomes perception, the
sensation of a part becoming the sensation of the whole, a _feeling_ of
the individual. It is perceptions which cause movement. To find a
connection between perception as generally understood and the action of
the muscle would be as difficult as to show the connection between body
and soul in the sense of Spirit. But if we regard perception as feeling,
then the awakening of a corresponding impulse, and the transformation of
this into will, which finds expression in a corresponding motion, is
something so natural that it needs but a glance at the nerve-apparatus
in order to comprehend the rapidity of the whole process. With regard to
the unconscious character of the greater part of the process, and its
corresponding rapidity, we have to consider the gradual nature of the
development of the nervous system, the gradual drill of the parts, until
the whole process becomes perfect. By feeling is here not meant
necessarily feeling as pain or pleasure. This quality of feeling does
not necessarily belong to every perception, else thought, as a train of
perceptions, would be unbearable; a certain strength of feeling is
necessary in order that it may attain the character of pain or pleasure;
as we recognize a boundary at which sensation begins, so we recognize
one at which feeling begins to attain the character of pleasure and from
which, up to a second boundary-line, it continues to appear as pleasure;
beyond this line it appears as pain. Moderate feeling is beneficial to
the organism, immoderate feeling harmful; hence the appearance of the
one as pleasure, and of the other as pain. We say expressly "moderate,"
not "weak" feeling, because too weak feeling may also, under certain
conditions, be painful. Horwicz rightly protests against any attempt to
arrange the feelings in an exact scale, since a particular feeling may
lead to quite different phenomena of emotion, according to the
particular circumstances and the particular development which it
undergoes in the organism, and since it is furthermore nothing
changeless and distinct, but merely an energy that necessarily leads to
activity. Hence it is that the excitation which does not pass the stage
of sensation remains localized, but when it attains to the stage of
feeling takes possession of the whole individual, and brings the
essential tendency of his being[68] to expression.

As Carneri tends to interpret the sensation which he predicates of the
lower animals as a mere higher reaction of living matter, and thus
wholly mechanical, so he tends to regard the activity of all animals
which lack brain (under which he understands especially the nervous
developments found in the gray matter which contains Haeckel's
"soul-cells") as devoid of pleasure and pain, and due to mere
inheritance and force of habit. So the action of the ants is not to be
attributed to intelligence, but to mere reaction upon sensation due to
inheritance and exercise; and so the movements of a butterfly impaled
upon a red-hot needle would be attributable to the hindrance of its
flight, not to pain.[69] Thus, with Carneri, the words "sensation,"
"soul," "perception," and "feeling," lose their ordinary significance;
and this fact must be held in mind in the interpretation of his
assertions that "all animals have soul," and "all animals have
sensation."

Carneri further cites Haeckel's definition of the organism as a
cell-monarchy, in which different individuals, and different groups of
individuals, having different duties, are guided by a central power. He
does not intend thus to assume special centres for consciousness and
will, but only to assert that, through such centralization, the
expression of the whole individual, as total consciousness and total
will, takes place.

Not only the brain, but other parts of the nervous system, are affected
in perception; and the same parts are operative in remembrance. Thus the
association of ideas is explained.

As long as the animal remains upon the plane of mere instinct, it has
only blind impulses.[70] Only in the most highly organized animals do we
find the first traces of conscious, though not yet of self-conscious,
will. In that the animal knows what it will, it distinguishes clearly
the objects of its will, and hence its own impulses. Upon the earlier
plane of mere self-preservation, the beneficial, harmful, and
indifferent were not yet made inward, but only distinguished outwardly
by nature in the struggle for existence, in which the fittest survived;
in consciousness, however, the harmful and advantageous become inward,
taking the form of pain and pleasure. But the animal never gets beyond
the concrete case,--in which his inherited instincts, working with a
rapidity and freedom we often see imitated in the passions of men,
sometimes act so advantageously as almost to deceive us into believing
them the result of reflection; yet sometimes, again, bring most
disastrous results. The animal never attains to a notion of the Whole.
Associations and general perceptions the higher animal species have, but
not concepts.

Impulses appear, in their primary form in the animals, as passions.[71]
The first beginning of the ethical may be found in the passion of love
in the broadest sense of the word, as sexual love and the love of
offspring. The first is chiefly exacting, the second is higher, in that
it gives.

That which divides man physically from the brutes is merely the union of
qualities, all of which, but never all of which united, we find among
the animals; that which divides him mentally from them is self-conscious
thought, developed by means of speech. Through the development of
attention, which arises in connection with a greater and greater
centralization, sensation becomes perception, this develops further to
general perceptions, and is still further perfected to concepts.

Carneri believes primitive man to have been, not more benevolent than
the animals, but less so. Leaving out of account the carnivorous
animals, the brutes seem to satisfy their own wants without interfering
with the satisfaction of others, and, except where the possession of
females is concerned, to live in peace with each other. On the other
hand, the influence of man upon the domestic animals may be seen in the
greed of the dog, who, as capable of instruction, takes on himself all
the evil qualities of his master. The cat, who is not so intelligent as
the dog, is not thus influenced.

For nature there is no good and evil. The animal which tears and devours
its prey is no worse than the swollen stream, that uproots the trees in
its course. With consciousness, intention awakes; yet in the brute this
is only secondary; the brute distinguishes between pain and pleasure,
but not between these as the result of its own action in distinction
from that of nature outside itself. Only the self-consciousness of the
human being knows good and evil; nature does not know evil, for she does
not know the opposition on which it is based. There is wisdom in the
story of Genesis, which sees in the beginning of knowledge, the
commencement of evil. The awakening of self-feeling is the beginning of
a chasm, through the full development of which the individual is at
length separated from nature. With self-consciousness and the feeling of
boundless isolation that therein comes over him, man begins his ethical
development.

But the ethical does not begin with the human being known to us by
natural history; even yet there are races of man which stand lower than
many species of animals; and the early development of moral activity was
of necessity much more of the nature of that which we call evil than of
that which we call good. The mind is a sort of light; and as warmth is
indivisible from the motion which we call light, and the first warmth of
the sun could only burn, so the motion which we call mind could at first
only have destroyed; self-consciousness, in its earliest stages, can
have produced only the intense feelings which lie nearer pain than
pleasure. As man came to have intention, and gained new wants in
development, he could regard the intentions of his fellow-men only with
distrust. Envy, hatred, dislike, were developed long before the family,
and, later, the tribe furnished opportunity for love. Self-consciousness
could, at first, interpret good and evil only as having reference to
self, just as it also conceived its freedom as that of its own caprice.
The desire for happiness and endeavor to attain it is the primary
incentive to all human undertakings. It is erroneous to suppose that man
is nearer to the brutes by this impulse; the animal does not possess it,
has only the impulse to self-preservation.

The idea that man and wife together first constitute the complete human
being, and that the real future of this human being lies in the
children--the idea of the family is, certainly, of all ideas,
primordial, though it probably came late to consciousness. From the
family developed the tribe with the eldest at its head. The more
peaceful the tribe, the more others combined against it, and by their
combination compelled it still further to strengthen its resources. The
feeling of power awakened by the growing concord extended further and
further, and finally made its way to the individual with the full force
of the Idea. This development, but more especially the compelling power
of the struggle for existence, soon called the bravest to command in
place of the eldest of the tribe.

It is by the agency of no other being that, in the mutual relation of
physical and mental activity, consciousness is attained; man himself
comes to a feeling of himself. In the being endowed with soul, who on
the one hand attains, through integration, an independence that appears
as the impulse to self-preservation, on the other hand becomes conscious
of this impulse to self-preservation through a centralized nervous
system that raises the part-sensations to feelings of the whole,
sensation divides into two chief functions, which appear as passion and
thought. We are not concerned, in thought and passion, with opposites,
but with an opposition which a single phenomenon develops through
manifold action and reaction with the rest of the world of phenomena.
The distinction is merely a convenience in finer investigations; there
is, in fact, as little thought without emotion as emotion without
thought. And since emotion always manifests itself as will, this highest
opposition is best defined as that of thought and will. In order to
understand the human being, we must analyze these two sides of
consciousness.

Carneri's examination of the primary laws of thought can be only touched
upon here. In the law of Identity, or, negatively speaking, the law of
Consistency,[72] there comes to our consciousness a more general Species
which includes a determinate species. "The adequate, clear, correct,
corresponding[73] concept is consistent with itself," means, the
adequate concept finds itself again in every object which it includes.
The law of Identity expresses, therefore, not entire sameness, with
which the cessation of all thought would be reached, but simple
consistency. It affords us, thus, the means of recognizing the Untrue in
that which is not what it is called, hence also the means of recognizing
the True. The law of Excluded Middle contains an extension or doubling
of the law of Identity, in that the identity here appears, not in the
form of consistency, but in that of contradiction; as, "either--or." Not
one, but two cases are supposed, only one of which can exist or be true.
The disjunctive proposition which corresponds to it is not less
determinate than the categorical proposition which corresponds to the
law or judgment of Identity, but is rather, on the contrary, a more
forcible affirmation of it. In this determinate nature lies the worth
of the Excluded Middle. Du Bois Raymond's address on the Limits of
Knowledge has caused much joy to conservative thinkers; but these have
made much more out of it than it really means. There is either for us a
transcendental, or there is not; and if not, then we are limited to the
knowledge of nature. The scientific limit set to our knowledge by our
hypotheses and theories is, however, merely a limit set for the purpose
of rounding knowledge to a whole, not of closing it to a further
advancement; but such hypotheses must be consistent with experience and
founded upon it; otherwise we leave knowledge behind us and abandon the
hope of it. We cannot say what, within the province of science, man will
not know, except that he never will know everything.

The law of Causality is the most important law of thought, after that of
Identity. Reason and result are often confused with cause and effect.
The reason on account of which we do a thing is not, however, the cause
by which it occurs. The cause is the complexity of all conditions which
make it possible, and the reason of its performance coincides with a
conscious design on our part that constitutes our purpose. Causality has
nothing in common with the concept of purpose. The principal of
Sufficient Reason has been made the bridge between Causality and Design.
Probably human experience reached first the conception that nothing
occurs without sufficient reason, and only later, by a further mental
step, the conviction that everything for which the necessary conditions
exist takes place. With this conviction, the concept of causality became
clear; but, at the same time the bridge which connects it with the
theory of design in the succession of events was destroyed, so that only
a logical leap can restore us to this incomplete conception of earlier
experience. Causal necessity excludes purposed necessity. That which
takes place may be regarded as, in one direction, conformable to an end,
but may, on the other hand, conform to no end in any direction. A
succession of events conforms to purpose only in so far as it is
regarded by a particular consciousness which combines it in thought with
ends of its own or such as it ascribes to another consciousness. In the
law of Causality, as in the law of Identity, the necessity of
self-consistency and the self-consistency of Necessity reaches
expression. The sufficient reason is simply the completeness of the
conditions, with the existence of which the event takes place, and the
absence of which the event fails to take place.

Spinoza's "Will and intellect are one and the same" is the ethical law
of Identity. All thought is willed; that is, indivisible from a certain
coloring which it has in virtue of its identity with the will, just as
all will is connected with thought; there is, indeed, a will-less
thought, which might, however, just as correctly be called "unthinking
thought,"[74] just as "unthinking willing" is, in reality, will-less
willing. In all mental operations, the identity of the two functions is
found. A will is unthinkable without something willed--an end, given by
thought. It is the fact that, in his practical life, man recognizes
purpose as a necessity, which causes him to read purpose into nature.

"At the basis of identity lies a concept which throws light upon the
teleological principle. This is the concept of the General. The basis of
the principle of identity is a concept of species which embraces the
general in contrast to the singular and particular; just as the judgment
of Identity constitutes an advance to still greater Generality. The
concept of the General which reaches expression in species coincides
with the concept: Law of Nature. The Law is, for a particular circle of
events, what the Species is for a particular circle of objects. As in
the Species, the characteristics are expressed which an object must
exhibit in order to belong to it, so in the Law the conditions are
expressed which much exist in order that the instance included under it
may take place. The relation of Identity to Causality is unmistakable.
Species and Law include no mere plurality of objects and instances, for
as often as the instance comes to pass the law is fulfilled, and the
number belonging to a species is, in conception, limitless. Worlds like
our earth may come into existence again and again; hence specimens of a
certain species, eternally destroyed, may eternally renew themselves,
and instances which fall under a certain law may eternally occur. Simply
their conditions must exist in order that they may occur. Such cases
form, therefore, a whole; and this is Totality in Little." The
importance of every whole which sets itself over against the greater
whole has already been noticed. The former whole constitutes the concept
of Individuality which, as Undivided Unity, becomes independent. "The
limitlessness which we claim for the whole is one of conception; we thus
seek to make that which is incomprehensible conceivable." The concept
does not need to be imagined; it may be thought. "Every one knows what
he means when he opposes the whole to the part. The whole is not a
larger part, but the opposite of the part, as 'all' constitutes the
opposite of the many and the particular."

What we aim at, in this analysis, is a true Realism in the conception of
the Purposeful. The Purposeful is that which conduces to an end, the
Useful. From Individuality follows the individual nature of ends. Every
man has his own ends, and in the attempt to attain his ends does not
hesitate to set himself in opposition to all the rest of mankind. If he
is sufficiently energetic and cunning, he may even succeed, for a time,
in his endeavors, to the harm of humanity. Yet to have the whole of
humanity against oneself is to endeavor to proceed in the direction of
greater resistance, and the process must, sooner or later, result in the
triumph of the stronger power. In the struggle for existence, in its
larger as well as its smaller manifestations, the individual seeks, with
all his power, to satisfy the impulse to happiness which arises with
conscious existence; while the species, as the complex of all energies
developed by its parts, has an impulse to self-preservation of its own,
which, by its action as type, has originated and preserved for centuries
the conception of changeless kind.

"Here is the beginning of the dawn, whose sun, however, in order to
become visible and impart warmth, must rise still higher. The certainty
afforded in the law of Identity in positive form, in the law of
Contradiction in negative form, in the law of Excluded Middle in the
form of an opposition, and in the law of Sufficient Reason in
conditional form, is based upon Causality, Community of Species, or
Totality. For this reason, deduction and induction are only then to be
relied upon when the first form of reasoning has for its middle
proposition one that expresses causality, community of species, or
totality, and the latter form of reasoning takes these for its point of
departure. The analysis of Deduction is of worth as clarifying and
confirming thought, and thus extending its field as often as the
syntheses of Induction stand the proof of the process of clarification.
The supernaturalism of Dualism leads to a dead, the natural character of
Monism to a living, dialectic,--to the dialectic of Becoming. The
concept assumes a concrete form, and, as higher and higher rising sun,
enables us to conceive what it will be to us as Idea. The understanding
knows nothing of ideas; their realm is that of the reason; yet since the
reason is but a higher development of the understanding, the
commencement of this dawn must be perceptible in it. Moreover, the
division which we make between the two originates in our genetic
treatment of the subject, which seeks to explain the concept by showing
the course of its development. Yet the distinction is no empty
abstraction which may not claim life and form to a certain extent. The
human being is always the whole human being; but he is not always
uniformly developed, either physically or mentally. In one individual
the understanding, in another the reason, manifests itself more plainly
in thought. This is also true of the race, the people, and the epoch, as
of the individual. Modern development has turned more and more from the
ideal to material interests; we seem to be progressing towards a
reaction," but what that reaction will be, we cannot say; it may be a
reaction in the worst sense. The mistakes of the understanding cannot be
predicted. With the point of culmination, the extreme is reached, and in
Spiritualism may be found traces of a touching of extremes. Yet the
influence of the understanding is to be relied on in so far as it is the
clear mirror of Necessity. The understanding may err, just because it is
conscious; but experience always corrects these mistakes. Nature, as
gifted with mind, is no new nature; the laws of thought are the natural
laws of the mind. In their mirror the will sees the accomplishment of
the first mental development, and learns to comprehend this, on higher
mental planes, as Common Weal.

The opposition of the individual to the rest of the world which arises
with self-consciousness and individuality is greater, the greater the
individuality. To the struggle for existence is added the struggle for
happiness, which, separating into numberless desires that gain in
attractiveness with every obstacle opposed to their satisfaction, is the
origin of all the passions,--of greed, jealousy, envy, hatred, etc.
Through passion, which is the exaggeration of activities that, in a
normal form, are good, man is led into a struggle for false happiness,
just as the concepts under which his passions arise are false. The
individual against the world cannot attain happiness for himself. The
greatest good, peace of soul, freedom from passion, is attained only
through knowledge, by which the concepts of the individual are
corrected; it is attained, not as dead incapability of emotion, but only
as clear enjoyment of life after past storm. Labor and education are
the path to true happiness and, through true happiness, to virtue. The
passions are not separate existences; the whole man is the passion of
his heart; the whole man feels, just as the whole man thinks. But just
for this reason, because of the identity of will and understanding, the
correction of the concept is the correction of will. This is not saying
that will and understanding are never in opposition to each other; the
apparent opposition is, however, merely a hesitation of the will, which
does not know what it really will. It is true that one passion can be
conquered only by another; we cannot will an emotion that leads to a
certain course of action; but we can fix our attention on the objects
which produce it, and by thus reaching a clear recognition of their
actual and necessary relations, affect our own action. It is true that
man does as he wills; but he wills necessarily as he does. According to
the doctrine of freedom, it must be exactly those who act without
knowing wherefore they act, and who are thus driven by blind impulse,
who are the most fully self-determined. A real freedom and conquest of
necessity can, on the contrary, be attained only by obedience. Just as,
in the animal, the summation of impulses and desires reaches a focus in
feeling, so in man, in proportion to his development, the summation is
in consciousness, the focus of which is the point of concentration of
the will's activity. Spinoza's "Will and understanding are one" means:
the activity of the will is the realization of the activity of thought.
Every one, the more self-sacrificing, as the less self-sacrificing man,
does that which is to him the pleasantest; egoism turns the scale in
both cases; only in the one case the egoism has a basis of broader love.
And since we act according to our conception of things, the question of
our responsibility is the question of our full possession of
consciousness. The necessity of nature must take away our desert, as far
as a future life and its reward are concerned; but from the standpoint
of a being who desires happiness and attains to it through evolution,
necessity gains a new aspect. Natural Selection is Natural Necessity.

Yet not in the understanding, as such, but in the reason, is the
reconciliation of the same with will. Reason in the narrower sense is a
higher development of the understanding, constitutes its completion and
perfection, and presupposes a high degree of culture; though in a wider
sense, as the half-unconscious modification of the impulses by
adjustment to the needs of the species, it develops early in man. By it
alone man becomes man in the full sense of the word. The activity of the
mere understanding is an analytical, that of the reason a synthetical
one, the return of cold consciousness to warm feeling, of abstract mind
to concrete nature. Truth lies, for the reason, in Totality; hence, to
it, the General alone is comprehensible. It has to do, not with abstract
concepts, to which nothing in the realms of the mental or physical
corresponds, but with concepts of species, concrete concepts, which we
call, in distinction from abstract concepts, ideas. By ideas is not
meant existences in the Platonic sense, but the Typical in species.

The impulse to happiness which arises with consciousness as thought and
will, calls itself "I." It is the individual who, with every nerve-cell
and every drop of blood, attempts his own realization. But all
individuals are alike in this, that they reach, at last, a point where
they recognize the fact that their ego is but a miserable half which
needs a Thou to its completion. In the union of the Thou and the I, the
first I becomes a complete and perfect I. Man and woman both realize
that only together do they represent the whole human being. I and Thou
together constitute a We. The ego remains after, as before the union,
the axis upon which the whole world turns. But the egoism of mere
understanding is, by a broader thought, elevated to the altruism of
reason. As the highest union of thought and will, the reason becomes
Idea in and for itself, actual, absolute Idea. With the We was born the
Saviour who should reconcile the sharply opposed factors of awaking
consciousness. The light of his gospel spread in wider and wider
circles; man and woman no longer beheld, each, merely his own happiness
in the other; they saw their mutual happiness in their children, and
their own and their children's happiness in friends, and their own and
their children's and their friends' happiness in their fellow-men. The I
of the reason is the self-conscious We.

The struggle for happiness has brought forth, out of the privileges and
endeavors of individuals, civilization in its present form. Want and the
necessity for labor have been the spur to endeavor and advance. Through
the concepts of ends and of intention, the self-conscious will further
evolved ideas, which themselves undergo a struggle in the activities to
which they give rise; and this is no longer the struggle for existence,
but the struggle for civilization.

There are three Ideas which, arising out of the extension of the I to
Thou and We, are the spring of all ethical conceptions; these are Love,
Humanity, and Public Spirit.[75] Love is the passion of passions and is
the spring of all capacity to altruistic emotion. Love is life in its
highest degree;[76] and by the manner in which a human being loves one
may know what manner of man he is, and what will be the nature of his
feelings towards his fellow-men in other relations of life. A man's
conduct towards women is the surest test of his character. That which
Spencer calls Integration, that which has created all nature, from the
first germ to the perfect human being, and, as preservative cell-labor,
still continues to create,--this infinite Something comes to
consciousness in the human being, as Love. On the lowest plane it can
appear only as simple impulse; but what, developing from stage to stage,
it can accomplish, the history of Love shows us.

To these three ideas of Love, Humanity (or Benevolence), and Public
Spirit correspond three outward phenomena, which bear such relation to
them in the development of morality as the body bears to the soul. These
are: the Family, the State-form, and the Representatives of Great Ideas.
These latter, the men who have been pioneers of civilization, we do not
need to pity or regard as victims, though life was to them a mighty
struggle and a restless labor; in their suffering was their pleasure;
and that which impelled them and compelled them to attain their end was
the impulse to happiness. Therein lies the wonderful secret of the
clarified impulse to happiness, that it finds its highest satisfaction
in itself. Such representatives of great ideas are those in whom the
species overcomes the individual, and out of the species "man" the
species-man is developed. That which they express is the True, if only
the True for, and in, mankind. In this lies their worth; as worth in
Science also, and in the Beautiful, lies in the truth of the Idea that
is therein expressed. The True becomes practical in the Good.

The reason is thus the first condition of happiness, and freedom of the
will lies in the ethical ennoblement of reason, which is nothing more
nor less than obedience, as the total result of all natural causes; by
it the individual is lost in the species as a whole. This ethical height
does not consist in impulse, but in the self-conscious activity of will.
Its mental expression is an Ethical Sense, in distinction from the Moral
Sense of the Intuitionists. Through it man is at one with himself as
with his kind.

The Ethical Sense is not the common property of the species. Just as it
has, however, reached expression in a few, so it is more and more
realized in the many by the process of evolution, through which a common
will, purpose, and good are necessarily finally evolved from all
striving of individual wills after happiness. Ethical ideas arise as the
result of experience, and in them man gradually attains reason.

For the Reason to which Love, Public Spirit, and Humanity are the
natural element, the General (Common) as truth, is no empty conception,
but a promise whose fulfilment is the Good and the Beautiful. The
faithfulness of this Reason never swerves, since it depends on no fear,
but springs from the clearest conviction, and therefore is one with the
love which it feels and inspires. Its friendship is as strong as it is
unselfish, for it does not call anything "friendship" that is based on
other relations than those of mind. Its generosity is always strength,
its mercy never weakness. As far as its power reaches, so far and no
farther do its remorse and pity extend; for all passions which reduce or
dim the activity of the soul are unreasonable. The way to the attainment
of the ethical spirit is pleasure, which guides, though it often
misguides us; fortunately, on the wrong paths we sooner or later meet
with pain, while on the right path we are ever accompanied by pleasure
as "transition from less to greater perfection," to quote Spinoza. The
feeling of Responsibility consists in the soul's recognition of all its
action and omission of action as its own, and in the courage to endure
the consequences of these.

The ethical Ideal, which the ethical imagination as "scientific"
conceives, is the truly happy man, the man fully in harmony with
himself. This idea is to be regarded as a star by which we are to shape
our course, not as an end to be fully attained. Through labor mankind
approaches this ideal, attains knowledge from experience, and clarifies
the concept of happiness. The "I" extends itself to an "I" of mankind,
so that the individual, in making self his end, comes to make the whole
of mankind his end. The ideal cannot be fully realized; the happiness
of all cannot be attained; so that there is always choice between two
evils, never choice of perfect good, and it is necessary to be content
with the greatest good of the greatest number as principle of action.

This is an ideal which is actually and necessarily evolved. Benevolence
has become more general, and has attained a degree not conceived of in
former times. The ideal of a happy humanity has gained definite
outlines, and has become an earnest aim towards which we steer with
filling sails. The end is not to be reached by force, which brings in
its train evil that cannot be gotten rid of for generations, but must be
attained within the bounds prescribed by the state, through education
and increase of intelligence. Nor can the state declare and ensure
happiness; the duties of the state are chiefly negative, as Bentham has
said. Each individual sacrifices a portion of his happiness in order
that the rest may be secured to him by the state; the first-named part
comprises his duties, the rest constitutes his rights; the office of the
state is to hold each to his duties and secure to each his rights. There
is no perfect state, just as there is no perfectly good individual; but
there is progress in states as in individuals.

The merely Useful can never furnish a full solution of the problem of
Ethics, any more than Mathematics and Mechanics or Physics and
Physiology can do so. The Perfect is much more than the merely Useful.
Spencer finds the condition of happiness in the exercise of function.
But he regards happiness as the final end of morality, while, according
to our system, the latter is the product of the former.

Carneri again pleads, in this book, for the like right of woman with man
to mental culture, and to labor which shall make her independent of the
caprice of man; the good of the family alone to be regarded as the
limiting factor.

The extent of Carneri's work on the subject of Ethics makes it
impossible to consider minor points of his theory, such as are included,
for instance, in his criticism of Hartmann, of Schopenhauer, Feuerbach,
and others; or to define more clearly than has been done his relation to
Spinoza, Kant, Hegel, etc. His book "Entwicklung und Glueckseligkeit,"
published in 1886, is a collection of essays which first appeared
separately in "Kosmos," and which, as such, do not hold to each other
the relation of parts of an organic whole. They are chiefly a
recapitulation of the views already expressed in the "Grundlegung der
Ethik," with some extensions and possibly some modifications;--these
last, however, chiefly of an extraneous character. In these essays
Carneri demands a systematic moral training in the common school, to the
end of the development of conscience, such training to be non-religious,
though not anti-religious excepting in case the religion itself be seen
to transgress the laws of right established by humane reason; he
protests against the error of Materialism, as likewise against that of
the Apriorists and the "Ideologists" or Idealists in the narrower sense
of the word; and he reaffirms, defines, and further defends his
standpoint as that of a "Real-idealist"; that is, of one to whom Kant is
the point of departure in a farther evolution of theory. He reaffirms
the oneness of the universe, so of man with nature, restates the
self-identity of the individual in will and thought, limits the
knowledge of man to nature as it is for us, but invests it with
certainty within these bounds, and reasserts the necessity of the
progress of the whole through the efforts of the many for happiness. He
lays further stress upon the absence of morality, not only among the
animals, in whom at least general ethical feelings, in distinction from
those towards individuals, are not found, but also among savages;
morality being not the incentive to, but the product of the state. From
this standpoint, he combats Socialism as proposing impossible ideals,
since it presupposes ethically perfect men as governing and being
governed by the laws, and since it disposes of the freedom of the
individual. The theory of compulsion reckons without the will of man as
he is and must be. Man has no primordial rights (except, perhaps, the
right to get and keep all he can); he has only rights that he has gained
by the help of the state. There is no one commandment in which man's
whole duty may be expressed, unless it be, perhaps, some such new
rendering of Kant's words as this: Act always in such a manner that the
maxims of thy will might be taken as the principle by which to render
happy the greatest possible number of human beings. But this can never
become a categorical imperative for all men. Morality lies in the Will
to Good, which becomes in the moral, or according to Carneri's phrase,
the ethical man, a second nature: his sense of duty is joy in duty,
highest satisfaction of his desire for happiness. It might perhaps be
claimed that Carneri, in his theory of the Conscience, has in this book
laid more stress on feeling than in his others; however, it is to be
recollected that, with him, thought and feeling are no distinct
faculties, but that conscience means less an impulse unconscious of
final ends than a self-conscious attitude or readiness of the will as
the result of conviction.

Carneri's latest book, "Die Lebensfuehrung des modernen Menschen" (1891),
is practical rather than theoretical, a consideration of general
problems and rules of action.

FOOTNOTES:

[65] Wirklich.

[66] Stofflichkeit; by this word Carneri designates "das Gemeinsame
aller Gegenstaendlichkeit."

[67] An sich autonom, unterwirft sich das Leben den Cesetzen, die aus
der allgemeinen Entwicklung sich ergeben.

[68] Daseinstrieb.

[69] Pp. 112, 113.

[70] Dunkle Triebe.

[71] Affecte.

[72] Widerspruchslosigkeit.

[73] Entsprechend.

[74] Gedankenloses Denken.

[75] Gemeinsinn oder Gemeingeist, pp. 340, 410. Carneri explains this
word as equivalent to the English "common-sense," but defines the latter
as feeling for the general, the universal.

[76] Potenz.




HARALD HOeFFDING

"ETHICS" ("Ethik," 1887)


Ethical judgments contain an estimate of the worth of human actions.
Every such estimate presupposes the existence of a need, a feeling which
spurs us on to the judgment of the action, as also the existence of a
standard, an ideal, according to which we judge. The motive to the
ethical judgment may be called the basis of Ethics. The standard
involved in the ethical judgment determines the content of Ethics, in
that it decides which actions, which directions and modes of life, are
to be called good in the ethical sense. The ethical basis is the
subjective, the standard the objective, principle in Ethics; the
character of an ethical conception depends upon this presupposed basis,
the applied standard, and the relation between the two.

The feelings and impulses of the individual are not only influenced by
his own experience, but bear also a character derived from the
experience of the whole species; hence the ethical judgments delivered
by the individual are the result of the whole experience of his kind. It
is by virtue of this circumstance that the ethical system of the
individual gains its power; as ethics of the species, it is a condition
of the health and vitality of human life.

This actual working Ethics of the species and of life has been named
Positive Morality. Such Positive Morality manifests itself in the
every-day judgments and principles of men, often in the form of
proverbs, and may express either the enduring worldly wisdom of a
nation, a tribe, or a religious society, or the less enduring "public
opinion" of a century or an epoch.

Is it well to treat such Positive Morality to a criticism, which,
arousing, as it must, doubts and questions, will interfere with the
certainty and energy of action that characterize unreflecting instinct?
Is it well to examine the principles of such a system from a scientific
standpoint? We may answer: Life itself leads naturally to such
questionings; only where the view is narrow and the problems simple is
there full security from doubt. With the growth of experience begins a
comparison of the different laws and ideals, the differing institutions
of different epochs and peoples of which one learns; or new experience
presents problems which cannot be solved by means of the system handed
down; or the individual seeks some orderly arrangement of the great
multiplicity of ethical judgments which he himself pronounces or hears
others pronounce, for the purpose of distinguishing between the more and
the less important ones. It is certainly a serious point in an
individual's or a nation's development when reflection and criticism
begin; but where life leads naturally to such questionings, we must
either find some answer to them or else some reason why they shall not
be answered. Moreover, it is to be noticed that certainty and force of
action are not absolute Goods. The greatest energy may take a most
disastrous direction, and must then be checked. To a new and better
insight, when attained, one must endeavor to secure all the energy
possible. All evolution consists in the diversion of energy from lower
to higher ends.

A scientific system of Ethics does not, and cannot, take the place of
Positive Morality; it only supplies the latter with a basis of reason,
broadens, and develops it. Such a scientific system only endeavors to
discover in accordance with what principles we direct our life, and to
secure for these, when ascertained, greater clearness and inner harmony.
In the mental life of the human being, a continuous action and reaction
of the conscious and the unconscious takes place, as well as of
perception, feeling, and will. What is won in the one province may
profit the others also.

Two tasks of Scientific Ethics, as Historical Ethics and as
Philosophical Ethics, are to be distinguished. Historical Ethics has to
do with the description and explanation of the development of Positive
Morality. Philosophical Ethics has to decide upon the worth of the
various forms assumed by the latter. Philosophical Ethics is a practical
science, and is based upon the supposition that we set ourselves ends
which may be reached through human action. Every ethical judgment
presupposes such an end, for feeling is set in motion by the sight or
the thought of an act only when the latter promotes, or stands in the
way of something, the existence and success of which are desired by us.
Not all that is developed as practical morality can be pronounced good.
On the other hand, customs which were at first assumed from motives
which must be condemned by Philosophical Ethics, may yet prove
themselves good, and may be practised, later, from higher motives; and
such customs cannot then be condemned on account of their origin. Hence,
Philosophical Ethics is both conservative and radical; it respects
nothing simply because it exists; but since it endeavors to furnish
guidance beyond present standards, it attempts to show how that which
has been developed historically may be given new forms and thus used for
further progress. It is difficult, from a broader view, to distinguish
perfectly between Historical and Philosophical Ethics; the historian has
an ideal which he applies more or less in his researches; and the
philosopher in Ethics is more or less ruled by the prevailing opinions
of his time. This necessitates a continual re-discussion of problems.
Yet it does not prevent the existence, in any system, of lasting
principles among the less enduring ones.

Theological Ethics is directly opposed to Historical Ethics as well as
to Philosophical Ethics. It builds upon tradition, upon truth as
something historically revealed. So far, it might appear as if
Theological Ethics were related to Historical Ethics. But the system of
the former does not recognize the method of scientific research, since
the revelation on which it is based is due, according to its doctrine,
to an interposition of supernatural forces not to be explained by the
physical, psychological, and social laws that serve as the foundation of
historical science. It demands a unique position for its historical
basis, and asserts that this must be looked at in an entirely different
light from that in which the rest of the history of the world is
regarded. It appears to approach Philosophical Ethics in instituting an
examination of the worth of historic acts and modes of life. But it
undertakes this examination, not according to any principle that can be
found in nature, but from the point of view of a supernatural revelation
of an ideal. Its foundation is an absolute principle of Authority; its
good is that which is God's will. But how is the individual to be sure
as to what, in the single case, is God's will? By the inward testimony?
How is he to distinguish certainly between such and his own natural
thoughts and feelings; what means of distinction can be applied? In
passing thus to the province of Psychology, we assume a human means of
distinction, and the principle of Authority loses its force. Or if it be
said that we should receive this principle of Authority because it
answers to a need of our nature, we may ask how we know that the need is
one that should be satisfied? Its mere existence cannot guarantee that.
Or how, then, are we to distinguish which of other wishes and needs of
our nature should, and which should not, be gratified? Is the principle
of Authority to decide this? Then we argue in a circle.

A similar circle is adopted by such theologians as attempt to combine
the two assertions: "The good is good because God wills it"; and "God
wills it because it is good." If the good is identical with God's will,
this means that he wills it because it is his will; if he, however,
first recognizes something as good, and therefore wills it, then his
will bows to a law and rule, and is not, in itself, the cause whereby
the Good is good.

Have we not, as a fact, already broken with the absolute principle of
Authority as soon as we begin to reflect, to endeavor to bring the
various commandments of Authority into harmony with each other, thus
applying the measure of our own reason to them?

But it is not these inner contradictions alone which hinder
Philosophical Ethics from making use of theological assumptions; that
which has called Philosophical Ethics into existence and lends it
interest, is the conviction that the ultimate reason of the ethical must
lie in man himself. However lofty may be the ideal, it can become man's
ideal only through his own recognition of it as ideal. For this reason
Socrates was the founder of Ethics by the command: "Know thyself!" In
this command is expressed the principle of free investigation, the
opposite to that of blind obedience. The desire to make Ethics as far as
possible independent of assailable assumptions is likewise active in the
establishment of a system of Philosophical Ethics.

In the great, sometimes too great, regard paid to the distinction
between the subjective and the objective worth of actions, and the
contest as to the relative importance of the two factors, the fact is
often overlooked, that the standard by which ethical judgment is
pronounced is itself of subjective nature. The question arises as to
wherefore we seek a general and objective standard.

It is a fact that human beings reflect upon their own acts, pronouncing
them, according to the result of this reflection, good or bad. How are
such judgments as these possible?

We will suppose, first, the simplest conceivable case, namely, that the
acting subject pronounces judgment on his own act without consideration
of the existence of other beings. Such a judgment must presuppose
memory; but it presupposes something more, namely pain or pleasure
through memory; an end is aimed at only because the thought of a result
causes pleasure. In the simple case supposed, the feeling which
determines the end can be only that of the individual himself, and the
latter will judge the act as good or bad according as it has affected
his own life. The character and significance of the judgment will depend
on whether the feeling of pain or pleasure is determined only by the
single moment or has reference to the life of the individual as a whole.
The lower the life of consciousness, the more isolated and independent
are the single moments of time in relation to each other, and the less
is the significance of the memory and the thought of the ego as a whole
embracing the single moments with their content. Only a half-unconscious
instinct hinders the individual from losing himself in the moment; the
instinct of self-preservation leads him to consider the future and to
make use of the experience of the past. The more he loses himself in the
moment, the less is the power of judgment, since comparison and action
and reaction of the different states cannot take place. The single
moment bears to all others the relation of an absolute egoist, who does
not wish to relinquish any part of its satisfaction for their advantage.

And here we may perceive the possibility of a standpoint upon which all
judgment is dispensed with. Such a standpoint is represented by
Aristippus of Cyrene, who asserts the sovereignty of the moment. It is
not without its justification. Ethics itself must show cause for the
relinquishment of the satisfaction of the moment in favor of other
moments.

If the principle of the sovereignty of the moment could be practically
carried out, no reasoning could overthrow it. However, there can
scarcely be a conscious individual in whom there are not instincts and
impulses which reach beyond the moment. When a momentary state of
feeling, as the effect of an act of the subject, comes together in
consciousness with the feeling determined by the conception of the life
as totality (the result of memory and comparison), a new feeling arises
which is either one of harmony or one of discord. The standard by which
judgment is pronounced is determined by this feeling. The capacity for
such feelings is conscience, as this may manifest itself in entirely
isolated individuals. Conscience, in the broadest sense of the word, is
a feeling of relations, and requires only a relation between central and
peripheral feelings,--feelings of wider, and feelings of narrower
thought-connection. The single moment and the single act are judged
according to their worth as parts of the individual life as totality.

And here the individual is confronted by the necessity of bringing the
single parts of his life into harmony. The problem is certainly never
solved by any individual involuntarily. The estimation of earlier acts
according to the assistance they give in this task is, therefore, at
this point, of great importance to the individual. The judgment
pronounced is thus not only made possible through the central feeling
which corresponds to the life as totality, but is determined by it. An
acute sense for that which benefits the individual life whose single
members are the moments, is a condition of the continuance and
development of the life; it is a higher sort of instinct of
self-preservation, and need not be confined to the continuance of
physical life, but may also refer to the ideal needs.

And here we come upon the standpoint of Individualistic Ethics. From
such a standpoint, the problem is to determine, not only how much energy
may be used in the single moments of time, but also in what manner it
should be used in order to secure as great variety and many-sidedness as
may be consistent with the interests of the life as totality. Nor are
the interests of the life to be summed up in physical self-preservation;
the individual acquires, in the natural course of things, interests of
increased ideality and complexity, through which the life gains in
content.

The ethical law, from the standpoint of Individualism, is expressed by a
formula which requires harmonious relation between the interest of the
life as totality and the impulse of the moment; it consists of two chief
mandates: (1) The single instant should have no greater independence
than corresponds to its significance in the life as totality; (2) but,
on the other hand, the single moments should be as richly and intensely
lived as is consistent with the preservation of the life's totality.

Of Individualism, or the principle of the Sovereignty of the Individual,
the same is true as of the sovereignty of the moment, that no reasoning
can overthrow it; if the individual recognizes no end but his own life,
there is no logical way of transition to another standpoint. A change of
aim can take place only through such a change in the central feelings
which determine the standard of the individual that a wider circle of
conceptions enter into his reflections. Until this takes place, there is
no use in appealing to conscience.

The science of Ethics has often claimed to be a science of pure reason.
This claim is opposed to its character as a practical science, since
action can be judged only according to the ends it had in view, and ends
presuppose feelings of pain and pleasure. On the other hand, there is,
in the mere capacity for pain and pleasure, no limitation of the extent
of the circle of conceptions with which the feelings of pain and
pleasure are connected.

Individualism can be carried out in practice only approximately; the
individual has his origin in the species, and lives his whole life as a
part of the life of his kind, with an organization in which the results
of the action and passion of earlier generations are inherited, and in a
mental atmosphere which has induced the development of his species. And
just as the instinct of self-preservation did away with the isolation of
the single moments of the individual life, becoming, thus, the basis of
feelings determined by the interests of the life as totality, so the
sympathetic instincts do away with the isolation of the single
individuals and determine the conditions of the life of the species in
the minds of its individuals. The most primitive form of the sympathetic
instincts is exhibited in the family. Here, however loose and variable
the relation of man and wife may be, that of mother and child cannot, by
its nature, be done away with or essentially changed. In this case, the
sympathetic feeling springs immediately from the natural instinct, and
the relation is the nucleus which makes possible the higher forms of
family life. In the family circle, the sympathetic feelings are
cultivated, and arrive at such strength that they come to include ever
wider and wider circles of human beings. Indeed, the mother-love remains
forever the image and criterion of all sympathy, as well in respect to
strength as to purity.

When sympathy has reached full purity, it is a feeling of pain or
pleasure determined by the fact that other beings feel pain or pleasure.
The most important point of its development was when it so broadened as
to include all mankind. The Peripatetic and the Stoic schools of Greek
philosophy led to this idea of love to all humanity and the natural
union of all men in one great society. But this idea acquired greater
historic importance when it became a chief commandment of a great
religion,--of Christianity. To this sympathetic feeling the criterion of
good and evil is no longer to be found in the individual life, but is
dependent on the life of the whole society of which the individual is a
member.

Yet sympathy is not, from this standpoint, identical with the ethical
feeling, conscience. Conscience is here, too, a feeling of relations
determined by the relation between the ruling or central feeling of the
individual and the results of action. When the individual feels his own
interests subordinate to the good of the whole of which, through
sympathy, he regards himself as a part, the ethical feeling appears as
the feeling of duty. A feeling of duty may be spoken of, likewise, from
the standpoint of pure Individualism, for the concept of duty expresses
only the relation of a lower, narrower consideration to a higher; and
this is represented, in Individualism, by the relation of the single
moments to the life as a whole.

From another point of view, the ethical feeling appears, in its higher
development, as the feeling of justice, which, while regarding the good
of the whole as the chief end, considers also the peculiarities of
individuals. Sympathy in its active form is impulse to share. This
sharing must be carried out according to fixed principles; where
sympathy is universal, differences of division can be justified only by
the fact that the Goods divided, if otherwise divided, would not be in
so high a degree Goods to those to whom they reverted, or would not
conduce to so great progress of the society as a whole. The ethical law
upon this standpoint, the standpoint of Humane Ethics, can be no other
as to content, than that action shall conduce to the greatest possible
welfare and the greatest possible progress of the greatest possible
number of conscious beings; and this law includes two chief mandates, a
negative and a positive mandate: (1) The individual may not receive more
than befits the position which, in consequence of his peculiar
qualities, he occupies among his kind; (2) but, on the other hand, the
capacities and impulses of every individual shall be as fully and
richly developed and satisfied as is consistent with the demands of the
life of the species as a whole. These two mandates follow with logical
necessity from the concept of society as a multiplicity of conscious
beings united into one whole. It is contrary to the unity of society,
that an individual, or that individuals, should be wilfully preferred to
others; every exceptional position must be justified by the demands of
the general conditions of life; on the other hand, a society is the more
perfect the more freely and more independently the single members move,
and the larger the number of different possibilities it realizes, if, at
the same time, unity is preserved and attains an ever higher character
and ever increasing validity.

When the ethical feeling develops, upon the basis of sympathy, to the
feeling of duty and justice, the principle included in the above law
becomes the standard according to which the individual judges his own
actions as well as those of others, and pronounces them good or bad. The
good is that which preserves and develops the welfare of conscious
beings.

The ethical principle now arrived at applies to the deeds of conscious
beings, presupposing an end in view. Unconscious nature affects man's
life, but its workings have no ethical character. The ethical judgment
is itself determined by the principle on which it is pronounced, and
hence it serves to produce greater welfare. This is especially to be
seen where the judging and the acting individual are one and the same
person; in other cases, it becomes a special problem to bring the acting
individual to the recognition of the principle; this is a problem of
psychologic-pedagogical nature.

The word "welfare" is used in preference to utility or happiness in
order to prevent misunderstanding, and may be defined as including all
that serves to satisfy the needs of man's nature. Ethics must take into
consideration all the gradations of life, and cannot, therefore,
distinguish in the beginning between outer and inner, higher and lower,
welfare. Such a distinction is already an ethical judgment, and can be
made only after determination of the ethical criterion. Another mistake
is the stress often laid upon momentary feelings of pain and pleasure.
Pain signifies, it is true, the beginning of the disintegration of life,
and pleasure its normal and harmonious development; yet each must be
considered in its relation to the whole consciousness, the whole
character, and the whole social state. So-called utilitarianism has
injured its own cause by resolving consciousness into a sum of feelings,
and society into a collection of individuals. The significance of single
feelings of pain and pleasure for the welfare of society cannot be
determined as if the problem were a simple arithmetical one.

The reasoning of Philosophical Ethics must not be confused with
practical reflection. In the last we are led by instincts and impulses,
by motives of which we are, for the most part, wholly unconscious, by
thoughts and feelings the first origin of which we cannot designate. We
follow the "positive morality" to which we have accustomed ourselves and
which is, in part, an inheritance of our species. Ethics as an art
precedes Ethics as a science; the aim of the latter is partly to show by
what principles the former is guided, and partly to correct these
principles.

The ethical principle broadens out, thus, from the single moment of the
individual life until it embraces the whole of mankind; but there are
many points in the course of the development at which we can make a
stand, and there may, therefore, be as many philosophical systems as
there are larger or smaller totalities. The position of the man who
holds fast consistently to a principle that determines the criterion by
the family, the caste, the nation, a sect, as highest totality, is as
unassailable as we have seen that of the individualist to be. The
psychologic-historical evolution alone can bring us, through the changes
which it produces in the feelings, beyond these criterions. In other
words, every criterion has a psychologic-historical basis. He who is to
recognize and carry out practically the principle of the greatest
possible welfare, must be no egoist or individualist, no fanatical
patriot or sectarian; this is the subjective condition necessary to the
objective principle. The conscience which is to be regulated by the
objective principle is always itself the condition of the recognition of
this principle. A system which leaves this fact out of consideration
takes on a dogmatic character. The basis of all ethical judgments is
feeling. By this is not meant, however, that the standpoint of an
individual cannot be influenced by argument; the feelings are always
connected with concepts, and discussion of these concepts is both
possible and must react upon them even if only very gradually.

Conscience is not infallible in its application of the objective
principle; a wider experience may show it to have erred. Conscience is
highest authority, but still an authority which may continually perfect
itself. The objective principle makes possible the mutual correction of
different consciences and the self-correction of the conscience of the
individual through self-judgment.

The difference between Subjective Ethics and Objective Ethics, as here
explained, does not coincide with the difference between Individual
Ethics and Social Ethics. Objective Ethics includes both the latter,
since it recognizes individual peculiarities. It has yet to be decided
whether, within the bounds of Objective Ethics, Individual Ethics and
Social Ethics are dependent upon each other, or whether one, and if one
then which one, determines the other. It has to be decided whether,
according to the principle of welfare, the free self-development of the
individual is to be limited by the conditions of social life, or _vice
versa_. Within the limits of Objective Ethics, there may arise an
Individualism of another sort than that before mentioned, founded, not
upon the sovereignty of the individual, but upon the principle of
welfare, which demands as many independent and peculiar points of
departure for action as possible. The like is true, also, of the
question of smaller organizations within larger ones.

The history of Ethics shows us that the ethical judgment of actions at
first regarded the outer act itself and its results, but was gradually
extended to include the motive, the disposition, the character of the
acting subject. It is perfectly natural that regard should first be
attracted to that which is the object of sense-perception. Moreover,
action at an earlier stage of development is essentially reflex action,
and the expression of instinct; the motives are simple and transparent,
and interest does not linger long with them. The great revolutions in
Ethics appear as essentially progress with regard to the importance
accorded, in ethical judgment, to the inner factors of action. This
greater inwardness is combined with a generalization; for the rejection
of a motive is the rejection of all action occasioned by it, and the
ethical acceptance of a motive the acceptance of all action springing
from it. Hence the transference of regard to inner conditions represents
a great simplification of the ethical law. Examples of such a
transference may be found in the rupture between Christianity and
Judaism, and between Protestantism and Catholicism.

In this way, too, Objective Ethics leads to Subjective Ethics. The
objective judgment not only presupposes a subjective basis, but also
finds some of its best objects in actions which spring from the same
mental constitution which is the basis of the judgment. Here, the basis
of mental constitution and the motive coincide; the ethical law demands
the existence of the moral disposition by which it itself exists in the
species. This Kant expresses in the assertion that it is a duty to
possess conscience. Since the recognition of duties presupposes the
existence of conscience, it might seem as if here were an argument in a
circle. But that this is an illusion may be seen from the fact that the
basis of ethical judgment and the motive do not necessarily coincide and
that it is not necessarily an imperfection when they do not coincide. It
may be necessary in some cases, in accordance with the principle of
welfare, that other motives than the sense of duty shall guide the
action; it may be necessary and healthful, for example, that in some
cases man should be led by the instinct of self-preservation, or by an
immediate sympathy, to labor for the welfare of others, and that
conscience should not be aroused in every single act. It may even be a
sign of perfection when actions that demand exertion and sacrifice are
carried out without the intervention of a sense of duty. Indeed, mental
drill in the end renders that which at first took place by means of a
long psychological process of reflection and will, direct and without
special consciousness of its reason.

All Ethics is practical Idealism. All systems assume an end, and an end
is not anything at present existing, but something which ought to be.
All systems assume, therefore, strong feeling, impulse, and endeavor,
combined with the image of that which is the object of the endeavor. But
the ideal must have points of contact with actuality, so that at least
an approach to it is practicable; it must be physically,
psychologically, and historically possible.

Ethical ideals deviate from the actual in three ways. In the first
place, there is often in actual willing and doing something directly
opposed to the principle of welfare. In this case, the office of Ethics
is to restrain and forbid. To this function corresponds, in the
practical life of the will, the hemming by which involuntary, original,
or acquired impulses and inclinations are repressed. Again, actual
willing and doing often exhibit only a weak and imperfect realization
of that which Ethics demands. Here there must be an increase in the
degree as well as in the extent of the realization. To this corresponds,
in the practical life of the will, effort and attention, the power of
the will, through its influence upon conceptions and feelings, to react
upon itself. And finally, there may be, in willing and doing, a lack of
unity and harmony; various opposed tendencies and impulses may make
themselves felt. Here a process of harmonizing and concentration is
necessary. And to this corresponds, in the practical life of the will, a
drilling in connected action and trains of thought, and in the power to
make an end of reflection by decision. In all three cases, the principle
of welfare is to be followed; and the three processes are to be applied
not only in the development of the individual but also in that of
societies, and of the species.

That which manifests itself in conscience is a species-instinct. In the
feeling of judgment, the relation between central and peripheral factors
finds expression, neither of which, and least of all the central
factors, are developed by individual experience, but both of which are,
on the contrary, the product of the experience of the species. What Kant
called the Categorical Imperative is, in fact, an instinct; and every
instinct speaks unconditionally, categorically, gives no reasons and
admits of no excuse.

No instinct finds expression without the existence of conditions which
call it forth; but all manner of individual and social circumstances may
furnish such conditions.

When conscience begins to be conscious of its office, it manifests
itself as an Impulse.[77] The thought of actions which the instinctive
judgment has recognized, or to the performance of which it has perhaps
incited, is combined with pleasure, the conception of actions of the
opposite nature with pain. The tendency arises to linger with the former
and to repeat them, and to turn from the latter, if no stronger impulses
of another sort make themselves felt.

Conscience may develop, without losing entirely its instinctive or
impulsive character, to practical reason. This takes place through the
development of the conceptions which determine the conscience as
impulse, to greater clearness and distinctness. When conscience acts as
instinct, the individual does not know what he does. If it acts as
impulse, he has a dawning consciousness of his acts. And when it
becomes practical reason, there arises a clear consciousness of ethical
laws and ethical ideals. In different individuals, conscience may appear
in very different forms and degrees, as instinct, impulse, practical
reason, sense of duty, sense of justice. Sometimes it appears as mainly
negative and restraining, sometimes again as chiefly positive, partly
harmonizing and partly increasing. Here it appears as enthusiastic
devotion, there as quiet and continuous tendency. It would be impossible
to name even the principal forms in which it may manifest itself, but it
is of great importance to call attention to the fact of these individual
differences, since we suffer at present from a dogmatism that has but
one measure for all these different manifestations.

We must go a step farther still. There may be men who possess no
strictly ethical feeling and who do not need it. Such men do what they
can with their whole heart without applying any reflective standard to
their own or others' acts. They entirely absorb themselves with
unflagging zeal in a work that perfectly corresponds to their
capabilities and impulses, without any doubt of its rightfulness and
import. They may devote themselves to art and science, to the service of
society, or to their family. Or they belong to the class of happy
natures who spread light and joy by their mere existence. They act in
accordance with the law, without being in possession of the law, and
what objection can Ethics have to offer to this? Ethics is for the sake
of life, not life for the sake of Ethics.

Since all ethical judgments have conscience for their psychological
basis, conscience is highest authority, highest law-giver, in comparison
with which every other authority is subordinate and derived. To wish to
go beyond one's conscience is to wish to go beyond oneself. When I yield
to another human being whose judgment I trust more than my own, this can
be justified only as it takes place through my conscience. Conscience is
infallible, if one understands by infallibility that it is, at every
instant, the highest judge; this infallibility does not mean, however,
that it does not err. Every earnest conviction takes the form of
conscience; the truth is not, however, secured by the mere form. Was it
not from conviction that Aristotle asserted the right of slavery, and
Calvin, with Melancthon's approval, sent Servetus to the stake?

Not less dogmatic than Fichte's assertion that conscience never deceives
us, is the view which regards a system of Ethics as merely the science
of the forms of society and of outward acts, and thus declares
conscience to be without authority in comparison with outer
circumstances and their demands. The law which we obey must always
express itself in the form of conscience. The light which illumines for
us all other things must be within ourselves.

Here we perceive the possibility of a conflict between Subjective Ethics
and Objective Ethics, between the two principles upon which Ethics is
founded. There can be no other solution to the problem than that we
shall follow the command of conscience, provided it speaks clearly and
after sufficient deliberation. It may be added that conscience can
correct and control itself, the later and more experienced conscience
criticising the earlier. As long as the individual acts according to his
best conviction, he is morally healthy; hence, from an ethical point of
view, a pernicious action carried out under the conviction that it is
good is to be preferred to a good action performed with the conviction
that it is bad. In the former case, the spring is pure; in the latter it
is corrupt. Only he who has courage to make mistakes can accomplish
anything great. It is not the cold and narrow, but those who are zealous
for the true and good, who thus err.

The power of self-correction can be developed only when some definite
principle or criterion may be found. Such a principle is that of
welfare. The problem of the application of this principle to action is,
however, like that of the application of the principle of causality to
actual phenomena, an endless one.

In close relation to the concept of Authority stands that of Sanction.
The Authority commands or forbids, the Sanction enables the command or
prohibition to remain in force. The sanction consists in the pain or
pleasure connected with the observation or transgression of the command,
in the reward or punishment which one brings on oneself through one's
action, in the heaven or hell which one approaches by the action. It is
only, however, when the authority itself is an outward one that the
sanction holds this outward relation to the action. In this outward form
it has no immediate ethical significance. The ethical character of an
action is dependent, in subjective regard, on its origin in the
intention of the performer, in objective regard, on its harmony with the
principle of welfare. What ethical significance could it have that here
a feeling of pain or pleasure not arising from the action itself, is
added to it? The outer sanction of reward and punishment is thus but an
educating sanction. The inner sanction consists in a feeling of harmony
and unity with one's own highest convictions, of consistency between
one's ideas and one's actual willing. Thus arises an inner peace that
may be stronger than all contradiction and opposition from without.

Such an inner sanction is not only an effect of the action, but a
feeling already present before the action. It was the preservation and
full development of this feeling that led to the decision and made it
possible. Blessedness, says Spinoza, is not the reward of virtue, but
virtue itself.

The manner in which the ethical is so often made dependent upon certain
fixed religious or speculative assumptions must be, from an ethical
point of view, matter for great solicitude. In the first place, it is
easy to suppose that the man who no longer respects these dogmas may
have emancipated himself also from the ethical maxims dependent upon
them, and would be most consistent if he acted in accordance with the
principle: "Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die." In the second
place, action is reft of its ethical character when the attention is
directed to things outside its essence and origin, and considerations of
reward and punishment are declared to be a necessary motive. Not even a
belief in progress within the world of experience can have any absolute
worth for Ethics. It may be theoretically difficult to maintain such a
belief; and even if the victorious direction of evolution were shown to
be unfavorable to Ethics, ethical principles would not be destroyed.
Simply the problems would be different; pity and resignation would
acquire greater importance. Wherever the ethical disposition were
present, it would take the side of the conquered and remain upon that
side though the gods themselves were with the conquerors. Ethical worth
does not depend upon mere might.

The birth-hour of conscience is the time when, through the difference
between ideal and actuality, a certain feeling arises. Its death-hour
would be the instant in which the difference forever disappeared. Such a
disappearance might occur in two ways, either through the conquest of
the ideal by actuality or through that of actuality by the ideal. The
objection has been made to the theory of evolution that it fulfilled
the first of these possibilities, and so left no room for Ethics. But
the very fact of the existence of ethical impulses as the actual result
of evolution would seem to belie this theory. And indeed, we see that
evolution is not physical growth alone, but mental as well; and that the
important feature of man's development consists in his aspiration
through desires and impulses, which act as moving forces in his life.
Aspiration is necessary to his evolution, and indifference and lack of
sensibility an obstacle to it. The theory of evolution leads directly to
Ethics, in that it shows that the struggle for existence becomes, in its
higher forms, a common struggle for the continuance and development of
human life. The theory of evolution takes us, indeed, not only to, but
beyond, Ethics; for, according to Spencer, the ethical sense is but an
intermediate condition in a development toward a state of "organic
morality," where right-doing will be involuntary and natural, and a
special ethical sense no longer existent or necessary. Such a state
would constitute the realization of the second alternative mentioned
above, with which Ethics would come to an end. This state is
conceivable, and Ethics could have no objection to offer to it. Yet we
are still far from such a condition, and though we may strengthen our
courage and hope with the thought of a continual progress of human
nature, yet the assumption of such an end to evolution cannot have an
essential influence upon the method of Ethics.

We must, in fact, suppose that progress will bring us new problems and
new ideals, that, as the Ethics of the civilized man includes whole
provinces unknown to the savage, so many relations will certainly
present themselves in the future whose ethical significance our present
thick-skinned condition, our ignorance and egoism, prevent us from
comprehending.

Can one do more than one's duty? From the standpoint of ethical systems
which are founded on authority or any outward principle, this question
may be answered in the affirmative. The Roman Catholic Church
distinguishes, for instance, between that which is commanded and that
which, beyond the command, is merely advised. But he who follows an
inward sanction cannot but feel that he has done no more than his duty
when he has done all that lies in his power for the welfare of mankind.
It may be right, from a pedagogical standpoint, to give especial praise
to actions that tower above the usual; he who performs them, however,
only then possesses the right spirit when he feels that he has done no
more than his duty, and could not have done otherwise. Even from a
pedagogical standpoint, the difference between duty and merely
counselled action, beyond the duty commanded, can be only a relative
one; that which is, upon a lower plane of development, merely advised,
becomes, upon a higher plane, one of the most elementary duties; mercy
to the conquered may be a high virtue in a savage, but to the civilized
man it is a primary rule of morals.

It is of the highest importance to keep in mind the fact that conscience
itself is a cause, and that ethical judgment, arising as a feeling,
takes part, by its influence upon the will, in the ethical evolution
towards highest welfare. Keeping this in mind, it is easy to see that
Ethics not only calls for no limitation of the law of Causality, but
that such a limitation would be pernicious, even destructive, to Ethics.

There are at least six different significations in which the expression
"freedom of the will" may be used.

It may be used to denote absence of outward constraint; but this might
rather be called a freedom of action than a freedom of the will.

It may be used to denote absence of inner constraint; the will which
springs from pain or fear is often called unfree in distinction from the
will which springs from pleasure or hope.

It may refer to energy and vitality of the will. Here the stress is laid
upon the amount which the will can accomplish, not, however, upon its
independence of causes. One can be a determinist and yet concede that
the will plays an important part in the world; or one can be an
indeterminist and yet assume that free will plays but a small part in
the world.

By freedom of the will is often meant the power of choice. This freedom
is not opposed, however, to causality, but to blindness of action,
subjection to momentary impulses. "Free will" denotes, in this case,
self-conscious will.

Or the word "freedom" may refer to the will as ruled by ethical motives.
In this sense, only the good man is free. This significance of the word
is the oldest, comes down to us from Socrates, and is used by Augustine,
Spinoza, and many others.

But the sense of the word "freedom" with which the strife between
Determinism and Indeterminism has to do is that in accordance with
which a free will is not subject to the law of Causality, is not, like
other phenomena, a link in the chain of causes, but is, on the contrary,
a cause, without being an effect. To be free in will is, according to
this definition, to will without cause,--independent of all that has
gone before.

Indeterminism destroys the bond between the individual and his kind,
between the individual and the rest of existence. Indeterminism is hence
unable to regard existence as a totality. Every deeper philosophical or
religious conception becomes, thus, impossible; the only religious
conception consistent with Indeterminism is Polytheism, since every
being that can form the absolute beginning of a chain of causes is a
little god, an absolute being. This fact is to be noted, for the reason
that Determinism is sometimes designated as a godless doctrine.

The assertion that the will is without cause, and the assertion that we
ourselves are the cause of our willing, are two different assertions.
The last finds a cause in our nature. Thoughts and feelings, tendencies,
instincts, and impulses arise in us, and in these the origin of the acts
of the will is to be sought.

If the will, or a part of it, is not subject to the law of Causality, it
stands in relation to the whole personality as something isolated and
accidental. The Indeterminist who asserts that Determinism makes man a
mere machine, himself makes of him something much meaner, something
incoherent and accidental. Ethical judgment is based upon the assumption
that my action is mine; it is, therefore, clear and certain only when
motives and the decision they cause are known. The less my actions can
be understood by knowledge of my character, the more easily I may be
regarded as irresponsible. Although law regards, by its nature, action
and not motive, yet even the judge must gain an insight into the
motives, the outer and inner relations from which the deed originated,
both in order to determine the degree of punishment necessary, and in
order even to be fully persuaded that the action really took place.

Many recent Indeterminists designate the freedom of the will as
exceedingly small. They thus extend the dissolution of the unity of
existence and of the unity of personality to the act of willing itself.
Moreover, if responsibility depends upon freedom, it is impossible to
see how reward and punishment are to be justified upon this standpoint;
since the individual can say with reason that he is not guilty with
respect to the whole, but only with respect to a very small part of his
act.

The words Responsibility, Guilt, Accountability, are taken, like so many
other ethical expressions, from Jurisprudence, or rather they come to us
from a time when the distinction between the province of Jurisprudence
and that of Ethics had not yet been recognized. That I am made
accountable for my action means that I stand as the one to whom reward
or punishment for the deed is meted out. _For what reason_ the action is
rewarded or punished is a question by itself.

In relation to Ethics, the feeling of guilt, of responsibility or
accountability, signifies that my act is subjected to the judgment of
conscience. If I find discord between my act and that which I recognize
as good, remorse arises,--a feeling of inner disharmony, unworthiness,
and self-contempt which may increase until it becomes the greatest
psychical pain. This feeling may be defined, from a deterministic
standpoint, as dissatisfaction with oneself because one has not acted
otherwise, and the wish that one had done so. This wish arises in the
moment of reflection, when one weighs one's act. From the present wish
is not, however, to be concluded that one could just as well have acted
otherwise _at the moment the act took place_. Such an illusion dates the
experience dearly bought with mistake and remorse back to an earlier
period. According to the theory of retribution, remorse must be greatest
in him who has committed the greatest crime. This is not so, however;
since remorse arises from a contrast between ideal and act, which
contrast can take place only when the conception of the ideal is strong;
the purest and best characters often have the strongest feelings of
remorse.

Remorse first arises when a new attitude of mind is attained different
from that which ruled at the time of the action. Time is necessary for
this new feeling to replace the old, if it is to be more than a
momentary passion, and during this interval the two feelings are both
active in consciousness. This is the time of the birth-pains by which
the new character comes into being. The significance of remorse lies in
the fact that it urges forward, that it gives birth to impulse and
endeavor after a higher plane. Only because remorse is a _motive_, is it
of ethical nature.

If the law of Causality were not active in the realm of the psychical,
this ethical endeavor would be hopeless. Only where order reigns can
the will accomplish anything. Only as we know the law of outer nature,
and know what conditions must be produced in order to bring about a
certain result, can we serve our own ends in this province; and the like
is true in our relation to human nature. Here the problem is to find
motives of the right sort and of sufficient strength. Of what use were
all possible exertion if, under given conditions, the same motive were
followed by now this, now the other entirely different decision. I am
master of my future willing only in so far as a causal relation exists
between my present and my future will. We find, therefore, that the
reason why responsibility goes no further back in the causal chain than
the will, is this: that it is the will which is to be acted on and
altered. That which precedes the act of the will interests us,
ethically, only in so far as it influences the will.

It is a strange assertion, sometimes made, that the consistent
Determinist must be a mere spectator of his own and others' lives. As if
one could feel no pain or pleasure and no desire to interfere, because
one believes life to be subject to law. It is true that theoretical
study may weaken practical interest; but Indeterminism is a theory as
well as Determinism.

What the ethically bad is follows from what has already been said. It
consists of a more or less conscious isolation of the single moment in
the life of the individual, or of the single individual in the life of
the species, such that not only a hindrance to the welfare of individual
or species arises, but also a relaxation of energy and a diminution of
the coherence of individual or species. In most such cases, inertia is
at work. The one moment demands to be lived without any consideration of
others, the individual will not move outside the circle of his own
interests. Such a resistance to influence may be unconscious. It may be
authorized in so far as it is a condition of the development of real
willing that action shall not immediately respond to impression. In this
resistance lies, therefore, the germ of the ethical as well as the
non-ethical life of the will. The clearer consciousness becomes, the
more this inertia takes on the character of defiance. Or the discord
felt through consciousness of the good may be so painful that the
individual desires to free himself at any price. In this case, no
remorse is felt; on the contrary, the individual seeks to dull the
awakened consciousness, or to get rid of it.

It is important to note that conceptions develop, in this connection,
faster than feelings. And as long as the former do not find points of
connection with the existing feelings, they will have no practical
influence. The bad consists in the persistence, from inertia or
defiance, upon a lower plane of development after the consciousness of a
higher has arisen. Evil is the animal in man, the remains of an earlier
plane of life. From the instincts of self-preservation and
self-propagation in their most primitive forms, the ethically bad is
produced, and offers fierce resistance to harmonizing influences.

Evil is, furthermore, a sociological phenomenon; the general
psychological elements take on different forms under different
historical conditions; society, in its different forms and functions, is
always one of the determining factors of its development. The criminal
is, like the saint, the child of his time.

It appears, therefore, that the term "bad" is applied from a standpoint
not shared by him to whom it is applied. If the man who stands upon the
lower plane of morals possessed the full and clear consciousness that
the predicate of badness applied to his conduct, the corresponding
feelings and impulses must arise in him, and his conduct be altered. It
is psychologically impossible to act against our fixed and full
conviction, if this is not blunted by other impulses.

The definition of the good must be, on different ethical planes, a
different one. But when a disinterested and universal sympathy
determines the ethical judgment, only that can be good which preserves
and adds to the welfare of conscious beings, increases their pleasure or
diminishes their pain. Every action which tends in this direction
without producing further results of an opposite nature, is authorized;
every action of which the opposite is true is to be rejected.

Since, in general, pleasure is connected with the healthy and natural
use of the powers, with that which preserves and benefits life, and pain
is connected with the opposite of this, Ethics merely continues the work
begun by nature, in aiming at human progress, at as rich and harmonious
a development of human powers as is possible. The problems of Ethics
concern, therefore, the pleasures of the moment as well as those of the
whole life, the pleasures of the individual as well as those of the
whole species. This remains true even if we accept the pessimistic view
that all life is pain; the good would consist, from this point of view,
in as great alleviation of pain as possible. Even the ascetic tortures
himself only in order to gain greater good.

The ethical end as welfare is not to be conceived as a state of
continuance on the same plane. Such a continuance is impossible;
evolution does not stand still; every step of progress creates new
needs, the satisfaction of which again demands endeavor; perfect
satisfaction is impossible. Even the development of sympathy makes it
easier to wound us in many ways and brings us larger duties. The need of
variety alone would make continuance upon one plane impossible; we labor
not only in order to arrive at conscious ends, but also in order to
relieve ourselves of accumulated energy. The highest end that we can
conceive is a progress in which each step is felt as a good because it
affords scope for action without over-exertion.

Activity is also welfare. But it is so only in so far as it is healthful
activity; when the powers are over-exerted or dissipated in action,
having no common end, or when their application in one direction is at
the cost of other more important directions, progress ceases to be
welfare. The evolution of civilization contains an element of blindness
and heedlessness which is bound up with both its excellencies and its
faults. But civilization is not an act of choice; it is the continuance
of the evolution of nature. Progress is necessary; it is impossible to
remain upon any level attained. Ethics must, therefore, accept progress
as a fact. It does not feel an admiration for an order of nature in
which no advance appears possible without one-sidedness and dissipation
of energy. It is not so hard-hearted that it could forget, in the
seeming splendor of outward results, the anxiety and pain, the sweat and
blood, with which these were won. It demands, therefore, that the heavy
burdens be lightened, the scattered forces united, and all capabilities
that are of worth developed. On the other hand, Ethics is not so
sentimental and short-sighted that it could forget that progress can
take place only through exertion and suffering. Its chief task with
regard to progress is to impress upon the mind the fact that life should
not be made a mere means to the solution of impersonal problems.
Civilization is a means for the individual, not _vice versa_.

The natural division of Ethics is into Individual Ethics and Social
Ethics. It has sometimes been assumed that the whole duty of man could
be summed up in Individual Ethics. However, it is not necessarily true
that that which assists the best development of the individual serves
society as a whole also. When the attention is directed so excessively
to oneself, the general welfare is likely to be forgotten. On the other
hand, a too great subjection of individual interests makes a man a mere
parasite, robbing him of all self-dependence. When Ethics condemns the
instinct of self-preservation, it condemns its own means. If the impulse
to self-preservation, self-assertion, and self-development were evil,
then our essential nature would be evil, and Ethics would be impossible.
The right relation of the two principles is given in the principle of
welfare. Mill's book "On Liberty" denies the ethical significance of
self-development and forgets the individual's oneness with his kind, in
declaring personal vices of no importance to the general welfare. That
which Mill wished to defend was the freedom of the individual, the loss
of which through the compulsion of society and the "moral police" he
feared. But he might have accomplished this purpose without denying the
ethical value of self-development. There is nothing that is a ground for
greater solicitude than the mistake that public opinion and Ethics are
one, and that a condition of things is no longer a subject for ethical
condemnation when no outer power has the right to denounce it.

The first question which presents itself in Individual Ethics is: How is
the individual to educate himself to an ethical personality? Here the
development and strengthening of the ethical principle as governing and
determining the life of the individual is concerned. The problem is one
with the determination of the chief virtue which includes all other
ethical qualities. This virtue is justice, which includes in itself the
two groups contained under Self-assertion and Self-sacrifice.[78]

In the application of this general theory of Ethics, Hoeffding maintains
the radical-conservative and individual-social position already stated.
The principle of welfare demands the reconciliation of the free
development of the individual and the progress of society as a whole;
the individual does not live to himself alone, hence the state has a
right to demand sacrifices; but it must always be able to show good
reason for such; the burden of proof lies with the side which would take
away the most valuable possession of the individual,--the right to free
self-development in the ever-shifting direction of his need. This very
characteristic of change makes it impossible for the state to decide for
the individual what are his needs, and how they may be satisfied; hence
the best course of the state is a chiefly restrictive one. The relation
between state-help and self-help must be exactly the reverse of that
which Socialism, in remarkable agreement with Bureaucracy and
Absolutism, asserts. Socialism presupposes not only perfection in the
governed but also perfection in the persons to whom the government is
entrusted. It assumes, moreover, that pleasure in activity and its
resulting power of originality and invention would not be weakened if
men's right of initiative were taken from them and their needs
determined by others. Much of the good even now accomplished by the
state in its functions is due to the competition with individual
undertakings.

Philanthropy, on the part of individuals as on that of the state, will
best follow this same principle of indirect aid, in order to obtain the
best results through education of character. Organization is desirable
on the part of individuals, but the state will achieve best results by
acting through smaller organizations which afford a wider field and the
possibility of more intelligent work. In its methods of punishment,
also, the state must have regard, not only to prevention through fear,
but also and chiefly to the bettering of the criminal character; capital
punishment and life-long imprisonment cannot be justified from a higher
ethical standpoint. Freedom should be allowed and tolerance shown the
various religious sects as corresponding to various needs. The more
liberal education of woman, which will make her capable of greater
independence of thought and action, is one of the chief means to the
solution of the marriage-question. The ideal of marriage is free
monogamy; in polygamy, the purely physical must always rule; that part
of self which one can surrender to many can be only the animal; long
association and sympathy alone admit to the sanctuary of love. It
belongs to the nature of true love to believe in its own endlessness; it
is, therefore, incompatible with its nature to arrange for a mere
temporary union. Yet where an unhappy union exists, divorce should be
permitted. Strict divorce laws have always fettered and burdened nobler
natures, while light-minded people have easily found means of escape.

The view that the artist occupies a peculiar position in his ideal
world, must free himself from the actual world, and live only for his
ideal, is ethically false; art should lend form to actual life, defining
and clarifying it, broadening the view and educating sympathy. A great
artist is, at the same time, half a prophet; his whole people and epoch
must learn to know themselves through him. Freedom is to be regarded as
both means and end. A representative government is not only an education
for the people, who through freedom alone can learn to use freedom, but
affords the state, moreover, a firmer foundation in the consciousness of
its citizens that they are responsible for the existing condition of
things.

The development of conscience in force and extent takes place through
thought and imagination. Knowledge alone is not enough; it must be fixed
by exercise,--made a persistent thought, until it becomes, by means of
the laws of association, such a thought as will easily come in play
whenever the case requires it.

FOOTNOTES:

[77] Trieb.

[78] Selbstbehauptung und Hingebung.




GEORG VON GIZYCKI

"MORAL PHILOSOPHY" ("Moralphilosophie," 1889)


Moral Philosophy has a scientific and a practical office. Its scientific
task is to supply the human being with a clearer, more thorough
understanding, founded on ultimate reasons, of his moral life. Its
practical task is to answer the important question: How am I to act? How
shall I order my life?

It was not left to science first to direct human action. Custom and law
seek to order the doing and leaving undone of the members of society.
Ethical philosophy ascertains means of testing the actually existing
ideas of morality, and thus enables us to better law and custom.

A highest criterion, one only, is necessary, by which to judge of the
morality of a deed. If there were more than one, the judgment might fall
out differently from the different standpoints furnished by these.

When I regard the qualities which I consider morally good, I perceive
that they all have a direction conducive to the general welfare or
happiness; and when I regard the qualities which I consider morally bad,
I find that they all have an aim prejudicial to the general welfare or
happiness.

When I attempt to convince any one that certain conduct which he
considers right is wrong, by showing him that it is opposed to the
general welfare, my final appeal is to his conscience. And in the same
manner, when I correct some of my own moral conceptions, it is my
conscience which determines me to the proof of them, and my conscience
which is the standard that determines my decision. Conscience is the
principle underlying my moral convictions. But I do not possess, in
conscience, a moral power which never errs; hence it behooves me to
judge carefully. Body and mind both have their laws on which depend the
welfare and happiness of society; the last results of science and human
experience give us these laws.

There are few things in regard to which there is so great unanimity as
there is in regard to the right and good. In the fundamental questions,
all the more highly civilized peoples are, for the most part, agreed.

On the lowest planes of civilization, only the narrowest tribal
association is taken into consideration in morals, but gradually, with
the growth of experience, growth of the understanding, which permits the
recognition, in a much higher degree, of the results of action and the
power of sympathy, ever larger circles of human beings are
regarded,--the tribe, the nation, the whole of mankind, all sentient
beings. In this development of conscience and benevolence, there is
nothing to cause moral uncertainty or contempt of conscience; for, in
that case, the fact that there was once a time when human beings were
not on the earth must be a reason for contempt of everything human.

We call various different things good, of worth, others bad, evil; there
must be something common to all these, on account of which we apply the
common term to them. That which is thus common to them is their relation
to a consciousness for which they are good or bad, and not to a merely
perceiving consciousness, but to one that feels and wills. As true and
false relate to the intellectual side of human nature, so do good and
bad relate to the side of feeling and will. Such things are good as are
the mediate or immediate cause of agreeable states of consciousness or
of the prevention or removal of disagreeable states; and on the other
hand, such things are bad as are the cause of pain or the hindrance of
pleasure. We say of these things that they are agreeable or
disagreeable. Or we may use, instead of "agreeable," the term "object
of desire," and instead of "disagreeable," the term "object of
aversion"; for all that is agreeable has an attractive influence upon
the will, and all that is disagreeable or painful has a repellant one.
Joy is that condition of consciousness which we seek to attain and
preserve, whose existence we prefer to its non-existence; and pain is
that state of consciousness which we seek to avoid and destroy, whose
non-existence we prefer to its existence.

The good is often defined as that which conduces to some end; but an end
is nothing other than something willed; that which conduces to an end is
the cause of something that is willed, so that this explanation also
refers back to a consciousness.

Whatever is existent for us must be existent in us, in our
consciousness. Our states of consciousness are either painful, or
indifferent, or pleasant. We must turn, therefore, in the last analysis,
not to things, but to the mind, if we wish to distinguish what is good
and what is bad; and according to the differing constitution of
different minds, the same things may be good or bad. There is good and
bad with respect to our body or senses, and good and bad with respect to
our mind. A moral good is one which causes conscious states of moral
satisfaction.

The good has often been divided into the useful and the agreeable. The
agreeable is that which causes immediate, the useful that which causes
mediate pleasure. A thing may be both useful and agreeable; and the like
is true of the disagreeable and the harmful. The useful and the harmful
in this, as it were inner, (subjective) sense, are to be distinguished
from the useful and the harmful in an objective sense; in the last
sense, that is useful which tends to the preservation of life. Between
the useful and harmful, and the pleasurable and painful, in this sense,
there must exist, as the theory of evolution teaches us, a wide-reaching
correspondence. Living beings do that which is pleasurable to them; they
avoid that which is painful; they continue alive when they do that which
is conducive to life and avoid that which is harmful to life. This
continuous process of exterminating those beings to whom the harmful is
agreeable and the useful painful, must tend to make the harmful coincide
with the painful, and the useful with the pleasurable. The agreement is,
however, far from being a perfect one; and it is the less so, the more
complicated are the conditions of life. It is the most imperfect in
human beings.

Good is that which causes pleasure or prevents pain; that is better
which causes more pleasure or prevents more pain. A thing may cause both
joy and pain; in this case, the excess decides whether a thing is good
or bad; and the greater the excess, the better or the worse is the
thing. The greatest possible excess of satisfied states of consciousness
in the life of a human being one may call his greatest possible
happiness. The greatest possible happiness is hence the standard by
which good and evil are determined.

From these reflections is to be seen that a distinction is to be made
between that which is _desired_ and that which is _desirable_. All that
is desired is pleasurable, yet much that is pleasurable has pain for its
result,--pain that is far greater than the momentary pleasure.

The good is often considered as opposed to the agreeable, and the bad as
opposed to the disagreeable or painful. In this case, by pain and
pleasure are understood feelings of the moment, by good and bad are
understood enduring, or at least long-continuing causes of lasting or
oft-recurring pain or pleasure; momentary pleasure may be bought at the
expense of long suffering; and short pain may be the condition of the
prevention of greater evil.

A thing may be good as regards one individual, bad as regards another. A
thing is truly good as regards a society when its total effect has for
the society lasting beneficial results, that is, accords with the
happiness of the society during its whole existence; and that is for
mankind truly good which is, in its total effect, beneficial to present
and future humanity.

In general, we may say that, when we order our conduct by the thought to
serve mankind to the best of our ability, we have a satisfied
consciousness, a good conscience. In so far, therefore, a noble deed is
good for ourselves as well as for society. The question whether or not
the performance of our duty corresponds to our greatest possible
happiness, is a different one. But the good man does not allow this
thought the chief role in consciousness; he is filled with the thought
of doing his duty in devoting himself to the happiness of mankind, and
there is but _one_ form of his own happiness which he will not forego,
namely, the blessedness of a good conscience. This consciousness, this
blessedness which unites the human being to mankind, he should regard
as his highest good; for it is a moral good; and the dissatisfaction
which lies in the consciousness of having violated his duty towards
mankind he should regard as the greatest evil.

It may be objected that this morally satisfied consciousness, this sort
of joy, cannot be called a good. A good is the _cause_ of pleasurable
states of consciousness. But it would appear strange to claim that joy,
happiness, are not goods, and pain, unhappiness, not evils; the terms
"good" and "evil" and "worth" refer not only to joy and suffering, but
also to _desire_ and _will_; and no one doubts that happiness is an
object of desire, and pain an object of aversion.

From what has been said it appears that happiness cannot be defined as
"satisfaction of the desires." Such satisfaction may have unhappiness as
its result. Not all desires are to be satisfied simply because they are
desires.

The study of the history of moral conceptions appears to show us that
most changes in this province are the result of a change of views
concerning the effects of actions with regard to the welfare of society;
hence, that they were the fruit of experience. This process of change
takes place, however, very gradually; the rules which are the result of
experience are handed down, for the most part, without statement of
reasons; and only in a very limited measure do the new generations labor
for a progressive development of moral conceptions. We cannot wonder
that a clear consciousness of the highest reasons of moral precepts is
seldom to be found. Yet in civilized societies, the conviction is
general that at least an average conformity to rules of morality is the
indispensable condition of the safety and the good of society. The
answer to the question: What would happen if every one were to act thus?
has been regarded, from earliest times, as decisive with regard to the
moral quality of an act.

When we recognize that actions which we call good and bad are so called
because of their causal relation to pain and pleasure, the belief must
arise in us, that the worth of qualities of character depends on the
promise they contain of future action. The most important power for the
happiness or misery of humanity is the character of human beings. Hence
the morally good, excellence of character, is to be regarded as
preeminently Good. And so it appears that our instinctive judgments are
justified by the deliberations of calm reason.

The question: Why shall I act in accordance with the general welfare? is
answered by these considerations; because such action is right and
reasonable, enjoined by conscience and reason, by human nature itself in
its higher development. He who does not recognize this fact, who does
not find in it the highest and holiest of commandments, and who yet
desires to act reasonably and well, recognizing duties to all men, does
not see what he himself really will.

The conception of right-doing is the motive of the human being, in so
far as he is good. The teacher who desires to have moral influence will
endeavor to awaken this motive in his hearers or readers. For this
purpose he must appeal to their actual characters. And it is as much a
_petitio principii_ to assume, in Ethics, the existence of moral
feelings, as to assume, in Optics, the existence of sight. Just as there
are blind persons, so there are persons without moral feelings. These
are, however, comparatively few; some trace of moral feeling, of
conscience, is to be found in almost every member of society.

The general welfare, that is, the greatest possible true happiness of
all, not the greatest happiness of the smallest number which is often
the ruling principle of state laws, nor the greatest happiness of the
greatest number without consideration of the minority,--is the highest
ethical criterion. It may be difficult to ascertain wherein this
happiness consists; Bentham demands, for the determination of the worth
of an action, a calculation of the intensity, duration, certainty,
fecundity, and purity, of the feelings produced by it. But the happiness
and misery of mankind is surely the most important object of mankind; it
must be, therefore, our highest care to ascertain the results of an
action _as far as we are able_. And, in fact, the most important results
of any form of action are generally ascertainable.

To make endeavor after one's own and others' perfection the criterion of
morality is to set up a false standard, a form without a content, since
"perfection" designates merely a state that accords with some
preconceived concept or end. The question is: What end shall human
perfection realize? The criterion of general welfare alone can define
human perfection. It is such a constitution of man's bodily and
spiritual characteristics as conduces in the highest degree to general
happiness.

Too long and detailed a consideration of possible results is not
desirable in every case where action is called for. There is seldom time
for a consideration of the intensity, duration, etc., of resulting pain
and pleasure. It is well, in most cases, to follow the general moral
rules we have attained to through previous reflection. In cases of
doubt, we need to appeal to our highest criterion. Often such doubt may
be caused by selfishness, by the hidden desire to act, after all, for
our own benefit; we need, therefore, to put to ourselves the question:
How would we judge the action of another in our own position? Thus we
arrive at the highest moral commandment, which is: So act that thy
conduct, if made general, would be for the good of mankind. And the
force of example is here one of the factors to be considered.

It has been asked what right one has to assert the rule that each one is
to count for one, and no one for more than one, in moral decisions. May
not one human being's capacity for happiness be greater than another's,
and his happiness, therefore, more to be considered? It may be answered
that bad men have never been embarrassed for an excuse for selfishness,
but that the arrogance of regarding one's own happiness as of greater
worth than that of others has brought incalculable harm into the world,
and that the only safe method of calculation for the purpose of
furthering the general welfare, is the rule above given,--that each one
shall count as one and no more.

The rule that the greatest possible happiness of _all_ is to be striven
for, is an assertion that the happiness of every one is to be
considered, that not that of the lowest human being is to be interfered
with unless such interference is _necessary_ in order to prevent still
greater harm to others; and that no such interference shall be greater
than is positively necessary in accordance with this aim. The highest
moral law is thus nothing more than the Christian commandment of love to
all men. And the rule "To count each as one, no more," may receive the
restrictive clause "in so far as the good of the whole of society is not
diminished by so doing."

Some Darwinians are inclined to regard the preservation of existence as
the criterion by which to judge the moral quality of action. "Aim for
the preservation of the species" would be, from their standpoint, the
moral law. But mere existence is not happiness; that is shown by the
fact of suicide. However, it is true that health is one of the
conditions of happiness. Pessimists are generally men of an unhappy
temperament, often of morbid physical constitution; medical science
must, in its progress, help to prevent the development of such morose
dispositions. Want of love may also be a cause of pessimism; most
pessimists have been lonely men. And want of employment may also lead to
pessimism. If we follow Rousseau's advice not to listen to those who are
in exceptional abnormal positions, but appeal to those who constitute
the great majority, we shall conclude that, in general, the happiness of
men greatly exceeds their misery. The increase of suicide is often used
as an argument that civilization has not caused an increase, but a
decrease, of happiness. To this argument it may be answered that the
religious scruples which formerly withheld men from this extreme step
have diminished, that men have grown more self-conscious and independent
in action; and that, moreover, our age is one of unrest, a
transition-period such as no other period has been. When we examine the
lives of tribes on a low plane of civilization, we find their existence
full of uncertainty and of superstitious fear, and at the mercy of the
forces of nature. Without doubt, much misery exists; a great part of it,
however, is caused by the disappointment of too extreme demands for
happiness; the individual must not require that life shall be continuous
rapture.

The recognition of what right action is, is not its accomplishment. Pain
and pleasure determine the will,--the pain and pleasure of the person
who wills, since he cannot feel with the feelings of others or will with
their will any more than he can move with their limbs. He may have a
conception of the welfare or suffering of others, but a mere mental
image does not determine the will. Only when such a conception arouses
pleasure or pain in the subject himself, are will and action possible.

Love consists in joy in the thought of the beloved person, with joy in
his joy, and pain in his pain. He who seeks to render happy one whom he
loves does not, as a rule, consider the fact that he will himself have a
joy in the happiness of that other; his aim is to give pleasure, not to
himself, but to the other. But the thought of doing for him is combined
with pleasure, the thought of not doing for him is combined with pain;
and these present feelings determine the will.

That which distinguishes the moral from the immoral man is that,
in the former, the notions of the right and good rouse strong
feelings,--feelings of pain at the thought of acting contrary to them,
of pleasure at the thought of acting in accordance with them, feelings
which may overpower all others; while in the immoral man these
conceptions call forth no feelings or only such weak ones as offer no
sufficient opposition to the influence of other feelings. Both men act
from feeling, but not from the same feelings.

Do we, by proving that the moral, as well as the immoral man is
determined in his action by feelings, show that the one approximates to,
or is identical with the other? By no means. In that case, the proof
that both the moral man and the immoral man will with their own will,
and act through their own limbs, that both possess arms, hands, senses,
feelings, understanding, in short, that both are human beings, must
show, in the same manner, an approximation of the moral to the immoral
man. A perceptive, intellectual, objective side, and an emotional,
inner, subjective side are to be distinguished in all action; and only
the confusion of the two has led to the fancy that, with the proof that
all action proceeds from the pain or pleasure of the person who wills,
it is shown that all action, every human being, is selfish, and that
unselfishness is a figment of the imagination. It is not the expected
pleasure that moves the will; it is only when the conception of future
happiness or misery awakens present feelings stronger than other present
feelings which would move the will in another direction, that willing
and action can follow in accordance with that conception. Hence, there
is nothing so remarkable in the sacrifice of one's own happiness. It is
not morally desirable that self-love should be weak, but only that
conscience and general benevolence should be stronger still.

Many who have recognized the reality of sympathy and benevolence have
not regarded them as primary but as evolved from egoism. However, if the
word egoism is to have a distinct meaning, it must be interpreted as the
conscious preference of one's own good to that of others. But with
self-consciousness is likewise developed the consciousness of other
beings, and the latter, as the former, clothes itself with
feelings--with egoistic feelings, and with sympathetic feelings as well.

It is further to be remarked that the proof that an action is
disinterested, is no proof of its moral worth. The worst action,--an
action of pure cruelty, envy, or hatred, may be disinterested, that is,
it may have for its end the pain of another without consideration of the
advantage of the doer.

The effects, as pain or pleasure, of conduct opposed to, or in harmony
with, civil or moral law, in so far as such effects can be predicted
and, as thus predicted, they influence the will, are called Sanctions.
One may distinguish between a physical, a political, a social, a
sympathetic, and a moral sanction. Doubtless the conduct recommended by
self-love, as a result of these sanctions, coincides, to a very large
extent, to a larger extent than egoists in the rule perceive, with that
which the good of society demands; but it is just as certain that, in
many cases, the way of selfish cunning and that of virtue diverge. The
outer sanctions do not insure the coincidence of duty and one's own
happiness; nor does the sympathetic sanction secure this, for sympathy
is often on the side opposed to duty. There is but one sanction which is
ever on the side of action in accordance with duty: the moral sanction,
the peace and joy which accompany the knowledge of having done right.
Duty and self-interest coincide the more nearly, the better and more
unanimous the various sanctions are, and, especially, the more strongly
the moral feelings are developed in a society; one of the tasks society
has to set itself is to labor for the greatest possible concord of duty
and self-interest. But this harmony will never become an absolutely
perfect one and self-sacrifice impossible. Man needs, therefore, some
end which shall depend upon himself alone, if he is to be kept from
discouragement and despair. Such an end is the consciousness of
right-doing. He who chooses this as highest end must devote himself to
the service of mankind, as well as he who makes the advancement of the
good of mankind his end. The thought of this end will prevent him from
being blinded by self-interest in answering the question as to what
right and duty are, and will also preserve him from permitting himself
one or the other pet sin under the excuse that he will atone for it by
other good actions; it will compel him to the endeavor to fulfil every
duty. And though he may not be perfectly happy, he will be happier than
the man who makes the good of humanity his end; since he is less
dependent upon outer events. Benevolence and conscience are not the
same. The latter constrains us to do right, that is, to perform actions
the expected results of which are in harmony with the general welfare;
it has attained its end when the right action is performed, and it has
failed to attain its end when this aim is frustrated. Man has a deep
inner longing for happiness of some sort. When he does not find it upon
earth, he seeks it in some other world. He has often a deep inner
yearning for holiness, and a secret dissatisfaction in his own conduct.
Ethics satisfies this double longing in commanding him to renounce his
greatest happiness and endeavor to attain moral blessedness, the
happiness of holiness.

Perhaps some one may object that this is a selfish view of the moral
life. Is it selfish to renounce one's greatest happiness in order to
attain only peace of conscience? That no one were without such
selfishness! He who sets himself this end will act better, more in
accordance with the good of humanity, than he who makes the advancement
of human welfare his ultimate aim. Hence the human being _should_ choose
this end. Therefore, the highest moral commandment, the Categorical
Imperative, receives this form: "Strive to attain peace of conscience in
devoting thyself to the service of mankind."

By "right" we understand what is in conformity with a standard of action
which we recognize, by "wrong," what is in opposition to it. The
recognition and application of the standard belong to the reason. But
not to reason alone; every rule is the outcome of feelings; and this is
the reason why ideas of right possess the power of motives.

Judgment of action may take place in two ways: immediately, through the
feeling; and mediately, through moral rules, the adoption of which,
however, presupposes feeling. According to the disposition, the
education, the circumstances, of a man, the one or the other form of
judgment prevails. The words "obligation," "commandment," "duty," "law,"
express the fact that something lies without the mere free pleasure of
the acting individual, is withdrawn from its sphere.

It has been said that a distinction is to be made between duty and the
sense of duty--that an objective duty still exists, even when no
corresponding inner sense of duty is present. This merely means that
some one else in distinction from the acting person recognizes a moral
law, by which he may blame the action. Duties are actions sanctioned by
one or another sort of punishment. The moral sanction is self-blame. But
not the performer of an act alone, others also, pronounce judgment on
his action, and in the rule there exists a greater or less harmony
between his judgment and that of others. To self-condemnation is added
the consciousness of having deserved the blame of others.

Human actions are not only an object of displeasure or of indifference,
but also of praise, gratitude, love, admiration. Actions which reveal a
character above the average are regarded as meritorious according to the
measure of their superiority; they deserve recognition, respect, praise,
honor.

Three classes of actions to which public opinion applies its sanction
may be distinguished: actions blamed; those the neglect of which is
blamed; and those which are praised. The first two classes, sanctioned
by a punishment, are regarded as duty; the last class, sanctioned by at
least mental reward, are actions of desert. Actions the omission of
which is punished or blamed are not actions of desert, but of duty and
obligation.

The boundary-line between duty and desert is not fixed and definite; in
the measure in which the moral condition of a society is perfected, the
province of that which is regarded as duty is extended into that which
was formerly regarded as desert. The distinction between duty and desert
has, in general, only an outward significance; it has regard to the
relation to others, to the social sanction. The moral human being does
not inquire what entitles him to praise, but simply what is right; and
he does not compare himself with others but with his moral ideal. Hence
he recognizes, with regard to himself, only duty, not desert. He aspires
to attain, not the approbation of others, but his own, and he attains
this only when he has done that which he holds to be the best possible.

The moral significance of the outward sanction lies in its educating
influence; it acts as counterpoise to inclination to action opposed to
the moral law, and facilitates, thus, the victory of the moral motives,
which increase in strength through use. If it is true that a condition
of "heteronomy" always precedes that of "autonomy," then the outer
sanction is the indispensable condition of the evolution of moral
feelings.

It has sometimes been said that the human being is under obligation to
others only. But it seems that this view has proceeded from a confusion
of the moral with the juridic significance of the word "duty." It is not
to be doubted that the consciousness of duty would not develop in an
individual who grew up in solitude,--but speech and reason likewise
would not become his. The law of morality applies not only to social
conduct but also to conduct having reference to self.

By "moral law" is not meant a law in the sense that it is imposed on
human beings from without, by another; it is exactly the peculiarity of
the moral law that it is self-imposed as the voice of conscience.

Virtue is related to duty as the enduring characteristic to the single
action, or the lasting will to obligation, to the "ought"; virtue is a
disposition to act in accordance with duty. Vice is a characteristic
which continually determines actions opposed to duty.

There may be exceptional cases where vice is innate, as is idiocy or
insanity, but the records of prisons and reformatories where a moral
influence has been attempted, show us that germs of good may exist even
in those apparently wholly given over to vice. It is true that the
capacity for moral education is narrowed with every added year of life;
but it is impossible for us to say, with certainty, how great this
decrease of capacity may be.[79]

The most essential influence for moral betterment is that which the
personality of an earnest human being exerts by example and precept. The
awakening and strengthening of good impulses is not, however, the
immediate destruction of the bad; and struggle is often necessary if the
good shall conquer. The more frequent the victory, the easier it
becomes. Every virtue can be acquired at least in some degree, if the
wish to acquire it be sufficiently strong and persistent.

But although such struggle as this is often necessary, exactly the sign
of the attainment of virtue consists in the absence of self-compulsion;
by this absence, its perfection is measured.

The assertion, occasionally heard, that virtue is in proportion to
struggle, amounts to the contradictory assertion that the more perfect
the man is, the less is his virtue. The truths which, imperfectly
comprehended, lead to this opinion, are these: We distinguish by the
name of virtue that moral constitution which rises above the average. It
is presupposed, however, that its possessor has, in general, the
impulses and capacities belonging to human nature; he could not be
called temperate in any particular direction, if he did not possess the
capacity of enjoyment which leads many to intemperance. Moreover, the
control of strong impulses from a desire to do right presupposes a
strong sense of duty; and it is on account of this sense of duty that we
respect a man. But if an individual distinguished by a strong sense of
duty gradually succeeds in tempering his impulses and ridding himself of
his faults, his virtue is not less, but more perfect. And finally, the
fact is also to be taken into consideration that, while one cannot
necessarily conclude, from a man's innate love for some especial class
of good actions, that he will do his duty in other directions also, this
is an inference which can be drawn where actions are performed from a
sense of duty.

A certain degree of intelligence is a condition of virtue; a being
without reason is not a moral being, as the animal is not; but morality
requires only average human intelligence.

There is no greater error than the opinion that virtue is not concerned
with action; for virtue is excellence of character which leads to right
action; action is the test of moral worth.

In olden times, an attempt was often made to set up one especial form of
character as universal ideal. Such an attempt is injustifiable, since
the nature and circumstances of individuals differ. In morality, too,
there may be originality.

In the judgment of an action, two questions must be distinguished: the
question whether the action is right or wrong, and the question as to
what inference shall be drawn from it with regard to the character of
the performer.

In the action, there must be distinguished the following points: the
movement of the body; the results of the act; the act of the will; the
intent; the presence or absence of a conviction that the action will not
have evil results; the part of the intent willed, not merely as means
but as end; and the incentive, or feeling from which the action springs.
The chief end and the incentive together are often called the motive.
The movement of the body is not an object of moral judgment, as are not,
also, the outer results of the action as such. Nor is a mere act of the
will as such, but its nature, of moral importance.

No human motive or incentive is, in itself, bad. Not even anger and
hatred are in themselves evil; since wrath against wrong is justifiable.
Yet motives are by no means morally of the same worth; while where
motives directed to the good of the individual are at work, the action
will be, in nine cases out of ten, in accordance with the general good;
it will be, let us say, in nine cases out of ten, contrary to the
general good where motives of malevolence are active. And for this
reason the motive in the single case gives us a clue to the character.
There exists a certain stability of character which makes it likely that
the individual who acts out of good motives on one occasion will do so
again. Of greatest worth are the motives which spring from desire for
the general good; these are moral motives. Actions may be right, yet
immoral, and moral yet wrong. Yet the theory that the objective judgment
of an action, and the judgment of the character of the doer have nothing
in common is erroneous; for in both cases the highest ground of
reasonable judgment is the same; namely, the general good.

Blame is not merely for the sake of prevention through fear; since we
may blame a deed and not its doer. When a man does what we consider
wrong under the impression that he is acting for the general good, we do
not endeavor to frighten him from his conduct by blame, but to convince
him of his error.

But the significance of the motives of an action does not lie merely in
our inference from them to the character of the doer; from the actual,
or inferred, motives of the action spring its most important results;
namely, its influence upon the morality of human beings. Every moral
action reacts for good upon the performer, strengthening his tendency to
such conduct; and it is, besides, an inciting example.

It is not necessary for morality that all actions should take place
directly from desire for the general good, but only that the belief be
present that they are in harmony with the general good; duty need not be
the only motive, but simply the ruling one; one may act immediately from
other motives.

The aesthetic judgment of a character is to be distinguished from the
moral judgment of it. Much that pleases one aesthetically in character is
morally indifferent; and much that is morally of the greatest worth has
little or no aesthetic value. The talk of an identity of the beautiful
and the good has caused much confusion.

Things have particular qualities according to which they affect us and
are affected. All that I can predicate of things, all their being is
their effect. And when I say that a certain thing, as long as it does
not change, will, under the same circumstances, operate in the same way,
I assert merely that this certain thing, as long as it remains
unchanged, is this certain thing. It may often be difficult or
impossible to determine whether or not the thing has changed, but if it
has not changed, it must, under the same circumstances, operate in the
same manner as formerly. As everything is, at each moment, a definite
thing, so is also every human being; he has definite qualities, and if
these do not change, neither does his action under the same
circumstances; if it could change, he would act according to that which
he is not.

Different individuals have different innate tendencies; and differing
circumstances develop similar tendencies in different ways. The history
of the human being is his character, if we add what he has inherited to
his own history. To reflect upon human nature is to assume its
conformity to law; to deny such conformity involves ceasing from thought
on it; for thought means the conclusion of like from like. Though the
action of the human being depends, in a high degree, upon circumstances,
we can often predict, from a knowledge of his character, the general
nature of his action. And if our expectation should be, for once,
disappointed, we do not say that his character has suddenly passed into
its opposite, but that we had an insufficient knowledge of the
circumstances, or that we imputed to him a character which he did not
really possess. We have thus to distinguish two groups of facts in the
contemplation of a particular action: the present constitution of the
doer of the action, and that of the outward circumstances concerned; if
a change occurs in either, the conduct will also change. Criminal
statistics are evidence of the effects of similar circumstances upon
similar characters.

Those who deny the action of cause and effect in the conduct of men as
contradictory of freedom, cannot refer to physical or political liberty,
since the absence of these does not involve the absence of cause and
effect. The free will which is said to be peculiar to the human being
and not possessed by the animals, is an absence of subjection to the
impressions of the moment, and this has been regarded as an activity of
pure reason. But, as Hoeffding says, the contest of the reason with the
passions is really a contest between feelings combined with reflections
of reason and other violent feelings that are combined with few
thought-elements. This free will is the capacity of reflection gained by
experience. It is not a negation of cause and effect, for the act of the
will is determined by the feelings, thoughts, inclinations, which
precede it; it may be determined by reflection as opposed to the
impressions of the moment. The word "freedom" is also used to denote
moral freedom, or the freedom from determination by immoral motives; in
such case, however, moral motives determine.

But it must be remembered that the natural law of cause and effect is
not like a law in the sense of the political law; it is not something
imposed from the outside. Natural laws are rules formed by men to
express the regularity of events in one sentence; things do not obey the
laws, but the laws are according to things. When we say: Gunpowder
"must" explode when it comes in contact with a flame, the explosion is
necessary; we do not mean that the gunpowder is compelled, under certain
circumstances, to explode; it explodes of its own essential nature.
"Necessity" designates, not a state of things, but a state of the
understanding regarding them. The same is true of the words "possible"
and "accidental." The accidental is the unintentional. The bullet which
accidentally killed a man was not sent with the intention of killing
him. Or "accident" is used of that with regard to which we are ignorant
and cannot predict; the word does not, in this sense either, denote an
absence of cause. Objectively, nothing is "possible"; either it is, or
it is not. Great confusion is, however, caused by a want of clearness in
the interpretation of the words "possible," "impossible," "necessary,"
etc., with regard to the will. When I say: "It is _possible_ for the
good man to perform even the worst action, he _can_ perform it"; and:
"It is not _possible_ for the good man to perform a bad act, he cannot
do it"; I use the words "possible" and "can" in two quite different
senses. The first sentence means: "Even the best man can perform the
worst act _if he will_"; the second: "The good man never has the will;
it follows from his nature that he does not possess it; it would be a
self-contradiction to say that he has it." The human being can do this
or that if he wills, provided no outer force opposes his will; but
whether he wills or not depends upon his character. His will is not
uncaused.

It has been said that "one should not allow himself to be determined,
but should himself determine his act." This assertion makes self
something distinct from one's thoughts and feelings. Free will has also
been interpreted as choice between motives. The human being does not,
however, choose between motives but between acts, and his choice is free
in that he can, as has been said, choose this or that act _if he will_;
but his choice is not the less caused. When, in reflection on a past
act, the human being says to himself: "It was possible for me to act
otherwise," he means, as a rule, simply: "If I had thought as I do now,
I should not have acted thus; but I did not think as I do now." The
delusion that he might have acted differently under the same outer
circumstances and with the same thoughts and feelings, arises from the
difficulty of realizing, from his present standpoint, his position at
the time of action. It may, indeed, seem to us, after we have chosen a
certain course, that another was the easier; but can it be possible that
one preferred the former course when he yet really preferred the latter?
It is the strongest motive that determines the action. Or, if it be
objected to this assertion, that our only criterion of the strength of
motives is their effect as overcoming other motives, the assertion that
the will follows the strongest motive would still exclude accident in
choice; the assertion would amount to this: that the motive which
determines the will in the one instance will always, under the same
outer and inner circumstances, determine it. So Mill remarks that, when
we say that the heavier weight will weigh down the other, we understand
by "heavier weight," merely the one which will weigh down the other.
Nevertheless, the sentence is not senseless, since it means that there
is, in many or most cases, a heavier weight, and that its action is
always the same. Education by others, and self-education would be
useless, if the same thoughts and feelings could, under the same
circumstances, produce now this, now that totally different result, and
not always the same one.

Kant's doctrine of freedom includes practical freedom (which is not,
according to his definition, opposed to causality) and transcendental
freedom; he seems, however, not always to have kept the distinction
between the two clearly in view. His theory of transcendental freedom is
grounded upon the doctrine of the pure ideality of time. The only method
of saving the doctrine of freedom is, according to Kant, the theory that
the law of necessity applies to things as phenomena but not to things
in themselves. If phenomena are not to be regarded as things in
themselves, but as mere thought-images, they must themselves have
reasons which are not phenomena. Such a cause for pure reason[80] is not
determined by phenomena, although its effects appear as phenomena. The
causal action of reason does not have a beginning in time, but is the
constant condition, outside time, of all free action of the will.

Kant failed, however, to prove the pure ideality of time, as Riehl has
sufficiently shown. Moreover, were the _intelligibile_ character of
reason the cause of action as phenomenon, there would be no possibility
of moral improvement, since the noumenon is not affected by
phenomena,--an inference which Schopenhauer makes in adopting Kant's
theory. Moreover, if space has, as Kant also assumes, transcendental
ideality, plurality is not conceivable; hence, the moral difference of
characters, and the science of Ethics itself, could have no
transcendental significance. It is evident that Kant argues from the
standpoint of an assumption of a "soul-thing," a constant "substratum"
of psychical phenomena,--a standpoint which he himself criticizes. He
identifies this thing-in-itself, moreover, with the reason, although he
himself declares that the concept of the thing-in-itself is but a
concept limiting reason.[81] He makes the reason a thing-in-itself
outside time, although it is an activity, a process of consciousness in
time. The thought of duty, of the categorical imperative, is a
phenomenon, and if the will is determined thereby, it is determined by
something in time. Kant takes but little account, moreover, of the fact
of birth. Is the _intelligibile_ character born? If so, it is preceded
by something in time; if not, it must be eternal, existing before birth
as well as after death. And how can he assert, too, that an action might
have been other than it was, if it depended upon the constitution of the
_intelligibile_ character, and this is as it is, and operates as it is?

Schopenhauer's argument for transcendental freedom contains many
self-contradictions, and is founded on the fiction of a first free
choice of character. Schopenhauer asserts, however, that character is
innate. If so, how is it chosen? The theory assumes that one is before
he is. An act of choice presupposes a chooser, and, according to his own
words, "Every _existentia_ presupposes an _essentia_"; that is, every
existence must have a particular being, essence.

Accountability assumes that some one is held answerable for an action or
event, and is, as answerable, amenable to punishment. The punishment may
be one of law, of society, or a moral punishment. The concept of
responsibility is closely allied to that of accountability; it assumes,
in general, that a person is the author of a deed. Responsibility may be
immediate, when the author of the deed was also its performer, or
mediate, when the performer was another person.

Remorse is pain at the recognition of the immorality of a past action.
With the pain is often connected the wish that the action had not been
performed. This wish is naturally unreasonable, since it is directed to
the impossible. Yet it is not idle, as Schopenhauer asserts, since it
has an effect upon future action. There is often also an egoistic
regret, or one not called forth especially by the conscience, for a past
action. This may or may not be moral, according as it is or is not in
harmony with the general welfare.

The friends of the theory of chance as regards the will have asserted
that shame, remorse, would be impossible, if the human being recognized
the fact that his act was necessary. They have neglected, however, to
give any reasons for this remarkable assertion. If a man recognizes that
the constitution of his mind was such as to lead unavoidably to vicious
acts, this is the strongest motive for condemnation of his own moral
constitution, for pain at it, and an endeavor to better it. But if the
act had no necessary foundation in his character, if it was merely an
accident that his will chose thus, then, since the act is past and there
is no reason for drawing conclusions from it with regard to future
action, how does it concern him?

Blame and punishment, as well as self-blame, have regard to character
and so to the future. Acts are not blameworthy and punishable if they
have no cause. Punishment is inflicted from two motives: as a
preventive, and as an expression of the felt need of retribution.
Originally, mankind punished from a desire for revenge. This is not the
moral motive. Not the criminal alone, but the whole constitution of
society, is responsible for his crime. If, then, punishment is allowable
for the sake of prevention, it cannot, as an evil, be permissible
further than is in accordance with this end. Punishment of the insane
could be justified only in case it could prevent insanity.

Nor is desert based upon an uncaused character of the will. We do not
admire, praise, and reward great genius the less because genius is
inborn; nor do we admire the moral man the less because his father
before him was distinguished by deeds of philanthropy. We admire him for
what he _is_.

The doctrine of causality in human action is far from being what it is
sometimes called, a doctrine of fatalism. Fatalism assumes that,
whatever a man may do, a power outside him determines the event; but the
recognition of cause and effect in human action is the recognition of
the fact that the actions of human beings are never without result.

It is often said that morality is founded upon religion. Assuming that,
by religion, is meant the belief in a personal God and in the
immortality of the soul, is this true?

If a mighty tyrant commanded a man to do what was contrary to his
conscience, if he promised rich reward for obedience and fearful torture
for disobedience, would obedience therefore be moral? Why is it
represented as wrong to follow Satan's commands and right to follow
God's will? Evidently not because God is mighty but because he is good,
and Satan is bad. But if it is, thus, a matter of duty, and not merely
one of selfish cunning, to obey God's will, then his will must be
directed to the good; and this presupposes the good to be something in
itself, without regard to the fact that God wills it. If God is a moral
being, this must be so.

This is, in fact, an assumption which the moral members of society have,
in general, made. They boast of the morals of their religion, comparing
it, in this respect, with other religions; and thus they subject it to
the test of morality. Moreover, when we examine the Christian gospel, we
find that it in general assumes the moral laws as already existent and
only urges obedience to them. The good is, as we have seen, that which
conduces to the general welfare. The earliest religions had no
connection with rules of morality; these have developed with the social
life of human beings and have, in it, their root.

As to the belief in immortality, cannot the human being do right without
the thought of the reward and punishment of another life? As a matter of
fact, many good men have not possessed such a belief. The distance of
such an end often makes its effect a weak one, and the motive may easily
become selfish. Yet it is true that a loss of faith may include a loss
of morality, in case the belief exist that there is no basis for
morality outside religion; the responsibility of such a loss of morality
lies with those who teach this latter doctrine. Through love to others
and the thought of the immortality of influence, the moral man gains a
larger life and loses the fear of death. He who has thus faced the
thought of death finds life more earnest but not less happy. Each hour
has not the less its own joy because there is an end, at last. Nor, in
spite of the deep pain the loss of friends causes us, do we lose them
wholly, since the memory of all that was best in them may remain with
us. Our own pain may bring to us a deeper sympathy with, and love for,
others.

If we are able to love the good in God, we may also learn to love the
good in those about us, and be incited, by it, to emulation. The love of
the good in men has always had stronger effect than love for a distant
God of whom but little was known. It was the thought of the man Buddha
which exerted an ennobling influence upon thousands, and it was the
thought of another human being that moved the "christians" more strongly
than did that of a Father in Heaven. Do we love father and mother,
brother or sister, wife or child, or our friends, for God's sake? Why
may we not love all men, as we love our friends and children, for their
own sake?

It has been said that there is no accountability, if not to God. But if
God is the author of the world, he must himself be the cause of evil,
either by direct influence or by neglect to avert. Where, then, is the
justice of his punishment? It does not suffice to answer that God's
justice is not our justice; for in that case, what right have we to
apply the word to him at all?

History demonstrates the fact that morality is by no means necessarily
connected with religion. In the name of religion millions upon millions
of human beings, and these often the most upright and conscientious men
of their nation, have been put to death, and thus the civilization of
whole peoples has been retarded. Slavery in America had no stronger
friends than the churches. How is the forgiveness of sins by God to be
justified? Are the evils which they caused any the less existent because
of such forgiveness, and is it well for the doer to escape, in this way,
the sense of responsibility? Only labor for the good of humanity is the
way of atonement. We ourselves are the creators of the kingdom of
righteousness.

Many claim that Ethics is not indeed based upon Theology, but that it
needs a metaphysical, a teleological, foundation. For it presupposes
that human life has an "end." If we wish to ascertain how our life
should be conducted, we must ascertain what is the end Nature has in
view for us.

But an end is an effect imagined beforehand and willed, which we cannot
bring about immediately but only through a chain of causes. These causes
we call the means to the end. They too are willed, but only indirectly
and because the end is attainable only through them. These processes to
an end are sometimes treated as if the causal succession in them were
reversed, so that the last effect appears as the beginning, and the
future determines the present; in this sense, the end has been called
the end-cause, because the final link of the process causes the
beginning. But this is a senseless conception, since the future, that
which does not yet exist, cannot now operate. In fact, the succession of
causes and effects is no more broken into in the processes leading to an
end than in any other processes. When a human being imagines to himself
a result and endeavors to bring it about, these mental processes are not
future but present; and they are not determined by an influence of the
future upon the present, but by an influence of the past upon the
present; they follow from experience, that is, from that which has
already occurred. They are causal processes in which the activities of
understanding and will have part. Hence "ends" exist in nature in so far
as they exist in man and the higher animals; but outside these, ends
cannot be predicated, unless Nature is regarded either as gifted with
imagination and will or as the creation of a being possessing these. But
imagination and will require, according to all our experience, a highly
developed nervous system, and to assume their existence where such a
centralized system does not exist is scientifically injustifiable.
Moreover, the laws of thought by no means determine us to inquire after
a cause of the whole world, since the concept of cause is applicable
only to changes, not, however, to enduring existences and their
qualities.

Or let us assume that we had discovered an end set by Nature. Then,
either it would appear useless to interfere with its attainment and
unnecessary to assist in it, or it would appear to us possible to oppose
this end. In this latter case, cause must be shown why we should assist,
or should resist, the process of Nature.

Many philosophers have said that man should live according to his own
nature. If the word "nature" here denotes the totality of his
characteristics, it is evident that the worst actions are not less
natural than the best. Therefore, the word nature cannot, as here used,
have this sense; the natural in this sense is not identical with the
moral. Nor can the term as here used refer to the usual, for in that
case the greatest moral excellence, as unusual, must be rejected. Nor
can it be used to designate the more primary, for in that case, again,
the later developments of benevolence and truthfulness should be
rejected.

The word can have but one other sense, namely, as opposed to artificial.
But what is in man artificial and what is natural? It seems that the
natural is understood as that which is not the work of human intention
and reflection, of labor, and of education. Innate impulses would be,
according to this definition, natural. But it is evident that one cannot
abandon himself to his blind impulses; society could not exist under
such circumstances.

Or if it be said that, since all organs and impulses of the human being
tend to preservation of the species, and that this must, therefore, be
the end, then let us say "the preservation of the species," or "the good
of mankind" but not "the natural life," is the end for man to attempt.

Nature as a whole is neither good nor bad. Her cruelty in the struggle
for life is continuous. Yet this is not "cruelty," in so far as it is
not willed. She has often selected the best men for her sacrifices. Yet
this is not all that is to be said of the relation of Darwinism to
Ethics. The law of natural selection regulates not only the life of the
individual but also that of peoples and nations. Evil may arise and
prosper in society. But it has no permanent existence. The chances that
the descendants of human beings possessing evil characteristics will
long survive, that they will not, sooner or later, perish as the result
of conflict with the mandates of health, or the laws of the state, or
the demands of society, are not great. In the life of nations, it
appears more clearly than in the life of the individual, that "Death is
the price of sin." Should in any society the opinion gain power that the
struggle for existence authorizes or demands a regardless pursuit of
one's own interests, an oppression and robbery of the weak by the
strong, an annihilation of pain through the annihilation of the
suffering individuals, an outrooting of conscience, and the natural
voice of pity which raises protest against such a course; should
selfishness be bred, and physical strength and refined cunning become
the highest ideal; such a community would be on the verge of its own
destruction; it would have labored for this result by justifying the
struggle of all against all, permitting this the moment that a conflict
of interests arose. Let times of need and danger, times of national war,
come, and we shall see what is the fate of a society in which love of
country, self-sacrifice, a sense of the ideal, respect for truth and
justice, are only subjects for scorn. "The world's history is its
judgment-day."

All positive human authorities are subject to the authority of the
conditions of life. If they do not take note of the nature of things, if
they disturb the foundations of social life, their endeavors must
finally suffer shipwreck on the rock of this powerful impersonal
authority.

Natural selection is therefore a power of judgment, in that it preserves
the just and lets the evil perish. Will this war of the good with the
evil always continue? Or will the perfect kingdom of righteousness one
day prevail? We hope this last but we cannot know certainly.

We ourselves shall decide our future, by our acts.

       *       *       *       *       *

In an essay written for the Society for Ethical Culture, and read
October 10, 1891, before the London branch of that society, Gizycki
reconstructs his theory of the right final end of life, advocating as
such the General Welfare, instead of Peace of Conscience in the pursuit
of the same. The objections to his own former theory offered are,
chiefly, that if peace of conscience is regarded as the final end, the
individual is likely to take too little account of the outward effects
of his action, to be too little impressed by the evil results which
should teach him greater care. The good of society is regarded by the
virtuous man as more important than his own happiness, as that for which
he is willing to sacrifice his own peace.

FOOTNOTES:

[79] The references here are to Lombroso, "Der Verbrecher," deutsche
Ausgabe, S. 129 u. f.; H. v. Valentini, "Das Verbrecherthum im
preussischen Staate," S. 226 u. f.

[80] Intelligibile Ursache.

[81] Grenzbegriff.




S. ALEXANDER

"MORAL ORDER AND PROGRESS" (1889)


The proper business of Ethics is the study of moral judgments--or, if we
say of human conduct, then of conduct as submitted to the praise or
blame of moral judgments. But these judgments are not mere opinions;
conduct is not that which is "judged" to be right in distinction from
that which is right; and thus the analysis of such judgments is a
systematization of both conceptions and facts.

The task of Ethics falls into two parts. It has (1) to supply a
_catalogue raisonne_ of the moral observances of life, the various moral
judgments which make up the contents of the moral consciousness, and (2)
to discuss what it is that the moral judgment, as such, expresses.

Nothing is more striking at the present time than the convergence of
different schools of Ethics--English Utilitarianism developing into
Evolutional Ethics, on the one hand, and the idealism associated with
the German philosophy derived from Kant on the other. The convergence is
not, of course, in mere practical precepts, but in method also. It
consists in an "objectivity" or impartiality of treatment, commonly
called "scientific." There is also a convergence in general results
which consists in a recognition of a kind of proportion between
individual and society, expressed by the phrase "organic connection."
The theory of egoism, pure and simple, has been long dead;
Utilitarianism succeeded it and enlarged the moral end. Evolution
continued the process of enlarging the individual interest, and has
given precision to the relation between the individual and the moral
law. But in this it has added nothing new; for Hegel, in the early part
of the century, gave life to Kant's formula by treating the law of
morality as realized in the society and the state. The change in ethical
conception is not due to biological research alone, but to the study of
history also, and to other general changes in the practical data on
which its principles are built. The social and political history of the
century represents the growth of the idea of freedom, which has properly
two sides--that of individual liberty of healthy development, and that
of the solidarity of society and the responsibility of the individual
to it. With the increasing complexity of interests and the growth of
individual freedom, has come, however, a certain sense of loneliness to
the individual in the midst of modern competition, and this explains, to
a great extent, the increase of suicide in the present century.

The convergence of dissimilar theories affords us some prospect of
obtaining a satisfactory statement of the ethical truths towards which
they seem to move.

Our inquiry falls into two parts, according as we analyze the
conceptions which relate to the existence of the moral judgment or those
connected with its growth, maintenance, and change--the statics or the
dynamics of morality. To these two divisions is to be added a third,
preliminary division, more closely allied with the statical examination
of morality. These three parts are represented by the questions: (1)
What is it that is good? To what are the terms good and bad applied? (2)
Why is it good? What does its goodness mean? (3) How does goodness come
into being; how is it maintained; how does it advance?

Moral judgments apply to voluntary action, that is, action distinguished
by the presence of an idea of the end to be attained "not merely _in_
consciousness but _to_ consciousness," and the conversion of the idea
into the actual reality of presentation. The terms good and bad, indeed,
are applied, not only outside the realm of morals, but also, within it,
to desires and thoughts; but to these only as they are the objects of
volition, in that the will at present allows them to persist in
consciousness or in that their present occurrence is regarded as the
result of past willing.

The conduct to which we apply moral judgment is a whole made up of many
parts--and actions, consequences, and internal feelings have value for
morality only in so far as they are its elements.

External action concerns conduct only in so far as the object of
volitions (which may be either internal or external) is derived from
this source. Voluntary external action is not external only, but has
also an internal side; and not whether I succeed in performing a certain
action or am prevented in the middle of it, but whether I willed it, is
of importance to moral judgment. Conduct is sometimes considered
separately from character; but this separation results from confusing
conduct with mere action. A character exists only in its conduct, and
all moral actions issue from character.

The consequences cannot be separated from conduct in the moral judgment,
except in so far as they could not have been foreseen. The consequences
of conduct are a most important part of action, in that they should be
considered by the person willing, and should influence the nature of his
conduct.

The internal side of conduct is represented by the moral sentiments.
These are to be distinguished from the mere motives, which, defined as
something that has propulsive force, whether a feeling or a passion,
does not enter into moral action except as absorbed into volition. No
emotion is, in itself, right or wrong, but is only indirectly judged as
such as it makes a difference to the action--as an aptitude of mind
which tends to this or that predominating form of conduct. Moral
sentiments, on the other hand, as moral aptitudes effective for
particular conduct, contain an additional element. Moral sentiments,
thus defined, being equivalent to conduct, it follows that the mere
possession of sentiments cannot constitute the difference between
intrinsic or internal, and customary morality; customs are themselves a
matter of sentiment. Thus "conduct as a concrete whole has an inward
element of sentiment and an outward element of action, and these are
different, on the one hand from mere given feelings, on the other from
mere action." "Conduct is this unity of feeling and action in which mere
feeling is modified by the idea of action, and mere action becomes a
mental, or, if we like, a spiritual thing." "Conduct and character are
the same thing facing different ways." "Think of a man's conduct in
relation to the mental conditions from which it proceeds, and you think
of his character; think of his character as it produces results beyond
these sentiments themselves, and you have conduct."

There are no morally indifferent acts; when viewed in general and
broader lights, all acts are either good or bad; though there are some
cases of really indifferent means arising from the mechanism of action;
as, for instance, that I am to go to London is not indifferent, but we
may suppose that the fact that I may go by the road or by the river
makes no difference to my volition. There is no distinction between
virtue and prudence as regard for self, but prudence, in so far as it is
compatible with social requirements, is a duty and a virtue.

Ethics, then, has to do with conduct as a whole in its external and its
internal aspects. In distinction from Psychology, it has to do with it
not merely as a fact to be analyzed, but with reference to its nature,
quality, or content, judged by a standard of value. It is not dependent
upon Metaphysics, but precedes it in order of time, whatever may be said
of the order of importance; Metaphysics examines, properly, the ultimate
questions left over unanswered by the other sciences. From the purely
physical method, Ethics has advanced to a biological method; and the
doctrine that pleasure is the end of right action has been replaced by
the idea of social vitality as the end.


STATICAL ANALYSIS--MORAL ORDER

The recognition of the reference in morality to society has been implied
in all ethical theories; theories of selfish pleasure themselves
recognize the social element in individual gratification, even Cyrenaic
theories recommending selection and refinement of pleasures, and
containing a reference to personal dignity which implies a conception of
man as typical of a perfection that others may sympathize in and attain.
Individualism and Universalism in morals differ only in the order in
which they take their terms. "To the former, the individual comes first
and is the measure of the law; to the latter, the law or society comes
first, and is the measure of the worth of the individual." Nevertheless,
the ethical problem is very differently conceived by the two schools.
But the History of Philosophy shows a tendency to harmonization of the
two; we find that Individualism becomes more and more socialistic, while
Universalism becomes more and more conscious of individuality. We may
trace this movement, in the case of Individualism, in the development of
the philosophic theory of morality as true benevolence from the theory
of benevolence as merely another form of self-love. The earlier
conceptions of Universalism, emphasizing the good as something binding
irrespective of the inclinations of the individual, issue in particular
formulae of virtue; later conceptions recognize the differences of
individual cases while still insisting on the universal or authoritative
character of morality. The problem receives its definite shape when the
explanation of authority is sought, not in some categorical imperative,
but in the very nature of society itself, which, if a whole, is yet a
whole made up of individuals. Ethical inquiry thus naturally breaks up
into two parts, according as we consider the meaning of right and wrong
for the individual, or for society as embracing many individuals.

As far as morality concerns itself with the individual, the good act
implies a certain adjustment of functions to one another, too much in
any one direction implying a defect in others. "The good life as a whole
is a system of consecutive acts, where each function has its limits
prescribed for it by the demands of all the other functions." And the
good character is "an order or systematic arrangement of volitions." The
goodness of an act is thus a matter of equilibration or adjustment of
the elements of an individual's nature. In this proportion or adjustment
consists the reasonableness, rationality (ratio, [Greek: logos]) of good
conduct. This does not mean that the principle of morality is the result
of reason, for moral adjustment is no more specially the work of reason
than of any other mental faculty.

This account of good character uses ideas which apply, _mutatis
mutandis_, to the life of any organism, as well as to the mind of man;
it merely explains, in terms of human experience, the elements involved
in the conception of organization; the difference lies simply in the
nature of the elements involved in the adjustment, the elements being,
in the case before us, conscious acts. To the question whether such a
definition of morality would not apply rather to conduct than to
character, and whether, the volitions being conceived as a series in
time, it does not dissolve the unity of character, may be answered that
conduct and character have already been shown to be identical, and that
unity can no more be denied to the series of acts involved than it can
be denied to the growing plant or animal whose functions are successive.
The unity conditioned by time is a unity characterized by succession, as
that of space by extension. The objection, as it gathers its strength
from a persuasion that the good character should be described by the
feelings or sentiments of any one time, is legitimate; good conduct is
built upon a man's needs or desires and is defined as satisfying every
part of his nature in its proportion; so that an equilibrium of the
emotions and the moral sentiments is involved in morality, and any
sentiment is moral which can be equilibrated with the rest. "The good
man may be described either as an equilibrated order of conduct, or as
an equilibrium of moral sentiments or of the parts of his nature.
Nevertheless, the order of conduct is a prior conception to that of
structural equilibrium." In a machine, the combination of parts is made
in order to produce the motion of the engine, and the equilibrium is
maintained by the motion. "In the organism, the bodily structure retains
its proportion only in so far as it is in physiological action, and this
physiological action subserves the conduct of the organism," while "in
like manner the equilibrium of moral sentiments exists only through
conduct and is determined by the requirements of conduct." The
equilibrium is effected simultaneously both for conduct and the moral
structure. The ideal is a plan of conduct, ideal in that it is never
fully attained. The ideal is hypothetical in two senses. It supposes
that every member of the order is good, whereas no life contains good
acts only; and that the order itself remains permanent, whereas morality
is necessarily progressive. Nevertheless, it is to be observed that the
ideal is a realized ideal. It is realized in every good act, since the
good act is the act which has the shape it would wear in the ideal
order. "Though it is adjusted to imaginary elements, it realizes the
whole so far as its own particular share is concerned."

Morality implies the existence of society. It is useless to inquire what
would be moral in case the human individual were an isolated being; the
fact is that he is not so, and that all moral judgment implies not only
the judgment of other individuals besides the acting individual, but
also the function of the acting individual as a member of a society. Yet
each member of a society has his special individual work, so that duty
varies according to individual circumstances, and so far from its being
true that morality is not a respecter of persons, it is a fact that it
is always a respecter of persons. This does not deny that there are
certain common bounds of morality, which allow the formation of some
general propositions; nor does it mean that each individual is at
liberty to construct his own moral precepts. The individuality of
morality, which finds a place or vocation for each individual, involves
an equilibrium between the members of society, in which consists the
morality of the whole.

The so-called self-regarding virtues are social as well as
self-regarding; their disregard involves evil, not to the individual
alone, but to others also. It may be objected that acts and thoughts
which can never be known to others are condemned by conscience. In
answer it must be observed:--

(1) That the knowledge of others is a matter of degree; my friends know
my actions; and in order to judge an action, it is not necessary to
suppose the whole nation looking on.

(2) That as personal morality becomes more and more complex, and hence
knowledge by others less and less possible, we leave the judgment of an
act more to the conscience of the individual, as vicegerent of the moral
law. "Acts which are wrong when nobody knows them have come to be so by
a process beginning with simple acts which are known, that is, known in
their outward appearance." The act, known or unknown, leaves its impress
upon character, raising or lowering the efficiency of the agent; and
hence is judged good or bad. The study of art and science has, thus,
moral value, as influencing character.

Good and bad acts and conduct are thus to be distinguished by their
adjustment or non-adjustment to the social order. The adjustment takes
place in a similar manner as in a trial of strength, and the compromise
between the different individuals must be taken as measuring the actual
forces which were engaged.

The social organism has both its morphological, or structural, and its
physiological or functional aspect; and here, once more, the order of
functions is a prior conception to the structural order; in the society,
conduct bears to structure the relation which physiological action in
the body bears to the bodily structure. The social ideal is doubly
hypothetical, implying that all members of the society are good and that
society is statical.

That to which moral judgment applies with regard to the individual's
relation to society, is the adjustment of individual wills regarded
either as directly appearing or as latent and capable of acting, the
occasion being given. The moral principle in society as a whole is thus,
as in the case of the individual, a rational one, and Aristotle rightly
gives the same name ([Greek: orthos logos]) to it as to the principle of
individual action. The moral individual is the reproduction in small of
the social order. But "the two conditions that the individual must be a
harmony within himself, and that he must possess all the powers that are
required of him for the purposes of society, are not different, but
identical." For the absence of such powers implies the absence of
adjustment to his conditions, failing which adjustment the inner harmony
is impossible, although life may be continued, just as it may be
continued under diseased physical conditions.

Good men may thus be said to conform to a certain type or ideal; but
this type is not merely something to which they are fashioned, but to
which they themselves are the contributory elements. Hence the social
ideal is a species of which all good men are the individual instances;
and the species exists, not, as in the case of natural science, as a
generalization in the mind of the observer or as an identical plan upon
which the members are organized, not as a mere collection of
individuals, but as in itself an organism. "Let it not be objected that,
since no society is in perfect equilibrium, and the ideal exists only in
good men, the ideal is therefore as much a creation of the observer's
mind as a natural species. An ideal implies no contrast of observer and
observed: conduct is something mental: the ideal is a reality of mind,
existing in the minds of those who act upon it. The social ideal has
thus a concrete existence in the collective action of good men."

In this manner, the supposed independence of the tendencies towards
Individualism and Universalism disappears, the harmony of the individual
and his harmony with society being identical--a true independence being
equivalent to true cooeperation.

Morality implying adjustment to the ideal order, a realization of the
bearings of our acts is important. But we need no special moral faculty
to teach us morality; it is prompted by thoughts and feelings that, as
the result of a process of compromise, are thoughts and feelings
adjusted to a social order.

Obligation "expresses that an act is the act required." "It is that
relation in which the single part of the order stands to the whole
order, when it is confronted by the whole," whether we consider the
single act in relation to the whole character of the individual, or the
single individual in his relations to society. "Duty in the abstract is
the name which comprehends obligation in all its details; a duty in the
concrete is any good act regarded in its relation to the whole. On the
other hand, the whole has _authority_ against its parts, and every
particular duty is said to have authority just so far as it is backed by
the whole mass of duties," as the command of a sovereign has authority
because it gives expression to the will of the whole society over which
he presides. Obligation "corresponds to the necessity under which an
organism lies of acting in a certain manner in order to conform to its
type." Duty is thus not necessarily antagonistic to inclination, as
Kant conceived it, since, in the good man, inclinations are adjusted to
the requirements of social life; and obligation is thus different from
compulsion, which, as attendant on authority, applies to the bad, not
the good, man. The negative side of compulsion is responsibility, which
implies that, in the case of transgression, the person will be called to
account. Duty, though thus free from the idea of antagonism, is itself
always negative, implying subjection of the individual to the larger
order. It is from this negativity that duty lends itself to the legal
idea of compulsion, and in general wears a legal garb.

In law, rights and duties are correlative, the right of one implying
duties of others, and _vice versa_; but in morals, rights and duties are
not merely correlative but identical; it is a duty to insist on rights
in so far as these rights are moral, not merely legal, and the
individual has a right to the performance of duty.

The moral judgment is a judgment on a fact, but expresses, nevertheless,
a fact also; it expresses an adjustment to an ideal order, which, if
ideal, is yet a fact, although never realized in its entirety. Thus
morality is not a mere matter of opinion. Opinions may differ with
regard to a fact of morality as different individuals differ in the
apprehension of a physical fact. An action is not right simply because I
think it is so; but the opinion of the good man represents what is
really good.

Goodness is a mental fact; the apprehension of goodness, as the passing
of judgment upon it, is different from it; but it is nevertheless, in
another sense, the goodness of the good man which approves or is the
approbation of the good act; and "badness exists in the mind of the good
man and is known as disapprobation." The quality of an action is that
which excites approbation; its goodness or adjustment is nothing but the
approbation of the good man, but not of other men. In like manner, duty
and the sense of duty are the same thing. When the act judged is
presented to the mind only as idea, the feeling of approbation or
disapprobation is that which we know as the working of the moral sense
or conscience.

It is this truth that goodness and approbation are identical that
Intuitionism builds upon. Intuitionism, however, regards goodness as
some new quality of action, peculiar and inexplicable; while a true
analysis looks upon goodness as no new quality, the moral judgment
merely placing a mark upon any action as conforming to a certain order
or equilibrated system wanted.

There is in the good man a vague mass of moral sentiments and emotions;
and when the idea of any act comes in contact with these, a feeling of
satisfaction or dissatisfaction arises, according as the idea fuses with
this mass of sentiments or fails in adjustment to them. Moral promptings
are merely promptings which have been adjusted on one side and the other
until they have come to be in harmony with social conditions; they grow
out of the natural feelings by the process of adjustment. The word
"conscience," as it is more generally used, seems to emphasize the
element of reflection in a greater degree than "moral sense." The
explanation of the apparent independence of conscience is merely that,
in the good man, the moral order is realized, and action from moral
principle takes place spontaneously. In so far as this is true, he is,
in the ethical sense, free, yet not free in the sense that he is to be
bound by his own conscience alone in opposition to the judgment of all
other consciences; "on the contrary, the conscience sits as a tribunal
on a man's acts or intentions, just because it is the representative of
the moral order."

In speaking of a "perverted conscience," morality condemns the isolation
of a man's ideas about right conduct, from the judgment of his fellows.

The conscience, by reason of the element of reflectiveness, is higher
than the moral sense; and the cultivation of a refined conscience is the
basis of all morality. Yet this very reflectiveness involves danger, in
that, attaching itself as it does to the negative side of duty, it tends
to associate the latter with the idea of painfulness rather than of
pleasure, and to induce fear, and also in that it tends to develop a
morbid subjectivity of feeling through too much self-examination.

Good conduct, as good in virtue of the equilibrium it establishes
between the various parts of conduct itself, should contain within
itself the whole justification of morality. As such, it is the end of
morality, in that it is both the object and purpose, the aim or desire;
and in that it is also the standard, criterion, or result by which
conduct is measured.

Good conduct involves a common good as part of the moral order, and so
creative of a tie between all members of society. The common good is
thus not to be conceived as something that might be, as it were, cut up
and distributed, but as common in that it involves an adjustment of
claims. The common good is thus, in a sense, objective, or objectively
valid, though not objective in the sense that it exists outside the
minds of men, but in the sense that it is a compromise between wills, in
which each mind surrenders merely personal whims for a common agreement.

Since there seems a discrepancy between my own good and the good of
others, how do I make the good of others my object, going beyond myself
in the range of my interest? And how is self-sacrifice possible? The
answer to the first question is that morality reconciles the likes and
dislikes of individuals, so that self-love and love of others describe
the moral relation from opposite ends; every act of respect for others
is an act of self-furtherance.

We are entitled to assume, as not needing proof, that the instincts of
altruism are as fundamental and original as those of self-love. But if
we use stricter reasoning, we can see how, in either case, we identify
ourselves with others. Altruism is merely a form of conduct in which the
egoistic element, though present, retires into the background; while in
all right egoism, we aim at the good of others as well as our own good,
though our own good appears as the more prominent feature in the act of
willing. We must not be understood as willing, in altruism, another's
good in any mystical sense, in the sense of any identification of self
with others; we will the good of others in quite a different sense from
that in which we will our own good, the idea of their good being a
representation in our mind from the analogy of our own experience; and
the good attained by each party to the transaction is different and
incommunicable. Neither must egoism or altruism be interpreted in the
sense that, in either, reflection on the end as distinctively the good
of self or of others is involved; the moral agent in general throws his
energies into this or that course of action, because it is felt to be
what is wanted, without further reflectiveness.

Human beings, as plastic shapes, moulded by contact, adjust themselves
to each other, and thus it comes about that certain personal claims are
waived. Self-sacrifice is a real fact, a fact attested by the existence
of the bad, to whom such sacrifice involves a loss of happiness and is
impossible. It means the abandonment of a real good which the individual
would seize under other circumstances. It is sometimes contended that
real self-sacrifice is impossible, either (1) because the sacrifice is
really pleasanter to the agent, or (2) because he is compensated for his
loss. But the evident fact that self-sacrifice is pleasanter to the
agent does not involve the seeking of his own pleasure by the agent, and
even if it be admitted that there is always the forecast of compensation
in the mind of the agent, yet part of the forecast is the picture of
happiness foregone. But here, as before, it may be said that the element
of reflection, the weighing of one's own and others' happiness against
each other is read into the act by the onlooker, and is not necessarily
involved. That his own self-sacrifice, the compensation of his own
consciousness of right-doing outweighs, to the moral man, the pleasure
of lower aims, does not mean that the individual is selfish in seeking
self-sacrifice. And, in fact, that any ulterior aim of self-satisfaction
beyond the act itself is sought, in self-sacrifice, by the moral man, is
false; the greatest acts of heroism are characterized by complete
absorption in the impersonal end sought, the good of the agent thus not
lying beyond, but consisting in his action. Acts characterized by
another spirit than this we do not term self-sacrifice.

As all conduct is a matter of will, so morality is concerned not merely
with the virtues, the practical dealings of men, but also with all that
strengthens or weakens the will and, in general, conduces to character.
In judging a man, the significance of his individual gifts, and the
responsibility which attends the cultivation of these gifts must be
recognized. Not special virtues alone must be considered, but the whole
man must be judged and the significance of his self-cultivation in this
or that direction observed. This does not mean that the exceptional
faults of exceptional men are to be condoned. On the contrary, there is
no reason to suppose that special gifts confer a special privilege
rather than a special responsibility. Judged in the entirety of their
character, such men may not be worse than others, and this fact should
be regarded; but we should not defend their sins as such. The neglect of
self-cultivation in one direction may be necessary to action in another
direction; but the moral criterion of such self-cultivation or action is
to be found in morality as an equilibrium of powers.

Perfection is not itself sufficient to define the end. Perfect is that
which is the best possible; perfection as a perfect activity rather
than a perfect state (as we must conceive it) is equivalent to the best
possible conduct. But the moral end can be understood as perfection only
when by the best possible conduct is understood that which is the best
possible under circumstances determined by morality itself. The fullest
development as demanded by morality is not necessarily the perfection of
development in any particular case, that is, with regard to any
particular gift or individual. Or, in other words, perfection in both
its absolute and its comparative meaning, is a conception which belongs,
not to morality as such, but to the materials out of which morality is
constituted. Take "perfect" as equivalent to "best," then perfection is
equally involved in every good action. The good is always the best; what
is right is perfect; morality discards degrees of comparison. But the
degree of perfection to which any power or individual is to be developed
is determined, morally, by the principle of equilibrium. Moreover, we
may recognize degrees of perfection in individuals who are,
nevertheless, not to be classified as of less or greater moral value.

There are two different conceptions of merit, the one as applied to
magnitude of actual achievement, the other to magnitude of effort. The
apparent discrepancy vanishes on reflection, since both conceptions
apply to what passes beyond the average and measures the distance
between the two.

Against the hedonistic doctrine, it has been urged by Green that
pleasure as such is not the end of action, for even where the single
pleasure is desired there is always the thought of a permanent self
whose good is supposed to lie in the direction of this pleasure; while a
sum of pleasures cannot, as such, be an object of desire, since
pleasures, as separate and transitory in contradistinction from the
permanent self, cannot be added together in fact, but only in thought;
and with regard to a greatest sum of pleasures the difficulty is still
greater, since pleasures admit of indefinite increase, and their sum can
never be the greatest possible. In so far as desire is supposed to be
for pleasures and nothing else, the argument that a sum of pleasures
cannot be desired must be admitted. The transiency of the pleasures has,
however, nothing to do with the question; the reason why a sum of
pleasures cannot form a single pleasure is that they are pleasures with
a higher idea--that of a series involving a plan. This does not prove
that a sum of pleasures might not be the criterion of conduct. It must
be admitted that "sum" is an unfortunate word, since it seems to imply
that the pleasures must be combined in one total result; but such an
interpretation of the word is not necessary. A series of pleasures is
properly nothing more than an aggregate or combination of pleasures,
partly successive, partly coexistent. Nor does the greatest possible
happiness mean a happiness than which no greater is possible, but the
greatest possible under the given conditions. The polemic is directed
against the individualistic psychology, which regards mental states as a
mere succession of events. So far the arguments enforce a great
principle; a mere succession of feelings or sensations could never yield
a conception of a sum apprehended as a sum. But this is irrelevant. For
such an idea we require much more than sensation: we require memory,
perception, the idea of a self. But this is only saying that morality
requires more than mere sensation, and the argument assumes the
standpoint it is fighting, treating mental states as mere events. It,
moreover, introduces the idea of a permanent self as something superior
to mere sensations, whereas perhaps this self is elaborated from
sensational elements. Furthermore, if the proposition means that a mind
which had only sensations could not have a sum of sensations, this may
be denied. A sum is possible from three positions--that of the
conception of a spectator, that of a reflecting consciousness, and that
of a feeling consciousness which feels its states continuously, though
it may not feel them as continuous, for such a feeling would argue
comparison and reflection. The polemic, therefore, while in so far right
as it is directed against individualistic psychology, seems to assign
wrong reasons for a rejection of hedonism; Utilitarians, while speaking
of pleasures in the language of psychology, treat them really as
something more than mere events--treat them as we really combine them by
processes much higher than sensation. A refutation of hedonism must
consist in showing that pleasures really differ in kind, and cannot,
therefore, be compared in intensity. "Pleasure" is often used as
equivalent to a pleasant sensation; such pleasures differ in kind, as in
the case of gratified hunger, ambition, and the like, and cannot be
actually added, either in thought or in enjoyment, because
incommensurable. "Pleasure" is often used, also, to refer, not to the
sensation itself, but to its pleasantness, and here the same thing is
true; if we distinguish the quality and the tone of feeling, as usual in
psychology, the classification of tones as pleasurable and painful is
insufficient. "The tones of colors and sounds, for instance, are more
naturally represented by the mood of mind they suggest: red has a warm
tone, black a sad, gray a sober, the organ a solemn tone."[82] The tone
of some feelings is too indefinite for description,--a vague comfort or
discomfort,--while the tone may rise to a condition to be described only
by "bliss" or "rapture." Pleasure and pain depend, moreover, not only on
the quality and quantity of the feeling, but on the whole condition of
the mind, pleasure indicating agreement with the mind, pain
non-agreement. Every pleasure being a function of the sensation in which
it is an element, the supposed sum of pleasures must be made up of
pleasures every one of which is qualified as that which is produced by a
certain activity. "The sum of pleasures, therefore, re-introduces the
distinctions and contents of the moral order, and, though an expression
of the criterion of conduct, is therefore, like perfection, not an
independent criterion." The element of quality in pleasure may be
_verified_ more easily as what may be called _preferability_. The term
preferability does not mean that there is an inherent moral value in
every pleasure, in virtue of which pleasures may be distinguished as
higher or lower--obviously an erroneous view, for higher and lower is an
antithesis established by morality itself; the value depends on the kind
of pleasure, and the preferability is that in the good man's mind.

It might be objected that even though pleasures differ in kind, a
comparison and summation of them might be possible, just as comparison
and summation of weights is possible, although weight depends not on
bulk alone but also on specific gravity. It cannot be denied that some
numerical expression for qualities of pleasure may yet be found, by
which they may be compared. But it is to be noted that, the higher we go
in the scale of existence, the more distinct becomes the growth of a
principle of selection or distribution which the members of a
combination must follow in order to produce a given quantitative result.
In chemistry we may obtain the atomic equivalent of sulphuric acid (98)
in many ways, but we can obtain the acid itself only by specific
combinations in specific proportions. In determining what food to give
an animal, we must consider not bulk alone but the nutritiousness of
various sorts. We might express the nutritiousness of various foods by
numbers, but the numerical equivalent would tell us nothing, unless we
knew the kinds of food to be combined. And in the same way we might
express the sum of pleasures as end numerically, but until we know the
kinds of activities and so of pleasures to be combined to this sum, the
formula is useless to inform us as to the end or method of attaining it.
The popular conception of happiness avoids all the difficulties and
perplexities caused by setting up pleasure as the end, because in that
conception pleasures and pains are never considered apart from conduct
and character. Thus, though the end involves pleasure, the criterion is
good conduct. The good conduct necessarily involves pleasure, for
conduct which only outwardly conforms to the moral rule, and in which
the agent does not take pleasure, is not really good.

The pleasure-formula thus represented as the standard of conduct is to
be distinguished, as actual ethical pleasure in the act, from the
pleasures attendant on the act as results, and which may be termed
pathological in a Kantian sense. The ethical pleasure need not be
unmixed, for the act which satisfies one part of a man's nature does not
necessarily satisfy all the other parts. But the ethical pleasure must
be present as the total reaction of character considered apart from the
incidentals of result.

Pleasures and pains may be divided into two classes, active and passive;
active pleasures being those attendant on an act, as gratification of an
impulse, passive pleasures those which come to us as enjoyments, not as
the gratification of the impulse producing an act, though perhaps
resulting from our act. Active pains are those of want, passive those of
suffering. The pleasures accompanying an act as pleasures of attainment
are always pleasures of gratification, but not of gratification merely,
for they gratify a sentiment directed towards an object previously
present to the mind in idea; and it is because the volition realizes the
idea that the pleasures are called pleasures of attainment, and in this
fact lies also their ethical value. The ethical pleasure in the action
itself is not to be confused with the mere pleasure in the explicit
consciousness of right-doing, which argues special reflectiveness. The
ethical pleasure meant is identical with the feeling of approbation, not
as a reflection on the act as idea, but as present in the act itself.
But the ethical pleasures are not independent of the incidental
pleasures, but depend upon them, the latter themselves being considered
in determining what acts are to be performed.

The pleasure-formula of the end represents the end in terms of all the
ethical pleasures secured by good action; and now we can see how
morality can be expressed in terms of all the pleasures and pains
involved in action, the purely ethical pleasures being reckoned among
the rest. Every pleasure is an inducement to persistence, every pain an
inducement to change; hence, since the society of good persons, or the
kingdom of powers within a man's own mind acquiesce in the moral order
as the equilibrium in which all their claims are gratified as far as may
be, it follows that the order of good conduct represents the maximum of
happiness. The end thus _involves_ the greatest happiness of the
greatest number.

If pleasure is but a part of the standard of morality, is it, then, the
object of conduct? If the idea before the mind to be realized in action
is called the object of the action, then in the same sense the pleasure
connected with the idea, which must be pleasant, is the object of
conduct. The difficulty in agreeing that the pleasure of the idea is
part of the object of desire arises from two causes: (1) confusion of
the object of desire with the character or criterion of the object; (2)
a misunderstanding of how the ideal object is related to the result. As
to the latter cause, it may be said that the idea is only in this sense
an idea of the result, that the result is the idea as it is realized;
the elements of the idea are derived from the past, and the desire is
not for the prospective pleasure of the end. As to the first cause,
though it is false that the prospective pleasure must necessarily be
part of the idea, the opposite conclusion is not necessarily legitimate
that desire is not for pleasure at all. It is true that, in order to
distinguish one object from another, we need to know what kind of an
object it is; but to conclude that, therefore, the desire is not for
pleasure, is to confuse the actual idea before the mind in desire with
its quality. That we do not make pleasure an object in the sense that
the pleasantness of the object itself is what we have before us in
desire, is obvious. Such a desire would argue a reflectiveness which has
been shown not to be necessarily characteristic of action. Nor is it the
pleasure of an act which is the cause of the desire, even if we suppose
this not in the sense that reflection apprehends it as cause. To suppose
this is to confuse the cause with its sign. The pleasure is a function
of the quality of the object. The element of reflectiveness _may_ enter
into a consideration of the object, and the prospective pleasure thus
become an element of the object of desire. But it is only a part; the
pleasure alone cannot be the object of desire. The pleasure which is
thus a part of the object is not a future pleasure, but that which is
actually present in our minds, belonging to the ideal object as part of
it--the represented pleasure of attainment. To call the pleasure desired
the prospective pleasure is to confound the reflection of the spectator
with the actual fact in the mind of the agent to an act. The pleasure
is, moreover, not pleasure in general, but the pleasure of the agent;
but this is not stating that the act is necessarily selfish.

Since every object of desire and will includes pleasure, the so-called
"paradox of hedonism"--that pleasure is lost by seeking after it--cannot
be explained by holding that pleasure is not itself the object of
desire, and that consequently pleasure is never, in enjoyment, what it
is in idea. This last is true, for no idea is in reality what it is as
idea. But the explanation lies rather in pointing out how foolish it is
to seek for what is a sign or effect rather than for its cause.

In the good man, the pleasure of attainment is the ethical sense of
approbation, and this is also goodness. It may, however, be asserted
that it is not this ethical pleasure, this goodness as such, that is
desired by the good man; again, it is only in exceptional cases of
reflectiveness that goodness or the right action as such is
distinctively desired; and herein lies Kant's mistake in asserting that
a moral act must be done from a sense of duty.

Active pains, as wants, are what prompt to action, and are, so, the
conditions of conduct. Though in themselves evil, as pain, they cannot
be considered by themselves apart from the action to which they lead. As
for passive pains, in so far as they are the result of evil action on
the part of others, they ought not to have occurred, and we try to
prevent their repetition by punishment. Those sufferings incidental to
right conduct are to be borne, in so far as they are inevitable, as a
necessary evil in that which, considered as a whole, is good. As soon as
they cease to be inevitable, they are to be removed. We do not imagine,
however, that pain may ever be wholly removed. But the statement that
pain is inevitable to right conduct is not to be interpreted as an
assertion that it is for the sake of goodness, as a discipline,--a
metaphysical conception depending on the idea of a divine purpose.

Morality is thus a kind of optimism, not ignoring the reality of pains
in right conduct, but treating them as part of the given conditions
which it has to turn to the best account, by the creation of a conduct
and character involving ethical pleasures. Pessimistic theories do not
ignore this optimism of morality; but in such theories the fact of pain
is emphasized and dwelt upon, and morality is regarded only as a means
of lessening pain, or, as in the case of Von Hartmann, finally getting
rid of it altogether by a universal suicide. It is impossible to
determine whether existence represents an excess of pain or of pleasure,
since the answer to the problem is a matter of individual temperament;
and, moreover, pleasures and pains cannot be (as yet) merely
quantitatively compared. Another error of pessimism consists in
comparing pleasures and pains in detail and supposing the result to hold
good in the general sum; but even in cases where pleasures are greatly
outweighed by pains, the pains may sink in value considered in
connection with the rest of life. The desirability of non-existence
could be maintained only as a race should be developed desiring it; but
the whole course of history is in the opposite direction.

The question, Is life worth living? involves two: (1) Is it actually
preferable to the creature who lives it? (2) Can any life be said to
have a real value; is any life subjectively, is any objectively,
preferable? The answer to the first question is the fact of life, for
the mysterious instinct of self-preservation called in to account for
the continuance of existence is one of the elements to be considered in
the problem, cannot be excluded. It is true that only certain kinds of
life are preferable, but the very meaning of the principle of selection
is the securing of the life that is worth living.

Having arrived at this answer, we can no longer compare existence and
non-existence in respect to preferability, and the second problem
presents itself to us as the question as to what existence is of value.
The answer is the moral life, goodness, as including all the activities
of character.

The moral end has sometimes been defined as social vitality. Vitality
is, in strictness, the energy to live, and has two aspects. It is (1)
the force which keeps a creature alive, or (2) the force which keeps it
well. As implying the keeping up of vital functions, the notion of
continued existence represents the end, but represents it in its lowest
aspect, its least and poorest significance, and is an insufficient
description; for not existence can be the end, but existence of a
certain sort. "Existence, in fact, is an abstraction to which nothing
corresponds in experience: nothing exists except upon certain terms.
Given the type, the end of the creature is to continue the existence of
that type; but continuance of existence is nothing more nor less than
the performance of those functions which constitute the type of life in
question: it is not separated from those functions as something which
they subserve." If the functions in man or animal are said to be
determined by the need of maintaining his existence, it may be answered
that his existence is these functions. In this sense of continued
existence as the repetition of vital functions in their order, it is
true, but only secondarily true, that the end is to preserve life. But
the doctrine of evolution implies much more than such preservation. It
means the victorious continuance of life. But because a type is
victorious, we cannot infer that the end of the type is to maintain its
victorious existence in the sense of aiming at victory. To do this is to
read into the end a theory of how the type came into existence. The end
of a type is to act according to the type; the victory over rivals
affords the opportunity of this. The preservation of existence is a
condition of the end, not the end itself; to regard it as such is to
confuse cause with effect.

Vitality as health, on the other hand, implies the equilibrium which
constitutes good conduct good. It must, however, "be observed that
health is not a further specification or a limitation of continued life,
but is coextensive with it."

But health, as applied to morals, is a metaphorical term. Morality does
not consist in mere physical vitality; on the contrary, some sacrifice
of such vitality may be necessary, the perfect physical vitality may be
inconsistent with the development of higher and finer mental functions.
"With this proviso, vitality as health is simply another name for the
character of good conduct which wins it the title of good."

There is often a distinction made between virtue and duty, the former
word seeming to include the latter and go beyond it. However, it is not
only virtuous to do one's duty, but it is also the duty of the
individual to do his best. In fact, the two, virtue and duty, are
coextensive, the term "virtue" describing conduct by the quality of the
agent's mind, the term "duty" by the nature of the act performed.
Nevertheless, there are actions to which it is more natural to apply the
term "virtue," "duty" being colored by legal implications. In the legal
sense, duty fixes, not the highest line of conduct, but the lowest
limit, beneath which conduct must not fall. Virtue, as contrasted with
duty in the legal sense, seems to be coextensive with merit. Negative
merit, however, where a man is good in spite of some great disadvantage,
does not make an act virtuous in distinction from dutiful conduct. It is
the duty of a man with a passion for drink to repress it; but we do not
term his performance virtuous, though it may be meritorious. Merit, that
is, implies a scale within the range of good acts themselves. Virtue and
duty coincide, however, only so long as the moral value of actions are
considered. For we distinguish two different classes of virtues, or two
senses of the word "virtue," corresponding to the distinction of ethical
and pathological, the pathological virtues being certain gifts of
emotion or sentiment, which are sometimes thought to make action more
virtuous, but do not alter its real character. "Thus, for example, the
virtue of benevolence may be thought imperfect without kindly feeling,
though a man may be benevolent without any such spontaneous movement.
Chastity, again, may in some natures be accompanied by, and flow from, a
delicacy of feeling which makes all unlawful suggestions impossible.
Now, if these emotions were necessary to their respective virtues, we
should have to admit that duty was less than virtue. But we must
maintain that they are excellences which do not alter the moral
character of conduct, and may be absent altogether and leave the agent
as virtuous as if they were present. Some persons, indeed, would say
that there was less virtue in characters which possessed these emotional
endowments.... In themselves, they are not virtues in the ethical sense,
but only 'add a lustre' to habits of will. They may even be ineffectual,
as often happens with very good-natured persons, or they may be
positively bad. Courage, for instance, we admire even in a villain. We
may conclude, then, that these excellences of disposition are only
valuable in so far as they are helps to virtue, and we praise the brave
villain on account of a quality which is of the utmost importance for
actual goodness. They enter into our ideal of the perfect or complete
character, though, if we estimate our ideal of perfection, we shall
find, I think, that we attach less value to them when they are native
than when they have been produced by a constant discipline."

It might seem, then, that we could classify duties under virtues. To a
considerable extent such a classification is possible. But it must be
imperfect, because there are duties--for example, filial duty, or the
duty of casting one's vote in a political contest--which do not
correspond to any general head of virtue, or may be ranked under several
heads: and again, we may rank along with virtues which stand for duties
qualities of conduct which do not correspond to duties in the same
sense; as, for instance, in a list of heads of duties, wisdom and
self-control. The enumeration mixes up two classifications, in the one
of which we group observances together under certain heads, in the other
of which we enumerate certain elements of good action in general,
certain aspects which every good action presents, and we exhibit them as
qualities in the agent's mind. The two classifications are combined in
the ancient description of morality under the heads of wisdom, courage,
temperance, and justice. The better classification is by moral
institutions, where the moral life is already mapped out for us into its
different parts. Such a scheme of classification will consider (_a_) the
Individual, (_b_) the Family, (_c_) the Society, (_d_) the State; the
fourth division including international duties, the third not being
necessarily limited to a particular society, but extending to all
mankind.


DYNAMICAL ANALYSIS--MORAL GROWTH AND PROGRESS

The previous description of morality supposes it to be stationary, and
is like a section taken across the path of morality at any one time. It
gives us no idea of the process and progress of morality. We have yet to
show how the moral order is produced, and to examine the meaning and the
law of moral progress.

As the moral organism may be compared to a species of which the various
moral individuals are the members, so the moral ideal may be regarded as
a species of which the various ideals in the minds of good men are the
different individuals. We should thus expect to find the origin and
growth of morality analogous to or, more strictly speaking, identical
with, the growth of natural species.

"If an ultimate ideal were admissible, it would be impossible to assert
that morality is essentially progressive." Morality, in the sense of an
equilibrium, has at every stage a certain finality, in the sense that it
is, for that stage, the ideal adjustment. But we cannot conceive of any
ideal as final in the sense of stationary. The good is always ultimate
but always in motion. "Moral progress admits of only two degrees of
comparison, the superlative being identical with the positive." By
"best" we do not imply a greater rightness in the ultimate condition,
but only a highest development. Spencer's conception of the distinction
between Absolute and Relative Ethics involves the conception of an
ultimate "ideal congruity," or complete adaptation of man to his
conditions, a mobile equilibrium including perfection as well as
goodness, present choice being never between wrong and an absolute
right, but always between two wrongs, the lesser of which is to have the
preference. The picture is, in itself, perfectly legitimate; and in so
far as Spencer "conceives that the only ideal is the absolutely right
conduct, his conception is not only legitimate, but true." There is
always, however, an absolute right that may be chosen; and "using the
conception of a mobile equilibrium, we found it to be, not a goal of
progress, but the meaning of goodness at any time." "The distinction of
good and bad (right and wrong) arises within the limited range of
conditions that are to be met by good action." That, as Sidgwick
asserts, there is always some course of conduct which is right, the
moral consciousness declares with certainty, and is thus against the
relativity of morality. Mr. Spencer holds that any concomitant of pain
makes an action wrong, therefore it is natural for him to regard all
present morality as only relative. But to the good man the pleasure of
doing right exceeds the possible attendant pains of an action; and
except upon the understanding that, in a society of good men, every one
will adjust himself with equanimity to the needs of others, not even the
acts which are declared to be typical of absolutely right conduct can be
free from concomitant pain. "Will the ideal state exhibit no
competitions, such as rivalry in love, which can be ended indeed with
the contentment of all persons, but assuredly not without attendant
pain?"

The general error in theory on this subject lies in a misconception of
the idea of "adjustment" to environment, the fact not being noted that
the environment is not itself fixed and permanent. What the environment
is depends upon the nature and faculties of the individual, the same
environment being a different one for amoeba and human being, for the
blind man and the man possessing sight; and what environment is and what
the individual does are settled at one and the same time, the process of
selection being one from both sides, and the variation of both. The
adaptation "wherever it exists and so far as it exists" is, hence,
perfect adaptation; if the lower organism is adapted to its environment,
its adaptation is as perfect as that of the higher organism to its
environment.

Every successful life means adaptation. "Every animal which can maintain
its life is in adaptation to its environment." The bare formula of
adaptation means nothing more than the fact of existence. "Adaptation to
the conditions as such teaches us nothing as to the nature of the
organism; for all functions are reactions upon the conditions, and
therefore, so far, adaptations. But it points to something behind. It
means that _all_ the functions of the animal are adapted to the
conditions, and this means that its functions are adapted or adjusted to
one another under the conditions."

"The moral ideal consists in a certain equilibrium established on the
basis of certain conditions--wants and sentiments in moral agents." It
involves advance just for this reason, because the act of adjustment
implied in good conduct itself alters the sentiments of the agent, and
creates new needs demanding a new satisfaction. The change is not always
in the same direction, however; for cultivation in one direction may
cause the individual to become aware of capacities or wants in quite
another direction, or the advocacy of one side of a question, persevered
in, may so open up the other side as to end in complete change of view.
In any case, however, there is an enlargement of experience, and the old
facts are themselves changed by it as well as are the individuals
subject to it.

This change or adjustment leads to a maladjustment requiring a new
adjustment. This maladjustment is to be distinguished from the
reaerrangements which are contemplated by the statical ideal and due to
the mere rotation of wants in society; the latter are within the moral
system as a system of mobile equilibrium. The maladjustment is of
another sort. "The good act ceases to be good by its performance. The
moral ideal ceases to satisfy." The two forms of change may be compared
respectively to a shifting of position on the same locus, and to such a
shifting of position as involves a shifting of locus. Thus, by change
after change of this sort, a new variety replaces its parent, and this
variety in time producing a fresh variety, there is finally reached a
new species. Progress thus becomes a necessary fact, and the difference
of so-called stationary societies from progressive ones can lie only in
the comparative slowness of change.

"As there is a difference between different societies in rate of change,
so there is a similar difference as between different parts of conduct."
Law, a part of morality, lags behind in moral progress. However, there
is nevertheless always advancement, otherwise legislators would be
unnecessary. And the direct outward change of form is preceded by other
change, laws which fall into disfavor by means of moral progress being
modified, in application, within the possible limits of interpretation,
and less and less rigidly enforced. There is good reason why law should
have a certain permanence.

The moral standard appears to have a similar more or less fixed
character, while morality itself is in continuous change. There are two
reasons for this appearance: (1) the changes in the moral order are
infinitesimal and not perceived by us except as accumulated through some
period of time; and, moreover, what is commonly called the moral
standard is only a kind of generalization from the extremely various
opinions of different persons as to what is right, and differs from the
real standard which "registers the conduct constituting equilibrium, and
is possessed by the good man. Perfectly good men are impossible. The
standard current is therefore nothing more than a common understanding,
which every one, even every good man, expresses differently; it is no
more an exact expression of the truth than is, let us say, a great
scientific conception (like development) which regulates all knowledge,
but is amongst the educated little more than the name of a general way
of thinking, while the thing itself is becoming, at the hands of men of
science, modified or even transformed." (2) The mistake is often made of
describing morality, not by institutions, but in terms of virtues, and
while the name applied to different virtues remains the same, their
content changes from age to age.

This idea of variability affects the statical conception of order with
regard to habit--the moral requirement being that the fixed habits of
morality should not be so fixed as to be incapable of advancement; and
with regard to conscience, of which it might be said that, instead of
representing the moral order, it was more occupied in changing than in
maintaining it, but which in reality thus represents the moral order, to
which the ideal is a changing one.

Two difficulties or objections may arise with regard to this idea of a
changing ideal. The progress has been represented by personifying the
ideal and supposing the person to change with each new ideal. Again,
"goodness consists, we saw, of a system of conduct in the individual
himself or in society, and this system forms a series in time. It would
seem to follow that, if goodness is always progressive, no second act
would be performed under the same law, although the very idea of the law
means a series of acts." But we are not to suppose that, if fifty good
men in a society act rightly, fifty new ideals are established, for the
ideal represents the equilibrium of the members of the society, and it
depends on whether the new ideals of the fifty men represent the new
equilibrium whether we shall call the persons good or bad. Again, the
ideal at any moment would be in fact realized in a series, supposing the
conditions did not alter meanwhile; and while the system of conduct is
serial, it is realized at any one moment in the mind of the man whose
sentiments correspond to its requirements.

"In this process we see exhibited the interplay of the element of
goodness or rightness with that of perfection. In all actual goodness,
we have perfection attained as well; but in the statical notion of
goodness perfection is subordinate--only that exercise is perfect which
is legitimate. But in the notion of progressive goodness, perfection
regains its rights. For goodness, having secured perfection, creates new
materials which destroy the old equilibrium and call for a new one.
Goodness determines perfection, but change in perfection determines,
therefore, changes in goodness." Morality is the creation of a better;
this better is change from a lower to a higher development, not the
growth of a greater rightness. All good conduct is _absolutely_ good,
and the good man of former days was as good as the good man of to-day,
although he performed acts not allowable by the higher moral standard
attained as highest development. Accordingly, there is no such thing as
an absolute morality, in comparison with which other conduct is variable
and relative. The relativity of good conduct, instead of being a
reproach, is in reality its highest praise, for it implies that the
conduct takes account of exactly those conditions to which it is meant
to apply. This conception of morality as absolute runs into that of
morality as an eternal and identical law: eternal, for the morality of
given conditions remains eternally true for those conditions; identical,
for although it cannot be called identical in the sense that virtues do
not change with institutions, it is identical in form,--as an
equilibrium of social forces in an order of conduct. The more important
conception of the moral law is its unity in which, as the stages of one
continuous law, its identity consists. "Progress is not mere destruction
of the lower, but fulfilment."

In considering how morality arises, it would be erroneous to suppose
that it comes into existence by an actual compromise. It arises through
a process of continuous change, parts of which may be an insensible
growth, parts the self-conscious adoption of a proposed new scheme. In
the latter case, a slight reform may be adopted with but little
opposition from members of the society other than the proposer, as
meeting a recognized, common want; or, in the case of a more extended
reform, the idea as first proposed may be long contended against, and
only finally adopted after much alteration by reason of contact with
such opposition. In its acceptance innumerable forces are combined,
innumerable different motives determine its acceptation by different
persons. Whatever the motive, however, the conduct of the person
accepting it alters in accordance with its acceptation.

The chief importance of pleasure and pain lies in the part they take in
such choice. They are "the tests of the act being suitable or the
reverse to the character (in the widest sense) of the agent." If a
reform does not suit the character, it will cause pain and urge to
removal of the pain by resistance; and on the other hand, when the
reform is accepted, it must be that it gives pleasure to the persons
concerned. But in saying this we have to remember the distinction
between ethical (or effective) and pathological (or incidental)
pleasures and pains. The total reaction of character on a stimulus may
be pleasurable, but this pleasure results from a mixture of pleasures
and pains weighed against one another. This balancing of pleasures and
pains is not reflective, but takes place by a kind of intuitive act in
which only subsequent reflection may be able to distinguish the
elements. The pleasure or pain involved in acceptance or rejection is
not the ground of acceptance or rejection. The cause of the acceptance
or rejection is the nature of the reform itself, its congruity or
incongruity with the natures of the persons accepting or rejecting it.
"When the new ideal is definitely established, those who do not obey it
are bad, those who do are good." Those who were good under the old may
thus be bad under the new ideal, and _vice versa_.

The gradual reform through the choice of individuals who act upon their
feelings without knowing the whole aim or bearing of their conduct is
similar to that where a definite reform is the end in view. It is a
gradual adjustment of wills under new conditions and represents the
position of equilibrium which would be completely realized if all the
society were good.

The new ideal is not to be defined as merely the will of the majority,
the possession of a majority being nothing but the fact of its
prevalence. The ground of prevalence is that it represents the
equilibrium. "There is no virtue in mere preponderance; it is not that
reforms follow the majority, but that a majority is attracted by a
suitable reform."

A new ideal arises by a struggle of varieties analogous to that in the
organic world,--the word "struggle" being metaphorical in both cases,
since actual conflict is not necessary to either. "The distinction of
good and bad corresponds to the domination of one variety... which has
come to prevail in virtue of its being a social equilibrium," and thus
representing suitability to all the conditions of life. Evil is simply
that which has been rejected and defeated in the struggle with the good.

The reformer, as not representing the predominating ideal and so the
social equilibrium, and the man who turns out to be bad by the new
ideal, thus stand originally upon the same level. "Each is an instance
of a variety of the original species, but the former is the successful
variety"; his ideal "represents the real forces of society and can be
adopted by the whole." The struggle is one of character and conduct, and
results not necessarily in the extinction of life, but in the extinction
of unsuitable ideals.

"The distinction of the _formally_ bad from the _materially_ good rests
upon the transition from the old ideal to the new, though sometimes we
use those terms as describing what is only legally wrong though morally
approved. A reformer, until his reform is established, is formally
wrong. He can be considered materially right only prospectively;... time
only can prove whether he had really forecast the movement of his
society." "Sometimes a society may be so divided, as in our civil war,
that neither variety is predominant. In such a case we must say, not
that there was no rule of right, but that there was a different rule for
each of the two halves of the nation." "There does not arise any need
for the distinction of formally and materially right conduct, until the
limits have been overstepped, within which it is in any age considered
right for a man to act upon his own conviction. These limits are placed
very differently in different ages."

Does good action, then, depend on the bad man as well as on the good?
"Good and evil arise together, and good is therefore always relative to
evil, but we do not therefore take our morality from the bad. We cannot,
in fact, know who is bad until the standard is created, but once
created, we maintain it against bad men by punishment. But, on the other
hand, the moral standard does depend upon the forces which, when allowed
free play, are distinguished as bad.... A large part of conduct consists
of precautions which it is not only legitimate but incumbent to take,
but which we should dispense with under happier conditions.... And in a
second way, morality depends on 'badness,' for when a habit of action
which we dislike and call bad comes to be strong enough to make itself
felt, we seek to satisfy its claims as reasonable. There is... no
external standard by which we can settle once and for all what claims
are legitimate and what are not. We derive our conception of the
reasonableness of things from our experience of their vitality and
effective powers. A wise man who thinks the feelings and beliefs of his
neighbors ridiculous will, by persuasion or force, resist them with all
his energies, but when he finds them persist in spite of all his
efforts, he will recognize that there are more things in human nature
than stir within the narrow limits of his own breast. If what we now
call bad conduct, murder, adultery, theft, could be conceived to become
predominant under greatly changed and of course impossible conditions,
it would cease to be bad and would be the ideal of life."

From the view that morality depends upon victory, misconceptions may
arise. The question may be asked: Should one, in case of doubt, follow
one's own conviction, or join the side it is thought will prevail? But
that good is created by predominance is a theory of the means by which
ideals come into existence, not a statement of the motive of those who
participate in the struggle. The struggle is between characters and
their forces, and not victory is the end, but the assertion of certain
principles.

"Interest or good in general is a different conception from the right or
the morally good. Interest means what is good for an individual
considered from his own point of view, and without regard to similar
claims of other individuals. It is the maximum of happiness or
satisfaction which he can secure under his conditions. By 'maximum
happiness' is meant that distribution of satisfactions or of the
energies which produce them, any deviation from which on either side
implies a less fulness of life." It refers, however, to his good as a
social, not as an isolated individual.

As a general rule, interest is in agreement with goodness; misdeeds are
unprofitable. But there are instances where goodness and interest do not
coincide, though not in the case of the good man. That virtue and
interest are in general identical means, statically, that morality is a
reconciliation of interests by which wants are satisfied, and is
established by the creation of a new type of character, which has wants
of only certain kinds; and, dynamically, it represents the fact that
forces are arrayed on the side of the good which are too powerful for
the bad. "Good is the victorious ideal"; and though we may say that it
would really be to the bad man's interest to be bad, if circumstances
were such that his variety could maintain itself, we may add that such
hypothetical interests cannot be secured. However, interest does not
coincide with morality--

(1) Where the individual does not care for punishments and social
censures. (2) Where a man, by reason of certain superiorities of force
over others with whom he is more directly in contact, is able to obtain
power and suppress their resistance, or where the moral weakness of
others leaves him unpunished. In these exceptional cases, we have the
contradictory phenomenon that an ideal which can maintain its existence
is yet declared to be bad. "Such cases mark a stage of transition in the
process by which the distinction of good or bad is established." In the
struggle of animal species, the same phenomenon may be found; an
exceptional individual of a vanishing variety maintains his existence
for a time by reason of his exceptional endowment or of coming in
contact merely with the weaker members of the successful variety.

There are two ways in which the moral ideal is maintained,--by education
and by punishment. Punishment is the condemnation of wrong-doing by
censure or by legal penalties. The unpleasant consequences of neglect of
the self-regarding virtues are not punishment; but the reaction of the
good forces of society against wrong-doing is as natural as the
unpleasant physical effects of imprudence.

"If the question as to what moral sanction is means, 'What reason is
there why morality exists?' the answer lies not in enumerating the
penalties of wrong-doing, but in tracing the origin of morality as an
equilibrium of the forces of society.... But the question, 'Why should I
be moral?' means, most naturally and usually, What inducements are there
to me to do right?" The answer is that motives differ for different
individuals. With some, outer social inducements, with others, the
approbation and disapprobation of conscience are stronger. These latter
ethical pains and pleasures which are felt at the idea of an action
stand on a different footing from feelings having regard to external
rewards and punishments and also the prospective pleasures and pains of
conscience. The man who does right because he shrinks from prospective
pains of conscience is not a good man, but intermediate morally between
the bad man who seeks only to escape legal punishment and the good man
whose pains of conscience felt at the idea of a wrong act prevent his
performing it.

Punishment wears different shapes according to the point of view from
which it is regarded, but, in the distinctively moral view, is
reformatory. All punishment is retribution, but not in the sense that it
is personal vengeance. The value of this idea of retribution lies in the
fact that it places punishment on a line with the process of
self-assertion by which species maintain their life; it is a part of the
reaction of the organism against anything which impedes its vitality.
If, however, punishment avenges the evil deed, it is a confusion to say
that it is for the sake of vengeance. The purpose in the mind of those
punishing is not necessarily vengeance, and the idea of mere retribution
is repugnant to the good man. From the juridic point of view, the object
of punishment is prevention; from the moral point of view, reformation.
The reformation seeks to destroy a bad ideal, and does not necessarily
destroy the individual in whom it is found; but in some cases the
wrong-doer's mind is so perverted that only death, it is judged, will
suffice. "Here, too, paradoxical as it may seem, though perhaps the
chief object of our punishment is the indirect one of bettering others,
we punish with death in order to make him a good man and to bring him
within the ideal of society.... The penalty of death is thought
necessary to bring home to him the enormity of his guilt."

The object of punishment is not always achieved, but this matters not
for its moral character, which lies in its conscious object. The idea of
punishment as reconciling the criminal with society includes the aspect
of retribution or expiation, under which punishment may be viewed from
without; but it is only when the suffering is attended by reformation
that it can be considered in a proper sense expiation or atonement.

Responsibility differs from obligation by introduction of the element of
punishment. Obligation is the necessity of good conduct which arises out
of the relation of the act to the order of which it forms a part.
"Responsibility is the negative aspect of this relation. When I think of
conduct as required of me, I think of it as my duty; when I think of it
as conduct which if I do not perform, I shall be rightly punished, I
have the sense of responsibility." The sense of responsibility is thus a
knowledge of the requirements of the law, and it is only as we have
law-abiding instincts that we feel it; and we feel it differently
according as we think of the authority of the law as derived from its
mere enactment or as founded upon the social good, or as established in
our own conscience and self-respect, which represent the social good. As
including recognition of certain conduct as right, the sense of
responsibility is more than the mere knowledge and fear of punishment.
"It is only those who can appreciate that punishment will be deserved to
whom the idea of responsibility applies. There is, therefore, no
difference between the fact of responsibility and the sense of
responsibility, any more than there is between goodness and the feeling
of approbation, or duty and the sense of duty. When we declare a bad
man responsible, we mean that the good man holds him to be justly
punished."

Responsibility depends, then, on two things,--that a man is capable of
being influenced by what is right, and that whatever he does is
determined by his character. This capacity depends on his being aware of
the meaning of his acts, and so of their connection with other acts, and
contains thus an element not present in the relations of animals.

"Except for the authority of one or two great names, there seems to be a
general agreement that the will is determined by character." If
character means the principle of volition, as it is regarded in our
analyses, the assertion is a truism. It is no less true if character is
defined as disposition; all our dealings with our fellow-men reckon on
their acting in accordance with their character. The distinction made by
Green that the mind acts from its own nature (the motive and the whole
process of willing being within the mind) is no more and no less true of
the action of other bodies. The emergence of new sentiments in character
might be urged as an argument for free will; but this is of no more
significance than the budding of trees in springtime. The sense of
freedom is the sense of choice between two motives; but this merely
depends upon the intellectual property that the object willed is present
to consciousness,--in case of choice two objects being present to the
mind. "So far is the consciousness of freedom from being a ground for
assuming an arbitrary or undetermined power of volition that it is
exactly what would be expected to accompany the process of determination
when the object concerned was a conscious mind. Pull a body to the right
with a force of twelve pounds and to the left with a force of eight; it
moves to the right. Imagine that body a mind aware of the forces which
act upon it; it will move in the direction of that which, for whatever
reason, appeals to it most; and in doing so it will, just because it is
conscious, act of itself, and will have the consciousness of freedom."
But which motive is chosen is fixed and dependent upon character, that
cannot choose otherwise than it does; and the sense of freedom is a
sheer delusion. The feeling that one ought to have acted otherwise
implies another sort of freedom, according to which he only is truly
free who chooses the right; in such choice it is, however, the
character which acts, and though a man is free, in this sense, _if he
chooses_, his choice is determined. The argument of free will in regard
to punishment does not explain punishment, but renders it inexplicable.
It would be senseless to punish except as, by so doing, we can influence
a man's character. Determinism does not make punishment wrong; it is not
cruelty, but kindness to punish: it saves a man from worse, from
degradation of character, enabling him to change his ideal, and thus
bringing himself into equilibrium with his kind. The reason of certain
doubts which are beginning to be felt to-day with regard to punishment
is the larger knowledge of the dependence of men on their surroundings,
hence of the culpability of society as a whole; it is not an objection
to responsibility as such, but to the distribution of responsibility.

Education, the second means by which the moral ideal is defended, is not
identical with social progress, by which the moral ideal is itself
changed, but is the individual progress included within each definite
moral ideal. Education and progress are, however, inseparably bound
together, in that education goes hand in hand with punishment, and in
that it leads to the discovery of new ideals. If we take only the
irregular line which includes the good, and discard the ideals which are
exterminated or left behind, the movement of ideals is continuous with
education, and progress may therefore be described as an education of
society. The education of children has to put them in possession of the
present moral achievement, and to make them independent individuals,--so
to penetrate them with the moral order that it shall appear in them as
spontaneous character. It is an evolving of an ideal already present;
for, to be capable of education, a person must have already set foot on
the right path.

As in the physical world, so in the moral, we have the survival of many
different genera and species,--various ideals of conduct or institutions
of life, some of which may be grouped together by strong resemblances,
others of which stand to each other in the relation of lower to higher
organisms; the survival of archaic institutions in the higher as well as
their history of progress showing their affinities with the lower.
"History is the palaeontology of moral ideals," and provides us with a
better means of studying the growth of morality than exists for the
study of the growth of species. As in the organic world, varieties
develop from species by a gradual and continuous movement of sentiment,
each successful variation forming the basis of a new variation, and the
differences of the varieties from each other and from the original
species increasing with their distance from the original species, until
the difference amounts to a difference of species. We may call these
modifications "accidental," but, as in the physical world, they are so
only as we regard them from the position occupied by a person before the
event; they have their causes if we can find them. These causes are to
be found in the contact of different minds. Variability depends to a
considerable extent on the size of a genus, but only in so far as
greater size involves greater complexity and variety of interests; the
vast but homogeneous societies of the East being less progressive than
the smaller but more complex ones of the West. "Where freer scope is
left to individual inclinations or aptitudes, there the friction of mind
against mind is more intense. New ideas are generated in the more vivid
consciousness of the people, and life becomes more inventive."

Species developed from a common genus will show some common traits and
some rules of mutual observance, savage peoples which have divided into
tribes being an exception to the latter part of the statement, for the
reason that lower societies have very little moral cohesion; they may be
compared to lower organisms which reproduce themselves by fission, or to
homogeneous colonies of animals, like sponges. Under the generic
institutions we must not include those which arise merely as the result
of similar circumstances. Ideals once formed advance at very different
rates, though the tendency to divergence is always being corrected by
the diffusion of ideas. But where one nation takes ideas from another,
these ideas are not borrowed, in the sense that they come wholly from
the other nation; there must have been, in the borrowing nation, a
development of ideas up to the point that makes the borrowing
possible,--a similar development to that of the nation from which the
borrowing takes place, due to similar circumstances. The communication
of moral ideas does not depend upon race-community, as is shown by the
ready adoption of Western ideas by such nations as the Hindoos and
Japanese.

In general language, we identify development and progress; and this is
true also in the case of morality. Goodness means progress; wickedness,
retrogression or else stagnation, which, compared with advance, is
retrogression. "In changing from one form to another, morality changes
from what is right under one set of conditions to what is right under
another set, and such change from good to good is what we mean by
becoming better. To deny this is to find some other standard of advance
than in the actual movement which has taken place, to put an _a priori_
conception of development in place of the facts." "The moral ideal is
always, therefore, a progress, for either the society is single, and
goodness represents the law of its advance, or if the society is part of
a larger one, its ideal can be retrogressive only because the society is
so far bad." "And since goodness and badness exhaust the field of moral
possibilities, if the propositions that goodness means progress, and
badness regress, are both true, we must be able to convert them, and
maintain that all progress is due to goodness and all regress to
badness." To do this, we must distinguish between degradation and a mere
degeneration which involves a return to simpler conditions as an
adaptation to changed environment. Such degeneration as adaptation to
circumstances, in an individual or a society as a whole, is progress.
Fish who become blind by living in the dark become thus better fitted to
their circumstances, and the like is true of moral degeneration under
simpler conditions. Old age and death are characteristic of the higher
type of organism, in distinction from the lower types which, multiplying
by fission, are practically eternal; they are conditions of the
advantage of type, in which the individual is partaker. So a good
society under simpler conditions is on the side of progress, though it
may lie outside the main line of advance.

It is true that bad persons often help on progress, but the good they do
lies in their representation of the will of society for progress, the
evil lies in their use of this will as means to their own ends. It may
be objected, too, that the good man is sometimes a hindrance to progress
through stupidity; but to this is to be answered that intellect itself
becomes morally characterized in action.

All events and institutions are thus determined by their conditions; but
there is a movement forward distinguishable from the delay of stragglers
and the resistance of enemies, and this distinction is enforced by the
moral predicates of good and bad.

Our theory does not imply that whatever is, is right; such a statement
involves the use of the word right in the sense of "correct," or
"intelligible," "accountable by reflection." Nor is the doctrine
fatalistic. Fatalism implies that men act at the impulse of some force
which they do not understand; "but the history of mankind is the history
of beings who, through their own gift of consciousness, subdue
circumstances to their own characters." In judging a nation's
development, we must not interpret it according to our own likings, as
progression or retrogression; nor must we imagine retrogression from
relaxation of duties in some certain directions, but must regard the
society and its institutions as a whole.

The test of higher organization usually given is that of increasing
differentiation of parts with corresponding specialization of function.
But the main course of progress is not linear, or in one continuous
direction; apparent reversions to former types are only apparent; the
new type stands higher than the old. In other words, history moves in
cycles. It follows, from this, that mere differentiation is insufficient
for definition. While the differentiation advances, its significance
alters, or, let us say, the relative places of specialization and of
unity alter. Along with differentiation goes a process of integration.
Great revolutions simplify. The result of greater and greater
heterogeneity is to produce a new principle, which combines the warring
elements. The definition of progress by increased differentiation is
lacking in two ways: It tells us nothing of the forces by which progress
is produced, and it gives no connected view of the actual facts of
historical development. A general statement of progress in its formal
sense is found in the conception of a struggle of ideals. But as in this
struggle the survival of the fittest does not necessarily mean the
destruction of those who represented the defeated ideal, but the
supplanting of their ideal by another, the movement is one of
comprehension, and we should expect to find, and do find, the history of
morality exhibit the gradual development of a universal moral order,
good not for one group of men but for all. It would be a misapprehension
to regard this change as merely quantitative, as if the virtues were the
same whether they applied on a larger or a smaller scale. "The
quantitative extension is parallel with, and in reality proceeds from, a
change in the conception of the human person himself." In primitive
communities, the individual is so limited that he can hardly be called
an individual at all. First among the Greeks do we find the person the
embodiment of the social order, but in a limited sense. "When this
limitation breaks down, and the individual stands forth as independent
and self-conscious, the author of the laws he obeys, we have at the same
time the extension of the area of persons with whom he is in moral
relation."

"It matters little that the Western ideal of a society of humanity is
realized to so slight an extent. The ideal exists and implies the
inclusion of mankind." The principle of democracy, which we are engaged
in working out, "continues, or perhaps supersedes, under much more
complex conditions and over a wider range of institutions, the same
principle as Christianity introduced." It is not merely an identical
element in many individual states, but a comprehensive ideal. The power
of naturalization, extradition laws, international action among the
working classes, etc., imply this.

This "comprehension" is not merely one of breadth, but of depth as well:
the ideal includes not only the present of mankind, but its whole future
also. Duties have always been recognized to posterity, but the range of
generations to whom they applied was small, and the interests which it
was believed could be secured were limited also. _Apres moi le deluge_
describes a form of selfishness of all ages, but different ages have
understood the _apres moi_ quite differently. At the present day, the
range of responsibility is extending indefinitely.

A common political ideal does not mean a universal peace. Coarser forms
of dispute disappear, but, on the other hand, as nations grow more
refined in their ideals, they grow more susceptible. What a political
humanity, or a political community of Europe, would mean, is the
substitution of international punishment for the self-willed conflicts
of irresponsible nations.

We cannot say what the future of society and of morality may
be,--whether mankind will be able to take mechanical means against a
period of ice, or whether human society may not, as a whole, be
destroyed, to be replaced by a higher type of existence, which may arise
on the earth from the development of humanity, or may, on some other
planet, take up the tale of human civilization as we take up that of the
civilization of Greece and Rome.

Two things follow from the progressive character of the moral ideal: (1)
that the classification and description of duties will vary with each
age; (2) that, as the ideal changes from age to age, the highest moral
principle or sentiment will change with it.

At the present time, a belief has gained great authority, that the sense
of duty is transitory and will finally disappear; but whether we, with
Spencer, identify obligation with coercion, or understand it as the
relation of a part of conduct to the rest, in neither sense is the
proposition true as it stands. If duty means constraint, it by no means
follows that constraint will cease with progress; for constraint arises
from confronting one inclination with a higher idea, and its
disappearance would mean that inclinations had become constant; this is,
however, impossible. The fiction of a final stage of mobile equilibrium
is an unwarranted conclusion from the fact that all morality involves a
cycle of conduct in mobile equilibrium. But the theory represents a
truth,--the truth that morality at no time implies in itself the sense
of duty. The sense of duty, as involving the hard feeling of compulsion,
of subjection to authority, and bound up with the sense of sin, a sense
stronger in proportion to merit or the interval between first
inclination and final moral willing, may and is giving place to a higher
conception. In the family, this may already be found, where
self-sacrifice and aid are matters of affection and rendered freely. In
the higher ideal, we have that love of man for a higher and larger order
than himself which morality represents as solidarity with society, a
continually progressive society of free individuals; which religion
represents as the love for and of God.

And at the last two questions may be asked: (1) whether the difficulties
in which Christianity is placed at the present day do not arise from
absorption of its highest idea into the conceptions and the practice of
morality, so that the religious sentiment is starved; and (2) whether
the ideal of a free cooeperation in the progress of humanity may not be
used to interpret the belief in immortality, putting in the place of
individual immortality the continuance of life in the persons whom the
individual may affect. In "The International Journal of Ethics" July,
1892, Alexander combats some misinterpretations of "Natural Selection in
Morals," which he says are partly due to Spencer's Individualism.
Natural Selection in social life does not mean necessarily destruction
of individuals, but is a struggle of ideals, such as that between
Individualism and Collectivism,--in which Selection seems to favor
Collectivism.

FOOTNOTES:

[82] The reference is here to Wundt, "Phys. Psych.," I. p. 485 (ed.
II.).




APPENDIX TO PART I

PAUL REE


Dr. Paul Ree's "Source of the Moral Feelings" ("Ursprung der moralischen
Empfindungen," 1877), is written from a pessimistic and mechanical
standpoint. The connection of thought and feeling in the region of
morals is, according to Ree, a purely, or very nearly a purely, outward
one, moral judgments not being the result of sympathy or antipathy, or
related to these feelings in more than an external manner, but arising
from associations of ideas engendered by education; the Sense of Justice
being, in this manner, the effect of Punishment. A definite distinction
is likewise made by Ree, between vice, which affects the individual
only, and badness, which affects society, the profligate who satisfies
his lust in the most unrestrained manner being regarded as perhaps
unwise, but not bad, as long as he does not seduce the pure. The author
fails, however, to show us how vice can be practised without social
injury, and necessarily fails also--since his position takes into
account no organic relations of characteristics--to notice the
significance of profligacy as an inherent feature of character. He
touches at one or two points, only, on Habit, and at one point alone on
Heredity, where he raises the question of the hereditary character of
Vanity, but arrives at no conclusion. He also makes the division of
Egoism from Non-egoism a definite one, fully identifying the Good with
the Non-egoistic, the Bad with the Egoistic. The Non-egoistic really
exists; a man may relieve another's suffering in order to free himself
from the sight of it; or he may relieve it for the other's sake.
Nevertheless, non-egoistic action is rare; men are much more egoistic
than the apes, who are rivals only with regard to food and sexual
desire, while men are rivals not only with respect to these primitive
wants, but with respect to many others besides, especially since they
not only regard the present but provide for the future also.

Vanity, according to Ree, gives rise to envy, hatred, and malignity.
But, the action of these passions being opposed to the safety of
society, some persons[83] introduced punishment for its protection, and
fear of punishment, and exchange of labor united men in peace. Deeds and
never motives were at first considered in the infliction of punishment,
but, outer compulsion not securing safety, the ideal of an inner
condition of character which should secure it arose. "Good" and "useful"
are synonyms, but men of later generations, receiving laws without
explanation of their origin, fail to understand that the Good was, in
its origin, simply the Useful, that the Bad was, in like manner, the
Harmful, and that Punishment is for the purpose of prevention and not in
the nature of a return for things done. The knowledge of this truth
takes from life some of its grandeur; but the truth remains the truth,
nevertheless.

The will is not free; the mistake of regarding it as free is the result
of the failure to perceive that punishment looks to the future, not to
the past,--is a means of prevention, not a requital. The right to punish
does not rest, therefore, upon the Sense of Justice; but punishment is
justifiable as a means of prevention. Its choice, like that of other
evils as the alternatives of greater ones, is the practice of the
principle, The end justifies the means. Those who repudiate this
principle have not generally looked deeply into its meaning; moreover,
it has been misused. In putting it in practice, several things must be
observed:--

1. The end to be served must be a good one;

2. The choice of means causing pain is permissible only when no other
means are possible;

3. The pain must be reduced to the least possible;

4. The pain must be less than would be involved in the omission of this
particular choice.

       *       *       *       *       *

The doctrine of eternal punishment is untenable, because:--

1. It presupposes the existence of a God.

2. Supposing a God to be existent, we cannot name him either good or
bad. "God is good" means "He does good to the world and its
inhabitants"; but of the world we know only the little earth, and of God
we know nothing.

3. If we will, nevertheless, predicate goodness or badness of God, we
must call him bad, since all beings known to us suffer much pain and
have little pleasure. The gods of the savages, who are not yet led away
by theological hair-splitting, are evil.

4. But if we still persist in naming God good, then we cannot suppose
him to be also cruel, and even more cruel than the hardest-hearted of
mortals.

5. The doctrine of eternal punishment assumes the existence of a soul;
but the difference between human beings and the higher animals is not so
great that one can ascribe an especial soul to men.

6. But if a soul exists, it cannot be tortured, since it is immaterial.

7. And the deeds which God will thus punish deserve, on the theory of
punishment as prevention, no requital.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is not immaterial to us whether men have a good or an evil opinion of
us.

1. Because we hope for advantages from a good opinion.

2. Because we are vain.

Vanity arose, in the first place, because admiration was useful to men,
just as it is useful to the birds at pairing-time, and habit rendered it
agreeable in itself. Men therefore desire it, even when it has no
especial use, because "they know that all admiration is followed by a
strong feeling of pleasure."[84] The difference between man and the
peacock in respect to vanity is merely that he desires to be admired for
other things than outer appearance alone,--for courage, strength,
cleverness, the tools of battle, and many other things. Since, among
human beings, men and not women choose their mates, endeavoring to
obtain one or more of the most beautiful women possible, women endeavor
to render themselves beautiful, expending greater efforts as the stake
is greater in their case than in that of the peacock. They endeavor to
supplement their outward attractiveness by amiability, cleverness,
household industry, and, in our days, wealth; but beauty always makes
the strongest impression upon the man. Men desire to be admired rather
for other things than outward appearance, though for this, too, to some
extent.

But vanity may be objected to (1) on the ground that it is a desire to
create envy, and envy is pain and gives rise to hatred; (2) on the
hedonistic ground that the vain man more often suffers pain from not
being admired than experiences pleasure from admiration; (3) on the
intellectual ground that vanity renders a man incapable of impersonal
interest in Nature, Art, Philosophy, and Science. Entire freedom from
vanity could, however, be attained only by a life of complete isolation.
Because of these reasons for blame, men do not confess that they act
from vanity, but give other reasons for deeds prompted by this
feeling.[85]

Ambition may be blamed on grounds similar to those on which vanity is
blamed. However, this feeling urges to many useful acts, and without it
few would find interest for great effort. And since, because of its
usefulness, ambition is less blamed than vanity, men are more ready to
acknowledge that they possess it.

We desire to appear well in the eyes of others, therefore we conceal our
envy and hatred, and affect high courage, great honesty, and charity.
Such hypocrisy is bad; but it is necessary. For if men were to show
themselves as they are, with hearts full of hostility, they could not at
all associate. In order to make frankness and peace both possible, men
must become what they now pretend to be; but this does not lie in their
power.

Malignant pleasure in others' pain arises from a comparison with our own
more agreeable situation, or from the pleasure in our own superiority in
any respect.

When a woman is seduced, it is in the interest of other women to
ostracise her, since, if marriage were to be abolished, women would lose
in position; the man who seduces her is blamed for bringing shame on
her, but not for unchastity, for men have no interest in maintaining
chastity in their own sex.

Caprice arises, not from change of mood, but from the pleasure of power
experienced in now charming by amiability, now causing gloom by
coldness, and again inspiring fear through anger.

If one desires anything from another, one should not say, "It is a
little thing," but "It is very much that I ask"; since he who is asked
gives more readily when he thinks he will appear very kind.

Natural Selection does not prefer the individual as far as morals are
concerned, but only nations. Moral rules are variable, but not steadily
progressive. Man is by nature selfish; simply habit tames men and makes
them, by change in nerves and muscle, more amenable to rule.

The good man is probably worse off than the bad man. Pain exceeds
pleasure in all beings. Everything, love included, becomes worthless
when attained, and labor begins again for new attainment. Man is,
moreover, the most unhappy of all beings, for he feels most strongly,
and in his complicated organism there is almost always something out of
order. For this reason, sympathy[86] brings more pain than pleasure. The
bad man has only pangs of conscience to disturb him, and, if he is
superstitious, the fear of punishment after death. It is difficult to
say whether the bad man or the good man is happier. In fact, happiness
depends rather on temperament, power of self-control, and health.
Possibly these truths may seem harmful; and if the good man is higher
than the bad man, and goodness should be sought, only so much of the
truth should be revealed as is not antagonistic to this end. But the
good man is not the higher, although, because goodness is useful, our
education has attempted to make us believe this. The animals may be
unselfish as well as man; on the other hand, the disinterested search
for truth is not found among the animals. The attainment of truth is,
moreover, pleasurable to the searcher, turning painful desire for truth
to pleasurable fulfilment.

Dr. Ree's later book, "The Origin of Conscience" ("Die Entstehung des
Gewissens," 1885), does not add anything distinctly new in theory to
this first book; it is rather noticeable for what it omits of the
pessimism of the earlier book, for a more moderate, thoughtful, and less
assertive tone, than for additional theories or even much further
elaboration of the old theories, except as regards the derivation of the
Sense of Justice. It traces the savage custom of the revenge of death
through its displacement by the payment of blood-money, up to the final
substitution of state punishment. Punishment does not grow out of
revenge, but succeeds it. It is not revenge, though the desire that the
guilty may be punished and the desire for revenge may be mixed, in some
cases. Pain, not the Sense of Justice, drives the savage to revenge.
Punishment does not grow out of the Sense of Justice, but the latter out
of the former. The interference of the state with the revenge of the
individual is at first a mediation between the two parties for the
maintenance of peace in the interest of the community; later, the state
arrives at a method of punishment for the purpose of prevention.

Hume's theory of the origin of religion has been confirmed by
Anthropology. The savage sees in natural phenomena the action of living
beings endowed with mental faculties like his own, and he gradually
comes to transfer this action to beings not in, but, according to his
new idea, behind, phenomena. The gods of primitive religions are moral
only as the peoples whose gods they are, are moral. As society
progresses, religion falls behind, and a new interpretation of old
doctrines must be introduced in order to bring it up to the later
standard. Then the gods, as moral with the morality of this later date,
are imagined as commanding the later standard, and to the fear of
punishment by the state is added, as a preventive force, that of the
punishment of the gods. The gods command what men command, forbid what
men forbid. The God of the Old Testament, Jahveh, was, like Zeus, a
nature-god, and took revenge as men did. When a later date demanded a
standard of greater humanity, Christ came, and he represented the God
of the Old Testament, no longer as revengeful and passionate, but as
possessing the attributes of sympathy which he felt in himself. The
later standard of the New Testament takes into consideration motives as
well as deeds, and commands positively as well as forbids. But the God
of the New Testament is not wholly love; if his love is unreturned, he
becomes angry, like men.

The Categoric Imperative in the individual is merely the result of his
individual education. Conscience alone accomplishes little; other
motives than the desire to do right--fear of punishment, etc.--are
stronger. Nothing is, in itself, good or bad, but only so far as it is
useful or harmful.

Sympathy is to some degree innate,--how it arose we cannot say; but it
has been preserved by natural selection.

FOOTNOTES:

[83] P. 46.

[84] P. 78.

[85] See, in contradistinction to Ree's theory of vanity, Sigwart's
admirable essay on this subject, contained in his "Kleine Schriften."

[86] Dr. Ree appears to depart from his general theory here and identify
sympathy with morality.




A REVIEW OF EVOLUTIONAL ETHICS

