Part II. of "The Principles of Ethics" is concerned with "The
Inductions of Ethics." It opens with a chapter on the confusion of
ethical thought due to the fact that, conforming to the general law of
evolution, "the set of conceptions constituting ethics, together with
the associated sentiments, arise out of a relatively incoherent and
indefinite consciousness; and slowly acquire coherence and definiteness
at the same time that the aggregate of them differentiates from the
larger aggregate with which it originally mingled. Long remaining
undistinguished, and then but vaguely discernible as something
independent, ethics must be expected to acquire a distinct embodiment
only when mental evolution has reached a high stage." "Originally,
ethics has no existence apart from religion, which holds it in solution.
Religion itself, in its earliest form, is undistinguished from
ancestor-worship," which passes, in the second stage, into worship of
dead rulers, and is a method of propitiation, prompted by self-interest.
Among some peoples, the idea of sin is limited to offences against the
gods; and in those other cases where there are ethical commands, the
propriety of not offending God is the primary reason given for obeying
them. This last phase of thought is illustrated by the religion of the
Hebrews, among whom good and bad conduct was but little associated with
the intrinsic natures of right and wrong. The popular belief is still
that right and wrong become such by divine fiat.

The gods of primitive, warlike peoples were gods of war, and the belief
in the moral virtue and honor of war still holds large place in the
thought of the world. The ethics of enmity, thus taught at the same time
with the ethics of amity necessary to the internal life of society, gave
rise to utterly inconsistent and contradictory sentiments and ideas,
which, in considerable measure, still exist side by side, in our
churches and outside them.

But, together with these ethical conceptions, there have slowly evolved
other, utilitarian conceptions, derived from a recognition of the
natural consequences of acts. Authority has been introduced into these
conceptions as the source of the duty of action in accordance with them;
yet there has generally been also some perception of their fitness. Such
utilitarian conceptions are to be found in the later Hebrew writings,
among the Egyptians, Greeks, etc. "The divergence of expediency-ethics
from theological ethics is well illustrated in Paley, who in his
official character derived right and wrong from divine commands, and in
his unofficial character derived them from observation of consequences.
Since his day, the last of these views has spread at the expense of the
first."

A still further simultaneous origin of moral dictates is found in the
sentiments which have arisen with such habits of conformity to rules of
conduct as have been furthered by survival of the fittest. We thus have
a conflict of ethical ideas arising from the conflict of these various
sanctions; and also from the further conflict that ensues where a later
religion has been grafted on a more primitive one, as is the case
everywhere in Christendom.

Among modern writers who assert the existence of a moral sense, there is
a division between those who regard the dicta of conscience as supreme,
and those who hold them to be subordinate to divine commands. The two
are agreed in so far as they regard conscience as having a supernatural
origin; and, in that they both recognize the moral sentiment as innate
and suppose human nature to be everywhere the same, they are also, by
implication, alike in supposing that the moral sentiment is identical in
all men.

But as a matter of fact, the moral sentiment is connected with entirely
different rules among different peoples, prescribing monogamy among one
people, polygamy among another; demanding faithfulness and chastity on
the part of women among one people, encouraging adultery among another,
etc.

Common elements in all codes of rules for conduct are the consciousness
of authority, whether that of a God, of a ruler or government, or of
conscience, the more or less definite sense of power or coercion on the
part of this authority, and the representation of public opinion. These
elements, combined in different proportions, result in an idea and a
feeling of obligation, forming a body of thought and feeling which may
be termed pro-ethical, and which, with the mass of mankind, stands in
place of the ethical.

"For now let us observe that the ethical sentiment and idea, properly
so-called, are independent of the ideas and sentiments above described
as derived from external authorities, and coercions, and
approbations--religious, political, or social. The true moral
consciousness which we name conscience does not refer to those extrinsic
results of conduct which take the shape of praise or blame, reward or
punishment, externally awarded; but it refers to the intrinsic results
of conduct which in part and by some intellectually perceived, are
mainly and by most intuitively felt. The moral consciousness proper
does not contemplate obligations as artificially imposed by an external
power; nor is it chiefly occupied with estimates of the amounts of
pleasure and pain which given actions may produce, though these may be
clearly or dimly perceived; but it is chiefly occupied with recognition
of, and regard for, those _conditions_ by fulfilment of which happiness
is achieved or misery avoided." It may or may not be in harmony with the
pro-ethical sentiment; but in any case it is "vaguely or distinctly
recognized as the rightful ruler, responding as it does to consequences
which are not artificial and variable, but to consequences which are
natural and permanent." With the established supremacy of this ethical
sentiment, the feeling of obligation retires into the background, right
actions being performed "spontaneously or from liking." "Though, while
the moral nature is imperfectly developed, there may often arise
conformity to the ethical sentiment under a sense of compulsion by it;
and though, in other cases, non-conformity to it may cause subsequent
self-reproach (as instance a remembered lack of gratitude, which may be
a source of pain without there being any thought of extrinsic penalty);
yet with a moral nature completely balanced, neither of these feelings
will arise, because that which is done is done in satisfaction of the
appropriate desire."

Where the really ethical sentiment conflicts with the factitious idea
and sentiment of obedience to legal authority, the latter may rule at
the expense of the former, as, for instance, in the case of a pedler
condemned for selling without a license. "His act of selling is morally
justifiable, and forbidding him to sell without a license is morally
unjustifiable--is an interference with his due liberty which is
ethically unwarranted."

The remainder of Part II. of the "Principles of Ethics" is occupied with
data cited to show that the amount of internal aggression, of revenge
and robbery, is greater among peoples much occupied with external
aggression, and that these decrease, while justice, generosity (which
Mr. Spencer defines as having a double root, in the philoprogenitive
instinct and the relatively modern feeling of sympathy), humanity
(including kindness, pity, mercy), filial obedience, and industry,
increase as more peaceful habits are reached. A greater veracity is also
indirectly the result of this evolution, since a coercive internal
structure of society is connected with external enmity, and such
coercive structure is unfavorable to veracity. Chastity also increases
with the social evolution, though it does not necessarily characterize
societies of the non-militant type. Its increase is connected with the
growth of the higher moral and aesthetic feelings; romantic love plays a
predominant part in our art. Intemperance, as causing, indirectly,
social evil by a lowering of social efficiency, must, in like manner,
decrease with social advancement.

In summing up his inductions, Spencer says: "Though, as shown in my
first work, 'Social Statics,' I once espoused the doctrine of the
intuitive moralists,... yet it has gradually become clear to me that the
qualifications required practically obliterate the doctrine as
enunciated by them. It has become clear to me that if, among ourselves,
the current belief is that a man who robs and does not repent will be
eternally damned, while an accepted proverb among the Bilochs is, that
'God will not favor a man who does not steal and rob'; it is impossible
to hold that men have in common an innate perception of right and wrong.

"But now, while we are shown that the moral sense doctrine in its
original form is not true, we are also shown that it adumbrates a truth,
and a much higher truth. For the facts cited... unite in proving that
the sentiments and ideas current in each society become adjusted to the
kinds of activity predominating in it.... If the life of internal amity
continues unbroken from generation to generation, there must result not
only the appropriate code, but the appropriate emotional nature.... Men
so conditioned will acquire, to the degree needful for complete
guidance, that innate conscience which intuitive moralists erroneously
suppose to be possessed by mankind at large. There needs but a
continuance of absolute peace externally, and a rigorous insistance on
non-aggression internally, to insure the moulding of men into a form
naturally characterized by all the virtues." Complete exemption from war
has already been attained by some few isolated peoples. "May we not
reasonably infer that the state reached by these small uncultured tribes
may be reached by the great cultured nations, when the life of internal
amity shall be unqualified by the life of external enmity?"

