PART II




INTRODUCTION


Twenty years ago, any one about to deal with moral science from the
standpoint of the Theory of Evolution, might have deemed it necessary to
preface his work with a statement of cogent reasons for the assumption
of such a standpoint. At a time when Theology saw in Darwinism only a
weapon of the anti-theological party, and when even many scientists were
not yet decided as to the worth of the new ideas, the right of the
student to make use of them in psychological and ethical investigations
might have been a subject for dispute. Yet even in the beginning the
attitude of apology was assumed oftener without, than within,
English-speaking countries, for the very reason that exactly among the
race from which Darwin sprang, the warfare of his conception of animate
nature with older systems was fiercest. At the present date, the
attitude of opinion is changed in all countries. The Theory of Evolution
has few, if it can be said to have any, enemies among the students of
science. "With Louis Agassiz died the last opponent of Darwinism
deserving scientific notice," says Haeckel.[87] Theology itself has
ceased from extreme hostilities, and many theologians have even found in
the idea of Evolution an argument with which to defend teleological
doctrine. The present opponents of Darwinism as applied to psychology
and ethics rather contest its special worth for these provinces than
deny its validity in them. Nevertheless, a universal acceptance cannot
be claimed for the theory; and since ethics is, above all other
sciences, the one that should most desire to persuade rather than to
alienate,--and this the more, the stronger its conviction of its own
truth,--it may be well to state or restate some of the reasons which
justify, from almost all modern standpoints, at least a tentative
application of the ideas of Evolution to ethical theory. Such a
statement, or restatement, must be an attempt to demonstrate the
validity of the theory in this province, and to give some good reasons
for supposing, _a priori_, that a survey of ethical questions from the
point of view it furnishes may be of ethical utility. The proof of such
utility can be found, ultimately, only in the results of the
investigation itself.

There is but one phase of the theological doctrine of Creation with
which the mere idea of an evolution of life, by itself considered, is
directly at variance; this is the doctrine of Creation as taught by the
older Theology, which accepted the opening chapters of Genesis as
literal history, not as, by any possibility, an oriental allegory.
Between the theory of Evolution and the idea of Creation as a primal
formation of matter with force or motion in accordance with fixed laws,
between it and the idea of an initial application of force from
without,--an impulsion which set the universe in motion,--between it and
the conception of a transcendental guidance through natural law or of a
pantheistic order of development, there is no such necessary
contradiction as could justify the denial of Evolution from the
standpoint of any of these theories. It is, therefore, with the
defenders of the older theological doctrine of creation only that an _a
priori_ defence of Evolution has to deal.

The argument which this doctrine has always regarded as one of its
strongest defences is that of the universality of the notion of a
Creating Spirit. But this defence is no longer available; modern
research has proved the idea to be by no means universal. Sir John
Lubbock says, "The lower races have no idea of a Creation; and among
those somewhat more advanced it is, at first, very incomplete." "The
lower savages regard their gods as scarcely more powerful than
themselves;... they are not creators; they are neither omniscient nor
all-powerful; far from conferring immortality on man, they are not even
in all cases immortal themselves."[88] "Stuhr, who was, as Mueller says,
a good observer of such matters, reports that the Siberians had no idea
of a Creator. When Burchill suggested the idea of creation to the
Bachapin Kaffirs, these 'asserted that everything made itself,' and that
trees and herbage grew by their own will."[89] "As regards Tahiti,
Williams observes that the 'origin of the gods and their priority of
existence in comparison with the formation of the earth, being a matter
of uncertainty even among the native priests, involves the whole in the
greatest obscurity.'"[90] "When the Capuchin missionary, Merolla, asked
the queen of Singa in Western Africa who made the world, she, 'without
the least hesitation, readily answered, "My ancestors."'"[91] "The
Bongos of Sudan had no conception of there being a Creator,"[92] the
Adipones, the Californian Indians, before they came in contact with
white men, the Crees, the Zulu Kaffirs, the Hottentots, had no idea of a
creation. "Even in Sanscrit, there is no word for creation, nor does any
such appear in the Rigveda, the Zendavesta, or in Homer."[93] The idea
of a creation in any sense is not, then, universal, and cannot be
asserted to be innate, _a priori_, primordial, or essential to human
nature. Nor, assuming the standpoint of belief in a Creator, is there
any ground for supposing that he would have chosen the one rather than
any other method of creation. The internal as well as the external
difficulties in the way of a too literal exegesis of the Old Testament
are rapidly causing the abandonment of dogmatism with respect to this
point; and any other interpretation than a literal one cannot, as has
been said, logically object to a theory of Becoming based on scientific
grounds.

It is in the nature of many of our greatest scientific theories that
their simplicity and naturalness in the explanation of facts fill us
with a sense of wonder that they had not long before suggested
themselves to scientists. If, for instance, we were to attempt, in a
Cartesian spirit, to free ourselves from all the prejudice of previous
dogma and regard only the general course of nature, we could not
logically avoid the conclusion, even from a superficial view, that a
theory of the gradual development of existing forms has far more
probability on its side than that of a creation from without which broke
in upon natural process, and placed ready-made suns and planets in the
heavens, and finished beasts and men upon the earth. Everywhere in the
organic world we behold the process of growth, the development of
germs, the passage of the inorganic into the organic, and of the organic
into the inorganic again,--change and transformation under natural law.

The difficulty which difference of form and function in the various
species offers to a theory of Evolution is by no means so large as has
often been claimed; as great difference exists between the oak and the
acorn, from which we know it, nevertheless, to spring; as much contrast
is exhibited between the brown twigs of the trees and shrubs in winter
and the brilliant foliage and flowers which they put forth under the
warmer sun of spring; quite as great contrasts may be found, in the life
of every human being, between the single cell and the individual
completeness attained at birth, between infancy and morally
characterized manhood and womanhood, between the vigor of full maturity
and the deterioration of age. Even the chasm between the organic and the
inorganic is not logically impassable. The necessity of nourishment is
the natural bridge between the two, and the equivalence of conditions
and result, the indestructibility of matter and motion, establish at
once the necessity of the inference that the organic can exist only at
the ultimate expense of the inorganic, from which it is continually
renewed. Were our senses such that, having before been closed, they were
suddenly opened to the perception of the daily observable facts of
growth, these would probably appear to us very nearly as strange,
anomalous, and impossible as the changes which, according to the
Darwinian Theory, have resulted in the existence of different species;
and it is obvious that the public mind, becoming gradually accustomed to
the conception of the latter changes, does not now regard them as so
wonderful and anomalous as they appeared to it in the beginning.

Processes involving complete change of form may be observed, at the
present time, everywhere in nature; but they are observable, everywhere
in the organic, as growth without breaches; even a primitive science has
always recognized the gradual character of motion, the absence of gaps
in the causal chain, at least outside of the initiative action of human
will. Such a natural hypothesis of creation as we have above supposed,
formed upon crude and superficial, but as far as it goes, logical
reasoning from facts of observation, could not regard the process as
other than a gradual one, in which simpler forms and conditions must be
supposed to have preceded more complex ones; in other words, it could
not logically conceive the process as other than an evolution.

Traces of an idea of Evolution may be found in various crude forms in
nearly all the earlier Greek philosophers, especially in Anaximander,
Heraclitus, Democritus, Empedocles, and later in Aristotle. Such traces
may even be found in many heathen mythologies in contradistinction from
the Judaic. The progress of investigation, establishing the universality
of natural law and, in every province, the gradual character of change
was, before Darwin, as it has been since his work, in the direction of
such a theory, as was shown by the ready acceptance with which Darwinism
met, if not by the world at large, at least by the majority of
scientists. In England, France, and Germany, there were others at work
under the influence of thoughts similar to if not identical with those
that inspired the researches and experiments of Darwin; and the nebular
theory of Kant had already claimed in Astronomy what the Darwinian
claimed in Biology. "When Kant, in his Natural History of the Heavens,
which has become the fundament of modern Astronomy, says, 'Give me
matter and I will make you a world,' what he intended to express was
that the natural laws of matter are perfectly competent to render
comprehensible to us the development of our well-known solar
system."[94]

In the very beginning, the theory of Evolution may be said to have had
three distinct branches, represented by the Nebular Theory in Astronomy,
Haeckel's Ontogeny, and the Biology of Lamarck, Darwin, Wallace, and
Huxley; and to these should properly be added the Sociological Ethics of
Spencer, which was not, however, worked out to a complete system. But Du
Prel says of later research: "In the progress of modern science, no
principle has proved so fruitful as that of evolution. All branches
compete with one another in its use, and have brought about by its aid
the most gratifying results. Geology interprets the significance of
superimposed, hardened strata of the earth's crust in the sense of a
history of the earth's development; Biology, in union with the study of
fossils, arranges the living and petrified specimens of plants and
animals in their order, and constructs a history of the evolution of
organic life; Philology prepares a genealogical tree of languages, and
finds in it signs which throw light on prehistoric times, and reveal
facts forgotten for thousands of years; Anthropology discovers in the
form and expression of human beings rudimentary signs that point to a
theory of development from lower forms; and, finally, History reveals
the evolution of civilization in far-distant historic times; and in all
these branches it becomes apparent that we only then understand
phenomena when we have comprehended their Becoming."[95]

It is due to the gradual perception of the fact that some such theory as
that of Evolution is implied in the very conception of the constancy of
nature that there has been a continual decrease of that negative form of
criticism which has made much of the gaps in the direct proof. Modern
science has so grown to, and by, the theory of Evolution that the
overthrow of the latter means nothing more nor less than the destruction
of science itself in its highest results. Even those who reject the
conclusions of Evolution are found to make use of its methods, and must
do so perforce. As the breadth and depth and height of the theory come
to be perceived, it is seen that the demand for complete proof is
nothing more nor less than a demand for the perfection of all branches
of knowledge, the refusal of credit without such proof a refusal to
place any confidence in the first principles of scientific theory until
it has fully explored the universe and left nothing further to be
discovered. But science would have less ground for complaint, if the
opponents of Darwinism consistently refused, on the ground of the
incompleteness of our knowledge, to form any theory whatever on the
subject of man's nature and development, permitting the worth of the
evolutional theory to be determined by its future results in application
as hypothesis. But the peculiar spectacle is afforded us of a party
rejecting a theory supported by numberless facts in all branches, and
whose very breaches the direction of discovery continually tends to
bridge, in favor of a dogma which cannot point to one scientific fact in
its support,--a party demanding absolute perfection of proof as the
condition of its acceptance of one theory, while it at the same time
fiercely defends a conception of nature of which it cannot furnish the
most imperfect proof. It is true that mankind has not beheld the
evolution of the whole vegetable and animal kingdom. But neither had any
human eye ever yet beheld the planet Neptune when Le Verrier prophesied
its existence and calculated its size and position. The theory of
Evolution is a reasoning from the constancy of nature, as was that of Le
Verrier, only, in the case of the former, we have the observation and
calculations of not one scientist alone, but of thousands, on which to
rely. To demand of the scientist that he shall produce the organic from
the inorganic, and practically demonstrate the change of form and
function, and the process of separation of species, before the
possibility of such development is conceded, is on a par with demanding
of him an actual reproduction of the Glacial Period before the theory of
its previous existence shall be accepted. There is no reason for
supposing that, if spontaneous generation once took place, the peculiar
complication of conditions which produced it will ever again recur or
can be artificially constructed.

But science has no desire to be dogmatic. It readily acknowledges the
total absence of direct and established proof at this particular
juncture of the beginning of life. It can only point to the indirect
testimony of Physiological Chemistry and Crystallogeny, to the
simplicity of structure and movement in certain forms of life, and
finally to the observed constancy of nature. But an exaggerated
significance has been given to this chief flaw in the theory of
Evolution, by those who, starting with the intention of defending
Theology or the dignity of the Human, have been driven back, step by
step, to this point, and fail to perceive that, arrived here, they have
already abandoned the ground on which contest was possible. What
significance a primal creation merely of lowest organisms can have, for
either a defence of human dignity or for Christian Theology, it is
difficult to perceive. As a matter of choice, it would seem to be more
consistent with the omnipotence and dignity of a Creator to suppose that
these very simple organisms arose, like other forms, under the action of
natural law than that special interference was necessary in just their
case. But, supposing such a special Creation, the following questions
immediately present themselves from the theological standpoint: Are
these special creations endowed with soul? If so, they must be immortal;
if not, then soul arises in the process of evolution; if it arises as do
all other things, qualities, functions, by growth,--that is, by the
addition of infinitesimal increments (as we must, indeed, suppose it to
arise if we regard it as "evolved")--then whence come these increments?
If they come direct from a Creator, then surely no special favor towards
man in the bestowment of soul can be alleged; and if they arise by
natural causes, out of nature, then why may not their first beginning,
their first infinitesimal appearance, also be supposed to be due to such
causes?

The proof of an increase, a growth, of what have been called
distinctively the mental faculties, throughout the animal kingdom, is
every day stronger. No one believes, at the present date, with
Descartes, that the animals are automata. Differences of mental power
would seem to be but differences of degree; the facts all point to such
a theory. The more scientific theologians have, indeed, abandoned this
with the other minor points of contest above discussed, and devoted
their efforts to argument from the moral nature of man. Philology,
Anthropology, and Geology testify to mental progress, even in the human
species; and if such a progress is a fact, it cannot have been without
influence upon the moral nature of man, even supposing the latter to be
God-given. Indeed, a merely physical progress or change cannot have been
without such influence; for the most conservative theologians admit the
strong action of the body upon the mind. It would seem, then, for all
reasons, that an investigation of the process of mental evolution, or of
evolution in general, ought not to be without results significant for
any system of morality. If it is true that we learn wisdom and morality
from human history, this can be so only because history gives us
increased knowledge of the constancy of nature in those of its
manifestations which specially concern the human, and thus enables us
better to judge the present and predict the future. We should suppose
that a still wider knowledge of our mental and physical evolution must
be of yet greater worth to us in the same manner,--that the disclosure
of more extended fields of nature to our vision must afford us new and
valuable lessons with regard to ourselves; just as the telescope makes
no discovery in the most distant regions of space that does not prove to
have, in the end, its peculiar significance for our own planet. If our
investigations should prove fruitless, as all such investigations have
been said by some to be, the fact, established _a posteriori_, could not
be disputed. But, considering all the points above noticed, such a
result could not but astonish us; and we should even be inclined, after
all that has been said, to suspect that the fault lay rather in the
particular method than in the direction of our research.

FOOTNOTES:

[87] "Natuerliche Schoepfungsgeschichte," 8th ed., p. 109.

[88] "Origin of Civilization," p. 391.

[89] "Origin of Civilization."

[90] Ibid.

[91] Ibid.

[92] Ibid.

[93] Ibid.

[94] Du Prel: "Die Entwicklungsgeschichte des Weltalls."

[95] "Die Entwicklungsgeschichte des Weltalls."




