CHAPTER I

THE CONCEPTS OF EVOLUTION


The preceding considerations have made it evident that the idea of
Evolution has undergone a broadening process since Darwin first brought
it before the world. It is necessary to glance briefly at some of the
chief phases and the general significance of this process in order to
define the extent and intent of the concept as far as science has made
such definition possible.

To Darwin himself the struggle for existence was always between the
unities represented by complete organisms whether as isolated
individuals, or in family, tribal, or national groups. Everywhere in his
calculations, appearing unchanged in his results, is found the unknown
quantity of variation from ancestral type, the known factors being
heredity, and natural and sexual selection in the struggle for
existence. Wallace's ideas as to color in birds deprive the theory of
sexual selection of one of its most important points of application in
Darwin's work. It is, in fact, easy to see that sexual selection cannot
neutralize natural selection, that any particular form of sexual
selection can arise and finally survive only by a harmony with the
direction of natural selection, and that the two must therefore appear,
even from any standpoint of freedom of the will, as continually
attaining coincidence. It has been said, above, that the struggle for
existence was, for Darwin, between the organisms as unities. This
consistent position of the specialist has been criticised, from a more
general point of view, by Lewes in his essay on the Nature of Life,[96]
in which he asserts that we must logically "extend our conception of the
struggle for existence beyond that of the competition and antagonism of
organisms--the external struggle; and include under it the competition
and antagonism of tissues and organs--the internal struggle." "Mr.
Darwin," he says, "has so patiently and profoundly meditated on the
whole subject, that we must be very slow in presuming him to have
overlooked any important point. I know that he has not altogether
overlooked this which we are now considering; but he is so preoccupied
with the tracing out of his splendid discovery in all its bearings, that
he has thrown the emphasis mainly on the external struggle, neglecting
the internal struggle; and has thus, in many passages, employed language
which implies a radical distinction where--as I conceive--no such
distinction can be recognized. 'Natural Selection,' he says, 'depends on
the survival, under various and complex circumstances, of the
best-fitted individuals, but has no relation whatever to the primary
cause of any modification of structure.'[97] On this we may remark,
first, that selection does not _depend_ on the survival, but _is_ that
survival; secondly, that the best-fitted individual survives because of
that modification of its structure which has given it the superiority;
therefore, if the primary cause of this modification is not due to
selection, the selection cannot be the cause of species. The facts which
are relied on in support of the idea of 'fixity of species' show, at any
rate, that a given superiority will remain stationary for thousands of
years; and no one supposes that the progeny of an organism will vary
unless some external or internal cause of variation accompanies the
inheritance. Mr. Darwin agrees with Mr. Spencer in admitting the
difficulty of distinguishing between the effects of some definite action
of external conditions, and the accumulation through natural selection
of inherited variations serviceable to the organism. But even in cases
where the distinction could be clearly established, I think we should
only see an _historical_ distinction, that is to say, one between
effects produced by particular causes now in operation and effects
produced by very complex and obscure causes in operation during
ancestral development.... Natural Selection is only the expression of
the results of obscure physiological processes."

The last statement is one to which Darwin himself would certainly not
have objected. It is an extension of the principle implicitly involved
in all his work and explicitly stated in his later work, although the
chief emphasis is laid on outer conditions. The extension of the idea of
competition from the outer condition of organisms to the more ultimate
physiological unities of organ and tissue is a philosophic gain. It is
evident, however, that that for which Darwin is seeking is not a
philosophical generalization which shall include outer and inner change
under one highest law, but, first of all, the particular causes of
particular variation interesting to the specialist in biology. It is
made too clear for mistake in "The Variation of Animals and Plants under
Domestication" that the uncertainty with regard to such particular forms
of cause is the spring of his declaration of our ignorance as to
variation. The possibility of an inclusion of lower in higher
generalizations he would not deny; though the special laws first occupy
his attention. Doubtless, his work is not, as is no man's, wholly free
from inconsistencies and contradictions,--which are due, in part, to the
fact that every scientific theory is, even in the thought of the
individual, an evolution. But the declaration of mystery in the question
of variation is not equivalent to a theory of accident, of
transcendental mystery, or of some special organic or vital force, such
as Claude Bernard especially opposed; it is merely and simply a
statement of the mystery of present ignorance. This fact is expressly
stated in Darwin's later work. We find, for instance, in the
introduction to a letter to the editor of "Nature," written in 1873, the
origin of many instincts referred to "modifications or variations in the
brain, which we, in our ignorance, most improperly call spontaneous or
accidental;" and we have, in "The Variation of Animals and Plants under
Domestication,"[98] such passages as the following: "When we reflect on
the individual differences between organic beings in a state of nature,
as shown by every wild animal knowing its mate; and when we reflect on
the infinite diversity of many varieties of our domesticated
productions, we may well be inclined to exclaim, though falsely, as I
believe, that variability must be looked at as an ultimate fact,
necessarily contingent on reproduction. Those authors who adopt this
latter view would probably deny that each separate variation has its own
proper exciting cause. Although we can seldom trace the precise relation
between cause and effect, yet the considerations presently to be given
lead to the conclusion that each modification must have its own distinct
cause." It is "probable that variability of every kind is directly or
indirectly caused by changed conditions of life. Or, to put the case
under another point of view, if it were possible to expose all the
individuals of a species during many generations to absolutely uniform
conditions of life, there would be no variability.... The causes which
induce variability act on the mature organism, on the embryo, and, as we
have good reason to believe, on both sexual elements before impregnation
has been effected." Darwin further considers, in this same book, some of
the probable particular causes of variation, as given in climate and
food. And it may be remarked, in this connection, that Rolph's criticism
of the impossibility of progress under conditions of want is irrelevant
as applied to Darwin, since the latter himself says expressly: "Of all
causes which induce variability, excess of food, whether or not changed
in nature, is probably the most powerful";[99] again: "We have reason to
suspect that an habitual excess of highly nutritive food, or an excess
relatively to the wear and tear of the organization from exercise, is a
powerful exciting cause of variability."[100] Rolph's criticism is
probably due to forgetfulness of the fact that Darwin limited the
struggle for existence to that of complete organisms with one another,
and that, under such a limitation of the conception to external
struggle, a condition of want cannot be conceived as necessarily
precluding a monopoly of abundance by best-fitted individuals.

Theories with regard to the special outer causes and resulting
physiological conditions of variation have been gradually added to, as
facts on this score have accumulated. But, as investigation advances,
the question is seen to involve all the problems of the intricate
chemical and mechanical nature of physiological structure in its
manifold forms and degrees of organization. The field stretches out in
this direction, under our contemplation, to an indefinite distance; and
science appears as yet to have passed only the outer limits of its
territory.

It is certain that the comparatively recent science of Physiological
Chemistry will have many of the decisive words to say on this score, in
the future. "When we see the symmetrical and complex outgrowths caused
by a single atom of the poison of a gall-insect, we may believe that
slight changes in the chemical nature of the sap or blood would lead to
extraordinary modifications of structure," says the great seer of
evolution himself.[101]

Among special theories of Evolution, a distinction may be made between:
(1) such special theories as aim at biological simplification by
reduction of all organic variation to one primary form of cellular
process; (2) such theories as are content with less ultimate laws, by
which the various ascertained forms of change are included in one
general statement not involving special physiological or physical theory
but applicable to all forms of life; (3) such theories as aim to give
distinctive philosophic expression to a generalization like the last
named, including in this statement both psychical and physiological
phenomena; and (4) such theories as aim at an ultimate expression of the
direction of evolution that shall include the phenomena of life, both
physiological and psychical, under one head with all other natural
phenomena. To the first class belong only "provisional" hypotheses,
among the best known of which are those of Pangenesis, Perigenesis, and
the Continuity of the Germ-Plasm. To the second, which are not merely
tentative but have a broad foundation in known fact, belongs Haeckel's
theory of Inheritance and Adaptation, a theory restated in substance,
from independent research, by Eimer, whose ultimate general factors of
analysis are the same with Haeckel's, though he deals, beyond these,
with special facts and special theories of his own. Phases of the second
class often entitle them to inclusion in the third. An example of the
third class is found in Spencer's definition, "Life is the continual
adjustment of inner relations to outer relations." The fourth and last
class includes Fechner's "Tendency to Stability" and Spencer's theory of
the rhythm of motion (see his "First Principles"), similar to which are
certain ideas of Zoellner, Du Prel, and others; and similar elements to
which are to be found in Haeckel's "Plastidule-Theory." In connection
with this class, reference may be made to an article by Dr. J. Petzoldt
in the "Vierteljahrschrift fuer wissenschaftliche Philosophie" under the
title "Maxima, Minima, und Oekonomie," in which, among others, Fechner's
views especially are discussed with reference to an ultimate principle
of evolution. The first pages on the "Tendency to Stability" in
Fechner's "Ideas concerning the Evolution of the Organic" ("Einige Ideen
zur Schoepfungs- und Entwicklungsgeschichte der Organismen") are as
follows:--

"For the sake of brevity I call relations of position and motions
recurring at regular periods, that is after like intervals, in the
particles forming a material system or in the centres of whole masses
conceived as forming a larger system, 'stable relations.' Among such
relations is to be reckoned the condition of rest of the particles or
masses in relation to each other, as the extreme case, which we may call
the state of 'absolute stability'; while a dissipation of the particles
or masses, to infinity, in different directions, constitutes the other
extreme of absolute instability.

"We do not speak of 'absolute stability,' but of 'full stability,' in
cases where motion still takes place, but this brings continually, in
exactly the same periods of time, the same relations of particles or
masses, not only as regards position, but also as regards velocity and
direction of the motion and change of velocity and direction....

"To absolute and full stability may be added, as third case, that of
greater or less approach to full stability, which we may term briefly
'aproximate stability'... and of which we have an example in the chief
bodies of our solar system.

"It may serve as a simplification of the consideration of stable
relations of motion to remark... that, in an isolated system or one
under constant outer conditions, exactly or very nearly the same
relations of velocity and direction recur when exactly or very nearly
the same relations in the position of the particles or masses return. As
regards the velocity, this follows directly from the principle of the
conservation of energy; as regards the direction, it is indisputably
possible to assume the connection of its recurrence with that of the
other relations, although I cannot remember that a direct general proof
of this has been found.

"With these introductory specifications in mind, let us assume any
number of material particles to be restricted, by forces of some sort,
to motion within limited space, and the system either withdrawn from
outer influences or under such as are constant; let us, moreover,
suppose the system undisturbed by the interference of psychic freedom,
or the latter impossible. In such case, certain initial positions,
velocities, and directions of the parts of the system being assumed, all
following states will be determined by these. And now, if there are
among these conditions, either present at the beginning, or attained in
the course of the motion, any such as have for their result a return of
the same states after a given time, then the motion, and so also the
positions of the parts conceived as at first undergoing alteration in
form and velocity, will, unless they contain the immediate condition of
periodic recurrence, continue altering until those of all the possible
states are reached which contain the condition of recurrence; until this
point is attained, the system will, so to speak, know no rest. Has the
recurrence once taken place within a given time, then it must always
take place anew within the same time, because the same conditions are
there to determine it. And since these conditions are determinative of
the whole course of motion from one recurrence to the next, the same
course must be repeated; that is, in every like phase of the period a
like state of motion will exist. But this gives us full stability of the
system, a change, a deviation from the attained stability being possible
only through changes in outer influences, the assumed constancy of which
rendered the attainment of stability possible.

"This principle appears at first purely _a priori_; but the assumption
should not be overlooked that there are among the conditions determining
the motion such as lead to their own recurrence, and this is to be taken
for granted, since it is necessary to assume that a system must continue
to change until, but only until, the conditions of full stability are
attained, in case it is attainable; and that this full stability, when
once reached, cannot be again destroyed by the action of the system
itself. The question presents itself as to how far calculation and
experience permit us to lay down a more general principle.

"In a system in which only two particles or masses, withdrawn from outer
influences, are determined to motion by mutual attraction and the
influence of a primary impulse in another direction, calculation shows
us that, motion to infinity being excluded, the attainment, and indeed
the immediate attainment, of full stability is a necessity; and for
swinging pendula and vibrating strings it may be calculated, from the
nature of the moving forces, that they would remain in a condition of
fully stable motion if outer resistance were removed; for, such
obstacles present, they pass through an approximately stable condition
to one of absolute stability. The power of purely mathematical
calculation does not go beyond such comparatively simple cases....

"But if we call experience to our aid, it may be asserted, in accordance
with very general facts, that, in a system left to itself or under
constant outer conditions, and starting from any conceivable state, if
not full stability at least a greater or less approximation to it is
reached as final condition, from which no retrogression takes place
through the inner workings of the system itself. The tendency to
approximately stable conditions appears, or the actual state is
attained, according to the measure in which variable outer influences
are withdrawn. So that so little is lacking to our hypothesis, that,
although it has at this point to make up for the impossibility of
perfect demonstration, we are nevertheless justified in laying down the
following law or principle:--

"In every system of material parts left to itself or under constant
outer influences, so, then, in the material system of the universe, in
so far as we regard it as isolated, there takes place, motion to
infinity being excluded, a continuous progress from more unstable to
more stable conditions, up to the attainment of a final condition of
full or approximate stability."

From the union of the principle thus stated and that of the conservation
of energy "it follows that no unlimited progress of the universe to
absolute stability, which consists in perfect rest of the parts, can
take place.... The energy manifested in the universe cannot be altered,
in general, in its amount, but only in the form in which it manifests
itself." "It cannot be asserted that the attainment of full stability in
the universe would be the attainment of an eternal rest, but only of the
most perfectly adjusted motions, and therefore such motions as would
give rise to no variations.... But a condition which brings with it
eternal repetition cannot be reached in finite time."

"To elucidation of this principle of the Tendency to Stability," says
Dr. Petzoldt analyzing Fechner's work, "we have only to call to
remembrance a number of natural phenomena, such as the ebb and flow of
the tide, the circulation of moisture, periodic changes of temperature,
and so forth, which exhibit great periods of approximate stability and
in which we notice in general no retrogression.

"Not less does the constitution of organisms which are, 'so to speak,
constituted dependent upon periodicity of their functions, and so upon
stable relations of their life,' serve to confirm the theory. Only the
concept of stability must be extended in their case, since not always
the same, but only substitutive parts of the organic systems tend
towards stability.

"Experience never gives us an example of an isolated system; on the
contrary, every system is a part of higher systems. The inner relations
of its stability are not conditioned by its own parts only, but also,
more or less, by those of other systems, so that the destruction of one
part-system is always only in the direction towards the stability of a
higher, ultimately of the highest, system; that is, of the system of the
universe."

"Thus the teleological principle coincides with the principle of the
Tendency to Stability, and at the same time the latter constitutes the
link between the former and the law of Causality. Though, in truth, this
manner of looking at the matter signifies a generalization of the
concept of 'end,' since it defines _all_ stable conditions as ends. The
view is justified, however, by the fact that the greatest possible
physical satisfaction--for us, the criterion of teleology--is always
bound up with the longest possible preservation or slow change of a
stable organic condition. The _physical_ Tendency to Stability 'bears
with it a _psychical_ tendency to the attainment and conservation of
just those conditions' towards which the physical tendency is directed."

Of the fact that Lange "feels the lack of the proof of this 'Tendency to
Stability,'" Dr. Petzoldt says: "But how is there a need of proof here?
To prove is to refer back to known facts. But what is there in Fechner's
remarks that stands in need of such a reference? They simply draw our
attention to the result of evolution as a state which bears, in itself,
the guarantee of some continuance. Can any one contest this? Is there
anything further to prove? It is said that Gauss once remarked that
Lagrange's equations of motion are not proved, but only historically
stated. The case is exactly the same here. The fact is attested, merely,
that evolution ends in a stable condition; and herein lies the pith and
the great merit of the theory of the Tendency to Stability."

Dr. Petzoldt criticises, among other things, especially Fechner's
concept of approximate stability, in that no distinction is made by the
author between three different cases. The first case comprises forms of
motion in which periodicity is only approximate, but in which,
nevertheless, no retrogression in stability takes place; this case is
illustrated by our solar system. The second case comprises forms of
motion in which the stability increases up to a certain point, but
beyond this, despite relative constancy in outer conditions, decreases
again until complete destruction of the system supervenes; an
illustration of this form of motion is found in all organisms. The
third case comprises forms of motion which we cannot concede to be
stable. "For, if we ascribe periodic motion to pendula and musical
strings which vibrate in a resisting medium, this is nevertheless a
periodicity, which continually changes _in the same sense_, and we
certainly cannot say that pendula and strings approach, in a resisting
medium, a condition of absolute, through a condition of approximate,
stability. We recognize in these vibrations, decreasing in amplitude,
merely unstable changes which tend toward a final stable
condition,--namely that of rest."

The author finds a further ground of criticism in Fechner's assertion
that organisms are entirely dependent upon the periodicity of their
functions. Only a part of such functions are periodic. Periodicity is
not conceivable without stability, but stability is conceivable without
periodicity.

In the process of evolution towards a stable form of movement,
Dr. Petzoldt recognizes briefly two factors, "Tendency and
Competition."[102] Tendency is defined, in general, as the direction,
actual or potential, of material parts or of mental or physical
function; competition, as the conflict of tendencies, from which a
tendency of a higher order results. "The concept of Competition is, like
that of Tendency, to be taken in a general significance. A number of
forces which act upon a single point compete. Different mental images,
observations, concepts, laws, come into competition, from which result
concepts and laws of lower and higher orders. The struggle for existence
is only a special case of competition. Though this often ends with the
immediate or gradual destruction of systems entering upon it,
nevertheless only a middle worth between all the competing tendencies
can be ascribed to the resultant. Even the conqueror is, after the
struggle, other than what he was before it; a part of the tendency
destroyed by him lives on in him, has combined with his original
tendency to a resultant. Tendencies can as little disappear without
compensation as can forces, whether the compensation consists in a
strengthening or in a weakening of others, and the _conservation of
competing tendencies_ might be regarded as a further qualitative
addition to the law of the conservation of force. Hence, in the
examination of the effects of the struggle for existence, the like
claim of all tendencies taking part in it is not to be left out of
consideration. Each makes its full force felt. But not all attain to
competition; of the numerous tendencies bound up in one organism, only a
few unite, in the single case, to a resultant, which has a direction
towards a definite issue." The less the opposition of competing
tendencies of concepts or laws, the less the deviation of the resultant
from its components, and the less the change these have to undergo. The
higher concepts and laws are, the less are the number of distinguishing
marks which they take from all single conceptions; for they are the
resultants of very strongly opposed components.[103]

Fechner's views are related to, and, to some extent, dependent upon,
certain ones of Zoellner adduced in connection with a consideration of
sun-spots.[104] Du Prel, who also acknowledges special indebtedness to
Zoellner, attempted in his "Struggle for Existence in the Heavens" ("Der
Kampf ums Dasein am Himmel") to demonstrate the fact of a struggle and
selection among the heavenly bodies analogous to that claimed for life
upon the earth. The title of the book was afterwards changed to "The
History of the Evolution of the Universe,"[105] its scope having "grown
far beyond the limit of the former title." Du Prel finds one of the
chief advantages of an application of Darwinian ideas to astronomy in
the fact that, unlike our earth, the heavens in their immensity afford
us existing, or to our eye existing, examples of the various stages of
their evolution, in nebular mist, comets, suns, fixed stars, planets,
rings, and moons,--all subject to processes of development, which we may
to some extent observe. In the first chapter of this book, Du Prel says:
"The existing condition of the Cosmos with respect to all forms of the
Purposeful[106]--whether we regard the realm of the organic or the
inorganic--can be looked upon only as an attained, moving equilibrium of
forces. Immanent in Nature lies the capacity to develop from chaotic
conditions to teleologic forms; for, in the ceaseless play of forces,
all other than such combinations are by their nature given over to
destruction, while it lies, on the contrary, in the essence of all
purposeful combinations to be preserved. In every system of mechanical
forces an adjustment of the same must finally be arrived at through the
removal of all immanent oppositions." "_It is impossible_ for nature to
remain in chaotic conditions." "Every system of forces tends to a state
of equilibrium. This is as true of the conflict of images in a human
brain, from whose mutual accommodation the resultant of a unified theory
of the universe arises, as of oppositions in the social organism, of the
conditions of power and civilization of neighboring peoples, of the
meteorologic states of the earth, of the mechanical forces of a solar
system, or the atoms of a cosmic mist. Every war of the elements ends
with an adjustment of ideal justice, for every 'moment' of force has
influence proportioned to its power and the duration of its
activity."[107]

There is one portion of Fechner's theory as above stated (its
metaphysical phases being beyond the scope of the present chapter have
not been touched upon) that raises a question which may perhaps appear
to have in itself no special significance, but which nevertheless opens
up, by its implications, new fields of inquiry, and may possibly lead to
further theory. The condition of stability which evolution in the
universe as a whole gradually approaches but can never attain to in
finite time is declared, namely, to be one not of rest, but of motion. A
question might be raised, here, as to the definition of the "infinite
time" asserted to be necessary to the attainment of such full
stability,--whether the phrase be used in the mathematical or the
philosophic sense; and the question would be found, I believe, to
involve the unanswerable problem of the finite or infinite character of
the universe in space. Of a universe conceived under the philosophic
concept of spatial infinitude, obviously no final state as the result of
evolution can be predicated, the evolution supposing a progress which,
as involving infinite matter, cannot be accomplished in finite time. If
we, however, conceive the universe as occupying finite space and
undergoing continual evolution as a whole in the direction of
equilibrium, it is a question whether the end must not be attained in
finite time. For a universe conceived as finite, however immense, there
must be a finite number, however great, representing the changes
necessary to the attainment of final equilibrium; and if progress in the
direction of such equilibrium is of necessity continual, the final
equilibrium must be attainable in finite time. The question of the
nature of such a state of final, universal stability is bound up with
the problem of motion through a perfect void, and of the possibility of
the formation of such a void through the concentration of matter.
Leaving out of consideration the problem in its metaphysical form, which
concerns the possibility of conceiving inter-material space, it may be
said that it is not now supposed that the heavenly bodies move through
an absolute void; and the existence of any medium opposing resistance,
however slight, is a condition rendering impossible the attainment of
absolute stability of motion or a full stability which suffers no
diminution and is, therefore, in effect, an absolute stability. It may
be questioned whether the very nature of motion is not coincident with
change, and this with action and reaction, or competition. Such a view
would reduce evolution to a single ultimate principle, in place of
Darwin's Variation and Selection through struggle, or Petzoldt's
Tendency and Competition. We should have left, instead of these, only
the final principle involved in moving matter considered in its ultimate
parts. The metaphysical problem of the infinite divisibility of matter
need not here concern us; the ultimate parts of an organism could not
be, however, its organs as Lewes defined them, but rather, from a
positive standpoint, the ultimate units recognized by science in cell
and cell-parts. We may, indeed, since we know no beginning of motion,
legitimately regard all tendency as itself resultant. Just as we cannot
separate matter and motion, except by abstraction from reality, so, too,
we cannot conceive of motion except as having definite direction; and
thus we arrive, by a final analysis, at the ultimate philosophic
principles of matter and its motion. I use these terms in no
metaphysical sense, but merely as generic terms including under one head
specific forms of material combination and the specific forms of motion
of their wholes or parts.

The question of the character of a conceived state of final equilibrium
may be approached from a somewhat different side, though the emphasis
falls, as before, on the solidarity of the universe and the nature of
motion as change. We may, for instance, regard the earth as an isolated
system whose isolation makes possible the continual progress of the
evolution taking place on its surface. But this whole evolution is, on
the other hand, dependent upon the light and heat of the sun. Again, the
sun is undergoing an evolution whose continuous progress may be regarded
as in a certain sense dependent upon isolation; but we see, on
reflection, that this very process is the result of the cooling nature
of the sun's surroundings, and that it is sending its motion in every
direction through space. The moon, which has passed through both the
evolution that the sun is undergoing and that which is in progress upon
the earth, is now passing through another stage which the earth must
reach in time by diffusion of its atmosphere, in case its destruction is
not accomplished by some catastrophic event before the arrival of that
distant period. Suns and planets, all the heavenly bodies, are sending
their influence in every direction through the unfathomable depths of
space; and just as the capacity of the earth to be warmed by the
influence of the sun involves its reciprocal capacity to act as a
cooling medium for that body, so the conditions throughout the universe
must be regarded as everywhere interdependent and mutually implying one
another. Thus we again arrive finally at a universal action and reaction
among the parts of the universe, all motion implying change of the
direction of motion. Or, since we may and are, in fact, obliged to
regard every direction or form of motion as a resultant,--for of motion
as of matter we know no absolute beginning,--even this simple assumption
may supply us with the conclusion which we have reached in a more
roundabout way. We may regard motion in any direction as counterbalanced
by a resistance in every other direction sufficient to produce it in
this one; in other words, motion takes place at every instant, in the
direction of least resistance, even though this direction may represent,
in the next instant, through the action of new "moments" of force, the
greatest resistance. Any direction as well as any change of direction
implies, then, resistance; resistance is equivalent to the interference
of force, or, in other words, to competition; and competition may, at
any moment, become catastrophe. The difference between competition and
catastrophe is one merely of degree, or rather it is a subjective
difference depending upon the point of view of the observer. In other
words, all that we can testify to is a certain periodicity of motion,
all motion meeting with resistance, the accumulation of which finally
induces motion in another sense. Larger periodicities are made up of
smaller periodicities, and, according to the point of view taken, any
period of such motion may be regarded as an evolution, that which
Fechner terms "full" stability being only the maximum towards which
motion during that period tends. Absolute stability can be conceived
only as perfect rest, whether we conceive it as merely an abstraction,
its realization as rendered impossible by the conservation of energy, or
whether we conceive it as possible in a universe regarded as finite; an
absolute stability of motion is a self-contradiction, and a full
stability which knows no retrogression is equally a self-contradiction.
Periodicity is, then, all into which the Tendency to Stability resolves
itself for nature as we know it.

We perceive, in the actual universe, the fact of a certain imperfect
periodicity. This wave form of movement in great and little plays, as
Spencer has shown far more elaborately than Fechner, a large part in the
universe.

But the evident fact of a present periodicity of imperfect form suggests
another possible conception. We are under no necessity to regard the
universe as finite either in space or time. On the contrary. We tend
naturally to conceive of it as finite after the analogy of particular
things which we perceive continually to arise and perish; but as
concerns space, we have no knowledge of any limit, and, as concerns
time, the conception of any actual beginning or end to the universe as a
whole is only the ancient naive idea which science has disproved in
showing that neither matter nor motion ever perish. An infinite universe
is conceivable, in which not exactly the same but very similar forms, or
forms of which the successive ones closely resemble each other though
those widely separated may be very dissimilar, continue to arise and be
destroyed to all eternity. The conception of a primal nebular mist is
not a necessary inference from astronomic phenomena; it is as easy and
as logical to regard the various phases of planetary development
revealed to us by the telescope as so many phases of an evolution and
dissolution continually recurring in different parts of the universe,
one extreme of which is represented by the nebular mist, the other by
the cold and lifeless remains of planets gradually suffering dissolution
as they revolve through space. The greater the immensity of the
universe is conceived to be, the nearer our conception of it must
approach to this type. But the term Tendency to Stability is misapplied
when applied to such infinite and imperfect periodicity--to the motion,
thus conceived, of the universe as a whole.

The periodicity in the life of organic species may be compared to the
wave-motions of light and heat as distinguished from those of water, the
individual representing the single wave-length. The analogy is not,
however, intended--to speak with Bacon--as one of nature, but merely as
one of mind. And just here it may be questioned whether Fechner may not
have been right, after all, in his assertion of the dependency of the
organism upon periodicity of function, whether the periodic character of
the individual life, dependent, as it must be supposed to be, on
adaptation to a medium to some degree resisting, does not sacrifice its
stability in so far as the increments of resistance lack uniformity.
This is evidently the case in large relations; is it not logically
necessary to suppose it so in minute relations, though the fact may not
be so evident to the coarse measurement of the senses? Experience seems
to prove that an approximate periodicity in larger relations, is most
consistent with health; and it must be remembered that the non-periodic
relations are subordinated to periodic ones, that not only in the case
of waking and sleeping, working and eating, but also in those of rest
and labor, a certain uniformity is necessary to the best mental and
physical condition. A close observation will, I think, reveal a greater
periodicity than was at first suspected; since much of it is of
so-called "automatic," "unconscious," or "half-conscious" nature. It is
to be noticed, here, that the termination of individual lives is often
in the nature of a catastrophe, and a uniform periodicity of individual
development and decay cannot be assigned, except in the form of an
average that falls much below the figure attained by the thoroughly
healthy individual. There is every reason to believe that if we could
sleep, rise, eat, bathe, exercise, work, and rest with the regularity of
a clock, we should be the better for it physically. But the
irregularities outside the province of our will-power render it
impossible for us to order our lives in this manner. Nor do we desire to
do so. For these very irregularities, as representing greater or less
change to which adaptation is necessary, are, in many cases and within
certain lines, the conditions and signs of progress; though they may
constitute in other cases and beyond these lines--that is, where they
are of too great intensity or duration--conditions of retrogression, the
imperfection in periodicity becoming catastrophe, which may extend
beyond the individual to his offspring. We may thus infer that the final
destruction of the individual organism is conditioned by its own
progress and the progress of its species, but that on the other hand,
when the destruction of the individual is too abrupt, it may mean
catastrophe to the species also, or at least to a part of it, through
heredity.

Our considerations so far have been of a nature to convince us that not
isolation, but a constancy in the continual action of like relatively
small increments of force in the same directions, is the condition of
steady evolution. The less constant and the larger the increments, the
nearer the changes involved resemble catastrophe, though the
catastrophes themselves may be regarded in another light as forming part
of an evolution of a higher order. The changes the sun is undergoing may
be regarded as evolution in so far as the influence of the cooling
medium is a constant one. The earth as a whole and in its parts may be
regarded as passing through a process of evolution towards full
stability in so far as the sun's heat is a constant quantity, the
periodic changes of seasons and of day and night the same. The relation
would seem, therefore, to be one of time--the time-relation involved in
the duration of outer conditions as constant with reference to the
period required for the attainment of stability. Thus the sun's
influence upon the earth might appear approximately constant to the
human individual, but might represent a rapid change in relation to some
stupendous and long-continued evolution in some other part of the
universe. Considerations which we have already noticed forbid our
regarding any conditions of "full" as distinguished from absolute
stability as anything other than peculiar states single in the system
and thus unenduring maxima succeeded by decrease, although the process
may be, with reference to any other particular process, so slow, the
retrogression from the culminating point so gradual, as to be, with
respect to this other process, inappreciable.

And while we are busied with matters which involve the whole
multiplicity of relations in the universe, just a word with reference
to cause and effect. Which one of these myriad material parts
interacting at any moment shall we single out as the cause of the
succeeding state? The solidarity of the universe as far as the complete
interdependence of all its parts is concerned is clear to us. It is true
we cannot reckon with all factors of the universe at once; and the
concept of cause and effect is therefore a useful one. But the cause of
anything must be, from a positive point of view, just what the methods
prescribed for its discovery in any particular case shows it to be:
namely, a factor, merely, in the manifold conditions determining a
following state, the removal of which means the prevention of the
succession of exactly that state. Which, for instance, shall we regard
as the cause of an evil act--the character of a man or the temptation
offered by circumstances? The change or removal of either means the
change or removal of the act. Neither is complete without the other, and
both are involved in the whole complexity of the universe, through
heredity on the one hand and the action of nature external to life on
the other.

And just here we may glance at Spencer's definition of life as "the
continual adjustment of inner relations to outer relations." Though
emphasizing an important side of evolution, it is evidently incomplete.
Evolution is not only the adjustment of inner relations to outer
relations, it is also the adjustment of outer relations to inner
relations as well as of inner relations among themselves; or it is a
process of mutual adjustment of all the parts engaged in it.

Our analysis, though crude and imperfect, may now be regarded as
complete. Our scope will not allow of a more elaborate one. It is
fitting, therefore, that we proceed to synthesis. The first matter which
presents itself to us, in this connection, is the theory of Heredity and
Adaptation mentioned above.

The theory is not a new one, wholly outside Darwin's conception of
evolution. The concept of Adaptation represents simply the
generalization of all those special causes with which Darwin more
particularly occupied himself, and is, in essence, only a proclamation
of that universal subjection to natural law which Darwin himself plainly
asserted. As such a. generalization it is, however, a useful one; it
furnishes us with an expression, for the organic world, of that
universal action and reaction through which opposing forces move towards
stability by mutual adjustment.

The law of Heredity, again, may be regarded as an organic expression of
the more general principle according to which motion that, in the sense
defined above, suffers only a minimum of interference, that is, motion
which, by a certain equilibrium of mutual relations, is "approximately"
or "fully" stable, tends to continue to take place in nearly the same
directions, or nearly to repeat itself. It is thus apparent, also, that
Heredity is closely related to the more special principle of Habit, or
also of Use and Disuse, if only we remember that, whatever the
metaphysical truths of Freedom or Determination, the psychical is always
accompanied by what may be called equivalents of the physical under
natural law. The special laws of Heredity are still enveloped in
mystery; I refer, not to that mystery which may be regarded as
surrounding all ultimate facts, if we choose to conceive them as
expressing or concealing something further unknowable, but to the
scientific mystery of ignorance, which time may dissolve. Biologists
disagree on this question, the ultimate decision of which must be left
to them. Still some general criticism on the results of research in this
direction may be allowable from a philosophic standpoint.

The chief point at issue between various theories of Heredity seems to
be the degree of importance to be attached to Adaptation: however we may
express the question, this is the ultimate form to which it is
reducible. Now it is obvious, from the foregoing analysis, that the form
of theory which would be most useful to us, if such were attainable,
would be one in which the degree of tendency to inheritance as well as
the strength of inherited tendency is expressed in terms of the
intensity and duration of exercise, use, function, habit, or form of
motion or action (however we may choose to term it); and variation is
regarded as the resultant of such tendency and change in the
environment, or, in other words, deviation from constancy of influence.
It may be useful to inquire to what extent such a general theory is
authorized by special ones.

We have the testimony of two of the acknowledged greatest
authorities--Darwin and Haeckel--as well as that of a score of other
biologists, and specialists in related branches, to the inheritance of
peculiarities acquired during the life of the individual.[108] Eimer
lays especial stress on the fact, long witnessed to by one class of
specialists, of the hereditary character of brain-diseases, among which
may be reckoned some that are without doubt due to direct influence of
the environment.[109] Haeckel and Eimer even instance cases in which
mutilation has been inherited.[110] One such instance would be
sufficient, in overthrowing the general denial of the inheritance of
individual adaptation, to make probable the direct influence of the
environment in other cases, the uniformity discoverable in the workings
of natural law leading us to suppose that the one instance would not be
isolated. It must have weight, too, as an argument, in the judgment of
many doubtful cases. Not one such case alone is furnished us, however,
but many well-authenticated ones. And it is to be remarked that even
Weismann has gradually parted from his original theory, recognizing more
and more clearly the element of adaptation in inheritance. It seems open
to question, indeed, whether Weismann's theory, in withdrawing the
germ-plasm from the direct influence of the environment with which the
parent individual is in contact does not exempt it from the universal
law of action and reaction. Eimer designates such an opposition as
Weismann postulates of the germ-plasm to the rest of the organism as a
"physiological miracle," and the artificial line thus drawn between the
germ-cells before and after the beginning of development as "opposed to
that conformity to law shown in the morphological and physiological
unity of living beings."[111] Ancient ideas seldom conceived of a
universality of action and reaction; and ancient belief, isolating
phenomena, invested each with some special guiding power. This belief
was maintained as the conception of a special vital force long after the
increasing knowledge of nature had caused it to be abandoned with regard
to inorganic phenomena; and the theory of the continuity of the
germ-plasm seems to be a survival, with regard to the comparatively
unexplored province of Embryology, of the idea of such a force.

The elements of which the organism is composed are not strange essences
or entities peculiar to the organic; they are the same with those of
inorganic matter, though their combinations differ somewhat from these,
both in chemical composition and in the morphological arrangement of the
composites. We can easily conceive these differences as cooerdinate with
differences of general form and function; but it is inconceivable that
the continual assimilation of matter in growth should be at any time
without result in function, however comparatively small this result may
be in higher forms representing an accumulation of energy from previous
conditions. The separation of form and function is an abstraction, as is
that of matter and motion; we cannot suppose the connection of
particular functions with particular forms,--particular
organization,--to be accidental, any more than we can suppose the
particular properties of particular inorganic composites and elements to
be accidental or these particular properties to be without result in the
organic matter into which the particular composites and elements are
taken up.

The environment must contain complementary conditions of function in
order that the individual may even come into existence and survive at
all. The great question is, then, how much is to be allowed for original
tendency in primal organisms and how much is to be reckoned to the
account of the action of the environment in the course of evolution.
Even if we go back beyond the organic, assuming a development of the
organic from the inorganic, we must come, in the last analysis, to
irresolvable elements whose motion, as distinct and particular action
and reaction, must have definite form. If we begin with a supposititious
simple organism conceived as lowest,--the primal form to which the name
"organism" may be applied,--we must likewise conceive of this as
embodying motion distinctive as its form, which may be regarded as
concomitant and cooerdinate with that form,--or, that is, as function.
The ultimate elements of this organism represent positive factors and
the primal organism itself must be regarded as a positive factor (or
positive composite) without which the evolution of highest organisms
would be impossible. We may, therefore, regard it as in this sense
embracing the potentialities of evolution. But are we to regard it as
representing potentiality in a further sense--in the sense that, beyond
the particular life-motion cooerdinate with its particular composition
and form, it represents an independent force that prefigures the whole
animate evolution? To such an assumption the analogy--which is something
far more than a mere analogy--of Embryology logically reduces us, on
Weismann's theory, unless we assume a fixity of species that practically
does away with the whole theory of Evolution and returns to the original
darkness that on which Darwin threw light. Or, if we leave out of
account this analogy and begin with sexual propagation, the problem, on
Weismann's theory, is very nearly as difficult. Are we to look upon the
conditions involved in the environment as mere negatives and simply
developing the positive potentialities of the germ-plasm? If we resolve
the environment into its elements, even the ultimate analysis must show
it composed of positive factors of matter and motion, each one of which
has its full worth in any resultant of incidence. The positivity of
these elements takes from the primal germ-plasm any superiority of
potentiality; the potentiality lies also in the environment. That the
organism is in constant contact with the environment is evident; and
that this contact, involving incidence of force, cannot be without
result, and result representing a full equivalent of all the factors, is
also evident. It may seem as if we could understand human progress, or
progress in other species, in the limited province open to direct
observation, on Weismann's theory; but evolution as a whole becomes, on
this theory, a mystery, and indeed, as Eimer terms it, a miracle.
Logical consistency thus tells against the theory; and undeniable
exceptions to its fundamental conception, furnished by such authorities
as Darwin and Haeckel, raise a further presumption against it, that,
taken in connection with the logical inconsistencies noticed,
constitutes the strongest probability against its truth.

The general experience of mankind has recognized, in a thousand ways,
that the individual is "a creature of habit." The strength of the
muscle, the cunning of hand or eye or ear, mental acuteness, and even
liability to temptation in any direction, or, on the other hand, moral
strength, all are coincident with exercise within the bounds set by the
normal of the organ,--that is, within its ability to repair its waste in
labor, an ability defined by the food-supply and its power of
assimilation; for even the moral struggle that is so great as to exhaust
physically ends in a weakness which may represent the very condition of
conquest by the temptation opposed, if this present itself again before
the system has had time to repair its loss. We may regard this weakness
as a lessening of force in one particular direction, the resultant of
action deviating in favor of the other of the opposing forces or
tendencies manifested in the struggle. In this connection I cannot do
better than refer to the "Kritik der reinen Erfahrung" already
mentioned, in which the influence of the environment on the individual
is minutely traced. The special feature of the work is its entire
freedom from the thousand metaphysical implications which have gradually
gathered about our philosophical vocabulary and which render it
well-nigh impossible to write from any new standpoint without danger of
misunderstanding. This perspicuity and exactness are secured by a new
vocabulary which may seem at first glance, on account of its
unfamiliarity, elaborate and incomprehensible, but which is, when
mastered, the greatest possible aid to understanding. Nevertheless, the
terminology of the book and the exceeding closeness of its analysis,
while rendering it peculiarly valuable to the expert in Philosophy,
place it beyond the grasp of the average reader; and Ethics is a science
which concerns, not the specialist in Philosophy alone, but all thinking
minds.

The influence of exercise even beyond the individual has long been
recognized. Lamarck advanced the theory that the development of organs
and their force of action is in ratio to their employment. Darwin also
laid stress, particularly in his later works, on Use and Disuse, but he
often defined the term more specifically than many other authors,
Lamarck among them, seem to have done. The very mass and magnitude of
Darwin's knowledge made it, as Huxley has said, somewhat unwieldy, and,
in diverting the attention to minute features, sometimes prevented
distinctness in broad generalizations; the very virtue of Darwin's work
conditioned also its defect. If we begin with the general theory of use
and disuse, we may regard each present form of organic action or
function, whether conscious or unconscious, as in some manner the result
of exercise, the processes of food-taking, digestion, repair of waste,
being classed, not as, in any case, mere negative reactions, but as
positive organic functions. If we apply the term "habit" to all these,
it is evident that we must, in so doing, extend the significance of the
word beyond its ordinary interpretation. From our present point of view,
such an extension of meaning might be claimed to be legitimate; the
question here is, in reality, only one of expediency, namely, whether it
is not better to retain the more specific significance of the word. It
may be useful, at least, to indicate the relations of Habit to Use and
Disuse. In its ordinary interpretation, the term "habit" refers more
particularly to a form of action acquired during the life of the
individual, and may be used to imply the action of the will in its
formation, or may simply have in view the organic concomitants of
whatever mental action is included in such formation. Since our present
standpoint supposes a certain equivalence of the mental and physical,
that is, uniformity in their connection (without entering into the
question of their dependence or independence, or considering which, in
case of dependence, is to be regarded as dependent, which as fundamental
and independent), we may leave for the moment the mental side of
function out of account, to take it up later. Darwin's definition of
habit was, as we have seen, no distinct and invariable one, and while he
speaks of "inherited habit," referring both to forms of action acquired
during the life of the individual and to such acquired through use
favored by constancy of environment during several generations, it is
not always plain whether he has in mind the action of the will, or only
its organic equivalents. He inclines, like many other authors, to give
prominence to the physical side of action in lower species, to the
mental side in higher. If we use the term "habit" in the sense of
tendency to function acquired by use, we employ what is certainly a
useful terminology, yet we are in danger, if we do not carefully define
our terms, of elevating to the position of a reality an abstraction that
has none. Function and Tendency to Function are not separable; the
distinction is not an inner, but an outer one, of favorable or
unfavorable environment by which tendency to function becomes function
or _vice versa_. To habit, then, we can attach, from our present
standpoint, no distinctive implication beyond that of individual
acquirement,--an implication obviously not fundamental in a theory of
organic function. Use and disuse are rather the fundamental concepts
with which, in a consideration of function under Heredity and
Adaptation, we have to do.

But, in this connection, it is also obvious that, when we, from our
point of view, distinguish between the organism as acted on by the
environment and the environment as acting, we make a distinction that
may be both useful and necessary for many purposes, but that is yet an
arbitrary one. The organism is not the dependent, passive, the
environment the independent, formative factor in the process of
development, the organism is not purely reactive, the environment
active, but the two are interactive; and from their interaction arises
change, as resultant, in both organism and environment. So, too, if we
return to Fechner's conception, the separation of function as effect
from use and disuse as cause is an arbitrary one. Every function, as
representing a state of more or less perfect, moving equilibrium, may be
regarded either as the final form issuing from a long process of action
and reaction or, as determined at present, by such a comparative
constancy of all its conditions as makes the line followed by the
resultant approximately a repetition of that which it has followed
before; and we may lay stress upon either the inferior resistance in
this line or the continual application of superior force, the
accumulation of energy, in its direction. Use or exercise is function;
long continuance of the same or approximately the same form of function
may be regarded as concomitant with a certain constancy of environment,
sufficient to furnish the complementary condition always necessary. The
present form of function may be regarded as the result of an evolution
of function in the sense that it is the end-form assumed by the same,
but not in a sense that separates it from previous forms of function by
a distinction of kind; since each of these may be regarded, in like
manner, as the result of the preceding evolution. As in the definition
of Habit, so in that of Use, the element of animal will or of a distinct
vital principle is likely to be consciously or unconsciously included,
lending it thus a superior significance to that of mere organic function
regarded as its result. Again it must be said, however, that, whatever
the metaphysical truth of freedom, will does not interfere with the
equivalence of physical conditions and results or prevent perfect
uniformity of relation between the physical and the psychical, and that
a special vital force cannot be demonstrated. Disuse may be defined
either as the mere discontinuance of Use or as Use in a sense opposed to
the form of function particularly under consideration.

The idea of some special vital principle doubtless has its origin in the
mysterious tendency of every organic form to develop along certain
lines. The mystery involved is here, again, besides that of ultimate
fact on which the metaphysician lays stress, the lack of the ability of
present science to furnish such a description of the process as shall
resolve it into its elements and demonstrate the uniformities of
relation among these elements in this last analysis. But it is to be
remarked that the metaphysician is apt to confuse these two meanings of
the word "mystery," and regard the mystery of the organism as a greater
metaphysical one than that of simpler processes whose elements are
better known; and this in spite of the fact that he himself does not at
all deny the uniformity in natural process which we term Law, or expect
to find it less in an ultimate analysis than in a more superficial one.
We understand the simple parallelogram by which the physicist represents
to us the action of two forces at incidence, we may represent to
ourselves the motion of any one of the heavenly bodies as the resultant
of the centrifugal and centripetal forces, but when we come to consider
the formation of a crystal, and watch the regularity of shape and
grouping, this very uniformity which had been before an explanation now
seems all at once to represent an insoluble mystery separating the
process forever from those others. The more complicated the process
becomes, the more the mystery appears to increase, until we build up,
out of a negative ignorance, some positive new entity to baffle us. And
yet neither do we deny, as has been said, the constancy of nature in its
most final elements, nor can it at all be shown or supposed that those
simpler processes we seemed to understand were less along fixed lines
than the more complicated ones. If we grant, then, the insoluble mystery
of the transcendental meaning of things claimed by the metaphysician, we
cannot admit the presence of this mystery in the organic more than in
the inorganic, nor discover in the science of the former any further
element lacking than in that of the latter, except a remediable
ignorance which, when remedied, can only reveal in new particulars the
workings of natural law. It may be remarked, in this connection, that
those who are so ready to claim the workings of some special force or
power in the development of the organism make no assertion of such in
the so analogous growth of the crystal. The passage of the inorganic
into the organic and back into the inorganic is, in fact, no more (if
the metaphysician will, no less) mysterious than the evaporation of
water and its recondensation, the propagation of animal form no greater
mystery than the continued flowing of a stream in spite of evaporation,
or the growth of a crystal to the form of its kind. The propagation of
species is, in one sense, an isolated fact; but so, in like sense, is
the evaporation of water or the formation of the crystal of a
particular chemical: but none of these phenomena are isolated in any
other sense, as less or more than a part of a universal whole. We carry
our notion of human importance into all our science, and so invest with
greater weight and mystery ignorance that concerns our own life and that
of allied forms. As we have seen, a connection of use, or of duration
and intensity of function, with its strength is evident in the
individual, and we are compelled to suppose the connection a constant
one even where such constancy cannot be directly demonstrated. There is
evidently a relation likewise between degree, or duration and intensity,
of use or exercise of function, and strength of tendency in the species,
which we must also suppose to be constant. Darwin distinctly recognizes
this, everywhere in his work, in asserting that such function as is
favored by the environment for several generations is more likely to be
transmitted. But though the separation of organism and environment into
cause and effect may be useful in the solution of some problems, it is
yet to be kept in mind that the distinction is an arbitrary selection of
some factors as dependent, others as independent variables, while all
are, in fact, interdependent. Function may be regarded as at every
moment determined by the factors given in environment and organism, in
which either may seem the more important, according to the particular
case or the point of view from which it is regarded. The tendency of the
organism may represent such an accumulation of potential energy that a
slight favorable element in the environment may be like a spark in a
magazine of gunpowder, followed by results seemingly most
disproportionate to its own significance; yet the accumulation of energy
in the organism can have taken place only under previous favorable
circumstances of the environment; and if we regard the organism in its
relation to the whole environment, that is, to the universal conditions
outside it, the primary importance may seem to attach to these. But yet,
which is, in the last analysis, the more important to the explosion of
the magazine--spark or powder? Either is insufficient without the other;
the two are simply complementary and both indispensable to the result.
So too habit, use, or exercise of function and influence of the
environment cannot be held distinct; exercise of function is impossible
without a sufficient complementary factor in the environment, but this
is evidently sufficient only with the existence of that tendency in the
organism of which it is the complement. Regarding strong tendency as the
result of a long process of evolution in which the environment has
presented sufficient complementary elements to condition its
development, the strength of tendency being cooerdinate with the duration
and intensity of the process of evolution, we can understand that any
such change in the environment as shall prevent such function may be of
so much significance, the suppression of the function represent so great
departure from what was previous resultant, that even the destruction of
the organism may supervene in cases where longest exercised and
strongest functions are prevented; and we can understand, from the same
standpoint, the slight comparative importance of the experience of
individuals as influencing their descendants, except under especially
favorable conditions of the organism.

All biologists make much of the mixture of types in sexual propagation;
and Rolph, perhaps, lays especial stress on it in connection with
progressive heredity. He calls attention to the intricacy of interaction
of forces at once introduced by it in its action and reaction with the
environment, and shows, in this connection, the extreme similarity of
the younger generation to the parent where propagation is non-sexual,
that is, does not involve such mixture of types. It may be said that
every new factor in development introduces a complexity greater as the
complexity of the conditions already attained by the organism is
greater, since its influence on the different elements and combinations
of elements varies; or (if we choose to put it thus) since the possible
chemical compounds and especially the possible combinations and
permutations of elements and parts increase enormously with the increase
of the latter in number. But the importance of the presence of any
particular new element in these complexities depends, further, on its
particular nature.

The final decision of the principal question of progressive heredity
which our argument concerns must be left to Biology; but biologists
themselves have as yet discussed these questions chiefly from a
philosophical standpoint,--on general, as distinguished from specific,
grounds. All theory is at this point tentative. But if only for this
reason we have a right, in assuming a working theory, to select that
which seems best to accord with philosophic principles of universal
application as well as with general biological fact. For the rest, it
has at least been made evident, by all that has been said above
concerning the constant contact and interaction of organism and
environment, that the selection of one of these two factors as the
positive and one as the negative, one as the formative the other as the
formed, one as the active the other as the passive factor, one as
independent the other as dependent, one as invariable the other as alone
variable, is an arbitrary one. In dealing with the complexity of the
universe, whether mathematically or logically, we cannot grasp all
factors at once, and so are obliged to regard some sides to the
exclusion of others, to disregard the variable and dependent nature of
some factors in the consideration of that of others. The method is
useful as well as necessary, useful because necessary; but we are too
apt to forget that we are dealing with half-truths, devices of reason,
and come to regard them as whole truths. Thus the abstraction of Natural
Selection is too often elevated to a separate entity, a particular power
residing in the environment as such. It is, on the contrary, a mere
fiction, a device for assisting our comprehension of complex action and
reaction. Not only does the action of the environment alter the
organism, the action of the organism also alters the environment; or, to
put it more plainly, the state of organism and environment at any moment
is the result of the interaction of preceding states of organism and
environment. Material combinations, whether organic or inorganic, when
fitted to their environment, survive; those best fitted, where perfect
fitness does not exist, thrive best; this is only another method of
saying that absence of resistance is cooerdinate with the preservation of
form and its inherent motion to the extent of the non-interference. As
organic forms survive only to the extent to which they are in harmony
with each other and with inorganic conditions, so inorganic forms or
combinations survive unaltered only when they are in harmony with other
inorganic conditions and uninterfered with by organic forms. Matter and
motion in some form must survive, both being indestructible. Natural
Selection in this sense, as at each moment regulating inorganic
combinations and motions and organic form and function, is either
ultimately the origin of variation, or else it is not its preserver. It
is to be remembered that the organism is, from the physical point of
view, simply form (that is, organization) and function; when we have
subtracted these, we have subtracted the organism.

The inability of the reason to grasp all sides of the complexity of
natural processes at once, even where these are known, is a thing to be
kept in mind in our future investigations; we are apt to take our
analyses for the syntheses of nature.

In the preceding considerations, an "equivalence of the Physical and the
Psychical" has been assumed, which, though already in a measure defined,
should have been, perhaps, more fully explained. It may be repeated
that, in such equivalence, no materialistic assumption is made of the
dependence of the Psychical on the Physical; nor is the intention to
assert that the Psychical can be measured by the weights and measures of
the Physical. The assertion is intended in the sense that there is
always a physical function connected with the psychical, and that the
relation of the two is not an accidental or variable, but a constant
one. All that is claimed is, in other words, that, whatever the
metaphysical truth as to the freedom of the will, such freedom cannot
interfere with the constancy of nature. But, in fact, all that is
postulated by physical science in the assertion of the equivalence of
physical forces is such a uniformity or constancy of relation as we
postulate of the Psychical and Physical; for the different forms of
physical force can no more be measured by the same standards than can
thought and brain-process.

It may be added, further, that by "force" as used in the above
arguments, no metaphysical entity is implied; the word simply serves as
the generic term embracing different forms of motion and the equivalent
of motion in resistance, and enables us to deal with motion regarded as
potential as well as with motion actually existent.

FOOTNOTES:

[96] "Problems of Life and Mind," second series, chap. on Evolution.

[97] "The Variation of Plants and Animals under Domestication," 1868,
II. 272.

[98] Vol. II. Chap. XXII.

[99] "Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication," II. p. 257.
See also "Origin of Species," 6th ed., I. pp. 7-9, etc.

[100] "Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication," II. p. 418.

[101] Ibid.

[102] For elaboration of definition and theory, _vide_ the article in
question, "Vierteljahrschrift fuer wissenschaftliche Philosophie," 1890.

[103] As confirming this analysis of evolution, reference is made to
Mach: "Die Mechanik in ihrer Entwicklungen," p. 128, and "Beitrage zur
Analyse der Empfindungen," pp. 25, 154; also Avenarius: "Kritik der
reinen Erfahrung."

[104] See above essay by Petzoldt.

[105] "Die Entwicklungsgeschichte des Weltalls," 1882.

[106] "Gestaltungen des Zweckmaessigen."

[107] "Die Entwicklungsgeschichte des Weltalls," chap. I.

[108] See especially Darwin: "The Variation of Animals and Plants under
Domestication"; Haeckel: "Natuerliche Schoepfungsgeschichte," 8th ed.,
1889, p. 179 _et seq._

[109] "Die Entstehung der Arten auf Grund von Vererben erworbener
Eigenschaften," p. 204 _et seq._

[110] Ibid. p. 190 _et seq._

[111] "Entstehung der Arten," p. 15.




