CHAPTER LXXIII. VISIT OF THORBJORN ANGLE TO DRANGEY


At the end of the summer Thorbjorn Angle went with a boat fully manned
to Drangey. Grettir and his party came forward on the cliff and they
talked together. Thorbjorn begged Grettir to do so much for his asking
as to quit the island. Grettir said there was not much hope of that.
Thorbjorn said: "It may be that I can give you some assistance which
will make it worth your while to do this. Many of the bondis have now
given up the shares which they had in the island to me."

Grettir said: "Now for the very reason that you have just told me,
because you own the greater part of the island, I am determined never
to go hence. We may now divide the cabbage. It is true that I thought it
irksome to have the whole of Skagafjord against me, but now neither
need spare the other, since neither is suffocated with the love of his
fellows. You may as well put off your journeys hither, for the matter is
settled so far as I am concerned."

"All abide their time," he said, "and you abide evil."

"I must risk that," he said. And so they parted. Thorbjorn returned home
again.




CHAPTER LXXIV. THE FIRE GOES OUT IN DRANGEY


Grettir had, it is said, been two years in Drangey, and they had
slaughtered nearly all the sheep. One ram, it is told, they allowed to
live; it was grey below and had large horns. They had much sport
with it, for it was very tame and would stand outside and follow them
wherever they went. It came to the hut in the evening and rubbed its
horns against the door. They lived very comfortably, having plenty
to eat from the birds on the island and their eggs, nor had they much
trouble in gathering wood for fire. Grettir always employed the man to
collect the drift, and there were often logs cast ashore there which he
brought home for fuel. The brothers had no need to work beyond going to
the cliffs, which they did whenever they chose. The thrall began to
get very slack at his work; he grumbled much and was less careful than
before. It was his duty to mind the fire every night, and Grettir bade
him be very careful of it as they had no boat with them. One night it
came to pass that the fire went out. Grettir was very angry and said it
would only be right that Glaum should have a hiding. The thrall said
he had a very poor life of it to have to lie there in exile and be
ill-treated and beaten if anything went wrong. Grettir asked Illugi what
was to be done, and he said he could think of nothing else but to wait
until a ship brought them some fire.

Grettir said that would be a very doubtful chance to wait for. "I will
venture it," he said, "and see whether I can reach the land."

"That is a desperate measure," said Illugi. "We shall be done for if you
miscarry."

"I shall not drown in the channel," he said. "I shall trust the thrall
less in future since he has failed in a matter of such moment to us."

The shortest passage from the island to the mainland is one sea-mile.




CHAPTER LXXV. GRETTIR SWIMS TO THE MAINLAND FOR FIRE


Grettir then prepared for his swim. He wore a cloak of coarse material
with breeches and had his fingers webbed. The weather was fine; he left
the island towards the evening. Illugi thought his journey was hopeless.
Grettir had the current with him and it was calm as he swam towards the
fjord. He smote the water bravely and reached Reykjanes after sunset.
He went into the settlement at Reykir, bathed in the night in a warm
spring, and then entered the hall, where it was very hot and a little
smoky from the fire which had been burning there all day. He was very
tired and slept soundly, lying on right into the day. When it was a
little way on in the morning the servants rose, and the first to enter
the room were two women, the maid with the bondi's daughter. Grettir was
asleep, and his clothes had all fallen off on to the floor. They saw a
man lying there and recognised him. The maid said:

"As I wish for salvation, sister, here is Grettir the son of Asmund
come. He really is large about the upper part of his body, and is lying
bare. But he seems to me unusually small below. It is not at all in
keeping with the rest of him."

The bondi's daughter said: "How can you let your tongue run on so? You
are more than half a fool! Hold your tongue!"

"I really cannot be silent, my dear sister," said the maid; "I would not
have believed it if any one had told me."

Then she went up to him to look more closely, and kept running back to
the bondi's daughter and laughing. Grettir heard what she said, sprang
up and chased her down the room. When he had caught her he spoke a
verse:

(VERSE MISSING IN MANUSCRIPT)

Soon afterwards Grettir went to the bondi Thorvald, told him his
difficulty and asked him to take him out to the island again, which he
did, lending him a ship and taking him over. Grettir thanked him for his
courtesy. When it became known that Grettir had swum a sea-mile, every
one thought his courage extraordinary both on sea and on land. The men
of Skagafjord blamed Thorbjorn Angle much for not having ridded Drangey
of Grettir, and all wanted their shares back again. That did not suit
him and he asked them to have patience.




