CHAPTER XXII. GRETTIR KILLS BJORN AND IS SUMMONED BEFORE JARL SVEINN


In the spring Grettir went North to Vagar with Thorkell's men. They
parted with friendship. Bjorn went West to England in Thorkell's ship,
of which he was master, staying there for the summer and transacting the
business which Thorkell had entrusted to him. In the end of the autumn
he returned from the western parts. Grettir stayed in Vagar till the
trading ships left, and then sailed South with some of the traders, as
far as the port of Gartar at the mouth of the Thrandheim's Fjord, where
he set up the awnings to make a stay. When they were settled down a ship
came up along the coast from the South, which they at once recognised as
one of the ships from England. She made fast further out off the coast
and her crew landed. Grettir went out with his companions to visit them.
On their meeting Grettir found Bjorn amongst the company and said: "It
is well that we meet here, for now we can continue our former quarrel. I
should like to try which of us is the better man."

Bjorn said that was all past now, as far as he was concerned. "But,"
he said, "if there has been anything between us I will pay you such
compensation that you shall be satisfied." Grettir spoke a verse:

     "Time was when the bear was slain by my hand;
     my cloak in tatters was torn.
     A rascally knave was the cause of it all
     but now he shall make me amends."

Bjorn said that weightier matters than this had been settled by payment.
Grettir said that few men had any reason to act maliciously towards him;
he had accepted no money-atonement, nor would he do so now; that if
he had his way they should not both go away unhurt, and that if Bjorn
refused to fight he would brand him as a coward. Bjorn saw that excuses
would not avail him, so he took his arms and went out. They rushed at
each other and fought; soon Bjorn was wounded and then he fell dead to
the ground. On seeing that, his men went on board their ship, sailed
away to the North along the coast to Thorkell's place and told him what
had happened. He said it had not come sooner than he expected. Directly
afterwards he sailed to the South to Thrandheim where he found jarl
Sveinn.

Grettir, after slaying Bjorn, went to More to his friend Thorfinn and
told him exactly what had happened. Thorfinn received him in a most
friendly way. "I am glad," he said, "that you will now have need of a
friend. You must stay with me until this affair is finished."

Grettir thanked him for his invitation and said he would accept it.

Jarl Sveinn was staying at Steinker in Thrandheim when he heard of the
Slaying of Bjorn. With him was a brother of Bjorn named Hjarrandi, as
one of his bodyguard. On hearing of Bjorn's death he became very angry
and begged the jarl for his support in the matter, which the jarl
promised that he should have. He sent messengers to Thorfinn to summon
both him and Grettir to appear before him. Immediately on receiving the
jarl's commands they both made ready and came to Thrandheim. The jarl
held a council on the matter and ordered Hjarrandi to be present.
Hjarrandi said he was not going to weigh his brother against his purse,
and that he must either follow him or avenge him.

When the case was looked into, it became evident that Bjorn had given
Grettir many provocations. Thorfinn offered to pay a fine such as the
jarl thought suitable to the position of his kinsman, and dwelt at
length upon Grettir's achievement in killing the berserks, and how he
had delivered the men in the North from them.

The jarl answered: "Truth do you speak, Thorfinn! that was indeed a
cleansing! It would befit us well to accept the compensation for your
sake. Grettir, too, is a fine fellow, and noted for his strength and
valour."

Hjarrandi, however, would accept no compensation, and the meeting came
to an end. Thorfinn appointed one of his kinsmen, Arnbjorn, to accompany
Grettir every day, for he knew that Hjarrandi was plotting against his
life.




CHAPTER XXIII. GRETTIR KILLS HJARRANDI


One day Grettir and Arnbjorn were walking along the road for their
diversion when they passed a gate, whence a man rushed out holding an
axe aloft with both hands and struck at Grettir, who was not on his
guard and was moving slowly. Arnbjorn, however, saw the man coming,
seized Grettir and pushed him aside with such force that he fell on his
knee. The axe struck him in the shoulder-blade and cut down to below
the arm, inflicting a severe wound. Grettir turned quickly and drew his
sword; he saw that it was Hjarrandi who had attacked him. The axe had
stuck fast in the road, and Hjarrandi was slow in recovering it. Grettir
struck at him and cut off his arm at the shoulder. Then there came
running up five of Hjarrandi's followers and a battle began with them.
They were soon routed; Grettir and Arnbjorn killed the five who were
with Hjarrandi; one man escaped and bore the tale to the jarl forthwith.
The jarl was very angry indeed, and summoned the assembly for the next
day. Thorfinn and his party appeared thereat. The jarl brought a charge
of manslaughter against Grettir, who admitted it and said that he had
been obliged to defend himself. "I bear the marks of it," he said. "I
should have been killed if Arnbjorn had not defended me."

The jarl said it was a pity he had not been killed, for this affair
would lead to many a man being slain if he lived.

There had come to the jarl's court Bersi the son of Skaldtorfa,
Grettir's comrade and friend. He and Thorfinn stepped before the jarl
and begged for pardon for Grettir. They asked that the jarl should
decide the matter himself as he thought best, only that Grettir should
have his life and the freedom of the country. The jarl was averse to any
terms being granted to him, but gave way to their entreaties. He granted
immunity to Grettir until the spring, but not absolutely until Gunnar
the brother of Bjorn and Hjarrandi should be present. Gunnar was a
landed proprietor in Tunsberg.

In the spring the jarl ordered Grettir and Thorfinn to appear at
Tunsberg, where he himself intended to be while the shipping was
assembled. So thither they went, and found the jarl was already in the
town. There Grettir met his brother Thorsteinn Dromund, who greeted
him joyfully and invited him to be his guest. He was a landowner in the
town. Grettir told him all about his case, and Thorsteinn took his view
of it, but told him to beware of Gunnar. So the spring passed.




