CHAPTER XLI. THORSTEINN DROMUND'S ARMS


Grettir stayed with Thorsteinn for the rest of the winter and on into
the spring. One morning when Thorsteinn and Grettir were above in their
sleepingroom Grettir put out his arm from the bed-clothes and Thorsteinn
noticed it when he awoke. Soon after Grettir woke too, and Thorsteinn
said: "I have been looking at your arms, kinsman, and think it is not
wonderful that your blows fall heavily upon some. Never have I seen any
man's arms that were like yours."

"You may know," said Grettir, "that I should not have done the deeds I
have if I had not been very mighty."

"Yet methinks it would be of advantage," said Thorsteinn, "if your arm
were more slender and your fortune better."

"True," said Grettir, "is the saying that no man shapes his own fortune.
Let me see your arm."

Thorsteinn showed it to him. He was a tall lanky man. Grettir smiled and
said:

"There is no need to look long at that; all your ribs are run together.
I never saw such a pair of tongs as you carry about! Why, you are
scarcely as strong as a woman!"

"It may be so," said Thorsteinn, "and yet you may know that these
thin arms of mine and no others will avenge you some day;--if you are
avenged."

"Who shall know how it will be when the end comes?" said Grettir; "but
that seems unlikely."

No more is related of their conversation. The spring came and Grettir
took a ship for Iceland in the summer. The brothers parted with
friendship and never saw one another again.




CHAPTER XLII. DEATH OF ASMUND LONGHAIR


We have now to return to where we broke off before. Thorbjorn Oxmain
when he heard of the death of Thorbjorn Slowcoach flew into a violent
passion and said he wished that more men might deal blows in other
people's houses. Asmund Longhair lay sick for some time in the summer.
When he thought his end was nigh he called his kinsmen round him and
said his will was that Atli should take over all the property after his
day. "I fear," he said, "that the wicked will scarce leave you in peace.
And I wish all my kinsmen to support him to the best of their power. Of
Grettir I can say nothing, for his condition seems to me like a rolling
wheel. Strong though he is, I fear he will have more dealing with
trouble than with kinsmen's support. And Illugi, though young now, shall
become a man of valiant deeds if he remain unscathed."

When Asmund had settled everything with his sons according to his wish
his sickness grew upon him. He died soon after and was buried at Bjarg,
where he had had a church built. All felt his loss deeply.

Atli became a great bondi and kept a large establishment. He was a great
dealer in household provisions. Towards the end of the summer he went
to Snaefellsnes to get dried fish. He drove several horses with him and
rode from home to Melar in Hrutafjord to his brother-in-law, Gamli. Then
Grim, the son of Thorhall, Gamli's brother, made ready to accompany him
along with another man. They rode West by way of Haukadalsskard and
the road which leads out to the Ness, where they bought much fish
and carried it away on seven horses; when all was ready they turned
homewards.




CHAPTER XLIII. THE SONS OF THORIR OF SKARD ARE SLAIN BY ATLI AND GRIM


Thorbjorn Oxmain heard of Atli and Grim having left home just when
Gunnar and Thorgeir, the sons of Thorir of Skard, were with him.
Thorbjorn was jealous of Atli's popularity and egged on the two
brothers, the sons of Thorir, to lie in wait for him as he returned
from Snaefellsnes. They rode home to Skard and waited there for Atli
returning with his loads. They could see the party from their house
as they passed Skard, and made ready quickly to pursue them with their
servants. Atli on seeing them ordered his horses to be unloaded.

"Perhaps," he said, "they want to offer me compensation for my man whom
Gunnar slew last summer. We will not be the first to attack, but if they
begin fighting us we will defend ourselves."

Then they came up and at once sprang off their horses. Atli greeted them
and asked what news there was, and whether Gunnar desired to offer him
some compensation for his servant. Gunnar answered:

"You men of Bjarg, you deserve something else than that I should pay
compensation for him with my goods. Thorbjorn whom Grettir slew is worth
a higher atonement than he."

"I have not to answer for that," said Atli, "nor are you the
representative of Thorbjorn."

Gunnar said it would have to be so nevertheless. "And now," he cried,
"let us go for them and profit by Grettir being away."

There were eight of them, and they set upon Atli's six. Atli led on his
men and drew the sword Jokulsnaut which Grettir had given him. Thorgeir
cried: "Good men are alike in many things. High did Grettir bear his
sword last summer on Hrutafjardarhals."

Atli answered: "He is more accustomed to deeds of strength than I am."

Then they fought. Gunnar made a resolute attack on Atli, and fought
fiercely. After they had battled for a time Atli said:

"There is nothing to be gained by each of us killing the other's
followers. The simplest course would be for us to play together, for I
have never fought with weapons before."

Gunnar, however, would not have it. Atli bade his servants look to
the packs, and he would see what the others would do. He made such a
vigorous onslaught that Gunnar's men fell back, and he killed two of
them. Then he turned upon Gunnar himself and struck a blow that severed
his shield right across below the handle, and the sword struck his leg
below the knee. Then with another rapid blow he killed him.

In the meantime Grim, the son of Thorhall, was engaging Thorgeir, and
a long tussle there was, both of them being men of great valour. When
Thorgeir saw his brother Gunnar fall he wanted to get away, but Grim
pressed upon him and pursued him until at last his foot tripped and he
fell forward. Then Grim struck him with an axe between the shoulders,
inflicting a deep wound. To the three followers who were left they gave
quarter. Then they bound up their wounds, reloaded the packs on to the
horses and went home, giving information of the battle. Atli stayed at
home with a strong guard of men that autumn. Thorbjorn Oxmain was not at
all pleased, but could do nothing, because Atli was very wary. Grim
was with him for the winter, and his brother-in-law Gamli. Another
brother-in-law, Glum the son of Ospak from Eyr in Bitra, was with them
too. They had a goodly array of men settled at Bjarg, and there was much
merriment there during the winter.




