CHAPTER XV. GAMES AT MIDFJORDVATN


There were then a good many youths growing up in Midfjord. A certain
Skaldtorfa, whose home was in Torfustadir, had a son named Bersi, an
accomplished young man and a clever poet. Two brothers named Kormak
and Thorgils lived at Mel and had with them a youth named Odd, who was
dependent upon them, and was nicknamed Odd the Needy-Skald. Another
was named Audun; he grew up in Audunarstad in Vididal, a pleasant
good-natured youth and the strongest of his age in the North. Kalf the
son of Asgeir and his brother Thorvald lived at Asgeirsa. Grettir's
brother Atli was then growing to a man; he was most gracious in manners
and universally liked.

These youths used to play at ball together at Midfjord Water. Those from
Midfjord and from Vididal used to meet there, and there came many from
Vestrhop and Vatnsnes with some from Hrutafjord. Those who came from
afar used to lodge there. Those who were about equal in the ball-game
were matched together, and generally they had much fun in the autumn.
Grettir went to the sports when he was fourteen years old at the request
of his brother Atli. The parties were made up. Grettir was matched
against Audun, the youth already mentioned, who was a few years the
elder. Audun struck the ball over Grettir's head so that he could not
reach it, and it bounded far away over the ice. Grettir lost his temper,
thinking he had done it out of mischief, but he fetched the ball,
brought it back and going up to Audun drove it straight into his
forehead, so that the skin was broken.

Audun then struck at Grettir with the bat that he was holding, but
Grettir ducked and the blow missed him. Then they seized each other
with their arms and wrestled. It was evident to the people around that
Grettir was stronger than they had supposed, for Audun was very strong
indeed of body. They struggled long together until at last Grettir was
thrown. Audun then set his knees on his stomach and dealt unmercifully
with him. Atli and Bersi and a number of the others ran up and separated
them. Grettir said they need not hold him like a mad dog, and added:
"The thrall alone takes instant vengeance, the coward never."

The rest had no mind to let the affair create discord among them,
and the brothers Kalf and Thorvald tried to reconcile them. Audun and
Grettir were distantly related to each other. The games went on and
there was no further disturbance.




CHAPTER XVI. GRETTIR KILLS SKEGGI AND IS OUTLAWED FOR THREE YEARS


Thorkell Krafla now began to grow very old. He was a great chieftain and
held the Vatnsdal Godord. He was a close friend of Asmund Longhair, as
befitted the near relations in which they stood to each other. He had,
therefore, been in the habit of riding every year in the spring to Bjarg
to visit his kinsmen there, and he did so in the spring which followed
the events just related. Asmund and Asdis received him with both hands.
He stayed there three nights and many a matter did the kinsmen discuss
together. Thorkell asked Asmund what his heart told him about his sons,
and what professions they were likely to follow. Asmund said that Atli
would probably be a great landowner, very careful and wealthy.

"A useful man, like yourself," said Thorkell. "But what can you tell me
of Grettir?"

"I can only say," he replied, "that he will be a strong man; but
headstrong and quarrelsome. A heavy trial has he been to me."

"That does not look very promising, kinsman!" said Thorkell. "But how
are we to arrange our journey to the Thing in the summer?"

"I am getting difficult to move," he said. "I would rather stay at
home."

"Would you like Atli to go for you?"

"I don't think I can spare him," Asmund said, "because of the work and
the provisioning. Grettir will not do anything. But he has quite wit
enough to carry out the duties at the Thing on my behalf under your
guidance."

"It shall be as you please," said Thorkell.

Then Thorkell made himself ready and rode home; Asmund dismissed him
with presents.

A little later Thorkell journeyed to the Thing with sixty men. All
the men of his godord went with him. They passed through Bjarg, where
Grettir joined them. They rode South through the heath called Tvidaegra.
There was very little grazing to be had in the hills, so they
rode quickly past them into the cultivated land. When they reached
Fljotstunga they thought it was time to sleep, so they took the bits
from their horses and turned them loose with their saddles. They lay
there well on into the day, and when they woke began to look for their
horses. Every horse had gone off in a different direction and some had
been rolling. Grettir could not find his horse at all. The custom was
at that time that men should find their own provisions at the Thing, and
most of them carried their sacks over their saddles. When Grettir found
his horse its saddle was under its belly, and the sack of provisions
gone. He searched about but could not find it. Then he saw a man running
very fast and asked him who he was. He said his name was Skeggi and that
he was a man from Ass in Vatnsdal in the North.

"I am travelling with Thorkell," he said. "I have been careless and lost
my provision-bag."

"Alone in misfortune is worst. I also have lost my stock of provisions;
so we can look for them together."

Skeggi was well pleased with this proposal, and so they went about
seeking for a time. Suddenly, when Grettir least expected it, Skeggi
started running with all his might along the moor and picked up the
sack. Grettir saw him bend and asked what it was that he had picked up.

"My sack," he said.

"Who says so besides yourself?" Grettir asked. "Let me see it! Many a
thing is like another."

Skeggi said no one should take from him what was his own. Grettir seized
hold of the sack and they both pulled at it for a time, each trying to
get his own way.

"You Midfjord men have strange notions," said Skeggi, "if you think that
because a man is not so wealthy as you are, he is not to dare to hold to
his own before you."

Grettir said it had nothing to do with a man's degree, and that each
should have that which was his own.

Skeggi replied: "Audun is now too far away to strangle you as he did at
the ball-play."

"That is well," said Grettir; "but however that may have been you shall
not strangle me."

Skeggi then seized his axe and struck at Grettir, who on seeing it
seized the handle of the axe with his left hand and pulled it forward
with such force that Skeggi at once let go. The next moment it stood in
his brain and he fell dead to the earth. Grettir took the sack, threw it
across his saddle and rode back to his companions.

Thorkell rode on, knowing nothing of what had happened. Soon Skeggi was
missed in the company, and when Grettir came up they asked him what news
he had of Skeggi. He answered in a verse:

     "Hammer-troll ogress has done him to death.
     Thirsting for blood the war-fiend came.
     With hard-edged blade she gaped, o'er his head,
     nor spared she his teeth.  I saw it myself."

Then Thorkell's men sprang up and said it was impossible that a troll
should have taken the man in full daylight. Thorkell was silent for a
moment. Then he said: "There must be something more in it. Grettir must
have killed him. What was it that really happened, Grettir?"

Grettir then told him all about their fight. Thorkell said: "It is a
most unfortunate occurrence, because Skeggi was entrusted to my service,
and was a man of good family. I will take the matter upon myself and pay
whatever compensation is adjudged. But a question of banishment does
not lie with me. Now, Grettir, there are two things for you to choose
between. Either you can go on to the Thing with us and take the chance
of what may happen there, or you can turn back and go home."

Grettir decided to go on to the Thing, and to the Thing he went. The
matter was taken up by the heirs of the man slain. Thorkell gave his
hand to pay the compensation and Grettir was to be banished for three
years.

On their way back from the Thing all the chiefs halted at Sledaass
before they parted company. It was then that Grettir lifted a stone
lying in the grass, which is still known as Grettishaf. Many went
afterwards to see this stone and were astounded that so young a man
should have lifted such a mountain.

Grettir rode home to Bjarg and told his father about his adventures.
Asmund was much put out and said he would be a trouble to everybody.




