CHAPTER XXV. EVENTS IN ICELAND. THORGILS MAKSSON ATTACKED BY THE
FOSTER-BROTHERS AND SLAIN


Asmund Longhair was in Bjarg whilst Grettir was away, and was much
respected as a bondi in Midfjord. Thorkell Krafla had died during
Grettir's absence. Thorvald Asgeirsson dwelt in Ass in Vatnsdal and was
a great chief. He was the father of Dalla who married Isleif, afterwards
bishop in Skalaholt. Asmund had great support from Thorvald in legal
suits and in other matters.

There grew up in Asmund's household a youth named Thorgils Maksson, a
near kinsman of his. Thorgils was a strong man of his body and made
much money under Asmund's guidance; he dwelt at Laekjamot, on a property
which Asmund had bought for him. Thorgils was a good manager and went to
Strandir every year, where he obtained whales and other things. He was
a man of great courage, and went as far as the eastern Almenningar.
At that time the two foster-brothers Thorgeir Havarsson and Thormod
Coalbrow-Skald were very much to the front; they kept a boat, gathering
what they wanted from the country around, and had not the reputation of
dealing fairly.

One summer Thorgils Maksson found a whale at the Almenningar and went
out at once with his men to cut it up. When the two foster-brothers
heard of it they went there too, and at first it seemed as if matters
would be settled peaceably. Thorgils proposed that they should share
equally that part of the whale which was yet uncut, but they wanted
to have all the uncut part or else to share the entire whale. Thorgils
positively refused to give up any portion of what had already been cut.
They began to use threats and at last took to their arms and fought.
Thorgeir and Thorgils fought each of them desperately together without
either prevailing. After a long and furious battle Thorgils fell slain
by Thorgeir. In another place Thormod was fighting with the followers
of Thorgils, and he overcame them, killing three. Those who remained of
Thorgils' party went off after he fell to Midfjord, taking his body
with them and feeling that they had suffered a great loss. The
foster-brothers took possession of the whole whale. The affair is
referred to in the memorial poem which Thormod composed upon Thorgeir.

News of the death of his kinsman was brought to Asmund Longhair, on whom
as nearest of kin the blood-feud devolved. He went to the spot, called
witnesses to testify to the wounds and brought the case before the
All-Thing, which appeared to be the proper course in this case where
the act had been committed in another quarter. Some time was passed over
this.




CHAPTER XXVI. THE FEUD WITH THE FOSTER-BROTHERS IS TAKEN UP BY ASMUND
AND THORSTEINN KUGGASON


There was a man named Thorsteinn; he was the son of Thorkell Kuggi, the
son of Thord Yeller, the son of Olaf Feilan, the son of Thorsteinn the
Red, the son of Aud the Deep-Minded. Thorsteinn Kuggason's mother was
Thurid, daughter of Asgeir Hothead. Asgeir was the brother of Asmund
Longhair's father. Thorsteinn Kuggason was equally responsible in the
blood-feud over Thorgils' death with Asmund Longhair, who now sent for
him. Thorsteinn was a great warrior and very masterful. He came at
once to his kinsman Asmund and they had a talk together about the suit.
Thorsteinn was for extreme measures. He said that no blood-money should
be accepted; that with their connections they were powerful enough to
carry through a sentence of either banishment or death on the slayer.
Asmund said he would support any measures whatever that he chose to
adopt. They rode then North to Thorvald their kinsman and asked for his
support, which he at once promised them. So the suit was begun against
Thorgeir and Thormod. Thorsteinn then rode home to his dwelling
at Ljarskogar in the Hvamm district. Skeggi in Hvamm also joined
Thorsteinn. He was a son of Thorarin Fylsenni, a son of Thord the
Yeller. His mother was Fridgerd, a daughter of Thord from Hofdi. They
had a large following at the All-Thing and pressed their suit valiantly.
Asmund and Thorvald rode from the North with sixty men, halting several
days at Ljarskogar.




CHAPTER XXVII. SENTENCES ON THE FOSTER-BROTHERS


There dwelt at Reykjaholar a man named Thorgils, the son of Ari, the son
of Mar, the son of Atli the Red, the son of Ulf Squint-Eye, the first
settler at Reykjanes. Thorgils' mother was Thorgerd the daughter of Alf
of Dalir. Alf had another daughter named Thorelf, who was the mother
of Thorgeir the son of Havar. Thorgeir, therefore, had a very strong
backing through his connections, for Thorgils was the most powerful
chief in the Vestfirding quarter. He was very open-handed and gave
hospitality to any free-man for as long as he would. There was
consequently always a crowd at Reykjaholar, and he lived in great
grandeur. He was both kindly and wise. Thorgeir stayed with him in the
winter and went to Strandir in the summer.

After slaying Thorgils the son of Mak, Thorgeir went to Reykjaholar and
told Thorgils Arason what had happened. Thorgils told him his house was
open to him. "But," he said, "they will press the matter vigorously, and
I am most unwilling to involve myself in difficulties. I will send a man
now to Thorsteinn and offer him blood-money for the Thorgils affair; if
he will not accept it I will not adopt any violent measures."

Thorgeir declared that he would submit to his wisdom. In the autumn
Thorgils sent a messenger to Thorsteinn Kuggason to try and arrange
a settlement. Thorsteinn was very disinclined to accept any money in
atonement for the slaying of Thorgils, although for the others he was
willing to follow the advice of men of counsel. Thorgils on receiving
the report of his messenger called Thorgeir to a consultation with him
and asked him what support he thought was proper. Thorgeir said that if
a sentence of banishment were passed upon him he would go. Thorgils said
that his resolve would be put to the trial.

There came a ship into the Nordra river in Borgarfjord, and Thorgils
secretly took a passage in her for the two foster-brothers. The winter
now passed, and Thorgils heard that Thorsteinn and his party had
assembled in great force for the All-Thing and were then in Ljarskogar.
So he put off his departure, intending that they should arrive from the
North before he came up from the West. So it came to pass. Thorgils and
Thorgeir then rode towards the South, Thorgeir killing one Boggul-Torfi
on the way at Marskelda and two other men named Skuf and Bjarni at
Hundadal. Thormod sings about this affair in his Thorgeir's drapa:

     "The hem slew the son of Mak;
     there was storm of swords and raven's food.
     Skuf and Bjarni he also felled;
     gladly he bathed his hands in blood."

Thorgils settled for the slaying of Skuf and Bjarni there and then
in the dale, and was delayed by the affair longer than he intended.
Thorgeir embarked on the ship and Thorgils went to the Thing, where
he did not arrive before they were proceeding to judgment in Thorgils
Maksson's case. Asmund Longhair then called for the defence. Thorgils
appeared before the court and offered blood-money in atonement on
condition of Thorgeir not being sentenced to banishment. He endeavoured
to meet the charge by pleading that finds in the Almenningar were
free to all. The question whether this was a valid defence or not was
referred to the Lawman, who at that time was Skapti. He upheld Asmund's
view on account of their kinship together. He declared that this was
indeed the law in the case of men equal in position, but that a bondi
had precedence over a vagrant. Asmund further urged that Thorgils had
offered to share the uncut portion of the whale with the foster-brothers
when they arrived. The defendants were non-suited on that point. Then
Thorsteinn and his party pressed their suit resolutely and said they
would not be satisfied with any sentence short of banishment upon
Thorgeir. Thorgils saw that no choice was left to him but either to call
up his men and try to carry his case with violence, the issue of which
would be uncertain, or else to submit to the sentence demanded by
the opposite party, and since Thorgeir was already on board his ship
Thorgils had no desire to press the case further. Thorgeir was banished,
but Thormod was discharged upon payment of blood-money.

Asmund and Thorsteinn gained great glory by this case. The men rode home
from the Thing. There were some who said that Thorgils had not taken
much trouble in the case, but he paid little attention and let them say
what they pleased.

When Thorgeir heard that he was banished, he said that if he had his
way, those who had brought it about should be repayed in full before it
was over.

There was a man named Gaut, called the son of Sleita, a kinsman of
Thorgils Maksson. He was intending to travel in the same ship with
Thorgeir, with whom he was on very bad terms, and frowned on him. The
traders thought it would never do to have them both together in the
ship. Thorgeir said he did not care what Gaut did with his eyebrows.
Nevertheless they decided that Gaut should leave the ship. He went
into the northern districts and for that time nothing happened, but the
affair brought about a feud between them which broke out later.




