CHAPTER XI. DEATH OF ONUND. DISPUTES BETWEEN THE SONS OF ONUND AND OF
EIRIK


Onund and Aesa had two sons; the elder was named Thorgeir, the younger
Ofeig Grettir. Soon afterwards Aesa died and Onund married a second
wife, Thordis Thorgrim's daughter of Gnup in Midfjord, a kinsman of
Skeggi of Midfjord. By her Onund had a son named Thorgrim, who grew
up quickly to manhood, tall and strong, wise and a good manager. Onund
continued to live at Kaldbak until his old age. He died a natural
death and lies in Treefoot's howe. He was the boldest and most active
one-legged man that ever came to Iceland.

Among Onund's sons Thorgrim was the foremost, although the others were
older. When he was twenty-five years old his hair was grey, whence they
nick-named him Greyhead. His mother Thordis married again, taking as her
second husband Audun Skokull. They had a son named Asgeir of Asgeirsa.
Thorgrim Greyhead and his brothers had a large property, which they
managed together without dividing it up.

Eirik lived, as was mentioned, at Arnes. He had married Alof, the
daughter of Ingolf of Ingolfsfjord, by whom he had a son named Flosi, a
very promising young man with many friends.

There came to that part of Iceland three brothers, named Ingolf, Ofeig,
and Eyvind, and took the three fjords which are called by their names,
where they lived. Eyvind had a son named Olaf. He at first lived at
Eyvindsfjord, but went later to Drangar. He was a most capable man.

So long as their fathers were living no disputes arose among these men;
but when Eirik was dead it occurred to Flosi that those of Kaldbak had
no legal title to the lands which Eirik had given to Onund. Out of
this serious dissensions arose between them. Thorgrim and his brothers
continued in possession of the lands as before, but they would not join
in games together. Thorgeir, the eldest brother, was managing the farm
at Reykjarfjord, and often rowed out fishing, as the fjords were full
of fish. The men of Vik now laid their plans. Flosi had a man in Arnes
named Thorfinn, and sent him to fetch Thorgeir's head. This man hid
himself in the boatshed. One morning when Thorgeir was preparing to
row out with two other men, one of whom was named Brand, Thorgeir was
walking ahead with a leather skin on his back containing some drink. It
was very dark, and as he passed the boat-house Thorfinn sprang out upon
him and dealt him a blow with an axe between his shoulders. The axe
went into something and made a squeaking noise. Thorfinn let go his
axe, feeling quite sure that no bandages would be needed, and being very
anxious to escape as fast as he could. He ran North, and reaching Arnes
before the day had quite broken, said that he had killed Thorgeir and
that Flosi must protect him. The only thing to be done was to offer some
compensation in money. "That," he said, "will be the best thing for us
after such a terrible piece of work."

Flosi said he must first learn more about it, and that he thought
Thorfinn seemed very frightened after his doughty deed.

We must now tell what had happened to Thorgeir. He turned round when he
was struck, but the blow had gone into the leather bottle, and he was
unhurt. They could make no search for the man because it was dark,
so they rowed on down the fjord to Kaldbak, where they told what had
happened. People made great game of the affair and called him Thorgeir
Bottleback, a name which stuck to him ever after. A verse was made:

     "In days gone by men bathed their blades
     in the streaming gore of a foeman's wound.
     But now a wretch of all honour bereft
     reddens his dastard axe in whey."




CHAPTER XII. BATTLE AT RIFSKER


At that time there came over Iceland a famine the like of which had
never been seen before. Nearly all the fisheries failed, and also the
drift wood. So it continued for many years.

One autumn some traders in a sea-going ship, who had been driven out of
their course, were wrecked at Vik. Flosi took in four or five of
them with their captain, named Steinn. They all found shelter in the
neighbourhood of Vik and tried to rig up a ship out of the wreckage, but
were not very successful. The ship was too narrow in the bow and stern
and too broad amidships. In the spring a northerly gale set in which
lasted nearly a week, after which men began to look for drift.

There was a man living in Reykjanes named Thorsteinn. He found a whale
stranded on the south side of the promontory at the place now called
Rifsker. It was a large rorqual, and he at once sent word by a messenger
to Flosi in Vik and to the nearest farms.

At Gjogr lived a man named Einar, a tenant of the Kaldbak men whom they
employed to look after the drift on that side of the fjord. He got to
know of the whale having been stranded and at once rowed across the
fjord in his boat to Byrgisvik, whence he sent a messenger to Kaldbak.
When Thorgrim and his brother heard the news they got ready to go with
all speed to the spot. There were twelve of them in a ten-oared boat,
and six others, with Ivar and Leif, sons of Kolbeinn. All the farmers
who could get away went to the whale.

In the meantime Flosi had sent word to his kinsmen in the North at
Ingolfsfjord and Ofeigsfjord and to Olaf the son of Eyvind who lived at
Drangar. The first to arrive were Flosi and the men of Vik, who at once
began to cut up the whale, carrying on shore the flesh as it was cut.
At first there were about twenty men, but more came thronging in. Then
there came the men of Kaldbak with four ships. Thorgrim laid claim to
the whale and forbade the men of Vik to cut, distribute, or carry away
any portion of it. Flosi called upon him to show proof that Eirik had
in express words given over the drift to Onund; if not, he said he would
prevent them by force. Thorgrim saw that he was outnumbered and would
not venture on fighting. Then there came a ship across the fjords, the
men rowing with all their might. They came up; it was Svan of Hol from
Bjarnarfjord with his men, and he at once told Thorgrim not to let
himself be robbed. The two men had been great friends, and Svan offered
Thorgrim his aid, which the brothers accepted, and they attacked
valiantly. Thorgeir Bottleback was the first to get on to the whale
where Flosi's men were. Thorfinn, who was spoken of before, was cutting
it up, standing near the head on the place where he had been carving.
"Here I bring you your axe," said Thorgeir. Then he struck at Thorfinn's
neck and cut off his head. Flosi was up on the beach and saw it. He
urged on his men to give it them back. They fought for a long time and
the Kaldbak people were getting the best of it. Most of them had no
weapons but the axes with which they were cutting up the whale and short
knives. The men of Vik were driven from the whale on to the sandbanks.
The men from the East, however, were armed and able to deal wounds.
Their captain Steinn cut off the leg of Kolbeinn's son Ivar, and Ivar's
brother Leif beat one of Steinn's men to death with a rib of the whale.
Then they fought with anything they could get, and men were slain on
both sides. At last Olaf came up with a number of ships from Drangar and
joined Flosi; the men of Kaldbak were then overpowered by numbers. They
had already loaded their ships, and Svan told them to get on board. They
therefore retired towards the ships, the men of Vik after them. Svan on
reaching the sea struck at Steinn their captain, wounding him badly, and
then sprang into his own ship. Thorgrim gave Flosi a severe wound and
escaped. Olaf wounded Ofeig Grettir fatally, but Thorgeir carried him
off and sprang on to his ship with him. The Kaldbak men rowed into the
fjord and the two parties separated.

The following verse was composed on these doings:

     "Hard were the blows which were dealt at Rifsker;
     no weapons they had but steaks of the whale.
     They belaboured each other with rotten blubber.
     Unseemly methinks is such warfare for men."

After this they made peace, and the dispute was laid before the
All-Thing. On the side of the Kaldbak men were Thorodd the Godi, Skeggi
of Midfjord, and many others from the South. Flosi was exiled, along
with several others who had been with him. He was put to great expense,
for he insisted upon paying all the fines himself. Thorgrim and his
brothers were unable to show that they had paid any money either for the
land or for the drift which Flosi claimed. The Lawman was Thorkell Mani,
and the question was referred to him. He declared that by law something
must have been paid, though not necessarily the full value.

"There was a case in point," he said, "between my grandfather Ingolf and
a woman named Steinvor the Old. He gave her the whole of Rosmhvalanes
and she gave him a dirty cloak for it; the transfer was afterwards held
to be valid. That was a much more important affair than this. My advice
is that the land be divided in equal portions between the two; and
henceforward it shall be legally established that all drift shall be the
property of the owner of the land upon which it has been stranded."

This was agreed to. Thorgrim and his brothers were to give up
Reykjarfjord with all on that side, and were to keep Kamb. For Ofeig
a large sum of money was paid, and Thorfinn was assessed at nothing at
all; Thorgeir received compensation for the attack made upon his life,
and all the parties were reconciled. Flosi went to Norway with Steinn
the captain and sold his lands in Vik to Geirmund Hvikatimbr, who lived
there thenceforward.

The ship which Steinn's sailors had built was rather a tub. She was
called Trekyllir--Tree-sack. Flosi went on his journey in her, but
was driven back to Oxarfjord; out of this arose the saga of Bodmod the
Champion and Grimolf.




