CHAPTER LX. THE BATTLE WITH THE MYRAMEN


When Grettir had been two winters in Fagraskogafjall and the third
winter had set in, he went South into Myrar to the farm called
Laekjarbug, where he took six wethers without their owner's permission.
Then he went down to Akrar and drove off two oxen for slaughter with
several sheep, and went up South to the Hitara. When the bondis heard of
his exploits they sent word to Thord at Hitarnes and asked him to take
the lead in the slaying of Grettir. He was rather reluctant, but as they
had asked him he sent his son Arnor, afterwards called Jarlsbard, to go
with them, and told them not to let Grettir escape. Messengers were then
sent round to all the farms.

There was a man named Bjarni who dwelt in Jorvi in Flysjuhverfi. He
collected men on the other side of the Hitara; the intention was that
each band should keep on its own side. Grettir had two men with him,
one named Eyjolf, a stout man, the son of a bondi in Fagraskogar, and
another. The party came on, about twenty in number, under Thorarin from
Akrar and Thorfinn of Laekjarbug. Grettir tried to get out across the
river, but was met by Arnor and Bjarni coming from the coast. There was
a narrow point jutting out into the river on Grettir's side, and when
he saw the men approaching he drove his animals on to it, for he never
would let go anything of which he had once got possession. The Myramen
prepared to attack in good order and Grettir told his companions to
guard his rear. They could not all come on at once. There was a hard
struggle between them; Grettir used his short sword with both hands and
they found it not easy to get at him. Some of the Myramen fell and some
were wounded. The men on the other side of the river were rather slow in
coming up because there was no ford near. Before they had been fighting
very long they fell back. Thorarin of Akrar was a very old man and not
able to join in the fighting. When the battle was over there came up
his son Thrand, his brother Ingjald's son Thorgils, Finnbogi the son
of Thorgeir, the son of Thorhadd of Hitardal, and Steinolf the son
of Thorleif of Hraundal. They set on their men and there was a hard
struggle.

Grettir saw that there was no choice left but either to flee or else
to do his utmost and not spare himself. He pressed on hard and nothing
could hold against him, for his foes were so numerous that there was
no chance of escaping except by fighting to the last before he fell. He
tried always to engage those who seemed most courageous; first he went
for Steinolf of Hraundal and cleft his skull down to his shoulders; then
he struck at Thorgils the son of Ingjald and almost cut him in two. Then
Thrand tried to spring forward and avenge his kinsmen, and Grettir hewed
at his right thigh, cutting out all the muscles so that he could fight
no more. Next he gave Finnbogi a severe wound. Then Thorarin ordered
them off. "The longer you fight," he said, "the worse you will get from
him and the more will he choose out the men from your company."

They obeyed and fell back. Ten had fallen; five were wounded to death or
crippled, and nearly all who had been in the battle were hurt. Grettir
was terribly fatigued but little wounded. The Myramen drew off, having
suffered heavy losses, for many a good man had fallen. Those who were
beyond the river came over slowly and did not arrive till the fight was
over, and when they saw the plight of their men Arnor would not risk
himself any further, for which he was much blamed by his father and by
others. Men thought he was not much of a warrior. The place where they
fought is now called Grettisoddi.

Grettir and his companions were all wounded; they took their horses and
rode back along the foot of the mountain. When they reached Fagraskogar
Eyjolf was behind. There was a bondi's daughter there and she asked for
their tidings, which Grettir told her fully and spoke a verse:

     "Goddess of horn-floods!  Steinolf's wounds
     are such that scarcely may be healed.
     Of Thorgils' life is little hope;
     his bones are smashed; eight more are dead."

Then Grettir went to his retreat and spent the winter there.




CHAPTER LXI. GRETTIR WINTERS UNDER THE GEITLAND GLACIER


The next time that Bjorn met Grettir he told him that this was a very
serious affair, and that he would not be able to stay there in peace
much longer. "You have killed kinsmen and friends of mine, but I will
not depart from my promise to you so long as you are here."

Grettir said he was sorry to have given him offence, but that he had to
defend his hands and his life. Bjorn said it would have to remain
so. Soon there came to him some of the men who had lost their kinsmen
through Grettir and petitioned him not to allow such a ruffian as he was
to stay there any longer and molest them. Bjorn said he would do as they
desired directly the winter was over.

Thrand the son of Thorarin of Akrar had now recovered from his wound. He
was a man of much worth, and had married Steinunn the daughter of Hrut
of Kambsnes. Steinolf's father Thorleif of Hraundal was a great man;
from him are sprung the Hraundal men.

No more meetings are told of between Grettir and the Myramen while he
was in the mountains. Bjorn continued in friendship with him, but some
of Bjorn's other friends fell away from him because of his allowing
Grettir to remain there, for they were annoyed at getting no
compensation for the slaying of their kinsmen. When the Thing assembled
Grettir left the Myrar district and went to Borgarfjord, where he
visited Grim the son of Thorhall and sought counsel of him where he
should move to next. Grim said he was not powerful enough to keep him
there, so Grettir went off to his friend Hallmund and stayed there till
the end of the summer.

In the autumn Grettir went to Geitland, where he stayed till bright
weather set in. Then he ascended the Geitlandsjokull and turned his
steps South-east along the glacier, taking with him a kettle and fuel.
It is supposed that he went there by the counsel of Hallmund, who knew
the country far and wide. He went on till he came to a long and rather
narrow valley in the glacier, shut in on every side by the ice
which overhung the valley. He went about everywhere, and found fair
grass-grown banks and brushwood. There were hot springs, and it seemed
as if volcanic fires had kept the ice from closing in above the valley.

A little stream flowed down the dale with smooth banks on either side.
Little did the light of the sun enter there, and the number of sheep
in the valley seemed to him countless. They were much better and fatter
than any which he had ever seen.

Grettir stayed there and built himself a hut out of logs which he found
about. He caught a sheep to eat, and it was better for slaughter than
two in other places. There was a ewe there with her lamb; she had a
brown head and excelled all the others in size. He was anxious to have
the lamb, so he caught it and slaughtered it and got half a measure of
suet out of it, and it was better in every way. When Brownhead missed
her lamb she came up every night to Grettir's hut and bleated so that he
never could get any sleep. He regretted much having killed the lamb on
account of the disturbance which she caused him. Every evening when the
twilight set in he heard a voice calling in the valley, and then the
sheep used to run together into a place of shelter. Grettir has told us
that a blending ruled over the valley, a giant named Thorir, under whose
protection he remained. Grettir called the valley after him Thorisdal.
He said that Thorir had daughters with whom he had some play, and that
they were very pleased, because not many people came there. And when the
days of fasting came Grettir remembered to tell them that fat and liver
should be eaten in Lent. Nothing particular occurred that winter, and
Grettir found it so dull that he could not stay there any longer. He
left the valley and went to the South through the glacier, reaching the
middle of Skjaldbreid from the North. There he took up a stone, cut a
hole in it and said that if a man put his eye to the hole he could see
into the gully which flows out of Thorisdal. Then he went across the
country South and reached the eastern fjords. He spent the summer and
the winter on this journey and visited all the great men, but found them
all against him so that nowhere could he get lodging or shelter. So he
returned to the North and stayed in various places.




