CHAPTER V. VISIT OF ONUND AND THRAND TO EYVIND IN IRELAND


The following summer they made ready for a voyage to the West, to
Ireland. At the same time Balki and Hallvard sailed westwards,
to Iceland, where they had heard that good land was available for
occupation. Balki took up some land at Hrutafjord, and had his abode in
two places called Balkastad. Hallvard occupied Sugandafjord and Skalavik
as far as Stigi, where he lived.

Thrand and Onund went to visit Eyvind the Easterner, who welcomed
joyfully his brother Thrand; but when he heard that Onund had also come,
he became very angry and wanted to fight him. Thrand asked him not to
do so, and said it would ill become him to quarrel with men from Norway,
especially with such as had given no offence. Eyvind said that he had
given offence before, when he made war on Kjarval the king, and that he
should now pay for it. The brothers had much to say to each other about
the matter, till at last Thrand said that he and Onund should share
their fortune together. Then Eyvind allowed himself to be appeased.
They stayed there a long time in the summer and went with Eyvind on his
expeditions. Eyvind found Onund to be a man of the greatest valour. In
the autumn they went to the Hebrides, and Eyvind made over to Thrand all
his share in their father Bjorn's patrimony in the event of Bjorn dying
before Thrand. They stayed in the Hebrides until they married and some
years after.




CHAPTER VI. DEATH OF BJORN; DISPUTES OVER HIS PROPERTY IN NORWAY


The next thing that happened was the death of Thrand's father Bjorn.
When the news of it reached Grim the Hersir he proceeded against Ondott
Crow and claimed Bjorn's estate. Ondott held Thrand to be the rightful
heir of his father, but Grim contended that Thrand was away in the West.
Bjorn, he said, came from Gautland, and the succession to the estate of
all foreigners passed to the king. Ondott said that he would hold the
property on behalf of Thrand, who was his daughter's son. Grim then
departed, having effected nothing by his claim.

Thrand, when he heard of his father's death, prepared to leave the
Hebrides, and Onund Treefoot decided to go with him. Ofeig Grettir and
Thormod Shaft went to Iceland with all their belongings, landing at
Eyrar in the South. They spent the first winter with Thorbjorn the
Salmon-man, and then occupied Gnupverjahrepp. Ofeig took the outer part
lying between the rivers Thvera and Kalfa, and lived at Ofeigsstad near
Steinsholt, while Thormod took the eastern part, living at Skaptaholt.
Thormod's daughters were named Thorvor and Thorve; the former afterwards
became the mother of Thorodd the Godi at Hjalli, Thorve of Thorstein the
Godi the father of Bjarni the Wise.

We now return to Thrand and Onund, who sailed back from the West to
Norway. A strong wind blew in their favour, so that they arrived at the
house of Ondott Crow before any one knew of their journey. He welcomed
Thrand and told him of the claim which Grim the Hersir had raised for
Bjorn's estate.

"To my thinking, kinsman," he said, "it is better that the property
should go to you than to the king's thralls. It is a fortunate thing for
you that no one knows of your having come here, for I expect that Grim
will make an attack upon one or the other of us if he can. I should
prefer if you would take over your property and stay in other
countries."

Thrand said that he would do so. He took over the property and prepared
to leave Norway. Before leaving he asked Onund Treefoot whether he would
not come to Iceland. Onund said he wanted first to visit some of his
relations and friends in the South.

"Then," said Thrand, "we must part. I should be glad if you would give
my kinsmen your support, for our enemies will certainly try to take
revenge upon them when I am gone. I am going to Iceland, and I want you
to come there too."

Onund said he would come, and they parted with great friendship. Thrand
went to Iceland, where he met with a welcome from Ofeig and Thormod
Shaft. He took up his dwelling at Thrandarholt to the west of Thjorsa.




CHAPTER VII. MURDER OF ONDOTT CROW, AND THE VENGEANCE THEREFOR


Onund went to Rogaland in the South and visited many of his relations
and friends. He lived there in concealment with a man named Kolbeinn. He
there learned that King Harald had taken all his property and given it
into the charge of a man named Harekr, one of his officials. Onund
went by night to Harekr's house and caught him at home; he was led to
execution. Then Onund took possession of all the loose property which he
found and burnt the building.

That autumn Grim the Hersir murdered Ondott Crow because he had not
succeeded in getting the property for the king. Ondott's wife Signy
carried off all their loose property that same night to a ship and
escaped with her sons Asmund and Asgrim to her father Sighvat. A little
later she sent her sons to Hedin, her foster-father in Soknadal, where
they remained for a time and then wanted to return to their mother. They
left at last, and at Yule-tide came to Ingjald the Trusty at Hvin.
His wife Gyda persuaded him to take them in, and they spent the winter
there. In the spring Onund came to northern Agdir, having learned of the
murder of Ondott. He met Signy and asked her what assistance they would
have of him. She said they were most anxious to punish Grim for the
death of Ondott. So the sons were sent for, and when they met Onund
Treefoot they all joined together and had Grim's doings closely watched.

In the summer there was a beer-brewing at Grim's for a jarl named Audun,
whom he had invited. When Onund and the sons of Ondott heard of it, they
appeared at his house unexpectedly and set fire to it. Grim the Hersir
and about thirty men were burnt in the house. They captured a quantity
of valuables. Then Onund went into the forest, while the two brothers
took the boat of their foster-father Ingjald, rowed away and lay in
hiding a little way off. Soon jarl Audun appeared, on his way to the
feast, as had been arranged, but on arriving he missed his host. So
he collected his men around him and stayed there a few nights, quite
unaware of Onund and his companions. He slept in a loft with two other
men. Onund knew everything that was going on in the house and sent for
the two brothers to come to him. On their arrival he asked them whether
they preferred to keep watch on the house or to attack the jarl. They
chose to attack. They then battered the entrance of the loft with beams
until the door gave way. Asmund seized the two men who were with the
jarl and threw them to the ground with such violence that they were
well-nigh killed.

Asgrim rushed at the jarl and demanded of him weregild for his father,
for he had been in league with Grim and took part in the attack when
Ondott was murdered. The jarl said he had no money about him and asked
for time. Asgrim then placed the point of his spear against his breast
and ordered him to pay up on the spot. Then the jarl took a necklace
from his neck and gave it to him with three gold rings and a velvet
mantle. Asgrim took the things and bestowed a name upon the jarl. He
called him Audun Nannygoat.

When the farmers and people about heard of the disturbances they all
came out to help the jarl. Onund had a large force with him, and there
was a great battle in which many a good farmer and many a follower of
the jarl were slain. The brothers returned to Onund and reported what
had occurred with the jarl. Onund said it was a pity they had not killed
him. It would, he said, have been something to make up for the losses
which he had suffered from King Harald. They said the disgrace was far
worse for the jarl as it was, and they went off to Surnadal to Eirik
Beery, a Landman there, who took them all in for the winter. At
Yule-tide they had a great drinking bout with a man named Hallsteinn,
nicknamed Stallion. Eirik opened the feast and entertained them
generously. Then it was Hallsteinn's turn, and they began to quarrel.
Hallsteinn struck Eirik with a deer's horn, for which Eirik got no
revenge, but had to go home with it, to the great annoyance of Ondott's
sons. A little later Asgrim went to Hallsteinn's house and gave him a
severe wound. All the people who were present started up and attacked
Asgrim. He defended himself vigorously and escaped in the dark, leaving
them under the belief that they had killed him. Onund and Asmund, on
hearing that Asgrim had been killed, were at a loss what they could do
in the matter. Eirik's advice was that they should betake themselves to
Iceland, for it would never do for them to remain in the land where the
king could get at them. This they determined to do. Each of them had his
own ship and they made ready for the voyage to Iceland. Hallsteinn was
laid low with his wound and died before Onund sailed with his party.
Kolbeinn, the man who was mentioned before, went in the ship with Onund.




