CHAPTER VIII. ONUND AND ASMUND SAIL TO ICELAND


Onund and Asmund set sail directly when they were ready and their ships
kept together. Onund said:

     "Hallvard and I were aforetime deemed
     worthy in storm of swords to bear us.
     With one foot now I step on the ship
     towards Iceland.  The poet's day is o'er."

They had a rough passage with cross winds, mostly from the south, so
that they drifted away to the north. They made Iceland right in the
North, at Langanes, where they regained their reckonings. The ships were
near enough to each other for them to speak together. Asmund said they
had better make for Eyjafjord, and this was agreed to. They kept under
the land and heavy weather set in from the south-east. Just as Onund
was tacking, the yard was carried away; they lowered the sail and were
driven out to sea. Asmund got under the lee of Hrisey, where he waited
until a fair wind set in which took him up to Eyjafjord. Helgi the Lean
gave him the whole of Kraeklingahlid, and he lived at South-Glera. A few
years later his brother Asgrim came to Iceland and took up his residence
at North-Glera. His son was Ellidagrim the father of Asgrim.




CHAPTER IX. ONUND SETTLES IN KALDBAK


Onund Treefoot was driven away from the shore for several days, after
which the wind shifted and blew towards the land. Then they made land
again, which those of them who had been there before recognised as the
western coast of the Skagi peninsula. They sailed in to Strandafloi,
almost to Sudrstrandir. There came rowing towards them a ten-oared boat
with six men on board, who hailed the sea-going ship and asked who was
their captain. Onund told them his name and asked whence they came.
They said they were the men of Thorvald from Drangar. Then Onund asked
whether all the land round that coast was occupied; they answered there
was very little left at Sudrstrandir and none at all in the North. So
Onund asked his men whether they would seek some land further to the
West or take that of which they had just been told. They said they would
first explore a little further. They sailed in along the coast of the
bay and anchored off a creek near Arnes, where they put off in a boat to
the shore.

Here dwelt a wealthy man named Eirik Snare, who had taken the land
between Ingolfsfjord and Ofaera in Veidileysa. On hearing that Onund had
arrived in those parts, he offered to let him have such portion as he
needed from his own lands, adding that there was little land which had
not already been taken up. Onund said he would first like to see what
there was.

Then they went further into the bay past some fjords and came to Ofaera,
where Eirik said: "Here is what there is to see. From here down to the
lands of Bjorn is unoccupied." A high range of mountains, on which snow
had fallen, rose from beside the river. Onund looked at the mountains
and spoke a verse:

     "My lands and my might have drifted away
       as drifts the ship on the ocean.
     My friends and my home I have left behind me,
       and bartered my acres for Kaldbak."

"Many a man," answered Eirik, "has lost so much in Norway that it
may not be mended. I expect too that nearly all the lands in the main
districts have been taken, so that I will not urge you to leave these
parts and seek elsewhere. I will keep to my word and let you have
whatever lands of my own you may require."

Onund said he would take advantage of his offer, and in the end he took
some of the Ofaera land and the three creeks Byrgisvik, Kolbeinsvik,
and Kaldbaksvik as far as Kaldbak's Cliff. Afterwards Eirik gave him
Veidileysa with Reykjarfjord and the outer part of Reykjanes on that
side. Nothing was settled about the drift which came to the coast,
because there was so much of it that every one could have what he
wanted. Onund made his home in Kaldbak and had a large household. His
property increased and he had another house in Reykjarfjord. Kolbeinn
lived in Kolbeinsvik and for some years Onund lived quietly at home.




CHAPTER X. OFEIG GRETTIR IS KILLED. VISIT OF ONUND TO AUD THE
DEEP-MINDED


Onund was a man of such valour that few, even of those whose limbs were
sound, could measure themselves against him. His name, too, was renowned
throughout the whole country on account of his ancestry. It happened
that a dispute arose between Ofeig Grettir and one Thorbjorn called
Jarlakappi, which ended in Ofeig being killed by Thorbjorn in
Grettisgeil near Haell. The feud was taken up by Ofeig's sons who
assembled a large force of men. Onund Treefoot was sent for, and in the
spring he rode South to Hvamm, where he stayed with Aud the Deep-Minded.
He had been with her over the sea in the West, and she received him with
welcome. Her grandson, Olaf Feilan, was then grown up, and Aud was very
infirm. She consulted Onund concerning her kinsman Olaf, for whom she
wished to ask in marriage Alfdis of the Barra Isles, the cousin of
Onund's wife Aesa. Onund thought it a very suitable match, and Olaf rode
with him to the South. Then Onund met friends and kinsmen, who made him
their guest. The matter of the dispute was talked over between them, and
finally laid before the Kjalarnes Thing, for the All-Thing had not yet
been established. Eventually it was settled by arbitration and heavy
weregilds were imposed for the murder. Thorbjorn Jarlakappi was exiled.
His son was Solmund, the father of Svidukari. These kinsmen were long
abroad after that. Thrand invited Onund and Olaf with his party to stay
with him, as did Thormod Shaft. The matter of Olaf's marriage was
then pressed, and an agreement easily arrived at, for Aud's rank and
influence were well known to them. The settlement was arranged and
Onund's party rode home again. Aud thanked him for his aid in behalf of
Olaf, who married Alfdis of the Barra Isles that autumn. Then Aud the
Deep-Minded died, as is told in the Laxdaela Saga.




