CHAPTER XXIV. GRETTIR KILLS GUNNAR. HIS FRIENDS RALLY ROUND HIM AND SAVE
HIM FROM THE VENGEANCE OF THE JARL


Gunnar was in the town and was plotting against Grettir's life. Wherever
he went Gunnar dogged his steps wherever he found a chance of getting
near him. One day Grettir was sitting in a booth and drinking, because
he wanted to keep out of Gunnar's way. Suddenly there was a bang at the
door, so hard that it broke in pieces, and in rushed four men armed and
attacked Grettir. They were Gunnar with his followers. Grettir seized
his arms which were hanging above his head and ran into a corner, where
he defended himself, holding his shield before him, and hewing with
his sword. They made little way against him. One blow he succeeded in
delivering upon one of Gunnar's followers, who needed nothing more. Then
Grettir advanced, driving them before him out of the booth, and killing
another of them. Gunnar would fain have got away with his men, but on
reaching the door he caught his foot on the doorstep, fell over and was
not able to recover himself at once. He held his shield before him and
retreated as Grettir pressed him hard. Then Grettir sprang on to the
crossbenches near the door. Gunnar's hands and the shield were still
inside the door, and Grettir struck down between him and the shield,
cutting off both his hands at the wrist. He fell backwards out of the
door, and Grettir gave him his death-blow. Then the man who was behind
him got on his feet and ran off at once to tell the jarl what had
happened. Sveinn was furious, and called the assembly to meet there and
then in the town. When Thorfinn and Thorsteinn Dromund heard the news,
they called all their followers and friends together and went to the
meeting in force. The jarl was very wroth, and it was no easy matter to
get speech with him. Thorfinn was the first to come before the jarl, and
he said: "I have come to offer an honourable atonement for the man who
has been slain by Grettir. The judgment shall remain with you alone if
you but spare his life."

The jarl replied in great wrath: "It is too late to beg for Grettir's
life, and you have no case that I can see. He has killed three brothers,
one at the feet of the other; men of noble minds who would not weigh
each other against their purses. Now, Thorfinn, it will not avail you
to beg for Grettir; I will not do such a wrong in the land as to accept
atonement for such a crime as this."

Then Bersi the son of Skaldtorfa came up and begged the jarl to accept
blood-money. "Grettir," he said, "is a man of high birth and is my good
friend. I offer you what I possess. May you see, my lord, that it is
better by sparing one man to earn the goodwill of many and to fix the
penalty yourself than to refuse honourable terms and risk whether you
can arrest the man or not."

The jarl replied: "You do right, Bersi; and herein as ever you show your
worth. But I do not mean to break the laws of the land by granting life
to a man who has forfeited it."

Then Thorsteinn Dromund came forward, and he, too, offered blood-money
on behalf of Grettir, adding many fair words thereto.

The jarl asked what moved him to offer blood-money for the man.
Thorsteinn said Grettir was his brother. The jarl said he had not known
that.

"It shows a manly spirit in you," he said, "that you want to help him.
But as I am determined not to accept blood-money in this case, I must
treat the requests of all of you alike. I must have Grettir's life
whatever it cost, directly I can get him."

Then the jarl rose quickly up and refused to hear any more about
atonement. They all went home with Thorsteinn and made their
preparations, whereupon the jarl ordered all the men of his guard under
arms and went forth with a large force. Before they came up, Grettir's
friends had made ready to defend the house. Thorfinn, Thorsteinn,
Grettir himself, and Bersi were in the forefront, each with a large
force of followers behind him. The jarl summoned them to give up
Grettir, and not to bring trouble on themselves. They repeated their
former offers, but the jarl would not listen to them. Thorfinn and
Thorsteinn said that more was at stake for the jarl than the taking of
Grettir's life. "One fate shall fall upon us all," they cried, "and men
shall say that you have given much for the life of one man when we are
all laid low with the ground."

The jarl said he would spare none of them, and they were on the very
verge of a battle when many of the well-disposed men came up to him and
begged him not to land himself in such a difficulty. He should bear
in mind that these men would work great havoc among his own followers
before they fell. The jarl thought this counsel was wise and let himself
be somewhat appeased. Then the terms of atonement were settled. Thorfinn
and Thorsteinn were ready to pay so long as Grettir's life was spared.
The jarl said: "You must know that although I agree to this compromise,
I do not consider it a full amnesty. Only I have no mind to fight
against my own men, although they appear to hold me of little account in
the matter."

Thorfinn said: "Yours is all the greater honour, my lord, that you will
have the fixing of the penalty yourself."

The jarl said that Grettir should have leave from him to depart from the
country in peace for Iceland, directly there was a ship leaving, if so
it seemed good to them. They agreed and paid the money to the jarl to
his satisfaction. They parted with little friendship. Grettir went
with Thorfinn after bidding an affectionate farewell to his brother
Thorsteinn.

Thorfinn earned great honour for the support which he had given Grettir
against such odds as he had to deal with. Not one of the men who had
helped Grettir was ever received into favour again with the jarl,
excepting Bersi.

Grettir then spoke:

     "Comrade of Odin, Thorfinn was born
     to rescue my life from the fangs of Hel.
     No less was Thorsteinn Dromund's aid
     when I was doomed to the realm of the dead."

And again:

     "The prince's retainers withdrew in fear
     when Bersi threatened their hearts to pierce."

Grettir returned with Thorfinn to the North and stayed with him until he
found a ship with some traders who were bound for Iceland. Thorfinn gave
him many valuable garments and a coloured saddle with a bridle. They
parted with friendship, and Thorfinn invited him to come and see him if
ever he returned to Norway.




