CHAPTER LXXXIII. THORBJORN VISITS GRETTIR'S MOTHER AT BJARG


The kinsmen of Grettir and Illugi were deeply grieved when they heard of
their death. They held that Angle had done a dastardly deed in slaying
a man at the point of death, and they also accused him of practising
sorcery. They applied to the most learned men, and Angle's case was
ill-spoken of.

Four weeks after the beginning of summer he rode Westwards to Midfjord.
When Asdis heard of his being in the neighbourhood she gathered her
men around her. She had many friends, Gamli and Glum, Skeggi, called
Short-hand, and Ospak, who was mentioned before. So much beloved was
she that the whole of Midfjord rose to help her, even those who had once
been Grettir's enemies. Chief among these was Thorodd Drapustuf, who was
joined by most of the Hrutafjord men.

Angle reached Bjarg with a following of twenty men, bringing Grettir's
head with him. All those who had promised their support had not yet
come in. Angle's party entered the room with the head and set it on
the floor. The mistress of the house was there and several others; no
greeting passed between them. Angle spoke a verse:

     "Grettir's head I bring thee here.
     Weep for the red-haired hero, lady.
     On the floor it lies; 'twere rotten by this,
     but I laid it in salt.  Great glory is mine."

She sat silent while he spoke his verse; then she said:

     "The swine would have fled like sheep from the fox
     if Grettir had stood there hearty and strong.
     Shame on the deeds that were done in the North!
     Little the glory you gain from my lay."

Many said it was small wonder that she had brave sons, so brave was she
herself before the insults which she had received. Ospak was outside
and was talking with those of Angle's men who had not gone in. He asked
about the fray, and they all praised Illugi for the defence that he had
made. They also told of Grettir's firm grip on his sword after he was
dead, and the men thought it marvellous. Then a number of men were seen
riding from the West; they were the friends of Asdis with Gamli and
Skeggi, who had come from Melar.

Angle had intended to have an execution against Illugi and to claim all
his property, but when all these men came up he saw that it would not
do. Ospak and Gamli were very forward in wanting to fight with Angle,
but the wiser heads told them to get the advice of their kinsmen
Thorvald and other chiefs, and said that the more men of knowledge
occupied themselves with the affair the worse it would be for Angle.
Through their intervention Angle got away and took with him Grettir's
head, which he intended to produce at the All-Thing. He rode home
thinking that matters were going badly for him, for nearly all the
chiefs in the land were either relations or connections of Grettir and
Illugi.

That summer Skeggi Short-hand married the daughter of Thorodd Drapustuf,
who then took part in the case on the side of Grettir's kinsmen.




CHAPTER LXXXIV. THORBJORN IS EXILED AT THE THING


Men now rode to the Thing. Angle's party was smaller than he had
expected, because the matter had come to be badly spoken of. Halldor
asked whether they were to take Grettir's head with them to the
All-Thing. Angle said he meant to take it.

"That is an ill-advised thing to do," said Halldor; "there are quite
enough men against you as it is, without your doing such a thing as that
to re-awaken their grief."

They were then on the road, and meant to ride South by Sand, so Angle
let him take the head and bury it in a sand-hill, which is now called
Grettisthuf.

The Thing was very full. Angle brought forward his case, making the most
of his own deeds. He told them how he had killed the forest-man on whose
head the highest price had been laid, and he claimed the money. Thorir
replied as before. Then the Lawman was asked for his opinion. He said
that he wished to hear whether any counter-charge was made, by which
Angle should forfeit the outlaw money; if not, the money offered for
Grettir's head must be paid. Then Thorvald the son of Asgeir asked
Short-hand to bring the case before the court, and he declared a first
summons against Thorbjorn Angle for witchcraft and sorcery through which
Grettir had met with his death, and a second for having killed a man who
was half dead, crimes which he said were punishable with outlawry.

There was a great division of parties, but those who supported Thorbjorn
were few. It went very unexpectedly for him, for Thorvald and his
son-in-law Isleif held that to do a man to death by sorcery was a crime
worthy of death. Finally, by the counsel of wise men sentence was passed
that Thorbjorn was to leave Iceland that summer and not to return during
the lifetime of any of the men concerned in the case on the side of
Illugi and Grettir. It was enacted as a law that all sorcerers should be
outlawed.

When Thorbjorn saw what his fate was going to be he got away from the
Thing, for Grettir's friends were making preparations to attack him.
None of the money that was set upon Grettir's head did he get; Steinn
the Lawman would not allow it because of his dishonourable conduct;
nor was any blood-money paid for the men who had fallen on his side in
Drangey; they were set off against Illugi, an arrangement, however, with
which Illugi's kinsmen were not at all pleased.

Men rode home from the Thing, and all the feuds which had arisen
on Grettir's account were now at an end. Skeggi the son of Gamli,
son-in-law of Thorodd Drapustuf and sister's son of Grettir, went North
to Skagafjord with the assistance of Thorvald Asgeirsson and of his
son-in-law Isleif, who afterwards became bishop of Skalaholt. After
obtaining the consent of the whole community he took ship and went to
Drangey, where he found the bodies of Grettir and Illugi and brought
them to Reykir in Reykjastrand and buried them in the church. Testimony
of Grettir lying there is in the fact that in the days of the Sturlungs,
when the church at Reykir was moved to another place, Grettir's bones
were dug up, and were found to be enormously big and strong. Illugi was
buried later on the north side of the church, and Grettir's head was
buried in the church at his home in Bjarg.

Asdis remained in Bjarg and was so beloved that no one molested her any
more than they did while Grettir was an outlaw. The property at Bjarg
passed after her death to Skeggi Short-hand, who became a great man.
His son was Gamli, the father of Skeggi of Skarfsstad and of Alfdis the
mother of Odd the Monk, from whom many are descended.




