CHAPTER XX. THORFINN'S RETURN. GRETTIR VISITS THE NORTH


When Yule-tide was past, Thorfinn made ready for his homeward journey
and dismissed his many guests with gifts. He sailed with all his men and
landed near the place where the boat-houses were.

They saw a ship lying on the sand which they at once recognised as his
great boat. Thorfinn had heard nothing of the vikings and told his
men to put him on shore, "for I suspect," he said, "that they are not
friends who have been at work here."

Thorfinn was the first to land, and went straight to the boat-house,
where he saw a craft which he knew at once to be that of the berserks.
He said to his men: "I suspect that things have taken place here such
that I would give the whole island and everything that is in it for them
not to have happened."

They asked how that was.

"Vikings have been here, men whom I know as the worst in all Norway,
namely Thorir Paunch and Ogmund the Bad. They will not have dealt gently
with us. I mistrust that Icelander."

Then he spoke many things to his men. Grettir was at home and detained
the men from going down to the shore. He said he did not care if the
bondi got a little fright from what he saw. The goodwife asked his leave
to go down, and he said she was mistress of her own ways, but that he
was not going. So she hurried away to greet Thorfinn and embraced him
joyfully. He was rejoiced to see her and said: "God be praised that I
see you well and my daughter too. But what has happened to you since I
left?"

"It has ended well," she said. "But we were nigh to suffering a disgrace
which could never have been wiped out, had not your winter-guest aided
us."

Thorfinn said: "Let us sit down and you shall tell me everything."

Then she told him fully all that had happened, praising highly Grettir's
courage and resourcefulness. Thorfinn was silent while she was speaking,
and when she had finished he said: "True indeed is the word, `Long shall
a man be tried'. But where is Grettir?"

"He is at home in the hall," she answered.

Then they went up to the house. Thorfinn went to Grettir and turned
towards him and thanked him with the fairest words for his courageous
conduct.

"I will say a word to you," he said, "which few would say to their
friend. I would it might happen that you should need the help of a man,
for you to know whether I count for anything or not; I cannot repay what
you have done for me as long as you are not in straits. You shall have
in my house whatever you desire, and shall be in the highest honour in
my household."

Grettir thanked him and said he would have accepted his offer even if he
had made it earlier.

Grettir stayed there the rest of the winter in high favour with
Thorfinn. The fame of his deed spread through all Norway, especially
in those parts where the berserks had ravaged most mercilessly. In the
spring Thorfinn asked him what he would like to do. He said he would go
North to Vagar while the fair was on there. Thorfinn said that any money
which he required should be at his service; Grettir said he did not want
more just then than enough to pay for his living. Thorfinn said that
was his due, and brought him to a ship, where he gave him the excellent
short sword. Grettir kept it as long as he lived; it was a most precious
possession. Thorfinn bade him come to him if ever he wanted any help.

Grettir then travelled to Vagar, which was crowded with people. Many
whom he had never set eyes on before greeted him warmly because of his
exploit in killing the vikings, and several of the leading men invited
him to stay with them, but he preferred to return to his friend
Thorfinn. So he took his passage in a trading ship belonging to one
Thorkell, a man of some consideration in Salfti in Halogaland. Grettir
went to visit Thorkell in his home, where he received a hearty welcome
and a very pressing invitation to stay there for the winter. Grettir
accepted the invitation and stayed the winter with Thorkell, who treated
him with great honour.




CHAPTER XXI. ADVENTURE WITH A BEAR


There was a man named Bjorn who was then on a visit to Thorkell. He was
of a somewhat violent character of good family and related in some way
to Thorkell. He was not generally liked, because he was too much given
to talking against the men who were about Thorkell and drove many away
from him. He and Grettir did not get on at all. Bjorn thought him of
small account compared to himself; Grettir paid him little deference,
and it became an open feud. Bjorn was a boisterous swaggering man, and
many of the younger men imitated him, loitering about outside in the
evenings.

It happened at the beginning of the winter that a savage brown bear
broke out of its den and raged about destroying men and cattle. Every
one declared that it had been provoked by the noise which Bjorn and his
company made. The beast became most mischievous, attacking the flocks in
the very face of the men themselves. Thorkell, being the wealthiest man
of that part, suffered most. One day he called up his men to come with
him and search out the bear's den. They found it in a cliff by the sea
where there was a cave under an overhanging rock, with a narrow path
leading to the entrance. Below was a sheer precipice down to the beach,
threatening certain death to any one who stumbled. In this den the
bear lay in the daytime, going abroad at night. Fences were of no avail
against him, nor could the dogs do anything, so that all were in the
utmost distress. Thorkell's kinsman Bjorn declared that the main thing
was gained now that they had found the den. "Now we shall see," he said,
"how the game will go with me and my namesake." Grettir pretended not to
hear what he said.

In the evenings when the others retired to bed, Bjorn used generally
to go out. One night he went to the bear's den and found the creature
inside, growling horribly. He lay down in the path, placing his shield
over him, intending to wait until the beast came out as usual. Bruin,
however, got wind of him and was rather slow in coming out. Bjorn got
very sleepy where he was lying and could not keep awake; in the meantime
out came the bear from his den and saw a man lying there. He clawed at
him, dragged off his shield and threw it down the cliff. Bjorn woke
up, not a little startled, took to his heels and ran off home, narrowly
escaping the bear's clutches. His friends knew all about it, having
watched his movements; on the next morning they found the shield and
made great game of his adventure.

At Yule-time Thorkell himself went out to the den with Bjorn, Grettir
and others of his men, a party of eight in all. Grettir had on a fur
cape which he put off when they were attacking the bear. It was
rather difficult to get at him, since they could only reach him with
spear-thrusts, which he parried with his teeth. Bjorn kept urging
them on to tackle him, but himself did not go near enough to be in any
danger. At last, when no one was looking out, he took Grettir's fur
cloak and threw it in to the bear. They did not succeed in getting the
bear out, and when night came on turned to go home. Grettir then missed
his cloak and saw that the bear had got it into his grip.

"Who has been playing tricks on me?" he cried. "Who threw my cloak into
the cave?"

Bjorn answered: "He who did it will not be afraid to say so."

"Things of that sort do not trouble me much," said Grettir.

Then they started on their way home. After they had gone a little way
Grettir's garter broke. Thorkell told them to wait for him, but Grettir
said it was not necessary. Then Bjorn said: "There is no need to suppose
that Grettir will run away from his cloak. He wants to have the honour
of killing the beast all alone, and he will say that we eight men went
away. Then he would appear to be what he is said to be. He has been
backward enough all day."

"I don't know how you stand in that matter," said Thorkell. "You and he
are not equal in valour; do not make any to-do about him."

Bjorn said that neither he nor Grettir should choose the words out of
his mouth.

There was a hill between them and Grettir, who had turned back along the
footpath. Now he had no others to reckon with in making the attack.
He drew his sword Jokulsnaut and tied a loop round the handle which he
passed over his wrist, because he thought that he could carry out his
plans better if his hand were free. He went along the path. When the
bear saw a man coming, he charged savagely, and struck at him with the
paw that was on the side away from the precipice. Grettir aimed a blow
at him with his sword and cut off his paw just above the claws. Then the
creature tried to strike him with his sound paw, but to do so he had to
drop on the stump, which was shorter than he expected, and over he fell
into Grettir's embraces. Grettir seized the beast by the ears and held
him off so that he could not bite. He always said that he considered
this holding back the bear the greatest feat of strength that he ever
performed. The beast struggled violently; the space was very narrow, and
they both fell over the precipice. The bear being the heavier came down
first on the beach; Grettir fell on the top of him, and the bear was
badly mauled on the side that was down. Grettir got his sword, ran it
into the heart of the bear and killed him. Then he went home, after
fetching his cloak which was torn to pieces. He also took with him the
bit of the paw which he had cut off.

Thorkell was sitting and drinking when Grettir entered. They all laughed
at the ragged cloak which he was wearing. Then he laid the piece of the
paw upon the table. Thorkell said: "Where is my kinsman Bjorn? I never
saw iron bite like that in your hands. Now I would like you to show
Grettir some honour to make up for the shame which you cast upon him."

Bjorn said that could wait, and that it mattered little to him whether
Grettir was pleased or not. Grettir then spoke a verse:

     "Oft returned the watcher at night
     trembling home, but sound in limb.
     None ever saw me sit in the dusk
     at the cave; yet now I am home returned."

"It is true," said Bjorn, "that you have fought well; and also true that
our opinions differ. I suppose you think that your taunts hurt me."

Thorkell said: "I should be glad, Grettir, if you would not revenge
yourself upon Bjorn. I will pay the full weregild of a man for you to be
reconciled."

Bjorn said he might invest his money better than in paying for that;
and that it would be better for him and Grettir to go on bickering since
"each oak has that which it scrapes from the other." Thorkell said: "But
I ask you, Grettir, to do so much for my sake as not to attack Bjorn
while you are both with me."

"That I promise," said Grettir.

Bjorn said that he would walk without fear of Grettir wherever they met.
Grettir grinned, and would accept no money on account of Bjorn. They
stayed there the winter.




