CHAPTER LV. GRETTIR IN THE ARNARVATN HEATH. DEATH OF GRIM THE FOREST-MAN


Grettir went up to the Arnarvatn Heath and built himself a hut there of
which the remains are still to be seen. He went there because he wanted
to do anything rather than rob, so he got himself a net and a boat and
went out fishing to support himself.

It was a weary time for him in the mountains because of his fear of the
dark. Other outlaws heard of his having come there and wanted to go and
see him, thinking that he would be a great protection to them.

There was an outlaw from the North named Grim. This man was bribed by
those of Hrutafjord to kill Grettir. They promised him pardon and money
if he succeeded. He went to visit Grettir and asked for his hospitality.

Grettir said: "I do not see how you will be holpen by coming to me, and
you men of the forest are untrustworthy. But it is ill to live alone;
I have no choice. Only he shall be with me who is willing to work at
whatever comes to hand."

Grim said that was just what he wished and pressed Grettir much, until
Grettir let himself be persuaded and took him in. He stayed there right
into the winter, and watched Grettir closely, but it seemed no easy
matter to attack him, for Grettir was suspicious and kept his weapons
at hand night and day; when he was awake the man would not venture to
approach him.

One morning Grim came home from fishing and went into the hut stamping
with his feet and wanting to know whether Grettir was asleep. Grettir
lay still and did not move. There was a short sword hanging above his
head. Grim thought he would never have a better opportunity. He made a
loud noise to see whether Grettir took any notice, but he did not,
so Grim felt sure that he was asleep. He crept stealthily to the bed,
reached up to the sword, took it down and raised it to strike. Just at
the moment when he raised it Grettir sprang up on to the floor, and,
seizing the sword with one hand, Grim with the other, hurled him over
so that he fell nearly senseless. "This is how you have proved yourself
with all your friendly seeming," he said. Then he got the whole truth
out of him and killed him. He learned from this what it was to take in
a forest-man. So the winter passed. The hardest thing of all to bear was
his fear of the dark.



CHAPTER LVI. TREACHERY AND DEATH OF THORIR REDBEARD


Thorir of Gard now heard where Grettir had taken up his abode and meant
to leave no stone unturned to get him slain. There was a man named
Thorir Redbeard, a stout man and a great fighter, on which account he
had been declared outlaw throughout the country.

Thorir of Gard sent word to him, and when they met asked Redbeard to
undertake the business of slaying Grettir. Redbeard said that was no
easy task, as Grettir was very wide awake and very cautious. Thorir told
him to try it, saying: "It would be a splendid deed for a valiant man
like you; I will get your outlawing removed and give you sufficient
money as well."

So Redbeard agreed and Thorir told him how he should go to work to
deal with Grettir. Redbeard then went away into the East in order that
Grettir might not suspect where he came from. Thence he came to the
Arnarvatn Heath, where Grettir had then been for one winter, found
Grettir and asked him for entertainment. He said: "I cannot allow
people to play with me again as the man did who came here last autumn,
pretending to be very friendly; before he had been here very long
he began plotting against my life. I cannot risk taking in anymore
forest-men."

"I think you have reason," Thorir said, "to mistrust forest-men. It may
be you have heard tell of me as a man of blood and a disturber of peace,
but never did you hear of such a monstrous deed of me as that I betrayed
my host. Ill is the lot of him who has an ill name; for men think of him
but as such; nor would I have come here if I had had any better choice.
All is not lost for us if we stand together. You might venture so
much to begin with as to try how you like me, and then if you find any
unfitness in me turn me away."

"Well," said Grettir, "I will risk it with you; but know of a surety
that if I suspect you of any treachery it will be your death."

Thorir agreed. Grettir took him in and found that in whatever he did he
had the strength of two men. He was ready for anything that Grettir gave
him to do. Nothing did Grettir need to do for himself, and he had never
lived so comfortably since he had become an outlaw. Nevertheless he was
so wary that Thorir got no chance. Two years was Thorir Redbeard with
Grettir on the Heath, and at last he began to weary of it. He thought
over what he could do to take Grettir off his guard.

One night in the spring a heavy gale sprang up while they were asleep.
Grettir awoke and asked where their boat was. Thorir sprang up, ran to
the boat, broke her all in pieces, and threw the fragments about so that
it looked as if the storm had wrecked her. Then he returned to the
hut and said aloud: "You have had bad luck, my friend. Our boat is all
broken in pieces and the nets are lying far out in the lake."

"Get them back then," said Grettir. "It seems to me to be your doing
that the boat is smashed."

"Of all things which I can do," said Thorir, "swimming is that which
suits me least. In almost anything else I think I can hold my own with
any ordinary man. You know very well that I have been no burden to you
since I came here; nor would I ask you to do this if I were able to do
it myself."

Grettir then arose, took his arms and went to the lake. There was a
point of land running out into the lake with a large bay on the further
side of it. The water was deep up to the shore. Grettir said: "Swim out
to the nets and let me see what you are able to do."

"I told you before," Thorir said, "that I cannot swim. I do not know now
where all your boldness and daring are gone to."

"I could get the nets," he said; "but betray me not if I trust you."

"Do not think such shameful and monstrous things of me," said Thorir.

"You will prove yourself what you are," Grettir said.

Then he threw off his clothes and his weapons and swam out to the nets.
He gathered them together, returned to the shore and cast them up on to
the bank. Just as he was about to land Thorir quickly seized his short
sword and drew it. He ran towards Grettir as he stepped on to the bank
and aimed a blow at him. Grettir threw himself down backwards into the
water and sank like a stone. Thorir stood by the shore intending to
guard it until he came up. Grettir swam beneath the water, keeping close
to the bank so that Thorir could not see him, and so reached the bay
behind him, where he landed without letting himself be seen. The first
Thorir knew of it was when Grettir lifted him up over his head and
dashed him down with such violence that the sword fell out of his hand.
Grettir got possession of it and without speaking a word cut off his
head. So his life ended. After that Grettir refused to take in any
forest-men, and yet he could not live alone.




