CHAPTER XXVIII. GRETTIR'S VISIT TO AUDUN IN VIDIDAL; OFFERS HIS SERVICES
TO BARDI


In the course of that summer Grettir Asmundsson returned to Skagafjord.
He had such a reputation for strength that none of the younger men was
supposed to be his equal. He soon came to his home in Bjarg, and Asmund
gave him a fitting welcome. Atli was then managing the property and the
brothers agreed well together, but Grettir became so over-weening that
he thought nothing was beyond his powers.

Many of the youths with whom Grettir had played at Midfjordsvatn before
he left were now grown up. Audun, the son of Asgeir, the son of Audun,
was now living at Audunarstad in Vididal. He was a good bondi and a
kindly man, and was the strongest of all the men in the northern parts,
as well as the most modest.

Grettir had not forgotten how he had seemingly been worsted by Audun at
the ball-play, as related above, and he was anxious to try which of them
had gained most since. With this object he went at the beginning of the
hay-harvest to Audunarstad. Grettir put on all his finery and rode with
the coloured and richly ornamented saddle which Thorfinn had given him,
on a splendid horse and in his best armour to Audun's place, where he
arrived early in the day and knocked at the door. Few of the men were
in the house, and to Grettir's question whether Audun was at home, they
replied that he had gone to the hill-dairy to bring home some produce.
Grettir took the bridle off his horse. The hay had not been mown in the
meadow and the horse went for the part where the grass was thickest.
Grettir entered the room and sat down on the bench, where he fell
asleep. Soon Audun returned home and saw a horse in the meadow with
a coloured saddle on its back. He was bringing two horses loaded with
curds in skins tied at the mouth--so-called "curd-bags." Audun took the
skins off the horses and was carrying them in his arms so that he could
not see in front of him. Grettir's leg was stretched out before him
and Audun stumbled over it, falling on the curd-bags which broke at
the neck. Audun sprang up and asked what rascal that was in his house.
Grettir told him his name.

"That was very awkward of you," said Audun. "But what do you want here?"

"I want to fight with you."

"First I must look after my dairy produce," Audun said.

"You can do that," answered Grettir, "if you have no one else to do it
for you."

Audun bent down, gathered up the skin and threw it right into Grettir's
breast, telling him to take what he sent him. Grettir was all covered
with curds, and felt more disgusted than at any wound which Audun
could have given him. Then they went for each other and wrestled pretty
smartly. Grettir rushed at him, but Audun escaped his grasp. He saw,
however, that Grettir had gained upon him. They drove up and down the
room, overthrowing everything that was near them. Neither of them spared
himself, but Grettir had the advantage, and at last Audun fell, after
tearing off all Grettir's weapons. They struggled hard and the din was
terrific.

Then there was a loud noise below. Grettir heard a man ride up to the
house, get off his horse and come quickly inside. He saw a handsome man
in a red jacket wearing a helmet. Hearing the commotion going on in the
room where they were wrestling, he came in and asked what was in the
room. Grettir told him his name; "but who is it that wants to know?" he
asked.

"My name is Bardi," answered the stranger.

"Are you Bardi the son of Gudmund from Asbjarnarnes?"

"The same," he replied. "But what are you after?"

Grettir said: "I and Audun are playing here."

"I don't know about your play," said Bardi. "But you are not alike. You
are overbearing and insolent, while he is modest and good-natured. Let
him get up at once."

Grettir said: "Many a man seizes the lock for the door. You would do
better to avenge your brother Hall than to come between me and Audun
when we are contending."

"I am always hearing that," said Bardi, "and I don't know whether I
shall ever obtain my vengeance. But I want you to leave Audun in peace,
for he is a quiet man."

Grettir said he was willing to do so because of Bardi's intercession,
though he did not like it much. Bardi asked what they were contending
about. Grettir replied in a verse:

     "I know not if for all your pride
     he may not try your throat to squeeze.
     Thus when within my home I dwelt
     did he once belabour me."

Bardi said there was certainly some excuse if he was taking revenge.
"Let me now settle it between you," he said. "Let matters remain as they
are and cease your strife."

So they consented, for they were kinsmen. But Grettir had little liking
for Bardi or his brothers. They all rode away together. On the way
Grettir said: "I hear, Bardi, that you intend to go South to Borgarfjord
this summer; I propose that I shall go with you, which I think is more
than you deserve."

Bardi was very pleased with this offer, and at once accepted it most
thankfully. Then they parted. Bardi then turned back and said to
Grettir: "I would like it to be understood that you only come with me
if it meets with Thorarin's approval, since all the arrangements for the
expedition are with him."

"I thought," said Grettir, "you were competent to make your arrangements
for yourself. I do not leave my affairs to other people to settle. I
shall take it very ill if you refuse me."

Then each went his own way. Bardi promised to send Grettir word "if
Thorarin wished him to go." Otherwise he could remain quietly at home.
Grettir then rode to Bjarg and Bardi to his own home.




