CHAPTER LVII. ATTACK ON GRETTIR BY THORIR OF GARD WITH EIGHTY MEN
REPULSED WITH THE AID OF HALLMUND


At the All-Thing Thorir of Gard learned of Thorir Redbeard having been
killed. It was evident that the matter was not so easy to deal with. He
now determined to ride from the Thing in a westerly direction through
the lower heath, and with the aid of about eighty men whom he had with
him to take Grettir's life. Grim the son of Thorhall heard of his
plans and sent word to Grettir, bidding him beware of himself. Grettir
therefore continued closely to watch the movements of men who came and
went.

One day he saw a number of men coming in the direction of his place of
dwelling. He went into a gorge between two rocks, but did not go right
away because he did not see the whole of the troop. Thorir then came
up with his whole party and bade them go between his head and his body,
saying that the scoundrel had but a poor chance now.

"A filled cup is not yet drunk," answered Grettir. "You have come far
to seek me, and some of you shall bear the marks of our game before we
part."

Thorir urged his men on to attack him. The gorge was very narrow so that
he could easily defend it from one end, and he wondered much that they
did not get round to his rear to hurt him. Some of Thorir's men fell
and some were wounded, but they effected nothing. Then Thorir said: "I
always heard that Grettir was distinguished for his courage and daring,
but I never knew that he was so skilled in magic as I now see he is; for
there fall half as many again behind his back as before his face, and I
see that we have to do with a troll instead of a man."

So he bade his men retire, and they did so. Grettir wondered what the
explanation could be, but was terribly exhausted. Thorir and his
men withdrew and rode into the northern parts. Their expedition was
considered very disgraceful. Thorir had left eighteen men on the ground
and had many wounded.

Grettir then went up the gorge and found there a man of huge stature
sitting up against the rock and sorely wounded. Grettir asked his name,
and he said it was Hallmund, adding: "That you may recognise me I may
remind you that you thought I gripped the reins rather tightly when I
met you in Kjol last summer. I think I have now made that good."

"Indeed," said Grettir, "I think you have done me a manly service;
whenever I can I will repay it."

"Now I wish," said Hallmund, "that you may come to my home, for it must
seem wearisome to you here on the Heath."

Grettir said he would come willingly, and they both went together to
the foot of the Balljokull, where Hallmund had a large cave. There they
found his daughter, a fine and well-grown maiden. They treated Grettir
well, and the daughter nursed both the wounded men to health again.
Grettir stayed there some time that summer. He composed an ode on
Hallmund in which the line occurs:

     "Hallmund steps from his mountain hall";

further:

     "The war-fain sword in Arnarvatn
     went forth to hew its bloody path.
     Heroes inherit Kelduhverfi.
     Hallmund the brave came forth from his den."

It is said that at that encounter Grettir slew six men and Hallmund
twelve.

As the summer passed Grettir began to long for the habitations of men,
and to see his friends and kinsmen. Hallmund told him to visit him
when he returned to the South and Grettir promised to do so. He went
westwards to Borgarfjord and thence to Breidafjardardalir and sought
counsel of Thorsteinn Kuggason as to where he should go next. Thorsteinn
said that his enemies were now becoming so numerous that few would care
to take him in; but told him to go to Myrar and see what he found there.
So in the autumn he went to Myrar.




CHAPTER LVIII. GRETTIR VISITS BJORN THE HITDALE WARRIOR AND TAKES REFUGE
IN THE FAGRASKOGAFJALL


There lived in Holm Bjorn the Hitdale Warrior, who was the son of
Arngeir, the son of Bersi the Godless, the son of Balki, who was the
first settler in Hrutafjord, as has already been told. Bjorn was a great
chief and a valiant man, always ready to take in outlaws. He received
Grettir well when he came to Holm on account of the friendship which had
existed between their former kinsmen. Grettir asked if he would give him
shelter, and Bjorn said that he had so many quarrels throughout the land
that men would be reluctant to take him in for fear of being outlawed
themselves. "But," he said, "I will give you some help if you will leave
the men who are under my protection in peace, whatever you do to others
in this part."

Grettir promised that he would, and Bjorn continued: "I have thought of
something. In the mountain which stretches away from the Hitara river
there is a good position for defence, and likewise a good hiding-place
if it is skilfully managed. There is a hole through the mountain from
which you can see down upon the high road that lies immediately beneath
it, and a sandy slope down to the road so steep that few could get up it
if it were defended above by one doughty man up in the hollow. It may, I
think, be worth your while to consider whether you can stay there; it
is easy to go down from there to the Myrar to get your supplies, and to
reach the sea."

Grettir said he would trust to his foresight if he would help him a
little. Then he went to Fagraskogafjall and made himself a home there.
He hung some grey wadmal in front of the hole, and it looked from the
road below as if one could see through. Then he began to get in his
supplies, but the Myramen thought they had an unhappy visitor in
Grettir.

Thord the son of Kolbeinn was an excellent poet who dwelt in Hitarnes.
There was a great feud between him and Bjorn at that time, and Bjorn
thought it would be more than half useful to him if Grettir were to busy
himself with Thord's men or his cattle. Grettir was a great deal with
Bjorn and they had many games of strength. It is related in Bjorn's saga
that they were considered equal in strength, but the opinion of most
people is that Grettir was the strongest man that had been in the land
since the days when Orin Storolfsson and Thoralf Skolmsson ceased their
trials of strength. Grettir and Bjorn swam in one course the whole
length of the Hitara from the lake at its head down to the sea. They
brought the stepping-stones into the river which neither floods nor
freezing nor icedrifts have since moved from their places. Grettir
stayed a year in Fagraskogafjall without any attack being made upon him,
and yet many lost their property through his means and got nothing for
it, because his position was strong for defence and he was always in
good friendship with those who were nearest to him.




