CHAPTER LXIV. GHOSTS IN BARDARDAL


There was dwelling at Eyjardalsa in Bardardal a priest named Steinn, a
good farmer and wealthy. His son Kjartan was grown up and was now a fine
young man. Thorsteinn the White was a man who dwelt at Sandhaugar to
the south of Eyjardalsa; his wife Steinvor was young and of a merry
disposition. They had children who at this time were yet young. Their
place was generally thought to be much haunted by trolls. Two winters
before Grettir came North into those parts, Steinvor the mistress of
Sandhaugar went as usual to spend Yule at Eyjardalsa, while her husband
stayed at home. Men lay down to sleep in the evening, and in the night
they heard a great noise in the room near the bondi's bed. No one dared
to get up to see what was the matter because there were so few of
them. The mistress of the house returned home the next morning, but her
husband had disappeared and no one knew what had become of him. So the
next season passed. The following winter the mistress wanted to go to
mass, and told her servant to stay at home; he was very unwilling but
said she should be obeyed. It happened just as before; this time the
servant disappeared. People thought it very strange and found some drops
of blood upon the outer door, so they supposed that some evil spirit
must have carried off both the men. The story spread all through the
district and came to the ears of Grettir, who being well accustomed to
deal with ghosts and spectres turned his steps to Bardardal and arrived
at Yule-eve at Sandhaugar. He retained his disguise and called himself
Gest. The lady of the house saw that he was enormously tall, and the
servants were terribly afraid of him. He asked for hospitality; the
mistress told him that food was ready for him but that he must see after
himself. He said he would, and added: "I will stay in the house while
you go to mass if you would like it."

She said: "You must be a brave man to venture to stay in the house."

"I do not care for a monotonous life," he said.

Then she said: "I do not want to remain at home, but I cannot get across
the river."

"I will come with you," said Gest. Then she made ready to go to mass
with her little daughter. It was thawing outside; the river was flooded
and was covered with ice. She said: "It is impossible for either man or
horse to cross the river."

"There must be fords," said Gest; "do not be afraid."

"First carry the maiden over," she said; "she is lighter."

"I don't want to make two journeys of it," said he; "I will carry you in
my arms."

She crossed herself and said: "That is impossible; what will you do with
the girl?"

"I will find a way," he said, taking them both up and setting the girl
on her mother's knee as he bore them both on his left arm, keeping his
right arm free. So he carried them across. They were too frightened to
cry out. The river came up to his breast, and a great piece of ice drove
against him, which he pushed off with the hand that was free. Then the
stream became so deep that it broke over his shoulder, but he waded on
vigorously till he reached the other bank and put them on shore. It was
nearly dark by the time he got home to Sandhaugar and called for some
food. When he had eaten something he told the servants to go to the
other end of the hall. Then he got some boards and loose logs and laid
them across the hall to make a great barricade so that none of the
servants could get across. No one dared to oppose him or to object to
anything. The entrance was in the side wall of the hall under the back
gable, and near it was a cross bench upon which Grettir laid himself,
keeping on his clothes, with a light burning in the room. So he lay till
into the night.

The mistress reached Eyjardalsa for mass and every one wondered how she
had crossed the river. She said she did not know whether it was a man or
a troll who had carried her over. The priest said it was certainly a man
though unlike other men. "Let us keep silence over it; may be that he
means to help you in your difficulties."

She stayed there the night.




CHAPTER LXV. ADVENTURE WITH A TROLL-WOMAN


We return now to tell of Gest. Towards midnight he heard a loud noise
outside, and very soon there walked a huge troll-wife into the room. She
carried a trough in one hand and a rather large cutlass in the other.
She looked round the room as she entered, and on seeing Gest lying there
she rushed at him; he started up and attacked her furiously. They
fought long together; she was the stronger but he evaded her skilfully.
Everything near them and the panelling of the back wall were broken to
pieces. She dragged him through the hall door out to the porch, where he
resisted vigorously. She wanted to drag him out of the house, but before
that was done they had broken up all the fittings of the outer door and
borne them away on their shoulders. Then she strove to get to the river
and among the rocks. Gest was terribly fatigued, but there was no choice
but either to brace himself or be dragged down to the rocks. All night
long they struggled together, and he thought he had never met with such
a monster for strength. She gripped him so tightly to herself that he
could do nothing with either hand but cling to her waist. When at last
they reached a rock by the river he swung the monster round and got his
right hand loose. Then he quickly seized the short sword which he was
wearing, drew it and struck at the troll's right shoulder, cutting off
her right arm and releasing himself. She sprang among the rocks and
disappeared in the waterfall. Gest, very stiff and tired, lay long by
the rock.

At daylight he went home and lay down on his bed, blue and swollen all
over.

When the lady of the house came home she found the place rather in
disorder. She went to Gest and asked him what had happened, and why
everything was broken to pieces. He told her everything just as it had
happened. She thought it a matter of great moment and asked him who
he was. He told her the truth, said that he wished to see a priest and
asked her to send for one. She did so; Steinn came to Sandhaugar and
soon learnt that it was Grettir the son of Asmund who had come there
under the name of Gest. The priest asked him what he thought had become
of the men who had disappeared; Grettir said he thought that they must
have gone among the rocks. The priest said he could not believe his word
unless he gave some evidence of it. Grettir said that later it would be
known, and the priest went home. Grettir lay many days in his bed and
the lady did all she could for him; thus Yule-tide passed. Grettir
himself declared that the trollwoman sprang among the rocks when she was
wounded, but the men of Bardardal say that the day dawned upon her while
they were wrestling; that when he cut off her arm she broke, and that
she is still standing there on the mountain in the likeness of a woman.
The dwellers in the valley kept Grettir there in hiding.

One day that winter after Yule Grettir went to Eyjardalsa and met the
priest, to whom he said: "I see, priest, that you have little belief in
what I say. Now I wish you to come with me to the river and to see what
probability there is in it."

The priest did so. When they reached the falls they saw a cave up under
the rock. The cliff was there so abrupt that no one could climb it, and
nearly ten fathoms down to the water. They had a rope with them. The
priest said: "It is quite impossible for any one to get down to that."

Grettir answered: "It is certainly possible; and men of high mettle are
those who would feel themselves happiest there. I want to see what there
is in the fall. Do you mind the rope."

The priest said he could do so if he chose. He drove a stake into the
ground and laid stones against it.




