CHAPTER III. MEETING OF DEFEATED CHIEFS IN THE WEST AND MARRIAGE OF
ONUND


There were then in the western parts many distinguished men who had fled
from their homes in Norway before King Harald, for he declared all who
fought against him outlaws, and seized their property. As soon as Onund
had recovered from his wound, Thrand went with his party to Geirmund
Swarthyskin, who was the most eminent of the vikings in the West. They
asked him whether he was not going to try and regain his kingdom in
Hordland, and offered to join him, hoping by this means to do something
for their own properties, for Onund was very wealthy and his kindred
very powerful. Geirmund answered that Harald had such a force that there
was little hope of gaining any honour by fighting when the whole country
had joined against him and been beaten. He had no mind, he said,
to become the king's thrall, and to beg for that which he had once
possessed in his own right. Seeing that he was no longer in the vigour
of his youth he preferred to find some other occupation. So Onund and
his party returned to the Southern Islands, where they met many of their
friends.

There was a man named Ofeig, nicknamed Grettir. He was the son of Einar,
the son of Olvir the Babyman. He was a brother of Oleif the Broad, the
father of Thormod Shaft. Another son of Olvir was named Steinolf, the
father of Una, whom Thorbjorn the Salmon-man married. A third son of
Olvir was Steinmod, who was the father of Konal, the father of Alfdis
of the Barra Isles. Konal's son was named Steimnod; he was the father of
Halldora, whom Eilif, the son of Ketil the One-handed, married.

Ofeig Grettir married Asny, the daughter of Vestar, the son of Haeing.
His sons were Asmund the Beardless and Asbjorn, and his daughters were
named Aldis, Aesa, and Asvor. Ofeig had fled from the wrath of King
Harald into the West over the sea, along with his kinsman Thormod Shaft
and all their families. They ravaged far and wide in the western seas.
Thrand and Onund Treefoot were going West to Ireland to join Thrand's
brother, Eyvind the Easterner, who had command of the Irish defences.
Eyvind's mother was named Hlif; she was the daughter of Hrolf, the son
of Ingjald, the son of King Frodi, while Thrand's mother was Helga, the
daughter of Ondott Crow. The father of Eyvind and Thrand was Bjorn, the
son of Hrolf of Ar. He had had to leave Gautland because he had burnt
in his house Sigfast the father-in-law of King Solvi. Then he went to
Norway and spent the winter with Grim the Hersir, a son of Kolbjorn
the Sneak, who wanted to murder him for his money. Thence Bjorn went
to Ondott Crow, who lived in Hvinisfjord in Agdir. There he was well
received, stayed the winter, and went campaigning with Ondott in the
summer until his wife Hlif died. Eventually Ondott gave Bjorn his
daughter Helga, and Bjorn then no longer went out to fight. Eyvind had
taken over his father's ships and become a great chief in the western
parts. He married Rafarta, the daughter of the Irish king Kjarval. Their
sons were Helgi the Lean and Snaebjorn.

When Thrand and Onund came to the Southern Islands they found there
Ofeig Grettir and Thormod Shaft, with whom they became very friendly,
for each thought the others had risen from the dead, their last meeting
having been in Norway when the war was at its worst. Onund was very
silent, and Thrand, when he noticed it, asked what was on his mind.
Onund answered with a verse:

     "No joy is mine since in battle I fought.
     Many the sorrows that o'er me lower.
     Men hold me for nought; this thought is the worst
     of all that oppresses my sorrowing heart."

Thrand said: "Why, you still seem as full of vigour as ever you were.
You may yet settle down and marry. You shall have my good word and my
interest if you will only tell me whom you fancy."

Onund said he behaved nobly; but said there had once been a time when
his chances of making a profitable marriage had been better.

Thrand said: "Ofeig has a daughter named Aesa; we might mention it if
you like."

Onund said he would like it, and soon afterwards Ofeig was approached on
the subject. He received the proposal favourably, saying he knew the
man to be of good lineage and to have some wealth in movable property,
though his lands were not worth much. "But," he said, "I do not think he
is very wise. Why, my daughter is quite a child."

Thrand said that Onund was more vigorous than many a man whose legs were
sounder.

So with the aid of Thrand the terms were settled. Ofeig was to give his
daughter a portion in cash, for neither would reckon anything for his
lands in Norway. Soon afterwards Thrand was betrothed to the daughter of
Thormod Shaft. Both the maids were to remain plighted for three years.

Then they went on fighting expeditions in the summer, remaining in the
Barra Isles during the winter.




CHAPTER IV. FIGHT WITH VIKINGS VIGBJOD AND VESTMAR


There were two Vikings from the Southern Isles, named Vigbjod and
Vestmar; they were abroad both summer and winter. They had eight ships,
and harried mostly round the coast of Ireland, where they did many an
evil deed until Eyvind undertook the defence of the coast, when they
retired to the Hebrides to harry there, and right in to the Scotch
firths. Thrand and Onund went out against them and learned that they had
sailed to an island called Bot. Onund and Thrand followed them thither
with five ships, and when the vikings sighted them and saw how many
there were, they thought their own force was sufficient, so they took to
their arms and advanced to the attack. Onund ordered his ships to
take up a position between two rocks where there was a deep but narrow
channel, open to attack from one side only, and by not more than five
ships at once. Onund was a very wily man. He sent his five ships forward
into the channel so that, as there was plenty of sea room behind them,
they could easily retire by merely backing their oars. One ship he
brought under an island lying on their beam, and carried a great stone
to a place on the front of the rock where it could not be seen from the
enemy's ships. The Vikings came boldly on, thinking they had caught them
in a trap. Vigbjod asked who they were that he had hemmed in. Thrand
answered that he was a brother of Eyvind the Easterner, and the man with
him was his comrade, Onund Treefoot. The vikings laughed and said:

     "Trolls take the rascal Treefoot
     and lay him even with the ground.

Never yet did I see men go to battle who could not carry themselves."

Onund said that could not be known until it was tried. Then the ships
came together. There was a great battle in which both sides fought
bravely. When the battle was thick Onund ordered his ships to back their
oars. The vikings seeing it thought they were taking to flight, and
pushed on with all their might, coming under the rock just at the moment
when the party which had been dispatched for that purpose arrived. They
launched upon the vikings stones so huge that nothing could hold against
them. A number of the vikings were killed, and others were so injured
that they could fight no more. Then the vikings tried to escape, but
could not, as their ships were in the narrowest part of the channel and
were impeded both by the current and by the enemy's ships. Onund's men
vigorously attacked the wing commanded by Vigbjod while Thrand engaged
Vestmar, but effected little. When the men on Vigbjod's ship had been
somewhat reduced, Onund's men, he himself with them, prepared to board
her. On seeing that, Vigbjod spurred on his men resolutely. He turned
against Onund, most of whose men gave way. Onund was a man of immense
strength and he bade his followers observe how it fared with them. They
shoved a log under the stump of his leg, so that he stood pretty firm.
The viking dashed forward, reached Onund and hewed at him with his
sword, which cut right through his shield and into the log beneath his
leg, where it remained fixed. As Vigbjod bent down to pull his sword
clear again, Onund dealt him a blow on his shoulder, severing his arm
and disabling him. When Vestmar saw his comrade fall, he sprang on to
the outermost ship and escaped along with all who could get on to her.
Then they examined the dead. Vigbjod had already expired. Onund went up
to him and said:

     "Bloody thy wounds.  Didst thou see me flee?
     'One-leg' no hurt received from thee.
     Braver are many in word than in deed.
     Thou, slave, didst fail when it came to the trial."

They took a large quantity of booty and returned to the Barra Isles in
the autumn.




