CHAPTER XXXVI. THORBJORN SLOWCOACH AT HOME


Thorbjorn Oxmain gave a great feast in the autumn at which many were
assembled, whilst Grettir was in the North in Vatnsdal. Thorbjorn
Slowcoach was there and many things were talked about. The Hrutafjord
people inquired about Grettir's adventure on the ridge in the summer.
Thorbjorn Oxmain praised Grettir's conduct, and said that Kormak would
have had the worst of it if no one had come to part them. Then Thorbjorn
Slowcoach said: "What I saw of Grettir's fighting was not famous; and
he seemed inclined to shirk when we came up. He was very ready to leave
off, nor did I see him make any attempt to avenge the death of Atli's
man. I do not believe there is much heart in him, except when he has a
sufficient force behind him."

Thorbjorn went on jeering at him in this way. Many of the others had
something to say about it, and they thought that Grettir would not leave
it to rest if he heard what Thorbjorn was saying.

Nothing more happened at the festivities; they all went home, and there
was a good deal of ill-will between them all that winter, though no one
took any action. Nothing more happened that winter.




CHAPTER XXXVII. GRETTIR SAILS FOR NORWAY AND KILLS THORBJORN SLOWCOACH


Early in the spring, before the meeting of the Thing, there arrived a
ship from Norway. There was much news to tell, above all of the change
of government. Olaf the son of Harald was now king, having driven away
jarl Sveinn from the country in the spring which followed the battle of
Nesjar. Many noteworthy things were told of King Olaf. Men said that he
took into favour all men who were skilled in any way and made them his
followers. This pleased many of the younger men in Iceland and made them
all want to leave home. When Grettir heard of it he longed to go too,
deeming that he merited the king's favour quite as much as any of the
others. A ship came up to Gasar in Eyjafjord; Grettir engaged a passage
in her and prepared to go abroad. He had not much outfit as yet.

Asmund was now becoming very infirm and scarcely left his bed. He and
Asdis had a young son named Illugi, a youth of much promise. Atli had
taken over all the management of the farm and the goods, and things went
much better, for he was both obliging and provident.

Grettir embarked on his ship. Thorbjorn Slowcoach had arranged to travel
in the same vessel without knowing that Grettir would be in her. Some of
his friends tried to dissuade him from travelling in Grettir's
company, but he insisted upon going. He was rather a long time over his
preparations and did not get to Gasar before the ship was ready to sail.
Before he left home Asmund Longhair was taken ill and was quite confined
to his bed. Thorbjorn Slowcoach arrived on the beach late in the day,
when the men were going on board and were washing their hands outside
near their booths. When he rode up to the rows of booths they greeted
him and asked what news there was.

"I have nothing to tell," he said, "except that the valorous Asmund at
Bjarg is now dead."

Some of them said that a worthy bondi had left the world and asked how
it happened.

"A poor lot befell his Valour," he replied. "He was suffocated by the
smoke from the hearth, like a dog. There is no great loss in him, for he
was in his dotage."

"You talk strangely about such a man as he was," they said. "Grettir
would not be much pleased if he heard you."

"I can endure Grettir's wrath," he said. "He must bear his axe higher
than he did at Hrutafjardarhals if he wishes to frighten me."

Grettir heard every word that Thorbjorn said, but took no notice as long
as he was speaking. When he had finished Grettir said:

"I prophesy, Slowcoach, that you will not die of the smoke from the
hearth, and yet perhaps you will not die of old age either. It is
strange conduct to say shameful things of innocent men."

Thorbjorn said: "I have nothing to unsay. I never thought you would fire
up like this on the day when we got you out of the hands of the men of
Mel who were belabouring you like an ox's head."

Then Grettir spoke a verse:

     "Too long is the tongue of the spanner of bows.
     Full often he suffers the vengeance due.
     Slowcoach!  I tell thee that many a man
     has paid for less shameful speech with his life."

Thorbjorn said his life was neither more nor less in danger than it was
before.

"My prophecies are not generally long-lived," said Grettir, "nor shall
this one be. Defend yourself if you will; you never will have better
occasion for it than now."

Grettir then struck at him. He tried to parry the blow with his arm, but
it struck him above the wrist and glanced off on to his neck so that his
head flew off. The sailors declared it was a splendid stroke, and that
such were the men for the king. No one would grieve, they said, because
a man so quarrelsome and scurrilous as Thorbjorn had been killed.

Soon after this they got under way and towards the end of the summer
reached the south coast of Norway, about Hordland, where they learned
that King Olaf was in the North at Thrandheim. Grettir took a passage
thither with some traders intending to seek audience of the king.




