CHAPTER LXVI. GRETTIR SLAYS A GIANT


Grettir now fastened a stone in a loop at the end of the rope, and
lowered it from above into the water.

"Which way do you mean to go?" asked the priest.

"I don't mean to be bound when I come into the fall," Grettir said. "So
my mind tells me."

Then he prepared to go; he had few clothes on and only a short sword; no
other arms. He jumped from a rock and got down to the fall. The priest
saw the soles of his feet but after that did not know what had become of
him. Grettir dived beneath the fall.

It was very difficult swimming because of the currents, and he had to
dive to the bottom to get behind the fall. There was a rock where he
came up, and a great cave under the fall in front of which the water
poured. He went into the cave, where there was a large fire burning
and a horrible great giant most fearful to behold sitting before it. On
Grettir entering the giant sprang up, seized a pike and struck at him,
for he could both strike and thrust with it. It had a wooden shaft and
was of the kind called "heptisax." Grettir struck back with his sword
and cut through the shaft. Then the giant tried to reach up backwards to
a sword which was hanging in the cave, and at that moment Grettir
struck at him and cut open his lower breast and stomach so that all his
entrails fell out into the river and floated down the stream. The priest
who was sitting by the rope saw some debris being carried down all
covered with blood and lost his head, making sure that Grettir was
killed. He left the rope and ran off home, where he arrived in the
evening and told them for certain that Grettir was dead, and said it was
a great misfortune to them to have lost such a man.

Grettir struck few more blows at the giant before he was dead. He then
entered the cave, kindled a light and explored. It is not told how much
treasure he found there, but there is supposed to have been some. He
stayed there till late into the night and found the bones of two men,
which he carried away in a skin. Then he came out of the cave, swam to
the rope and shook it, thinking the priest was there; finding him gone
he had to swarm up the rope and so reached the top. He went home to
Eyjardalsa and carried the skin with the bones in it into the vestibule
of the church together with a rune-staff, upon which were most
beautifully carved the following lines:

     "Into the fall of the torrent I went;
     dank its maw towards me gaped.
     The floods before the ogress' den
     Mighty against my shoulder played";

and then:

     "Hideous the friend of troll-wife came.
     Hard were the blows I dealt upon him.
     The shaft of Heptisax was severed.
     My sword has pierced the monster's breast."

There too it was told how Grettir had brought the bones from the cave.
The priest when he came to the church on the next morning found the
staff and all that was with it and read the runes. Grettir had then
returned home to Sandhaugar.




CHAPTER LXVII. VISIT TO GUDMUND THE MIGHTY


When the priest met Grettir again he asked him to say exactly what had
happened, and Grettir told him all about where he had been. He said that
the priest had held the rope very faithlessly, and the priest admitted
that it was true. Men felt no doubt that these monsters were responsible
for the disappearance of the men in the valley, nor was there any
haunting or ghost-walking there afterwards; Grettir had evidently
cleared the land of them. The bones were buried by the priest in the
churchyard. Grettir stayed the winter in Bardardal, but unknown to the
general public.

Thorir of Gard heard rumours of Grettir being in Bardardal and set some
men on to take his life. Men thereupon advised him to depart, and he
went into the West to Modruvellir, where he met Gudmund the Mighty and
asked him for protection. Gudmund said it would not be convenient for
him to take him in.

"You must," he said, "find a place to settle in where you need be in no
fear for your life."

Grettir said he did not know where such a place was.

"There is an island," Gudmund said, "in Skagafjord, called Drangey. It
is excellent for defence; no one can get up to it without a ladder. If
once you can reach it there is no chance of any one attacking you there
with arms or with craft, so long as you guard the ladder well."

"That shall be tried," said Grettir. "But I am in such dread of the dark
that even for the sake of my life I cannot live alone."

"It may be that it is so," said Gudmund; "but trust no man so well that
you trust not yourself better. Many are unfit to be trusted."

Grettir thanked him for his excellent advice and departed from
Modruvellir. He went on straight to Bjarg, where his mother and
Illugi greeted him joyfully. He stayed there several days and heard of
Thorsteinn Kuggason having been slain in the autumn before he went to
Bardardal. Fate, he thought, was striking hard against him. Then he rode
South to Holtavarda Heath, intending to revenge the death of Hallmund if
he could meet with Grim. On reaching Nordrardal he learnt that Grim had
left two or three years before, as has already been related. Grettir
had not received news of it because he had been in hiding there for two
years and a third in Thorisdal and had met no one to tell him of what
had happened. Then he turned his steps towards the Breidafjord valleys
and waylaid those who passed over Brattabrekka. He continued to let his
hands sweep over the property of the small farmers during the height of
the summer season.

When the summer was passing away, Steinvor at Sandhaugar gave birth to
a son who was named Skeggi. He was at first fathered on Kjartan, the son
of Steinn the priest at Eyjardalsa. Skeggi was unlike all his family
in his strength and stature. When he was fifteen years old he was the
strongest man in the North, and then they put him down to Grettir. There
seemed a prospect of his growing into something quite extraordinary, but
he died when he was seventeen and there is no saga about him.




