CHAPTER LXII. HALLMUND IS KILLED BY A FOREST-MAN NAMED GRIM


Soon after Grettir had left the Arnarvatn Heath there came a man there
named Grim, the son of a widow at Kropp. He had killed the son of Eid
of Ass, the son of Skeggi, and been outlawed for it. So there he stayed
where Grettir had been before him and got plenty of fish out of the
lake. Hallmund was not at all pleased at Grim being there instead of
Grettir, and said that he should have little advantage from his great
catches of fish. One morning Grim had caught a hundred fish, which he
brought to the hut and arranged outside. The next morning when he went
there every fish was gone. He thought it very strange, but returned
to the lake and caught this time two hundred. He carried them home and
arranged them; again everything happened as before; in the morning all
were gone, evidently through the same agency as before. The third day he
caught three hundred, carried them home and kept a watch on his hut. He
looked out through a hole in the door to see if any one came, and so
he remained for a time. When about one third of the night had passed
he heard some one walking near and stepping rather heavily; so he
immediately took his axe, which was very sharp, and wanted to know what
was the matter. There came a man with a big basket on his back; he put
it down and looked round, but saw no one outside. He rummaged about
among the fish and seemed to think that they would do for him to lay
hands upon. He threw them all into his basket and they quite filled it.
The fishes were so large that Grim thought no horse would be able to
carry more. This man then took the load and got beneath it. Just as
he was about to rise Grim rushed out and taking his axe in both hands
struck a blow at his neck which went through the skin. He started in
surprise and then ran off towards the south of the hill with his basket.
Grim went after him to see whether he had got him. They went south along
the foot of the Balljokull where the man entered a cave. There was
a bright fire in the cave and a woman standing in it, very tall but
shapely. Grim heard her greet her father, calling him Hallmund. He flung
down his load and heaved a great sigh. She asked why he was covered with
blood. He answered in a verse:

     "No man, I see, may trust his might.
     His luck and heart will fail at death."

Then she pressed him to say what had happened, and he told her
everything.

"Hear now," he said, "what I tell you of my adventure. I will tell it to
you in verse, and you shall cut it in runes on a staff."

She did so, and he spoke the Hallmundarkvida, in which the following
occurs:

     "I was strong when Grettir's bridle I seized
     I saw him gazing long at his palms.

     Then Thorir came on the Heath with his men.
     'Gainst eighty we two had play with our spears.

     Grettir's hands knew how to strike;
     much deeper the marks that were left by mine.

     Arms and heads then flew as they tried
     to gain my rear; eighteen of them fell.

     The giant-kind and the grim rock-dwellers,
     demons and blendings fell before me,
     elves and devils have felt my hand."

Many exploits of his did Hallmund recount in the lay, for he had been in
every land.

The daughter said: "That man was not going to let his catch slip away
from him. It was only to be expected, for you treated him very badly.
But who is going to avenge you?"

"It is not certain that anybody will, but I think that Grettir would
avenge me if he were able. It will not be easy to go against this man's
luck; he is destined to great things." Then as the lay continued his
strength began to fail. Hallmund died almost at the moment when he
finished the song. She grieved much for him and wept sorely. Then Grim
came forward and bade her be comforted. "All," he said, "must depart
when their fate calls. It was partly his own fault, for I could not look
on and see myself robbed."

She said he might speak much about that: "The unjust man prospers ill."

She was somewhat cheered by the talk with him. Grim stayed several
nights in the cave and learned the lay; all went well with them. Grim
was in the Arnarvatn Heath all the winter after Hallmund's death.
Afterwards Thorkell the son of Eyjolf came to the heath and fought with
him. The meeting ended by Grim having Thorkell's life in his power, but
he would not kill him. Thorkell then took him in, sent him abroad and
supplied him with means; each was considered to have acted generously
towards the other. Grim became a great traveller and there is a long
saga about him.




CHAPTER LXIII. GRETTIR'S MEETING WITH THORIR ON THE REYKJA HEATH


We now return to Grettir, who came from the eastern fjords, travelling
in disguise and hiding his head because he did not wish to meet Thorir.
That summer he spent in Modrudal Heath and other places. For a time
too he was on Reykja Heath. Thorir heard of his being on Reykja Heath,
gathered his men and rode thither, determined not to let him escape.
Grettir scarcely knew of their plans before they came upon him. He was
in a hill-dairy a little off the road with another man, and when they
saw the troop they had to lay their plans quickly. Grettir said they
should make their horses lie down inside the house, and they did so.
Thorir rode forward across the heath in a northerly direction, missed
the place, did not find Grettir and turned back home. When the troop had
ridden round to the West, Grettir said: "They will not be pleased with
their expedition if they do not meet me. You stay and mind the horses
while I go after them. It would be a good jest if they did not recognise
me."

His companion tried to dissuade him, but he would go. He changed his
dress, put on a wide hat which came down over his face and took a stick
in his hand. Then he went along the road towards them. They addressed
him and asked whether he had seen any men riding over the heath.

"I have seen the men whom you are seeking," he said, "you very nearly
came upon them; they were on your left hand just south of the marshes."

On hearing this they galloped off towards the marshes, which were so
swampy that they could not get through and had to spend a great part
of the day dragging their horses out. They swore much at the supposed
traveller for playing a practical joke upon them.

Grettir returned speedily home to his companion, and when they met spoke
a verse:

     "I will not ride to the warriors' arms;
     too great the danger is.
     I dare not meet the storm of Vidri;
     but homeward turn my steps."

They rode off as fast as they could westwards towards the homestead in
Gard before Thorir could come there with his company. When they were
near the place they met a man on the road who did not know them. There
was a young woman standing outside, very much dressed up, and Grettir
asked who she was. The man who had come up said she was Thorir's
daughter. Then Grettir spoke a verse:

     "Maiden, when thy father comes
     tell him, little though it please him,
     how I rode his dwelling past;
     only two who with me rode."

From this the man learnt who it was, and rode to the house to tell them
that Grettir had come round. When Thorir returned many men thought that
he had been bamboozled by Grettir. He then set spies to watch Grettir's
movements. Grettir took the precaution of sending his companion to the
western districts with his horse, while he himself went North into the
mountains at the beginning of the winter, muffling up his face so that
no one should recognise him. Every one thought that Thorir had fared no
better but even worse than at their former encounter.




