CHAPTER XXXIX. GRETTIR APPEARS BEFORE THE KING AND FAILS TO UNDERGO THE
ORDEAL


One day when the king was sitting in judgment Grettir came before him
and saluted him respectfully. The king looked at him and said:

"Are you Grettir the Strong?"

"So I have been called," he replied, "and I have come here in the hope
of obtaining deliverance from the slanders which are being spread about
me, and to say that I did not do this deed."

The king said: "You are worthy enough; but I know not what fortune you
will have in defending yourself. It is quite possible that you did not
intend to burn the men in the house."

Grettir said that he was most anxious to prove his innocence if the king
would permit him. Then the king bade him relate faithfully all that had
happened. Grettir told him everything exactly as it was, and declared
that they were all alive when he escaped with his fire; he was ready to
undergo any ordeal which the king considered that the law required.

King Olaf said: "I decree that you shall bear iron, if your fate so
wills it."

Grettir was quite content with that, and began his fast for the ordeal.
When the day for the ceremony arrived the king and the bishop went to
the church together with a multitude of people who came out of curiosity
to see a man so much talked about as Grettir. At last Grettir himself
was led to the church. When he entered many looked at him and remarked
that he excelled most men in strength and stature. As he passed down the
aisle there started up a very ill-favoured, overgrown boy and cried to
him:

"Wondrous are now the ways in a land where men should call themselves
Christians, when evil-doers and robbers and thieves walk in peace to
purge themselves. What should a wicked man find better to do than to
preserve his life so long as he may? Here is now a malefactor convicted
of guilt, one who has burnt innocent men in their houses, and yet is
allowed to undergo purgation. Such a thing is most unrighteous."

Then he went at Grettir, pointing at him with his finger, making
grimaces and calling him son of a sea-ogress, with many other bad names.
Then Grettir lost his temper and his self-control. He raised his hand
and gave him a box on the ear so that he fell senseless, and some
thought he was dead. No one seemed to know whence the boy had come nor
what became of him afterwards, but it was generally believed that he was
some unclean spirit sent forth for the destruction of Grettir.

There arose an uproar in the church; people told the king that the man
who had come to purge himself was fighting with those around him. King
Olaf came forward into the church to see what was going on, and said:

"You are a man of ill luck, Grettir. All was prepared for the ordeal,
but it cannot take place now. It is not possible to contend against your
ill-fortune."

Grettir said: "I expected, oh king, more honour from you for the sake of
my family than I now seem likely to obtain."

Then he told again the story as he had done before of what had taken
place with the men. "Gladly," he said, "would I enter your service;
there is many a man with you who is not my better as a warrior."

"I know," said the king, "that few are your equals in strength and
courage, but your luck is too bad for you to remain with me. You have my
leave to depart in peace whithersoever you will for the winter, and then
in the summer you may return to Iceland, where you are destined to lay
your bones."

"First I should like to clear myself of the charge of burning, if I
may," said Grettir; "for I did not do it intentionally."

"Very likely it is so," said the king; "but since the purgation has come
to naught through your impatience you cannot clear yourself further
than you have done. Impetuosity always leads to evil. If ever a man was
doomed to misfortune you are."

After that Grettir remained for a time in the town, but he got nothing
more out of Olaf. Then he went to the South, intending after that to go
East to Tunsberg to find his brother Thorsteinn Dromund. Nothing is told
of his journey till he came to Jadar.




CHAPTER XL. ADVENTURE WITH THE BERSERK SNAEKOLL


At Yule Grettir came to a bondi named Einar, a man of wealth who had a
wife and a marriageable daughter named Gyrid. She was a beautiful maiden
and was considered an excellent match. Einar invited Grettir to stay
over Yule, and he accepted.

It was no uncommon thing throughout Norway that robbers and other
ruffians came down from the forest and challenged men to fight for their
women, or carried off their property with violence if there was not
sufficient force in the house to protect them. One day at Yule-tide
there came a whole party of these miscreants to Einar's house. Their
leader was a great berserk named Snaekoll. He challenged Einar to hand
over his daughter to him or else to defend her, if he felt himself man
enough to do so. Now the bondi was no longer young, and no fighter. He
felt that he was in a great difficulty, and asked Grettir privately what
help he would give him, seeing that he was held to be so famous a man.
Grettir advised him to consent only to what was not dishonourable. The
berserk was sitting on his horse wearing his helmet, the chin-piece of
which was not fastened. He held before him a shield bound with iron and
looked terribly threatening. He said to the bondi:

"You had better choose quickly: either one thing or the other. What does
that big fellow standing beside you say? Would he not like to play with
me himself?"

"One of us is as good as the other," said Grettir, "neither of us is
very active."

"All the more afraid will you be to fight with me if I get angry."

"That will be seen when it is tried," said Grettir.

The berserk thought they were trying to get off by talking. He began
to howl and to bite the rim of his shield. He held the shield up to his
mouth and scowled over its upper edge like a madman. Grettir stepped
quickly across the ground, and when he got even with the berserk's horse
he kicked the shield with his foot from below with such force that it
struck his mouth, breaking the upper jaw, and the lower jaw fell down on
to his chest. With the same movement he seized the viking's helmet with
his left hand and dragged him from his horse, while with his right hand
he raised his axe and cut off the berserk's head. Snaekoll's followers
when they saw what had happened fled, every man of them. Grettir did
not care to pursue them for he saw that there was no heart in them. The
bondi thanked him for what he had done, as did many other men, for the
quickness and boldness of his deed had impressed them much. Grettir
stayed there for Yule and was well taken care of till he left, when the
bondi dismissed him handsomely. Then Grettir went East to Tunsberg to
visit his brother Thorsteinn, who received him joyfully and asked him
about his adventures. Grettir told him how he had killed the berserk,
and composed a verse:

     "The warrior's shield by my foot propelled
     in conflict came with Snaekoll's mouth.
     His nether jaw hung down on his chest,
     wide gaped his mouth from the iron ring."

"You would be very handy at many things," said Thorsteinn, "if
misfortune did not follow you."

"Men will tell of deeds that are done," said Grettir.




