CHAPTER XLIV. SETTLEMENT OF THE FEUD AT THE HUNAVATN THING


Thorbfron Oxmain took up the suit arising from the death of Thorir's
sons. He prepared his case against Grim and Atli, and they prepared
their defence on the grounds that the brothers had attacked them
wrongfully and were, therefore, "ohelgir." The case was brought before
the Hunavatn Thing and both sides appeared in force. Atli had many
connections, and was, therefore, strongly supported. Then those who were
friends of both came forward and tried to effect a reconciliation; they
urged that Atli was a man of good position and peacefully disposed,
though fearless enough when driven into a strait. Thorbjorn felt that
no other honourable course was open to him but to agree to a
reconciliation. Atli made it a condition that there should be no
sentence of banishment either from the district or the country. Then men
were appointed to arbitrate: Thorvald Asgeirsson on behalf of Atli, and
Solvi the Proud on behalf of Thorbjorn. This Solvi was a son of
Asbrand, the son of Thorbrand, the son of Harald Ring who had settled in
Vatnsnes, taking land as far as Ambattara to the West, and to the East
up to the Thvera and across to Bjargaoss and the whole side of Bjorg as
far as the sea. Solvi was a person of much display, but a man of sense,
and therefore Thorbjorn chose him as his arbitrator.

The decree of the arbitrators was that half penalties should be paid
for Thorir's sons and half should be remitted on account of the wrongful
attack which they made and their designs on Atli's life. The slaying
of Atli's man at Hrutafjardarhals should be set off against the two of
theirs who had been killed. Grim the son of Thorhall was banished
from his district and the penalties were to be paid by Atli. Atli was
satisfied with this award, but Thorbjorn was not; they parted nominally
reconciled, but Thorbjorn let drop some words to the effect that it was
not over yet if all happened as he desired.

Atli rode home from the Thing after thanking Thorvald for his
assistance. Grim the son of Thorhall betook himself to the South to
Borgarfjord and dwelt at Gilsbakki, where he was known as a worthy
bondi.




CHAPTER XLV. ATLI MURDERED BY THORBJORN OXMAIN


There was dwelling with Thorbjorn Oxmain a man whose name was Ali,
a servant, rather stubborn and lazy. Thorbjorn told him he must work
better or he would be beaten. Ali said he had no mind for work and
became abusive. Thorbjorn was not going to endure that, and got him down
and handled him roughly. After that Ali ran away and went to the North
across the neck to Midfjord; he did not stop till he reached Bjarg. Atli
was at home and asked whither he was going. He said he was seeking an
engagement.

"Are you not a servant of Thorbjorn?" Atli asked.

"We did not get on with our bargain. I was not there long, but it seemed
to me a bad place while I was there. Our parting was in such a way that
his song on my throat did not please me. I will never go back there,
whatever becomes of me. And it is true that there is a great difference
between you two in the way you treat your servants. I would be glad to
take service with you if there is a place, for me."

Atli said: "I have servants enough without stretching forth my hands for
those whom Thorbjorn has hired. You seem an impatient man and had better
go back to him."

"I am not going there of my own free will," said Ali.

He stayed there for the night, and in the morning went out to work with
Atli's men, and toiled as if he had hands everywhere. So he continued
all the summer; Atli took no notice of him, but allowed him his food,
for he was pleased with the man's work. Soon Thorbjorn learned that Ali
was at Bjarg. He rode thither with two others and called to Atli to come
out and speak with him. Atli went out and greeted him.

"You want to begin again provoking me to attack you, Atli," he said.
"Why have you taken away my workman? It is a most improper thing to do."

Atli replied: "It is not very clear to me that he is your workman. I do
not want to keep him if you can prove that he belongs to your household;
but I cannot drive him out of my house."

"You must have your way now," said Thorbjorn; "but I claim the man and
protest against his working for you. I shall come again, and it is not
certain that we shall then part any better friends than we are now."

Atli rejoined: "I shall stay at home and abide whatever comes to hand."

Thorbjorn then went off home. When the workmen came back in the evening
Atli told them of his conversation with Thorbjorn and said to Ali that
he must go his own ways, for he was not going to be drawn into a quarrel
for employing him.

Ali said: "True is the ancient saying: The over-praised are the worst
deceivers. I did not think that you would have turned me off now after
I had worked here till I broke in the summer. I thought that you
would have given me protection. Such is your way, however you play the
beneficent. Now I shall be beaten before your very eyes if you refuse to
stand by me."

Atli's mind was changed after the man had spoken; he no longer wanted to
drive him away.

So the time passed until the hay-harvest began. One day a little before
midsummer Thorbjorn Oxmain rode to Bjarg. He wore a helmet on his head,
a sword was girt at his side, and in his hand was a spear which had a
very broad blade. The weather was rainy; Atli had sent his men to mow
the hay, and some were in the North at Horn on some work. Atli was at
home with a few men only. Thorbjorn arrived alone towards midday and
rode up to the door. The door was shut and no one outside. Thorbjorn
knocked at the door and then went to the back of the house so that he
could not be seen from the door. The people in the house heard some one
knocking and one of the women went out. Thorbjorn got a glimpse of
the woman, but did not let himself be seen, for he was seeking another
person. She went back into the room and Atli asked her who had come.
She said she could see nobody outside. As they were speaking Thorbjorn
struck a violent blow on the door. Atli said:

"He wants to see me; perhaps he has some business with me, for he seems
very pressing."

Then he went to the outer door and saw nobody there. It was raining
hard, so he did not go outside, but stood holding both the door-posts
with his hands and peering round. At that moment Thorbjorn sidled round
to the front of the door and thrust his spear with both hands into
Atli's middle, so that it pierced him through. Atli said when he
received the thrust: "They use broad spear-blades nowadays."

Then he fell forward on the threshold. The women who were inside came
out and saw that he was dead. Thorbjorn had then mounted his horse; he
proclaimed the slaying and rode home. Asdis, the mistress of the house,
sent for men; Atli's body was laid out and he was buried beside his
father. There was much lamentation over his death, for he was both
wise and beloved. No blood-money was paid for his death, nor was any
demanded, for his representative was Grettir, if he should ever return
to Iceland. The matter rested there during the summer. Thorbjorn gained
little credit by this deed, but remained quietly at home.




