CHAPTER LXXVI. ADVENTURE OF HAERING IN DRANGEY


That summer a ship came to Gonguskardsos, on board of which was a man
named Haering. He was a young man and very active; he could climb
any cliff. He went to visit Thorbjorn Angle and stayed there into the
autumn. He pressed Thorbjorn much to take him to Drangey, that he
might see whether the cliff was so high that he could not get up there.
Thorbjorn said it should not be for nothing if he succeeded in getting
up on to the island and either killing or wounding Grettir; he made it
appear attractive as a task for Haering to undertake.

One day they went to Drangey and he put the Easterner ashore in a
certain place, telling him not to let himself be seen if he got to the
top. Then they set up the ladder and began a conversation with Grettir's
people. Thorbjorn asked him whether he would not leave the island. He
said there was nothing on which he was so determined.

"You have played much with us," said Thorbjorn, "and we do not seem
likely to have our revenge, but you have not much fear for yourself."

Thus they disputed for long, but came to no agreement.

We have now to tell of Haering. He climbed all about on the cliffs and
got to the top in a place which no other man ever reached before or
since. On reaching the top he saw the two brothers standing with their
backs turned to him. He hoped in a short time to win money and glory
from both. They had no inkling of his being there, and thought that
nobody could get up except where the ladders were. Grettir was occupied
with Thorbjorn's men, and there was no lack of derisive words on both
sides. Then Illugi looked round and saw a man coming towards them,
already quite close. He said: "Here is a man coming towards us with his
axe in the air; he has a rather hostile appearance."

"You deal with him," said Grettir, "while I look after the ladder."
Illugi then advanced against the Easterner, who on seeing him turned and
ran about all over the island. Illugi chased him to the furthest end of
the island; on reaching the edge he leaped down and broke every bone
in his body; thus his life ended. The place where he perished was
afterwards called Haering's leap. Illugi returned and Grettir asked him
how he had parted with his man.

"He would not trust me to manage for him," he said. "He broke his neck
over the cliff. The bondis may pray for him as for a dead man."

When Angle heard that he told his men to shove off. "I have now been
twice to meet Grettir," he said. "I may come a third time, and if then
I return no wiser than I am now, it is likely that they may stay in
Drangey, so far as I am concerned. But methinks Grettir will not be
there so long in the future as he has been in the past."

They then returned home and this journey seemed even worse than the
one before. Grettir stayed in Drangey and saw no more of Thorbjorn
that winter. Skapti the Lawman died during the winter, whereby Grettir
suffered a great loss, for he had promised to press for a removal of his
sentence when he had been twenty years an outlaw, and the events just
related were in the nineteenth year. In the spring died Snorri the Godi,
and much more happened during this winter season which does not belong
to our saga.




CHAPTER LXXVII. GRETTIR'S CASE BEFORE THE ALL-THING


That summer at the All-Thing Grettir's friends spoke much about
his outlawry, and some held that his term was fulfilled when he had
completed any portion of the twentieth year. This was disputed by the
opposite party, who declared that he had committed many acts deserving
of outlawry since, and that, therefore, his sentence ought to be all the
longer. A new Lawman had been appointed, Steinn the son of Thorgest,
the son of Steinn the Far-traveller, the son of Thorir Autumn-mist.
The mother of Steinn the Lawman was Arnora, the daughter of Thord the
Yeller. He was a wise man, and was asked for his opinion. He told them
to make a search to find out whether this was the twentieth year of his
outlawry, and they did so. Then Thorir of Gard went to work to put every
possible difficulty in the way, and found out that Grettir had spent one
year of the time in Iceland, during which he must be held to have been
free of his outlawry. Consequently it had only lasted nineteen years.

The Lawman declared that no man could be outlawed for longer than twenty
years in all, even though he committed an outlaw's acts during that
time. But before that he would allow no man to be freed.

Thus the endeavour to remove his sentence broke down for the moment, but
there seemed a certainty of his being freed in the following summer. The
men of Skagafjord were little pleased at the prospect of Grettir being
freed, and they told Thorbjorn Angle that he must do one of the two,
resign his holding in the island or kill Grettir. He was in great
straits, for he saw no way of killing Grettir, and yet he wanted to keep
the island. He tried everything he could think of to get the better of
Grettir by force or by fraud or in any other way that he could.




CHAPTER LXXVIII. THORBJORN'S FOSTER-MOTHER


Thorbjorn Angle had a foster-mother named Thurid. She was very old and
of little use to mankind, but she had been very skilled in witchcraft
and magic when she was young and the people were heathen. Now she seemed
to have lost it all. Still, although the land was Christian, many sparks
of heathendom remained. It was not forbidden by the law of the land to
sacrifice or perform other heathen rites in private; only the one who
performed them openly was sentenced to the minor exile. Now it happened
to many as it is said: The hand turns to its wonted skill, and that
which we have learned in youth is always most familiar to us. So
Thorbjorn Angle, baffled in all his plans, turned for help to the
quarter where it would have been least looked for most people, namely,
to his foster-mother, and asked her what she could do for him.

She replied, "Now it seems to me to have come to this, as the saying is:
Many go to the goat-house to get wool. What would I less than to think
myself above the other men of the country, and then to be as nothing
when it comes to the trial? I see not that it fares worse with me than
with you, even though I scarce rise from my bed. If you will have my
counsel then I must have my way in all that is done."

He consented, and said that she had long given him counsel for his good.
The "double month" of the summer was now approaching. One fine day the
old woman said to Angle: "The weather is now calm and bright; I will
that you go to Drangey and pick a quarrel with Grettir. I will go with
you and learn what caution is in his words. I shall have some surety
when I see how far they are prospering, and then I will speak over them
such words as I please."

Angle said: "Let us not go to Drangey. It is always worse in my mind
when I leave that place than when I arrive."

The woman said: "I will not help you if you will not let me do as I
like."

"Far be that from me, my foster-mother. I have said that I will go there
a third time, that something may come of it for us."

"You may venture it," she said, "much labour will you have before
Grettir is laid in the earth; often your lot will be doubtful and hard
will it go with you before it is finished. And yet you are so bound that
somehow you must get yourself out of it."

Then Thorbjorn Angle had a ten-oared boat manned and went on board with
eleven men. The woman was with them and they rowed out to Drangey. When
the brothers saw them coming they came forward to the ladder and began
once more to talk about their case. Thorbjorn said he had come once more
to hear their answer whether Grettir would leave the place. He said he
would treat the destruction of his property and Grettir's stay there
as a light thing, provided they parted in peace. Grettir said he had
no intention of coming to any terms about his going away. "I have often
told you," he said, "that there is no use in talking to me about it. You
may do whatever you please; I mean to stay here and abide what happens."

Thorbjorn saw that his end would not be gained this time, and said: "I
knew very well with what men of Hel I had to do. It is most likely that
some days will pass before I come here again."

"It would not hurt me if you never came at all," said Grettir.

The woman was lying in the stern sheets covered up with clothes. Then
she began to stir and said:

"These men are brave and unfortunate; there is much difference between
you; you offer them good and they refuse everything. There are few more
certain tokens of evil than not to know how to accept the good. Now I
say this of you, Grettir, that you be deprived of health, of all good
luck and fortune, of all protection and counsel, ever the more the
longer you live. I wish that your days may be less happy in the future
than they have been in the past."

When Grettir heard that he started violently and said: "What fiend is
that in the ship with them?"

Illugi said: "I think that must be the old woman, Thorbjorn's
foster-mother."

"Curse the hag!" he said. "I could have thought of nothing worse!
Nothing that was ever said startled me more than her words, and I know
that some evil will befall me from her and her spells. She shall have
something to remind her of her visit here."

Then he took up an enormous stone and threw it down into the boat. It
fell into the heap of clothes. Thorbjorn had not thought that any man
could throw so far. A loud scream was heard, for the stone had struck
her thigh and broken it.

Illugi said: "I wish you had not done that."

"Do not blame me for it," said Grettir. "I fear it has been just too
little. One old woman would not have been too great a price for us two."

"How will she pay for us? That will be a small sum for the pair of us."

Thorbjorn then returned home; no greeting passed between them when
he left. He spoke to the old woman and said: "It has happened as I
expected. Little credit has the journey to the island brought you. You
have been injured for the rest of your life, and we have no more
honour than we had before; we have to endure unatoned one insult after
another."

She answered: "This is the beginning of their destruction; I say that
from this time onwards they will go downwards. I care not whether I live
or not, if I do not have vengeance for the injury they have done me."

"You seem to be in high spirits, foster-mother," he said. Then they
arrived home. The woman lay in bed for nearly a month before her leg was
set and she was able to walk again. Men laughed much over the journey of
Thorbjorn and the old woman. Little luck had come from the meetings with
Grettir, first at the peace declaration at the Thing, next when Haering
was killed, and now the third time when the woman's thigh was broken,
while nothing had been done on their side. Thorbjorn Angle suffered much
from their talk.




