CHAPTER XCI. ABSOLUTION IN ROME


There were many who urged Thorsteinn to visit King Harald and become his
man, but he would not. Spes said to him: "I would not, Thorsteinn, that
you go to Harald, for a larger debt remains unpaid to another King,
whereto we must now turn our thoughts. Our youth is now passed; we are
both becoming old, and we have lived more after our desires than after
Christian doctrine or regard for righteousness. Now I know that neither
kinsmen nor wealth may pay this debt if we pay it not ourselves. I would
therefore that we now change our way of life and leave the country
to betake ourselves to Pafagard. [4] I have hope that so I shall be
absolved from my sin."

Thorsteinn answered: "The matter of which you speak is as well known
to me as it is to you. It is right that you should rule now, and most
seemly, since you allowed me to rule when our matter was much less
hopeful. And so shall it be now in all that you say."

This resolve of theirs took men by surprise. Thorsteinn was then two
years past of sixty-five, but still vigorous in all that he undertook.
He summoned all his kinsmen and connections to him and told them
his plans. The wiser men approved of his resolve, while holding his
departure a great misfortune for themselves. Thorsteinn said there was
no certainty of his return. He said:

"I wish now to thank you all for the care of my goods which you took
while I was absent. Now I ask you to take over my children along with
my property, and to bring them up in your own ways; for I am now come
to such an age that even if I live there is much doubt about whether I
shall return. Manage all that I leave behind as if I should never return
to Norway."

The men answered that matters would be more easily managed if his wife
remained to look after them.

She answered: "I left my own country and came from Mikligard with
Thorsteinn, I bade farewell to my kinsmen and my possessions, because
I wished that one fate should befall us both. And now it has seemed
pleasant to me here, but no desire have I to remain in Norway or in
these Northern lands after he has departed. There has always been
goodwill between us and no dissension. Now we must both depart together;
for we ourselves know best about many things which have happened since
we first met."

When they had thus dealt with their own condition, Thorsteinn appointed
certain impartial men to divide his property in two parts. Thorsteinn's
kinsmen took over the half which was to go to the children, and brought
them up with their father's relations. They became in time men of the
utmost valour, and a large posterity in the Vik is sprung from them.
Thorsteinn and Spes divided their share, giving some to the church for
the good of their souls and keeping some for themselves. So they set off
for Rome, bearing the good wishes of many with them.


ENDNOTES:

[Footnote 4: Rome.]




CHAPTER XCII. THE END OF THORSTEINN AND SPES


They travelled then the whole way to Rome, and appeared before him
who was appointed to hear confessions. They related truly all that
had happened, all the cunning tricks wherewith they had achieved their
union. They submitted with humility to the penances laid upon them,
and by reason of their having voluntarily turned their hearts to desire
absolution from their sins, without any pressure from the elders of the
church, their penance was lightened so far as it was possible, and
they were gently admonished to arrange their lives with wisdom for the
well-being of their souls, and, after receiving absolution in full, to
live henceforward in purity. They were declared to have acted wisely and
well.

Then the lady Spes said: "Now, I think it has gone well; and now we have
not suffered only misfortune together. It may be that foolish men will
follow the example of our former lives. Let us now end in such way that
we may be an example to the good. We will come to an agreement with some
men skilled in building to erect for each of us a stone retreat, thus
may we atone for all the offences which we have committed against God."

So Thorsteinn advanced money to stone-masons and such other persons
as might be needed, that they might not be without the means of
subsistence. When these works were completed and all matters were
settled, a fitting time was chosen for them to part company with each
other, each to live alone, in order more surely to partake of the
eternal life in another world. They remained each in their own retreat,
living as long as it pleased God to spare them, and thus ending their
lives.

Most men consider Thorsteinn Dromund and Spes to have been most
fortunate in escaping from the difficulties which they had fallen into.
None of their children or posterity are mentioned as having come to
Iceland.




CHAPTER XCIII. THE TESTIMONY OF STURLA THE LAWMAN


Sturla the Lawman has declared that no outlaw was ever so distinguished
as Grettir the Strong. For this he assigns three reasons. First, that he
was the cleverest, inasmuch as he was the longest time an outlaw of
any man without ever being captured, so long as he was sound in health.
Secondly, that he was the strongest man in the land of his age, and
better able than any other to deal with spectres and goblins. Thirdly,
that his death was avenged in Constantinople, a thing which had never
happened to any other Icelander.

Further, he says that Thorsteinn Dromund was a man who had great luck in
the latter part of his life.

Here endeth the story of Grettir the son of Asmund.







