CHAPTER LIII. GRETTIR WINTERS IN LJARSKOGAR WITH THORSTEINN KUGGASON


During the autumn Grettir returned to the South and did not stop till he
came to his kinsman Thorsteinn Kuggason in Ljarskogar, who welcomed
him. He accepted Thorsteinn's invitation to stay the winter with him.
Thorsteinn was a man who worked very hard; he was a smith, and kept a
number of men working for him. Grettir was not one for hard work, so
that their dispositions did not agree very well. Thorsteinn had had a
church built on his lands, with a bridge from his house, made with much
ingenuity. Outside the bridge, on the beam which supported it, rings
were fastened and bells, which could be heard from Skarfsstadir half a
sea-mile distant when any one walked over the bridge. The building of
the bridge had cost Thorsteinn, who was a great worker in iron, much
labour. Grettir was a first-rate hand at forging the iron, but was not
often inclined to work at it. He was very quiet during the winter so
that there is not much to relate.

The men of Hrutafjord heard that Grettir was with Thorsteinn, and
gathered their forces in the spring. Thorsteinn then told Grettir that
he must find some other hiding-place for himself, since he would not
work. Men who did nothing did not suit him.

"Where do you mean me to go to?" asked Grettir.

Thorsteinn told him to go South to his kinsmen, but to return to him if
he found them of no use.

Grettir did so. He went to Borgarfjord in the South to visit Grim the
son of Thorhall, and stayed with him till the Thing was over. Grim sent
him on to Skapti the Lawman at Hjalli. He went South over the lower
heaths and did not stop before he reached Tunga, where he went to
Thorhall, the son of Asgrim the son of Ellidagrim, and paid few visits
to the farms around. Thorhall knew of Grettir through the relations
which had been between their ancestors; indeed Grettir's name was well
known throughout the country because of his exploits. Thorhall was a
wise man and treated Grettir well, but did not want to keep him there
for very long.




CHAPTER LIV. ADVENTURE WITH LOPT


Grettir went from Tunga up the Haukadal valley northwards to Kjol and
was there for some time in the summer. For men travelling either to the
North or to the South there was no certainty of their not being stripped
of what they had on them, for he was hard pressed for the means of
living.

One day when Grettir was keeping to the North near Dufunesskeid he saw a
man riding South along the Kjol valley. He was a tall man on horseback,
riding a good horse with a studded bridle, and was leading another horse
loaded with sacks. He had a slouched hat on his head, so that his face
was not clearly seen. Grettir was very pleased to see his horse and his
property, and went to meet him and asked him his name. He said it was
Lopt, and added: "I know what your name is; you are Grettir the Strong,
son of Asmund. Whither are you going?"

"I have not made up my mind yet about that," said Grettir. "My present
business is to know whether you will lay off some of the property which
you are travelling with."

"Why should I give you what belongs to me? What will you give me for the
things?"

"Have you not heard that I never pay anything? And yet it seems to most
people that I get what I want."

Lopt said: "Make this offer to those who seem good to you; I am not
going to give my property away for nothing. Let us each go our own way."
Then he whipped on his horse and was about to ride away from Grettir.

"We shall not part so quickly as that," said Grettir, and seized the
bridle of Lopt's horse in front of his hands, pulled it from him and
held it with both hands.

"Go your own way," said Lopt; "you will get nothing from me as long as I
am able to hold it."

"That shall now be tried," said Grettir.

Lopt reached down along the cheek-strap and got hold of the reins
between the end ring and Grettir's hands, pulling with such force that
Grettir let go, and at last Lopt wrenched the whole bridle away from
him. Grettir looked at his palms and thought that this man must have
strength in his claws rather than not. Then he looked at him and said:
"Where are you going to now?"

He answered:

     "To the storm-driven den, over ice-clad heights,
     I ride to the rock and the rest of the hand."

Grettir said: "There is no certainty to be had from asking where your
dwelling is if you do not speak more clearly." Then Lopt spake and said:

     "I seek not to hide thy ways from thy ken.
     'Tis the place which the Borgfirdings Balljokull call."

Then they parted. Grettir saw that he had no strength against this man.
Then he spoke a verse:

     "Illugi brave and Atli were far.
     Never again may such hap be mine!
     The bridle was torn away from my hand.
     Her tears will flow when I am afeared."

After this Grettir left Kjol and went South to Hjalli where he asked
Skapti for shelter. Skapti said: "I am told that you are acting with
violence and are robbing men of their property; that ill becomes a man
so highly connected as you are. It would be easier to negotiate if you
gave up robbing. Now as I am called Lawman of this country, it would not
be seemly for me to break the law by harbouring outlaws. I would
like you to betake yourself somewhere where you do not need to commit
robbery."

Grettir said he would be very glad to, but that he could scarcely
live alone owing to his fear of the dark. Skapti said he would have to
content himself with something short of the best: "And trust no one so
fully that what happened to you in the Western fjords may be repeated.
Many have been brought to death by over-confidence."

Grettir thanked him for his good advice and turned back to Borgarfjord
in the autumn, when he went to his friend Grim, the son of Thorhall, and
told him what Skapti had said. Grim advised him to go to the North to
Fiskivotn in the Arnarvatn Heath, and he did so.




