CHAPTER LXVIII. FIGHT WITH THORODD THE SON OF SNORRI


After the death of Thorsteinn Kuggason, Snorri the Godi was on bad terms
with his son Thorodd and with Sam the son of Bork the Fat. It is not
clearly stated what they had done to displease him except that they had
refused to undertake some important work which he had given them to do;
what is known is that Snorri turned off his son Thorodd and told him
not to come back until he had slain some forest-man, and so it remained.
Thorodd then went to Dalir. There dwelt at Breidabolstad in Sokkolfsdal
a certain widow named Geirlaug; she kept as her shepherd a grown-up
youth who had been outlawed for wounding some one. Thorodd Snorrason
heard of this, rode to Breidabolstad and asked where the shepherd was.
The woman said he was with the sheep and asked what Thorodd wanted with
him.

"I want to take his life," he said; "he is an outlaw and a forest-man."

She said: "Such a warrior as you has nothing to gain by killing a
miserable creature like him. I will show you a much doughtier deed,
should you have a mind to try it."

"What is that?" he asked.

"Up there in the mountains," she said, "is Grettir the son of Asmund;
deal with him; that will be more fitting for you."

Thorodd liked the proposal and said he would do it. Then he put spurs to
his horse and rode up along the valleys. On reaching the hills below the
Austra river he saw a light-coloured horse saddled, with a big man in
armour, and at once directed his steps towards them. Grettir hailed him
and asked who he was. Thorodd told his name and asked: "Why do you not
rather ask my business than my name?"

"Because," he said, "it is not likely to be very weighty. Are you a son
of Snorri the Godi?"

"So it is indeed; we shall now try which of us is the stronger."

"That is easily done," said Grettir, "but have you not heard that I have
not proved a mound of wealth to most of those who have had to do with
me?"

"I know that; but I mean to risk something on it now."

Then he drew his sword and went valiantly for Grettir, who defended
himself with his shield but would not use his weapons against Thorodd.
They fought for a time without his being wounded. Grettir then said:

"Let us stop this play; you will not gain the victory in a battle with
me."

Thorodd struck at him most furiously. Grettir was tired of it, so he
took hold of him and set him down next to himself, saying: "I could do
what I liked with you; but I have no fear of your killing me. I am much
more afraid of your grey-headed father, Snorri the Godi, and of his
counsels, which have brought many a man to his knees. You should take up
tasks which you are able to accomplish; it is no child's play to fight
with me."

When Thorodd saw that there was nothing to be done he quieted down,
and then they parted. He rode home to Tunga and told his father of his
encounter with Grettir. Snorri smiled and said: "Many a man has a high
opinion of himself; but the odds against you were too great. While you
were aiming blows at him he was doing what he pleased with you. But he
was wise not to kill you, for it would not have been my purpose to leave
you unavenged. I will now rather use my influence on his side if I ever
have to do with his affairs."

Snorri showed his approval of Grettir's action towards Thorodd, for his
counsels were always friendly to Grettir.




CHAPTER LXIX. GRETTIR'S LAST VISIT TO BJARG AND JOURNEY WITH ILLUGI TO
DRANGEY


Soon after Thorodd left him Grettir rode North to Bjarg and remained
there in hiding for a time. His fear of the dark grew so upon him that
he dared go nowhere after dusk. His mother offered to keep him there,
but said she saw that it would not do for him because of the feuds
which he had throughout the land. Grettir said she should not fall into
trouble through him, "but," he said, "I can no longer live alone even to
save my life."

Illugi his brother was then fifteen years old and was a most goodly
young man. He heard what they were saying. Grettir told his mother what
Gudmund the Mighty had advised him to do, and declared he would try to
get to Drangey if he could. Yet, he said, he could not go there unless
he could find some faithful man to stay with him. Then Illugi said: "I
will go with you, brother. I know not whether I shall be a support to
you, but I will be faithful to you and will not run from you so long as
you stand upright. And I shall know the better how it fares with you if
I am with you."

Grettir answered: "You are such an one amongst men as I most rejoice
in. And if my mother be not against it I would indeed that you should go
with me."

Asdis then said: "It has now come to this, that I see two difficulties
meeting each other. It is hard for me to lose Illugi, but I know that so
much may be said for Grettir's condition that he will find some way out.
And though it is much for one to bid farewell to both of you, yet I will
consent to it if Grettir's lot is bettered thereby."

Illugi was pleased at her words, for his heart was set upon going with
Grettir. She gave them plenty of money to take with them and they made
ready for their journey. Asdis took them along the road, and before they
parted she said: "Go forth now, my sons twain. Sad will be your death
together, nor may any man escape that which is destined for him. I shall
see neither of you again; let one fate befall you both. I know not what
safety you seek in Drangey, but there shall your bones be laid, and many
will begrudge you your living there. Beware of treachery; yet shall you
be smitten with weapons, for strange are the dreams which I have had.
Guard yourselves against witchcraft, for few things are stronger than
the ancient spells."

Thus she spoke and wept much. Grettir said: "Weep not, my mother. It
shall be said that you had sons and not daughters if we are attacked
with arms. Live well, and farewell."

Then they parted. The two travelled North through the districts and
visited their kinsmen while the autumn passed into winter. Then they
turned their steps to Skagafjord, then North to Vatnsskard on to
Reykjaskard below Saemundarhlid to Langholt, reaching Glaumbaer as
the day was waning. Grettir had slung his hat over his shoulder; so
he always went when out of doors whether the weather was good or bad.
Thence they continued their journey, and when they had gone a short way
they met a man with a big head, tall and thin and ill clad. He greeted
them and each asked the other's name. They told theirs and he said his
name was Thorbjorn. He was a vagrant, had no mind to work and swaggered
much. It was the habit of some to make game of him or fool him. He
became very familiar and told them much gossip about the district and
the people therein. Grettir was much amused. He asked whether they did
not want a man to work for them and said he would much like to go with
them. So much he got from his talk that they let him join them. It was
very cold and there was a driving snow-storm. As the man was so fussy
and talkative they gave him a nickname and called him Glaum.

"The people in Glaumbaer," he said, "were much exercised about your
going without a hat in this weather, and wanted to know whether you were
any the braver for being proof against the cold. There were two sons of
bondis there, men of great distinction; the shepherd told them to come
out and mind the sheep with him, but they could scarcely get their
clothes on for the cold."

Grettir said: "I saw a young man inside the door putting on his mittens,
and another going between the cow-house and the dung-heap. Neither of
them will frighten me."

Then they went on to Reynines and stayed the night there; then to the
sea-shore to a farm called Reykir where a man, a good farmer, named
Thorvald, lived. Grettir asked him for shelter and told him of his
intention of going to Drangey. The bondi said that men of Skagafjord
would not think his a very friendly visit and drew back. Then Grettir
took the purse of money which his mother had given him and gave it to
the bondi. The man's brows unbent when he saw the money and he told
three of his servants to take them out in the night by the moonlight.
From Reykir is the shortest distance to the island, about one sea-mile.

When they reached the island Grettir thought it looked quite pleasant;
it was all overgrown with grass and had steep cliffs down to the sea
so that no one could get on to it except where the ladders were. If the
upper ladder was pulled up it was impossible for any one to get on to
the island. There was also a large crag full of sea birds in the summer,
and there were eighty sheep in the island belonging to the bondis,
mostly rams and ewes, which were meant for slaughter.

There Grettir quietly settled down. He had been fifteen or sixteen years
an outlaw, so Sturla the son of Thord has recorded.




