CHAPTER I.

_The Situation of the Country._


Crapulia is a very fair and large territory, which on the north is
bounded with the Æthiopic Ocean, on the east with Laconia and Viraginia,
on the south by Moronia Felix, and westward with the Tryphonian Fens. It
lies in that part of the universe where is bred the monstrous bird
called Ruc, that for its prey will bear off an elephant in its talons;
and is described by the modern geographers.

The soil is too fruitful, and the heavens too serene; so that I have
looked upon them with a silent envy, not without pity, when I considered
they were blessings so little deserved by the inhabitants. It lies in
seventy-four degrees of longitude, and sixty degrees of latitude, and
eleven degrees distant from the Cape of Good Hope; and lies, as it were,
opposite to the whole coast of Africa. It is commonly divided into two
provinces, Pamphagonia and Ivronia, the former of which is of the same
length and breadth as Great Britain (which I hope will not be taken as
any reflection), the other is equal to the High and Low Dutch Lands.
Both obey the same prince, are governed by the same laws, and differ
very little in their habit or their manners.




CHAPTER II.

_Pamphagonia; or, Glutton's Paradise._


Pamphagonia is of a triangular figure, like that of ancient Egypt, or
the Greek letter delta, Δ. It is mountainous, inclosed with very high
hills; its soil is of the richest, so that birds which come thither to
feed, if they tarry but three months, grow so very fat and weighty, that
they cannot fly back again over the mountains, but suffer themselves to
be taken up in the hand, and are as delicious as the ortolan or the
beccaficos of the Italians. And it is no wonder to them who know that
geese in Scotland are generated from leaves fallen into the water, and
believe the testimony of one of our ambassadors, that in the north-east
parts of the world lambs grow upon stalks like cabbages and eat up the
grass all around about them, to find the same sort of provisions in this
country. Besides, the fish upon that coast are in such plenty, and so
voracious (whether they conform themselves to the genius of the place
and people, or presage to themselves the honour of so magnificent a
sepulchre as was given to Nero's turbot), that, as soon as the hook is
cast in, they press to it as the ghosts in Lucian did to Charon's boat,
and cling to the iron as miners do to a rope that is let down when the
light of their candle forbodes some malignant exhalation.

The sea-ports, with which this country abounds more than any other, are
of no other use than to receive and take in such things as are edible,
which they have for their superfluous wool and hides: nor may the
inhabitants export anything that has the least relation to the palate.
You see nothing there but fruit-trees. They hate plains, limes, and
willows, as being idle and barren, and yielding nothing useful but their
shade. There are hops, pears, plums, and apples, in the hedge-rows, as
there is in all Ivronia; from whence the Lombards, and some counties in
the west of England, have learned their improvements. In ancient times,
Frugonia, or the Land of Frugality, took in this country as one of its
provinces; and histories tell us, that, in Saturn's time, the Frugonian
princes gave laws to all this part of the world, and had their palace
there; and that their country was called Fagonia, from the simplicity of
their diet, which consisted only in beech-mast. But that yoke has been
long ago shaken off; their manners are wholly changed, and, from the
universality of their food, they have obtained, in their own country
language, the title of Pamphagones.




CHAPTER III.

_The First Province of Pamphagonia._


Friviandy, or Tight-bittia (that we may take the provinces in their
order), were it not for a temperament peculiar to the place, is rather
of the hottest to produce those who are properly called good
trencher-men. Its utmost point, which other geographers call the
Promontory of the Terra Australis, is of the same latitude as the most
southerly parts of Castile, and is about forty-two degrees distant from
the equator. The inhabitants have curled hair and dusky complexions, and
regard more the delicacy than the largeness and number of their dishes.
In this very promontory, which we shall call the black one from its
colour (for it is a very smoky region, partly from the frequent vapours
of the place, partly from its vicinity to the Terra del Fogo, which, by
the common consent of geographers, lies on the right hand of it, but
rather nearer than they have placed it), is the city Lucina, whose
buildings are lofty, but apt to be smoky and offensive to the smell;
from whence a colony went, perhaps, as far as the Indies, where it
remains to this day by the name of Cochin-China.

Here is the famous temple of the great deity Omasius Gorgut, or
Gorbelly. It is a vast pile, and contains a thousand hearths, and as
many altars, which are constantly employed in the Rucal Festivals. In
the midst is a high pyramid, as lofty as the hand of man can erect it,
little inferior to those of Memphis. It is called the Cheminean Tower.
This, rising high, gives the signal of war to the adjoining countries:
for, as we by beacons lighted upon a high hill discover the danger of an
approaching enemy, so these, on the contrary, do the same by letting
their smoke cease and their fires go out: for, when the perpetual vapour
ceases to roll forth in thick and dark clouds of smoke, it is a token
that the Hambrians are drawing nearer, than whom there can be no enemy
more terrible to this nation. There are several smaller towns, that lie
under the dominion of this supreme city. Charbona is the largest
village, and, what is seldom seen elsewhere, lies all under ground. Upon
its barren soil arises another, though of less note, called Favillia.
After these lies Tenaille, a narrow town, and Batillû, a broad one, both
considerable. On the left are some subservient petty hamlets, as
Assadora, Marmitta, Culliera, as useful for the reception of strangers,
amongst which, that of Marmitta is watered by the river Livenza; which,
as is said of a fountain in the Peak of Derby, boils over twice in
four-and-twenty hours.




