The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ideal Commonwealths, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Ideal Commonwealths

Author: Various

Editor: Henry Morley

Release Date: June 20, 2006 [EBook #18638]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IDEAL COMMONWEALTHS ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Graeme Mackreth and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






IDEAL COMMONWEALTHS


PLUTARCH'S LYCURGUS

MORE'S UTOPIA

BACON'S NEW ATLANTIS

CAMPANELLA'S CITY OF THE SUN

AND A FRAGMENT OF

HALL'S MUNDUS ALTER ET IDEM


_WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY HENRY MORLEY_

LL.D., PROFESSOR OF ENGLISH LITERATURE AT UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, LONDON

FIFTH EDITION

LONDON
GEORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS, LIMITED
BROADWAY, LUDGATE HILL
GLASGOW, MANCHESTER, AND NEW YORK

1890

MORLEY'S UNIVERSAL LIBRARY.


1. _Sheridan's Plays._

2. _Plays from Molière._ By English Dramatists.

3. _Marlowe's Faustus_ and _Goethe's Faust._

4. _Chronicle of the Cid._

5. _Rabelais' Gargantua_ and the _Heroic Deeds of Pantagruel._

6. _Machiavelli's Prince._

7. _Bacon's Essays._

8. _Defoe's Journal of the Plague Year._

9. _Locke on Civil Government_ and _Filmer's "Patriarcha"._

10. _Butler's Analogy of Religion._

11. _Dryden's Virgil._

12. _Scott's Demonology and Witchcraft._

13. _Herrick's Hesperides._

14. _Coleridge's Table-Talk._

15. _Boccaccio's Decameron._

16. _Sterne's Tristram Shandy._

17. _Chapman's Homer's Iliad._

18. _Mediæval Tales._

19. _Voltaire's Candide_, and _Johnson's Rasselas._

20. _Jonson's Plays and Poems._

21. _Hobbes's Leviathan._

22. _Samuel Butler's Hudibras._

23. _Ideal Commonwealths._

24. _Cavendish's Life of Wolsey._

25 & 26. _Don Quixote._

27. _Burlesque Plays and Poems._

28. _Dante's Divine Comedy._ LONGFELLOW'S Translation.

29. _Goldsmith's Vicar of Wakefield, Plays, and Poems._

30. _Fables and Proverbs from the Sanskrit. (Hitopadesa.)_

31. _Lamb's Essays of Elia._

32. _The History of Thomas Ellwood._

33. _Emerson's Essays, &c._

34. _Southey's Life of Nelson._

35. _De Quincey's Confession of an Opium-Eater, &c._

36. _Stories of Ireland._ By Miss EDGEWORTH.

37. _Frere's Aristophanes: Acharnians, Knights, Birds._

38. _Burke's Speeches and Letters._

39. _Thomas à Kempis._

40. _Popular Songs of Ireland._

41. _Potter's Æschylus._

42. _Goethe's Faust: Part II._ ANSTER'S Translation.

43. _Famous Pamphlets._

44. _Francklin's Sophocles._

45. _M.G. Lewis's Tales of Terror and Wonder._

46. _Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation._

47. _Drayton's Barons' Wars, Nymphidia, &c._

48. _Cobbett's Advice to Young Men._

49. _The Banquet of Dante._

50. _Walker's Original._

51. _Schiller's Poems and Ballads._

52. _Peele's Plays and Poems._

53. _Harrington's Oceana._

54. _Euripides: Alcestis and other Plays._

55. _Praed's Essays._

56. _Traditional Tales._ ALLAN CUNNINGHAM.

57. _Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity. Books I.-IV._

58. _Euripides: The Bacchanals and other Plays._

59. _Izaak Walton's Lives._

60. _Aristotle's Politics._

61. _Euripides: Hecuba and other Plays._

62. _Rabelais--Sequel to Pantagruel._

63. _A Miscellany._

"Marvels of clear type and general neatness."--_Daily Telegraph._




INTRODUCTION.


Plato in his "Republic" argues that it is the aim of Individual Man as
of the State to be wise, brave and temperate. In a State, he says, there
are three orders, the Guardians, the Auxiliaries, the Producers. Wisdom
should be the special virtue of the Guardians; Courage of the
Auxiliaries; and Temperance of all. These three virtues belong
respectively to the Individual Man, Wisdom to his Rational part; Courage
to his Spirited; and Temperance to his Appetitive: while in the State as
in the Man it is Injustice that disturbs their harmony.

Because the character of Man appears in the State unchanged, but in a
larger form, Plato represented Socrates as studying the ideal man
himself through an Ideal Commonwealth.

In another of his dialogues, "Critias," of which we have only the
beginning, Socrates wishes that he could see how such a commonwealth
would work, if it were set moving. Critias undertakes to tell him. For
he has received tradition of events that happened more than nine
thousand years ago, when the Athenians themselves were such ideal
citizens. Critias has received this tradition, he says, from a
ninety-year-old grandfather, whose father, Dropides, was the friend of
Solon. Solon, lawgiver and poet, had heard it from the priests of the
goddess Neïth or Athene at Sais, and had begun to shape it into a heroic
poem.

This was the tradition:--Nine thousand years before the time of Solon,
the goddess Athene, who was worshipped also in Sais, had given to her
Athenians a healthy climate, a fertile soil, and temperate people strong
in wisdom and courage. Their Republic was like that which Socrates
imagined, and it had to bear the shock of a great invasion by the people
of the vast island Atlantis. This island, larger than all Libya and Asia
put together, was once in the sea westward beyond the Atlantic
waves,--thus America was dreamed of long before it was discovered.
Atlantis had ten kings, descended from ten sons of Poseidon (Neptune),
who was the god magnificently worshipped by its people. Vast power and
dominion, that extended through all Libya as far as Egypt, and over a
part of Europe, caused the Atlantid kings to grow ambitious and unjust.
Then they entered the Mediterranean and fell upon Athens with enormous
force. But in the little band of citizens, temperate, brave, and wise,
there were forces of Reason able to resist and overcome brute strength.
Now, however, gone are the Atlantids, gone are the old virtues of
Athens. Earthquakes and deluges laid waste the world. The whole great
island of Atlantis, with its people and its wealth, sank to the bottom
of the ocean. The ideal warriors of Athens, in one day and night, were
swallowed by an earthquake, and were to be seen no more.

Plato, a philosopher with the soul of a poet, died in the year 347
before Christ. Plutarch was writing at the close of the first century
after Christ, and in his parallel Lives of Greeks and Romans, the most
famous of his many writings, he took occasion to paint an Ideal
Commonwealth as the conception of Lycurgus, the half mythical or all
mythical Solon of Sparta. To Plutarch's Life of Lycurgus, as well as to
Plato, Thomas More and others have been indebted for some part of the
shaping of their philosophic dreams.

The discovery of the New World at the end of the fifteenth century
followed hard upon the diffusion of the new invention of printing, and
came at a time when the fall of Constantinople by scattering Greek
scholars, who became teachers in Italy, France and elsewhere, spread the
study of Greek, and caused Plato to live again. Little had been heard of
him through the Arabs, who cared little for his poetic method. But with
the revival of learning he had become a force in Europe, a strong aid to
the Reformers.

Sir Thomas More's Utopia was written in the years 1515-16, when its
author's age was about thirty-seven. He was a young man of twenty when
Columbus first touched the continent named after the Florentine Amerigo
Vespucci, who made his voyages to it in the years 1499-1503. More wrote
his Utopia when imaginations of men were stirred by the sudden
enlargement of their conceptions of the world, and Amerigo Vespucci's
account of his voyages, first printed in 1507, was fresh in every
scholar's mind. He imagined a traveller, Raphael Hythloday--whose name
is from Greek words that mean "Knowing in Trifles"--who had sailed with
Vespucci on his three last voyages, but had not returned from the last
voyage until, after separation from his comrades, he had wandered into
some farther discovery of his own. Thus he had found, somewhere in those
parts, the island of Utopia. Its name is from Greek words meaning
Nowhere. More had gone on an embassy to Brussels with Cuthbert Tunstal
when he wrote his philosophical satire upon European, and more
particularly English, statecraft, in the form of an Ideal Commonwealth
described by Hythloday as he had found it in Utopia. It was printed at
Louvain in the latter part of the year 1516, under the editorship of
Erasmus, and that enlightened young secretary to the municipality of
Antwerp, Peter Giles, or Ægidius, who is introduced into the story.
"Utopia" was not printed in England in the reign of Henry VIII., and
could not be, for its satire was too direct to be misunderstood, even
when it mocked English policy with ironical praise for doing exactly
what it failed to do. More was a wit and a philosopher, but at the same
time so practical and earnest that Erasmus tells of a burgomaster at
Antwerp who fastened upon the parable of Utopia with such goodwill that
he learnt it by heart. And in 1517 Erasmus advised a correspondent to
send for Utopia, if he had not yet read it, and if he wished to see the
true source of all political evils.

Francis Bacon's "New Atlantis," first written in Latin, was published in
1629, three years after its author's death. Bacon placed his Ideal
Commonwealth in those seas where a great Austral continent was even then
supposed to be, but had not been discovered. As the old Atlantis implied
a foreboding of the American continent, so the New Atlantis implied
foreboding of the Australian. Bacon in his philosophy sought through
experimental science the dominion of men over things, "for Nature is
only governed by obeying her." In his Ideal World of the New Atlantis,
Science is made the civilizer who binds man to man, and is his leader to
the love of God.

Thomas Campanella was Bacon's contemporary, a man only seven years
younger; and an Italian who suffered for his ardour in the cause of
science. He was born in Calabria in 1568, and died in 1639. He entered
the Dominican order when a boy, but had a free and eager appetite for
knowledge. He urged, like Bacon, that Nature should be studied through
her own works, not through books; he attacked, like Bacon, the dead
faith in Aristotle, that instead of following his energetic spirit of
research, lapsed into blind idolatry. Campanella strenuously urged that
men should reform all sciences by following Nature and the books of God.
He had been stirring in this way for ten years, when there arose in
Calabria a conspiracy against the Spanish rule. Campanella, who was an
Italian patriot was seized and sent to Naples. The Spanish inquisition
joined in attack on him. He was accused of books he had not written and
of opinions he did not hold; he was seven times put to the question and
suffered, with firmness of mind, the most cruel tortures. The Pope
interceded in vain for him with the King of Spain. He suffered
imprisonment for twenty-seven years, during which time he wrote much,
and one piece of his prison work was his ideal of "The City of the Sun."

Released at last from his prison, Campanella went to Rome, where he was
defended by Pope Urban VIII. against continued violence of attack. But
he was compelled at last to leave Rome, and made his escape as a servant
in the livery of the French ambassador. In Paris, Richelieu became
Campanella's friend; the King of France gave him a pension of three
thousand livres; the Sorbonne vouched for the orthodoxy of his writings.
He died in Paris, at the age of seventy-one, in the Convent of the
Dominicans.

Of Campanella's "Civitas Solis," which has not hitherto been translated
into English, the translation here given, with one or two omissions of
detail which can well be spared, has been made for me by my old pupil
and friend, Mr. Thomas W. Halliday.

In the works (published in 1776) of the witty Dr. William King, who
played much with the subject of cookery, is a fragment found among his
remaining papers, and given by his editors as an original piece in the
manner of Rabelais. It seems never to have been observed that this is
only a translation of that part of Joseph Hall's "Mundus Alter es Idem,"
which deals with the kitchen side of life. The fragment will be found at
the end of this volume, preceded by a short description of the other
parts of Hall's World which is other than ours, and yet the same.

H.M.

_March 1885._




PLUTARCH'S

LIFE OF LYCURGUS.




LIFE OF LYCURGUS.


Of Lycurgus the lawgiver we have nothing to relate that is certain and
uncontroverted. For there are different accounts of his birth, his
travels, his death, and especially of the laws and form of government
which he established. But least of all are the times agreed upon in
which this great man lived. For some say he flourished at the same time
with Iphitus, and joined with him in settling the cessation of arms
during the Olympic games. Among these is Aristotle the philosopher, who
alleges for proof an Olympic quoit, on which was preserved the
inscription of Lycurgus's name. But others who, with Eratosthenes and
Apollodorus, compute the time by the succession of the Spartan kings,
place him much earlier than the first Olympiad. Timæus, however,
supposes that, as there were two Lycurguses in Sparta at different
times, the actions of both are ascribed to one, on account of his
particular renown; and that the more ancient of them lived not long
after Homer: nay, some say he had seen him. Xenophon too confirms the
opinion of his antiquity, when he makes him contemporary with the
Heraclidæ. It is true, the latest of the Lacedæmonian kings were of the
lineage of the Heraclidæ; but Xenophon there seems to speak of the first
and more immediate descendants of Hercules. As the history of those
times is thus involved, in relating the circumstances of Lycurgus's
life, we shall endeavour to select such as are least controverted, and
follow authors of the greatest credit.

Simonides the poet, tells us, that Prytanis, not Eunomus, was father to
Lycurgus. But most writers give us the genealogy of Lycurgus and Eunomus
in a different manner; for, according to them, Sous was the son of
Patrocles, and grandson of Aristodemus, Eurytion the son of Sous,
Prytanis of Eurytion, and Eunomus of Prytanis; to this Eunomus was born
Polydectes, by a former wife, and by a second, named Dianassa, Lycurgus.
Eutychidas, however, says Lycurgus was the sixth from Patrocles, and the
eleventh from Hercules. The most distinguished of his ancestors was
Sous, under whom the Lacedæmonians made the Helotes their slaves, and
gained an extensive tract of land from the Arcadians. Of this Sous it is
related, that, being besieged by the Clitorians in a difficult post
where there was no water, he agreed to give up all his conquests,
provided that himself and all his army should drink of the neighbouring
spring. When these conditions were sworn to, he assembled his forces,
and offered his kingdom to the man that would forbear drinking; not one
of them, however, would deny himself, but they all drank. Then Sous went
down to the spring himself, and having only sprinkled his face in sight
of the enemy, he marched off, and still held the country, because all
had not drank. Yet, though he was highly honoured for this, the family
had not their name from him, but from his son, were called Eurytionidæ;
and this, because Eurytion seems to be the first who relaxed the
strictness of kingly government, inclining to the interest of the
people, and ingratiating himself with them. Upon this relaxation their
encroachments increased, and the succeeding kings, either becoming
odious, treating them with greater rigour, or else giving way through
weakness or in hopes of favour, for a long time anarchy and confusion
prevailed in Sparta; by which one of its kings, the father of Lycurgus,
lost his life. For while he was endeavouring to part some persons who
were concerned in a fray, he received a wound by a kitchen knife, of
which he died, leaving the kingdom to his eldest son Polydectes.

But he too dying soon after, the general voice gave it for Lycurgus to
ascend the throne; and he actually did so, till it appeared that his
brother's widow was pregnant. As soon as he perceived this, he declared
that the kingdom belonged to her issue, provided it were male, and he
kept the administration in his hands only as his guardian. This he did
with the title of Prodicos, which the Lacedæmonians give to the
guardians of infant kings. Soon after, the queen made him a private
overture, that she would destroy her child, upon condition that he would
marry her when king of Sparta. Though he detested her wickedness, he
said nothing against the proposal, but pretending to approve it, charged
her not to take any drugs to procure an abortion, lest she should
endanger her own health or life; for he would take care that the child,
as soon as born, should be destroyed. Thus he artfully drew on the woman
to her full time, and, when he heard she was in labour, he sent persons
to attend and watch her delivery, with orders, if it were a girl, to
give it to the women, but if a boy, to bring it to him, in whatever
business he might be engaged. It happened that he was at supper with the
magistrates when she was delivered of a boy, and his servants, who were
present, carried the child to him. When he received it, he is reported
to have said to the company, "Spartans, see here your new-born king." He
then laid him down upon the chair of state, and named him Charilaus,
because of the joy and admiration of his magnanimity and justice
testified by all present. Thus the reign of Lycurgus lasted only eight
months. But the citizens had a great veneration for him on other
accounts, and there were more that paid him their attentions, and were
ready to execute his commands, out of regard to his virtues, than those
that obeyed him as a guardian to the king, and director of the
administration. There were not, however, wanting those that envied him,
and opposed his advancement, as too high for so young a man;
particularly the relations and friends of the queen-mother, who seemed
to have been treated with contempt. Her brother Leonidas, one day boldly
attacked him with virulent language, and scrupled not to tell him that
he was well assured he would soon be king; thus preparing suspicions,
and matter of accusation against Lycurgus, in case any accident should
befall the king. Insinuations of the same kind were likewise spread by
the queen-mother. Moved with this ill-treatment, and fearing some dark
design, he determined to get clear of all suspicion, by travelling into
other countries, till his nephew should be grown up, and have a son to
succeed him in the kingdom.

He set sail, therefore, and landed in Crete. There having observed the
forms of government, and conversed with the most illustrious personages,
he was struck with admiration of some of their laws, and resolved at his
return to make use of them in Sparta. Some others he rejected. Among the
friends he gained in Crete was Thales, with whom he had interest enough
to persuade him to go and settle at Sparta. Thales was famed for his
wisdom and political abilities: he was withal a lyric poet, who under
colour of exercising his art, performed as great things as the most
excellent lawgivers. For his odes were so many persuasives to obedience
and unanimity, as by means of melody and numbers they had great grace
and power, they softened insensibly the manners of the audience, drew
them off from the animosities which then prevailed, and united them in
zeal for excellence and virtue. So that, in some measure, he prepared
the way for Lycurgus towards the instruction of the Spartans. From Crete
Lycurgus passed to Asia, desirous, as is said, to compare the Ionian
expense and luxury with the Cretan frugality and hard diet, so as to
judge what effect each had on their several manners and governments;
just as physicians compare bodies that are weak and sickly with the
healthy and robust. There also, probably, he met with Homer's poems,
which were preserved by the posterity of Cleophylus. Observing that many
moral sentences and much political knowledge were intermixed with his
stories, which had an irresistible charm, he collected them into one
body, and transcribed them with pleasure, in order to take them home
with him. For his glorious poetry was not yet fully known in Greece;
only some particular pieces were in a few hands, as they happened to be
dispersed. Lycurgus was the first that made them generally known. The
Egyptians likewise suppose that he visited them; and as of all their
institutions he was most pleased with their distinguishing the military
men from the rest of the people, he took the same method at Sparta, and,
by separating from these the mechanics and artificers, he rendered the
constitution more noble and more of a piece. This assertion of the
Egyptians is confirmed by some of the Greek writers. But we know of no
one, except Aristocrates, son of Hipparchus, and a Spartan, who has
affirmed that he went to Libya and Spain, and in his Indian excursions
conversed with the Gymnosophists.

The Lacedæmonians found the want of Lycurgus when absent, and sent many
embassies to entreat him to return. For they perceived that their kings
had barely the title and outward appendages of royalty, but in nothing
else differed from the multitude; whereas Lycurgus had abilities from
nature to guide the measures of government, and powers of persuasion,
that drew the hearts of men to him. The kings, however, where consulted
about his return, and they hoped that in his presence they should
experience less insolence amongst the people. Returning then to a city
thus disposed, he immediately applied himself to alter the whole frame
of the constitution; sensible that a partial change, and the introducing
of some new laws, would be of no sort of advantage; but, as in the case
of a body diseased and full of bad humours, whose temperament is to be
corrected and new formed by medicines, it was necessary to begin a new
regimen. With these sentiments he went to Delphi, and when he had
offered and consulted the god, he returned with that celebrated oracle,
in which the priestess called him "Beloved of the gods, and rather a god
than a man." As to his request that he might enact good laws, she told
him, Apollo had heard his request, and promised that the constitution he
should establish would be the most excellent in the world. Thus
encouraged, he applied to the nobility, and desired them to put their
hands to the work; addressing himself privately at first to his friends,
and afterwards by degrees, trying the disposition of others, and
preparing them to concur in the business. When matters were ripe, he
ordered thirty of the principal citizens to appear armed in the
market-place by break of day, to strike terror into such as might desire
to oppose him. Hermippus has given us the names of twenty of the most
eminent of them; but he that had the greatest share in the whole
enterprise, and gave Lycurgus the best assistance in the establishing of
his laws, was called Arithmiades. Upon the first alarm, king Charilaus,
apprehending it to be a design against his person, took refuge in the
Chalcioicos. But he was soon satisfied, and accepted of their oath. Nay,
so far from being obstinate, he joined in the undertaking. Indeed, he
was so remarkable for the gentleness of his disposition, that Archelaus,
his partner in the throne, is reported to have said to some that were
praising the young king, "Yes, Charilaus is a good man to be sure, who
cannot find in his heart to punish the bad." Among the many new
institutions of Lycurgus, the first and most important was that of a
senate; which sharing, as Plato says, in the power of the kings, too
imperious and unrestrained before, and having equal authority with them,
was the means of keeping them within the bounds of moderation, and
highly contributed to the preservation of the state. For before it had
been veering and unsettled, sometimes inclining to arbitrary power, and
sometimes towards a pure democracy; but this establishment of a senate,
an intermediate body, like ballast, kept it in a just equilibrium, and
put it in a safe posture: the twenty-eight senators adhering to the
kings, whenever they saw the people too encroaching, and, on the other
hand, supporting the people, when the kings attempted to make themselves
absolute. This, according to Aristotle, was the number of senators fixed
upon, because two of the thirty associates of Lycurgus deserted the
business through fear. But Sphærus tells us there were only twenty-eight
at first entrusted with the design. Something, perhaps, there is in its
being a perfect number, formed of seven multiplied by four, and withal
the first number, after six, that is equal to all its parts. But I
rather think, just so many senators were created, that, together with
the two kings, the whole body might consist of thirty members.

He had this institution so much at heart, that he obtained from Delphi
an oracle in its behalf, called _rhetra_, or the decree. This was
couched in very ancient and uncommon terms, which interpreted, ran thus:
"When you have built a temple to the Syllanian Jupiter, and the
Syllanian Minerva, divided the people into tribes and classes, and
established a senate of thirty persons, including the two kings, you
shall occasionally summon the people to an assembly between Babyce and
Cnacion, and they shall have the determining voice." Babyce and Cnacion
are now called Oenus. But Aristotle thinks, by Cnacion is meant the
river, and by Babyce the bridge. Between these they held their
assemblies, having neither halls, nor any kind of building for that
purpose. These things he thought of no advantage to their councils, but
rather a disservice; as they distracted the attention, and turned it
upon trifles, on observing the statues and pictures, the splendid roofs,
and every other theatrical ornament. The people thus assembled had no
right to propose any subject of debate, and were only authorized to
ratify or reject what might be proposed to them by the senate and the
kings. But because, in process of time, the people, by additions or
retrenchments, changed the terms, and perverted the sense of the
decrees, the kings Polydorus and Theopompus inserted in the _rhetra_
this clause: "If the people attempt to corrupt any law, the senate and
chiefs shall retire:" that is, they shall dissolve the assembly, and
annul the alterations. And they found means to persuade the Spartans
that this too was ordered by Apollo; as we learn from these verses of
Tyrtæus:

     Ye sons of Sparta, who at Phœbus' shrine
     Your humble vows prefer, attentive hear
     The god's decision. O'er your beauteous lands
     Two guardian kings, a senate, and the voice
     Of the concurring people, lasting laws
     Shall with joint power establish.

Though the government was thus tempered by Lycurgus, yet soon after it
degenerated into an oligarchy, whose power was exercised with such
wantonness and violence, that it wanted indeed a bridle, as Plato
expresses it. This curb they found in the authority of the Ephori, about
a hundred and thirty years after Lycurgus. Elatus was the first invested
with this dignity, in the reign of Theopompus; who, when his wife
upbraided him, that he would leave the regal power to his children less
than he received it, replied, "Nay but greater, because more lasting."
And, in fact, the prerogative, so stripped of all extravagant
pretensions, no longer occasioned either envy or danger to its
possessors. By these means they escaped the miseries which befell the
Messenian and Argive kings, who would not in the least relax the
severity of their power in favour of the people. Indeed, from nothing
more does the wisdom and foresight of Lycurgus appear, than from the
disorderly governments, and the bad understanding that subsisted between
the kings and people of Messena and Argos, neighbouring states, and
related in blood to Sparta. For, as at first they were in all respects
equal to her, and possessed of a better country, and yet preserved no
lasting happiness, but, through the insolence of the kings and
disobedience of the people, were harassed with perpetual troubles, they
made it very evident that it was really a felicity more than human, a
blessing from heaven to the Spartans, to have a legislator who knew so
well how to frame and temper their government. But this was an event of
a later date.

A second and bolder political enterprise of Lycurgus was a new division
of the lands. For he found a prodigious inequality, the city overcharged
with many indigent persons, who had no land, and the wealth centred in
the hands of a few. Determined, therefore, to root out the evils of
insolence, envy, avarice, and luxury, and those distempers of a state
still more inveterate and fatal, I mean poverty and riches, he persuaded
them to cancel all former divisions of land, and to make new ones, in
such a manner that they might be perfectly equal in their possessions
and way of living. Hence, if they were ambitious of distinction they
might seek it in virtue, as no other difference was left between them
but that which arises from the dishonour of base actions and the praise
of good ones. His proposal was put in practice. He made nine thousand
lots for the territory of Sparta, which he distributed among so many
citizens, and thirty thousand for the inhabitants of the rest of
Laconia. But some say he made only six thousand shares for the city, and
that Polydorus added three thousand afterwards; others, that Polydorus
doubled the number appointed by Lycurgus, which were only four thousand
five hundred. Each lot was capable of producing (one year with another)
seventy bushels of grain for each man, and twelve for each woman,
besides a quantity of wine and oil in proportion. Such a provision they
thought sufficient for health and a good habit of body, and they wanted
nothing more. A story goes of our legislator, that some time after
returning from a journey through the fields just reaped, and seeing the
shocks standing parallel and equal, he smiled, and said to some that
were by, "How like is Laconia to an estate newly divided among many
brothers!"

After this, he attempted to divide also the movables, in order to take
away all appearance of inequality; but he soon perceived that they could
not bear to have their goods directly taken from them, and therefore
took another method, counterworking their avarice by a stratagem. First
he stopped the currency of the gold and silver coin, and ordered that
they should make use of iron money only, then to a great quantity and
weight of this he assigned but a small value; so that to lay up ten
_minæ_, a whole room was required, and to remove it, nothing less than a
yoke of oxen. When this became current, many kinds of injustice ceased
in Lacedæmon. Who would steal or take a bribe, who would defraud or rob,
when he could not conceal the booty; when he could neither be dignified
by the possession of it, nor if cut in pieces be served by its use? For
we are told that when hot, they quenched it in vinegar, to make it
brittle and unmalleable, and consequently unfit for any other service.
In the next place, he excluded unprofitable and superfluous arts:
indeed, if he had not done this, most of them would have fallen of
themselves, when the new money took place, as the manufactures could not
be disposed of. Their iron coin would not pass in the rest of Greece,
but was ridiculed and despised; so that the Spartans had no means of
purchasing any foreign or curious wares; nor did any merchant-ship
unlade in their harbours. There were not even to be found in all their
country either sophists, wandering fortune-tellers, keepers of infamous
houses, or dealers in gold and silver trinkets, because there was no
money. Thus luxury, losing by degrees the means that cherished and
supported it, died away of itself: even they who had great possessions,
had no advantage from them, since they could not be displayed in public,
but must lie useless, in unregarded repositories. Hence it was, that
excellent workmanship was shown in their useful and necessary furniture,
as beds, chairs, and tables; and the Lacedæmonian cup called _cothon_,
as Critias informs us, was highly valued, particularly in campaigns: for
the water, which must then of necessity be drank, though it would often
otherwise offend the sight, had its muddiness concealed by the colour of
the cup, and the thick part stopping at the shelving brim, it came
clearer to the lips. Of these improvements the lawgiver was the cause;
for the workmen having no more employment in matters of mere curiosity,
showed the excellence of their art in necessary things.

Desirous to complete the conquest of luxury, and exterminate the love of
riches, he introduced a third institution, which was wisely enough and
ingeniously contrived. This was the use of public tables, where all were
to eat in common of the same meat, and such kinds of it as were
appointed by law. At the same time they were forbidden to eat at home,
upon expensive couches and tables, to call in the assistance of butchers
and cooks, or to fatten like voracious animals in private. For so not
only their manners would be corrupted, but their bodies disordered;
abandoned to all manner of sensuality and dissoluteness, they would
require long sleep, warm baths, and the same indulgence as in perpetual
sickness. To effect this was certainly very great; but it was greater
still, to secure riches from rapine and from envy, as Theophrastus
expresses it, or rather by their eating in common, and by the frugality
of their table, to take from riches their very being. For what use or
enjoyment of them, what peculiar display of magnificence could there be,
where the poor man went to the same refreshment with the rich? Hence the
observation, that it was only at Sparta where Plutus (according to the
proverb) was kept blind, and like an image, destitute of life or motion.
It must further be observed, that they had not the privilege to eat at
home, and so to come without appetite to the public repast: they made a
point of it to observe any one that did not eat and drink with them, and
to reproach him as an intemperate and effeminate person that was sick of
the common diet.

The rich, therefore (we are told), were more offended with this
regulation than with any other, and, rising in a body, they loudly
expressed their indignation: nay, they proceeded so far as to assault
Lycurgus with stones, so that he was forced to fly from the assembly and
take refuge in a temple. Unhappily, however, before he reached it, a
young man named Alcander, hasty in his resentments, though not otherwise
ill-tempered, came up with him, and, upon his turning round, struck out
one of his eyes with a stick. Lycurgus then stopped short, and, without
giving way to passion, showed the people his eye beat out, and his face
streaming with blood. They were so struck with shame and sorrow at the
sight, that they surrendered Alcander to him, and conducted him home
with the utmost expressions of regret. Lycurgus thanked them for their
care of his person, and dismissed them all except Alcander. He took him
into his house, but showed no ill treatment either by word or action;
only ordering him to wait upon him, instead of his usual servants and
attendants. The youth, who was of an ingenuous disposition, without
murmuring, did as he was commanded. Living in this manner with Lycurgus,
and having an opportunity to observe the mildness and goodness of his
heart, his strict temperance and indefatigable industry, he told his
friends that Lycurgus was not that proud and severe man he might have
been taken for, but, above all others, gentle and engaging in his
behaviour. This, then, was the chastisement, and this punishment he
suffered, of a wild and headstrong young man to become a very modest and
prudent citizen. In memory of his misfortune, Lycurgus built a temple to
Minerva Optiletis, so called by him from a term which the Dorians use
for the eye. Yet Dioscorides, who wrote a treatise concerning the
Lacedæmonian government, and others, relate that his eye was hurt, but
not put out, and that he built the temple in gratitude to the goddess
for his cure. However, the Spartans never carried staves to their
assemblies afterwards.

The public repasts were called by the Cretans Andria; but the
Lacedæmonians styled them Phiditia, either from their tendency to
friendship and mutual benevolence, _phiditia_ being used instead of
_philitia_; or else from their teaching frugality and parsimony, which
the word _pheido_ signifies. But it is not all impossible that the first
letter might by some means or other be added, and so _phiditia_ take
place of _editia_, which barely signifies eating. There were fifteen
persons to a table, or a few more or less. Each of them was obliged to
bring in monthly a bushel of meal, eight gallons of wine, five pounds of
cheese, two pounds and a half of figs, and a little money to buy flesh
and fish. If any of them happened to offer a sacrifice of first fruits,
or to kill venison, he sent a part of it to the public table: for after
a sacrifice or hunting, he was at liberty to sup at home: but the rest
were to appear at the usual place. For a long time this eating in common
was observed with great exactness: so that when king Agis returned from
a successful expedition against the Athenians, and from a desire to sup
with his wife, requested to have his portion at home, the Polemarchs
refused to send it: nay, when, through resentment, he neglected, the day
following, to offer the sacrifice usual on occasion of victory, they set
a fine upon him. Children also were introduced at these public tables,
as so many schools of sobriety. There they heard discourses concerning
government, and were instructed in the most liberal breeding. There they
were allowed to jest without scurrility, and were not to take it ill
when the raillery was returned. For it was reckoned worthy of a
Lacedæmonian to bear a jest: but if any one's patience failed, he had
only to desire them to be quiet, and they left off immediately. When
they first entered, the oldest man present pointed to the door, and
said, "Not a word spoken in this company goes out there." The admitting
of any man to a particular table was under the following regulation.
Each member of that small society took a little ball of soft bread in
his hand. This he was to drop, without saying a word, into a vessel
called _caddos_, which the waiter carried upon his head. In case he
approved of the candidate, he did it without altering the figure, if
not, he first pressed it flat in his hand; for a flatted ball was
considered as a negative. And if but one such was found, the person was
not admitted, as they thought it proper that the whole company should be
satisfied with each other. He who thus rejected, was said to have no
luck in the _caddos_. The dish that was in the highest esteem amongst
them was the black broth. The old men were so fond of it that they
ranged themselves on one side and eat it, leaving the meat to the young
people. It is related of a king of Pontus, that he purchased a
Lacedæmonian cook, for the sake of this broth. But when he came to taste
it he strongly expressed his dislike; and the cook made answer, "Sir, to
make this broth relish, it is necessary first to bathe in the Eurotas."
After they had drank moderately, they went home without lights. Indeed,
they were forbidden to walk with a light either on this or any other
occasion, that they might accustom themselves to march in the darkest
night boldly and resolutely. Such was the order of their public
repasts.

Lycurgus left none of his laws in writing; it was ordered in one of the
_Rhetræ_ that none should be written. For what he thought most conducive
to the virtue and happiness of a city, was principles interwoven with
the manners and breeding of the people. These would remain immovable, as
founded in inclination, and be the strongest and most lasting tie; and
the habits which education produced in the youth, would answer in each
the purpose of a lawgiver. As for smaller matters, contracts about
property, and whatever occasionally varied, it was better not to reduce
these to a written form and unalterable method, but to suffer them to
change with the times, and to admit of additions or retrenchments at the
pleasure of persons so well educated. For he resolved the whole business
of legislation into the bringing up of youth. And this, as we have
observed, was the reason why one of his ordinances forbad them to have
any written laws.

Another ordinance levelled against magnificence and expense, directed
that the ceilings of houses should be wrought with no tool but the axe
and the doors with nothing but the saw. For, as Epaminondas is reported
to have said afterwards, of his table, "Treason lurks not under such a
dinner," so Lycurgus perceived before him, that such a house admits of
no luxury and needless splendour. Indeed, no man could be so absurd as
to bring into a dwelling so homely and simple, bedsteads with silver
feet, purple coverlets, golden cups, and a train of expense that follows
these: but all would necessarily have the bed suitable to the room, the
coverlet of the bed and the rest of their utensils and furniture to
that. From this plain sort of dwellings, proceeded the question of
Leotychidas the elder to his host, when he supped at Corinth, and saw
the ceiling of the room very splendid and curiously wrought, "Whether
trees grew square in his country."

A third ordinance of Lycurgus was, that they should not often make war
against the same enemy, lest, by being frequently put upon defending
themselves, they too should become able warriors in their turn. And this
they most blamed king Agesilaus for afterwards, that by frequent and
continued incursions into Boeotia, he taught the Thebans to make head
against the Lacedæmonians. This made Antalcidas say, when he saw him
wounded, "The Thebans pay you well for making them good soldiers who
neither were willing nor able to fight you before." These ordinances he
called _Rhetræ_, as if they had been oracles and decrees of the Deity
himself.

As for the education of youth, which he looked upon as the greatest and
most glorious work of a lawgiver, he began with it at the very source,
taking into consideration their conception and birth, by regulating the
marriages. For he did not (as Aristotle says) desist from his attempt to
bring the women under sober rules. They had, indeed, assumed great
liberty and power on account of the frequent expeditions of their
husbands, during which they were left sole mistresses at home, and so
gained an undue deference and improper titles; but notwithstanding this
he took all possible care of them. He ordered the virgins to exercise
themselves in running, wrestling, and throwing quoits and darts; that
their bodies being strong and vigorous, the children afterwards produced
from them might be the same; and that, thus fortified by exercise, they
might the better support the pangs of child-birth, and be delivered with
safety. In order to take away the excessive tenderness and delicacy of
the sex, the consequence of a recluse life, he accustomed the virgins
occasionally to be seen naked as well as the young men, and to dance and
sing in their presence on certain festivals. There they sometimes
indulged in a little raillery upon those that had misbehaved themselves,
and sometimes they sung encomiums on such as deserved them, thus
exciting in the young men a useful emulation and love of glory. For he
who was praised for his bravery and celebrated among the virgins, went
away perfectly happy: while their satirical glances thrown out in sport,
were no less cutting than serious admonitions; especially as the kings
and senate went with the other citizens to see all that passed. As for
the virgins appearing naked, there was nothing disgraceful in it,
because everything was conducted with modesty, and without one indecent
word or action. Nay, it caused a simplicity of manners and an emulation
for the best habit of body; their ideas too were naturally enlarged,
while they were not excluded from their share of bravery and honour.
Hence they were furnished with sentiments and language, such as Gorgo
the wife of Leonidas is said to have made use of. When a woman of
another country said to her, "You of Lacedæmon are the only women in the
world that rule the men;" she answered, "We are the only women that
bring forth men."

These public dances and other exercises of the young maidens naked, in
sight of the young men, were, moreover, incentives to marriage: and, to
use Plato's expression, drew them almost as necessarily by the
attractions of love, as a geometrical conclusion follows from the
premises. To encourage it still more, some marks of infamy were set upon
those that continued bachelors. For they were not permitted to see these
exercises of the naked virgins; and the magistrates commanded them to
march naked round the market-place in the winter, and to sing a song
composed against themselves, which expressed how justly they were
punished for their disobedience to the laws. They were also deprived of
that honour and respect which the younger people paid to the old; so
that nobody found fault with what was said to Dercyllidas, though an
eminent commander. It seems, when he came one day into company, a young
man, instead of rising up and giving place, told him, "You have no child
to give place to me, when I am old."

In their marriages, the bridegroom carried off the bride by violence;
and she was never chosen in a tender age, but when she had arrived at
full maturity. Then the woman that had the direction of the wedding, cut
the bride's hair close to the skin, dressed her in man's clothes, laid
her upon a mattrass, and left her in the dark. The bridegroom, neither
oppressed with wine nor enervated with luxury, but perfectly sober, as
having always supped at the common table, went in privately, untied her
girdle, and carried her to another bed. Having stayed there a short
time, he modestly retired to his usual apartment, to sleep with the
other young men; and observed the same conduct afterwards, spending the
day with his companions, and reposing himself with them in the night,
nor even visiting his bride but with great caution and apprehensions of
being discovered by the rest of the family; the bride at the same time
exerted all her art to contrive convenient opportunities for their
private meetings. And this they did not for a short time only, but some
of them even had children before they had an interview with their wives
in the daytime. This kind of commerce not only exercised their
temperance and chastity, but kept their bodies fruitful, and the first
ardour of their love fresh and unabated; for as they were not satiated
like those that are always with their wives, there still was place for
unextinguished desire. When he had thus established a proper regard to
modesty and decorum with respect to marriage, he was equally studious to
drive from that state the vain and womanish passion of jealousy; by
making it quite as reputable to have children in common with persons of
merit, as to avoid all offensive freedom in their own behaviour to their
wives. He laughed at those who revenge with wars and bloodshed the
communication of a married woman's favours; and allowed, that if a man
in years should have a young wife, he might introduce to her some
handsome and honest young man, whom he most approved of, and when she
had a child of this generous race, bring it up as his own. On the other
hand, he allowed, that if a man of character should entertain a passion
for a married woman on account of her modesty and the beauty of her
children, he might treat with her husband for admission to her company,
that so planting in a beauty-bearing soil, he might produce excellent
children, the congenial offspring of excellent parents. For, in the
first place, Lycurgus considered children, not so much the property of
their parents as of the state; and therefore he would not have them
begot by ordinary persons, but by the best men in it. In the next place,
he observed the vanity and absurdity of other nations, where people
study to have their horses and dogs of the finest breed they can procure
either by interest or money; and yet keep their wives shut up, that they
may have children by none but themselves, though they may happen to be
doting, decrepit, or infirm. As if children, when sprung from a bad
stock, and consequently good for nothing, were no detriment to those
whom they belong to, and who have the trouble of bringing them up, nor
any advantage, when well descended and of a generous disposition. These
regulations tending to secure a healthy offspring, and consequently
beneficial to the state, were so far from encouraging that
licentiousness of the women which prevailed afterwards, that adultery
was not known amongst them. A saying, upon this subject of Geradas, an
ancient Spartan, is thus related. A stranger had asked him, "What
punishment their law appointed for adulterers?" He answered, "My friend,
there are no adulterers in our country." The other replied, "But what if
there should be one?" "Why then," says Geradas, "he must forfeit a bull
so large that he might drink of the Eurotas from the top of Mount
Taygetus." When the stranger expressed his surprise at this, and said,
"How can such a bull be found?" Geradas answered with a smile, "How can
an adulterer be found in Sparta?" This is the account we have of their
marriages.

It was not left to the father to rear what children he pleased, but he
was obliged to carry the child to a place called Lesche, to be examined
by the most ancient men of the tribe, who were assembled there. If it
was strong and well-proportioned, they gave orders for its education,
and assigned it one of the nine thousand shares of land; but if it was
weakly and deformed, they ordered it to be thrown into the place called
Apothetæ, which is a deep cavern near the mountain Taygetus; concluding
that its life could be no advantage either to itself or to the public,
since nature had not given it at first any strength or goodness of
constitution. For the same reason the women did not wash their new-born
infants with water, but with wine, thus making some trial of their habit
of body; imagining that sickly and epileptic children sink and die under
the experiment, while healthy became more vigorous and hardy. Great care
and art was also exerted by the nurses; for, as they never swathed the
infants, their limbs had a freer turn, and their countenances a more
liberal air; besides, they used them to any sort of meat, to have no
terrors in the dark, nor to be afraid of being alone, and to leave all
ill humour and unmanly crying. Hence people of other countries purchased
Lacedæmonian nurses for their children; and Alcibiades the Athenian is
said to have been nursed by Amicla, a Spartan. But if he was fortunate
in a nurse, he was not so in a preceptor: for Zopyrus, appointed to that
office by Pericles, was, as Plato tells us, no better qualified than a
common slave. The Spartan children were not in that manner, under tutors
purchased or hired with money, nor were the parents at liberty to
educate them as they pleased: but as soon as they were seven years old,
Lycurgus ordered them to be enrolled in companies, where they were all
kept under the same order and discipline, and had their exercises and
recreations in common. He who showed the most conduct and courage
amongst them, was made captain of the company. The rest kept their eyes
upon him, obeyed his orders, and bore with patience the punishment he
inflicted: so that their whole education was an exercise of obedience.
The old men were present at their diversions, and often suggested some
occasion of dispute or quarrel, that they might observe with exactness
the spirit of each, and their firmness in battle.

As for learning, they had just what was absolutely necessary. All the
rest of their education was calculated to make them subject to command,
to endure labour, to fight and conquer. They added, therefore, to their
discipline, as they advance in age; cutting their hair very close,
making them go barefoot, and play, for the most part, quite naked. At
twelve years of age, their under garment was taken away, and but one
upper one a year allowed them. Hence they were necessarily dirty in
their persons, and not indulged the great favour of baths, and oils,
except on some particular days of the year. They slept in companies, on
beds made of the tops of reeds, which they gathered with their own
hands, without knives, and brought from the banks of the Eurotas. In
winter they were permitted to add a little thistle-down, as that seemed
to have some warmth in it.

At this age, the most distinguished amongst them became the favourite
companions of the elder; and the old men attended more constantly their
places of exercise, observing their trials of strength and wit, not
slightly and in a cursory manner, but as their fathers, guardians, and
governors: so that there was neither time nor place where persons were
wanting to instruct and chastise them. One of the best and ablest men of
the city was, moreover, appointed inspector of the youth: and he gave
the command of each company to the discreetest and most spirited of
those called Irens. An Iren was one that had been two years out of the
class of boys: a Melliren one of the oldest lads. This Iren, then, a
youth twenty years old, gives orders to those under his command in their
little battles, and has them to serve him at his house. He sends the
oldest of them to fetch wood, and the younger to gather pot-herbs: these
they steal where they can find them, either slily getting into gardens,
or else craftily and warily creeping to the common tables. But if any
one be caught, he is severely flogged for negligence or want of
dexterity. They steal, too, whatever victuals they possibly can,
ingeniously contriving to do it when persons are asleep, or keep but
indifferent watch. If they are discovered, they are punished not only
with whipping, but with hunger. Indeed, their supper is but slender at
all times, that, to fence against want, they may be forced to exercise
their courage and address. This is the first intention of their spare
diet: a subordinate one is, to make them grow tall. For when the animal
spirits are not too much oppressed by a great quantity of food, which
stretches itself out in breadth and thickness, they mount upwards by
their natural lightness, and the body easily and freely shoots up in
height. This also contributes to make them handsome; for thin and
slender habits yield more freely to nature, which then gives a fine
proportion to the limbs; whilst the heavy and gross resist her by their
weight. So women that take physic during their pregnancy, have slighter
children indeed, but of a finer and more delicate turn, because the
suppleness of the matter more readily obeys the plastic power. However,
these are speculations which we shall leave to others.

The boys steal with so much caution, that one of them having conveyed a
young fox under his garment, suffered the creature to tear out his
bowels with his teeth and claws, choosing rather to die than to be
detected. Nor does this appear incredible, if we consider what their
young men can endure to this day; for we have seen many of them expire
under the lash at the altar of Diana Orthia.

The Iren, reposing himself after supper, used to order one of the boys
to sing a song; to another he put some question which required a
judicious answer: for example, "Who was the best man in the city?" or
"What he thought of such an action?" This accustomed them from their
childhood to judge of the virtues, to enter into the affairs of their
countrymen. For if one of them was asked, "Who is a good citizen, or who
an infamous one," and hesitated in his answer, he was considered a boy
of slow parts, and of a soul that would not aspire to honour. The answer
was likewise to have a reason assigned for it, and proof conceived in
few words. He whose account of the matter was wrong, by way of
punishment had his thumb bit by the Iren. The old men and magistrates
often attended these little trials, to see whether the Iren exercised
his authority in a rational and proper manner. He was permitted, indeed,
to inflict the penalties; but when the boys were gone, he was to be
chastised himself, if he had punished them either with too much severity
or remissness.

The adopters of favourites also shared both in the honour and disgrace
of their boys: and one of them is said to have been mulcted by the
magistrates, because the boy whom he had taken into his affections let
some ungenerous word or cry escape him as he was fighting. This love was
so honourable and in so much esteem, that the virgins too had their
lovers amongst the most virtuous matrons. A competition of affection
caused no misunderstanding, but rather a mutual friendship between those
that had fixed their regards upon the same youth, and an united
endeavour to make him as accomplished as possible.

The boys were also taught to use sharp repartee, seasoned with humour,
and whatever they said was to be concise and pithy. For Lycurgus, as we
have observed, fixed but a small value on a considerable quantity of his
iron money; but, on the contrary, the worth of speech was to consist in
its being comprised in a few plain words, pregnant with a great deal of
sense: and he contrived that by long silence they might learn to be
sententious and acute in their replies. As debauchery often causes
weakness and sterility in the body, so the intemperance of the tongue
makes conversation empty and insipid. King Agis, therefore, when a
certain Athenian laughed at the Lacedæmonian short swords, and said,
"The jugglers would swallow them with ease upon the stage," answered in
his laconic way, "And yet we can reach our enemies' hearts with them."
Indeed, to me there seems to be something in this concise manner of
speaking which immediately reaches the object aimed at, and forcibly
strikes the mind of the hearer. Lycurgus himself was short and
sententious in his discourse, if we may judge by some of his answers
which are recorded; that, for instance, concerning the constitution.
When one advised him to establish a popular government in Lacedæmon,
"Go," said he, "and first make a trial of it in thy own family." That
again, concerning sacrifices to the Deity, when he was asked why he
appointed them so trifling and of so little value, "That we might never
be in want," said he, "of something to offer him." Once more, when they
inquired of him, what sort of martial exercises he allowed of, he
answered, "All, except those in which you stretch out your hands."
Several such like replies of his are said to be taken from the letters
which he wrote to his countrymen: as to their question, "How shall we
best guard against the invasion of an enemy?"--"By continuing poor, and
not desiring in your possessions to be one above another." And to the
question, whether they should enclose Sparta with walls, "That city is
well fortified, which has a wall of men instead of brick." Whether these
and some other letters ascribed to him are genuine or not, is no easy
matter to determine. However, that they hated long speeches, the
following apophthegms are a farther proof. King Leonidas said to one
who discoursed at an improper time about affairs of some concern, "My
friend, you should not talk so much to the purpose, of what it is not to
the purpose to talk of." Charilaus, the nephew of Lycurgus, being asked
why his uncle had made so few laws, answered, "To men of few words, few
laws are sufficient." Some people finding fault with Hecatæus the
sophist, because, when admitted to one of the public repasts, he said
nothing all the time, Archidamidas replied, "He that knows how to speak,
knows also when to speak."

The manner of their repartees, which, as I said, were seasoned with
humour, may be gathered from these instances. When a troublesome fellow
was pestering Demaratus with impertinent questions, and this in
particular several times repeated, "Who is the best man in Sparta?" He
answered, "He that is least like you." To some who were commending the
Eleans for managing the Olympic games with so much justice and
propriety, Agis said, "What great matter is it, if the Eleans do justice
once in five years?" When a stranger was professing his regard for
Theopompus, and saying that his own countrymen called him Philolacon (a
lover of the Lacedæmonians), the king answered him, "My good friend, it
were much better, if they called you Philopolites" (a lover of your own
countrymen). Plistonax, the son of Pausanias, replied to an orator of
Athens, who said the Lacedæmonians had no learning. "True, for we are
the only people of Greece that have learned no ill of you." To one who
asked what number of men there was in Sparta, Archidamidas said, "Enough
to keep bad men at a distance."

Even when they indulged a vein of pleasantry, one might perceive that
they would not use one unnecessary word, nor let an expression escape
them that had not some sense worth attending to. For one being asked to
go and hear a person who imitated the nightingale to perfection,
answered, "I have heard the nightingale herself." Another said, upon
reading this epitaph,

     Victims of Mars, at Selinus they fell,
     Who quench'd the rage of tyranny--

"And they deserved to fall, for, instead of _quenching_ it, they should
have let it _burn out_." A young man answered one that promised him some
game-cocks that would stand their death, "Give me those that will be the
death of others." Another seeing some people carried into the country in
litters, said, "May I never sit in any place where I cannot rise before
the aged!" This was the manner of their apophthegms: so that it has been
justly enough observed that the term _lakonizein_ (to act the
Lacedæmonian) is to be referred rather to the exercises of the mind,
than those of the body.

Nor were poetry and music less cultivated among them, than a concise
dignity of expression. Their songs had a spirit, which could rouse the
soul, and impel it in an enthusiastic manner to action. The language was
plain and manly, the subject serious and moral. For they consisted
chiefly of the praises of heroes that had died for Sparta, or else of
expressions of detestation for such wretches as had declined the
glorious opportunity, and rather chose to drag on life in misery and
contempt. Nor did they forget to express an ambition for glory suitable
to their respective ages. Of this it may not be amiss to give an
instance. There were three choirs on their festivals, corresponding with
the three ages of man. The old men began,

     Once in battle bold we shone;

the young men answered,

     Try us: our vigour is not gone;

and the boys concluded,

     The palm remains for us alone.

Indeed, if we consider with some attention such of the Lacedæmonian
poems as are still extant, and get into those airs which were played
upon the flute when they marched to battle, we must agree that Terpander
and Pindar have very fitly joined valour and music together. The former
thus speaks of Lacedæmon,

     There gleams the youth's bright falchion: there the muse
     Lifts her sweet voice: there awful Justice opes
     Her wide pavilion.

And Pindar sings,

     There in grave council sits the sage;
     There burns the youth's resistless rage
       To hurl the quiv'ring lance;
     The Muse with glory crowns their arms,
     And Melody exerts her charms,
       And Pleasure leads the dance.

Thus we are informed, not only of their warlike turn, but their skill in
music. For as the Spartan poet says,

     To swell the bold notes of the lyre,
     Becomes the warrior's lofty fire.

And the king always offered sacrifice to the muses before a battle,
putting his troops in mind, I suppose, of their early education and of
the judgment that would be passed upon them; as well as that those
divinities might teach them to despite danger, while they performed some
exploit fit for them to celebrate.

On these occasions they relaxed the severity of their discipline,
permitting their men to be curious in dressing their hair, and elegant
in their arms and apparel, while they expressed their alacrity, like
horses full of fire and neighing for the race. They let their hair,
therefore, grow from their youth, but took more particular care, when
they expected an action, to have it well combed and shining; remembering
a saying of Lycurgus, that "a large head of hair made the handsome more
graceful, and the ugly more terrible." The exercises, too, of the young
men, during the campaigns, were more moderate, their diet not so hard,
and their whole treatment more indulgent: so that they were the only
people in the world with whom military discipline wore, in time of war,
a gentler face than usual. When the army was drawn up, and the enemy
near, the king sacrificed a goat, and commanded them all to set garlands
upon their heads, and the musicians to play Castro's march, while
himself began the pæan, which was the signal to advance. It was at once
a solemn and dreadful sight to see them measuring their steps to the
sound of music, and without the least disorder in their ranks or tumult
of spirits, moving forward cheerfully and composedly, with harmony, to
battle. Neither fear nor rashness was likely to approve men so disposed,
possessed as they were of a firm presence of mind, with courage and
confidence of success, as under the conduct of heaven. When the king
advanced against the enemy, he had always with him some one that had
been crowned in the public games of Greece. And they tell us, that a
Lacedæmonian, when large sums were offered him on condition that he
would not enter the Olympic lists, refused them, having with much
difficulty thrown his antagonist, one put this question to him,
"Spartan, what will you get by this victory?" He answered with a smile,
"I shall have the honour to fight foremost in the ranks before my
prince." When they had routed the enemy, they continued the pursuit till
they were assured of the victory: after that they immediately desisted;
deeming it neither generous nor worthy of a Grecian to destroy those who
made no farther resistance. This was not only a proof of magnanimity,
but of great service to their cause. For when their adversaries found
that they killed such as stood it out, but spared the fugitives, they
concluded it was better to fly than to meet their fate upon the spot.

Hippias the sophist tells us, that Lycurgus himself was a man of great
personal valour, and an experienced commander. Philostephanus also
ascribes to him the first division of cavalry into troops of fifty, who
were drawn up in a square body. But Demetrius the Phalerean says, that
he never had any military employment, and that there was the profoundest
peace imaginable when he established the constitution of Sparta. His
providing for a cessation of arms during the Olympic games is likewise a
mark of the humane and peaceable man. Some, however, acquaint us, and
among the rest Hermippus, that Lucurgus at first had no communication
with Iphitus; but coming that way, and happening to be a spectator, he
heard behind him a human voice (as he thought) which expressed some
wonder and displeasure that he did not put his countrymen upon resorting
to so great an assembly. He turned round immediately, to discover whence
the voice came, and as there was no man to be seen, concluded it was
from heaven. He joined Iphitus, therefore; and ordering, along with him,
the ceremonies of the festival, rendered it more magnificent and
lasting.

The discipline of the Lacedæmonians continued after they were arrived at
years of maturity. For no man was at liberty to live as he pleased; the
city being like one great camp, where all had their stated allowance,
and knew their public charge, each man concluding that he was born, not
for himself, but for his country. Hence, if they had no particular
orders, they employed themselves in inspecting the boys, and teaching
them something useful, or in learning of those that were older than
themselves. One of the greatest privileges that Lycurgus procured his
countrymen, was the enjoyment of leisure, the consequence of his
forbidding them to exercise any mechanic trade. It was not worth their
while to take great pains to raise a fortune, since riches there were of
no account: and the Helotes, who tilled the ground, were answerable for
the produce above-mentioned. To this purpose we have a story of a
Lacedæmonian, who, happening to be at Athens while the court sat, was
informed of a man who was fined for idleness; and when the poor fellow
was returning home in great dejection, attended by his condoling
friends, he desired the company to show him the person that was
condemned for keeping up his dignity. So much beneath them they reckoned
all attention to mechanics arts, and all desire of riches!

Lawsuits were banished from Lacedæmon with money. The Spartans knew
neither riches nor poverty, but possessed an equal competency, and had a
cheap and easy way of supplying their few wants. Hence, when they were
not engaged in war, their time was taken up with dancing, feasting,
hunting, or meeting to exercise, or converse. They went not to market
under thirty years of age, all their necessary concerns being managed by
their relations and adopters. Nor was it reckoned a credit to the old to
be seen sauntering in the market-place; it was deemed more suitable for
them to pass great part of the day in the schools of exercise, or places
of conversation. Their discourse seldom turned upon money, or business,
or trade, but upon the praise of the excellent, or the contempt of the
worthless; and the last was expressed with that pleasantry and humour,
which conveyed instruction and correction without seeming to intend it.
Nor was Lycurgus himself immoderately severe in his manner; but, as
Sosibius tells us, he dedicated a little statue to the god of laughter
in each hall. He considered facetiousness as a seasoning of their hard
exercise and diet, and therefore ordered it to take place on all proper
occasions, in their common entertainments and parties of pleasure.

Upon the whole, he taught his citizens to think nothing more
disagreeable than to live by (or for) themselves. Like bees, they acted
with one impulse for the public good, and always assembled about their
prince. They were possessed with a thirst of honour, an enthusiasm
bordering upon insanity, and had not a wish but for their country. These
sentiments are confirmed by some of their aphorisms. When Pædaretus lost
his election for one of the "three hundred," he went away "rejoicing
that there were three hundred better men than himself found in the
city." Pisistratidas going with some others, ambassador to the king of
Persia's lieutenants, was asked whether they came with a public
commission, or on their own account, to which he answered, "If
successful, for the public; if unsuccessful, for ourselves." Agrileonis,
the mother of Brasidas, asking some Amphipolitans that waited upon her
at her house, whether Brasidas died honourably and as became a Spartan?
they greatly extolled his merit, and said there was not such a man left
in Sparta; whereupon she replied, "Say not so, my friends; for Brasidas
was indeed a man of honour, but Lacedæmon can boast of many better men
than he."

The senate, as I said before, consisted at first of those that were
assistants to Lycurgus in his great enterprise. Afterwards, to fill up
any vacancy that might happen, he ordered the most worthy men to be
selected, of those that were full threescore years old. This was the
most respectable dispute in the world, and the contest was truly
glorious; for it was not who should be swiftest among the swift, or
strongest of the strong, but who was the wisest and best among the good
and wise. He who had the preference was to bear this mark of superior
excellence through life, this great authority, which put into his hands
the lives and honour of the citizens, and every other important affair.
The manner of the election was this: when the people were assembled,
some persons appointed for the purpose were shut up in a room near the
place; where they could neither see nor be seen, and only hear the
shouts of the constituents: for by them they decided this and most
other affairs. Each candidate walked silently through the assembly, one
after another according to lot. Those that were shut up had writing
tables, in which they set down in different columns the number and
loudness of the shouts, without knowing who they were for; only they
marked them as first, second, third, and so on, according to the number
of the competitors. He that had the most and loudest acclamations, was
declared duly elected. Then he was crowned with a garland, and went
round to give thanks to the gods: a number of young men followed,
striving which should extol him most, and the women celebrated his
virtues in their songs, and blessed his worthy life and conduct. Each of
his relations offered him a repast, and their address on the occasion
was, "Sparta honours you with this collation." When he had finished the
procession, he went to the common table, and lived as before. Only two
portions were set before him, one of which he carried away: and as all
the women related to him attended at the gates of the public hall, he
called her for whom he had the greatest esteem, and presented her with
the portion, saying at the same time, "That which I received as a mark
of honour, I give to you." Then she was conducted home with great
applause by the rest of the women.

Lycurgus likewise made good regulations with respect to burials. In the
first place, to take away all superstition, he ordered the dead to be
buried in the city, and even permitted their monuments to be erected
near the temples; accustoming the youth to such sights from their
infancy, that they might have no uneasiness from them, nor any horror
for death, as if people were polluted with the touch of a dead body, or
with treading upon a grave. In the next place, he suffered nothing to be
buried with the corpse, except the red cloth and the olive leaves in
which it was wrapped. Nor would he suffer the relations to inscribe any
names upon the tombs, except of those men that fell in battle, or those
women who died in some sacred office. He fixed eleven days for the time
of mourning: on the twelfth they were to put an end to it, after
offering sacrifice to Ceres. No part of life was left vacant and
unimproved, but even with their necessary actions he interwove the
praise of virtue and the contempt of vice: and he so filled the city
with living examples, that it was next to impossible, for persons who
had these from their infancy before their eyes, not to be drawn and
formed to honour.

For the same reason he would not permit all that desired to go abroad
and see other countries, lest they should contract foreign manners, gain
traces of a life of little discipline, and of a different form of
government. He forbid strangers too to resort to Sparta, who could not
assign a good reason for their coming; not, as Thucydides says, out of
fear they should imitate the constitution of that city, and make
improvements in virtue, but lest they should teach his own people some
evil. For along with foreigners come new subjects of discourse; new
discourse produces new opinions; and from these there necessarily spring
new passions and desires, which, like discords in music, would disturb
the established government. He, therefore, thought it more expedient for
the city to keep out of it corrupt customs and manners, than even to
prevent the introduction of a pestilence.

Thus far, then, we can perceive no vestiges of a disregard to right and
wrong, which is the fault some people find with the laws of Lycurgus,
allowing them well enough calculated to produce valour, but not to
promote justice. Perhaps it was the Cryptia, as they called it, or
ambuscade, if that was really one of this lawgiver's institutions, as
Aristotle says it was, which gave Plato so bad an impression both of
Lycurgus and his laws. The governors of the youth ordered the shrewdest
of them from time to time to disperse themselves in the country,
provided only with daggers and some necessary provisions. In the daytime
they hid themselves, and rested in the most private places they could
find, but at night they sallied out into the roads, and killed all the
Helotes they could meet with. Nay, sometimes by day, they fell upon them
in the fields, and murdered the ablest and strongest of them. Thucydides
relates in his history of the Peloponnesian war, that the Spartans
selected such of them as were distinguished for their courage, to the
number of two thousand or more, declared them free, crowned them with
garlands, and conducted them to the temples of the gods; but soon after
they all disappeared; and no one could, either then or since, give
account in what manner they were destroyed. Aristotle particularly says,
that the Ephori, as soon as they were invested in their office, declared
war against the Helotes, that they might be massacred under pretence of
law. In other respects they treated them with great inhumanity:
sometimes they made them drink till they were intoxicated, and in that
condition led them into the public halls, to show the young men what
drunkenness was. They ordered them too to sing mean songs, and to dance
ridiculous dances, but not to meddle with any that were genteel and
graceful. Thus they tell us, that when the Thebans afterwards invaded
Laconia, and took a great number of the Helotes prisoners, they ordered
them to sing the odes of Terpander, Aleman, or Spendon the Lacedæmonian,
but they excused themselves, alleging that it was forbidden by their
masters. Those who say that a freeman in Sparta was most a freeman, and
a slave most a slave, seem well to have considered the difference of
states. But in my opinion, it was in after-times that these cruelties
took place among the Lacedæmonians, chiefly after the great earthquake,
when, as history informs us, the Helotes, joining the Messenians,
attacked them, did infinite damage to the country, and brought the city
to the greatest extremity. I can never ascribe to Lycurgus so
abominable an act as that of the ambuscade. I would judge in this case
by the mildness and justice which appeared in the rest of his conduct,
to which also the gods gave their sanction.

When his principal institutions had taken root in the manners of the
people, and the government was come to such maturity as to be able to
support and preserve itself, then, as Plato says of the Deity, that he
rejoiced when he had created the world, and given it its first motion;
so Lycurgus was charmed with the beauty and greatness of his political
establishment, when he saw it exemplified in fact, and move on in due
order. He was next desirous to make it immortal, so far as human wisdom
could effect it, and to deliver it down unchanged to the latest times.
For this purpose he assembled all the people, and told them the
provisions he had already made for the state were indeed sufficient for
virtue and happiness, but the greatest and most important matter was
still behind, which he could not disclose to them till he had consulted
the oracle; that they must therefore inviolably observe his laws,
without altering anything in them, till he returned from Delphi; and
then he would acquaint them with the pleasure of Apollo. When they had
all promised to do so, and desired him to set forward, he took an oath
of the kings and senators, and afterwards of all the citizens, that they
would abide by the present establishment till Lycurgus came back. He
then took his journey to Delphi.

When he arrived there, he offered sacrifice to the gods, and consulted
the oracle, whether his laws were sufficient to promote virtue, and
secure the happiness of the state. Apollo answered, that the laws were
excellent, and that the city which kept to the constitution he had
established, would be the most glorious in the world. This oracle
Lycurgus took down in writing, and sent it to Sparta. He then offered
another sacrifice, and embraced his friends and his son, determined
never to release his citizens from their oath, but voluntarily there to
put a period to his life; while he was yet of an age when life was not a
burden, when death was not desirable, and while he was not unhappy in
any one circumstance. He, therefore, destroyed himself by abstaining
from food, persuaded that the very death of lawgivers should have its
use, and their exit, so far from being insignificant, have its share of
virtue, and be considered as a great action. To him, indeed, whose
performances were so illustrious, the conclusion of life was the crown
of happiness, and his death was left guardian of those invaluable
blessings he had procured his countrymen through life, as they had taken
an oath not to depart from his establishment till his return. Nor was he
deceived in his expectations. Sparta continued superior to the rest of
Greece, both in its government at home and reputation abroad, so long as
it retained the institution of Lycurgus: and this it did during the
space of five hundred years, and the reign of fourteen successive kings,
down to Agis the son of Archidamus. As for the appointment of the
Ephori, it was so far from weakening the constitution, that it gave it
additional vigour, and though it seemed to be established in favour of
the people, it strengthened the aristocracy.

But in the reign of Agis money found its way into Sparta, and with money
came its inseparable attendant--avarice. This was by means of Lysander;
who, though himself incapable of being corrupted by money, filled his
country with the love of it, and with luxury too. He brought both gold
and silver from the wars, and thereby broke through the laws of
Lycurgus. While these were in force, Sparta was not so much under the
political regulations of a commonwealth, as the strict rules of a
philosophic life; and as the poets feign of Hercules, that only with a
club and lion's skin he travelled over the world, clearing it of lawless
ruffians and cruel tyrants; so the Lacedæmonians with a piece of
parchment and coarse coat kept Greece in a voluntary obedience,
destroyed usurpation and tyranny in the states, put an end to wars, and
laid seditions asleep, very often without either shield or lance, and
only by sending one ambassador; to whose directions all parties
concerned immediately submitted. Thus bees, when their prince appears,
compose their quarrels and unite in one swarm. So much did justice and
good government prevail in that state, that I am surprised at those who
say the Lacedæmonians knew indeed how to obey, but not how to govern:
and on this occasion quote the saying of king Theopompus, who, when one
told him that Sparta was preserved by the good administration of its
kings, replied, "Nay, rather by the obedience of their subjects." It is
certain that people will not continue pliant to those who know not how
to command; but it is the part of a good governor to teach obedience. He
who knows how to lead well, is sure to be well followed: and as it is by
the art of horsemanship that a horse is made gentle and tractable, so it
is by the abilities of him that fills the throne that the people become
ductile and submissive. Such was the conduct of the Lacedæmonians, that
people did not only endure, but even desired to be their subjects. They
asked not of them either ships, money or troops, but only a Spartan
general. When they had received him, they treated him with the greatest
honour and respect; so Gylippus was revered by the Sicilians, Brasidas
by the Chalcidians, Lysander, Callicratidas, and Agesilaus by all the
people of Asia. These, and such as these, wherever they came, were
called moderators and reformers, both of the magistrates and people, and
Sparta itself was considered as a school of discipline, where the beauty
of life and political order were taught in the utmost perfection. Hence
Stratonicus seems facetiously enough to have said, that he would order
"the Athenians to have the conduct of mysteries and processions; the
Eleans to preside in games, as their particular province; and the
Lacedæmonians to be beaten, if the other did amiss." This was spoken in
jest: but Antisthenes, one of the scholars of Socrates, said (more
seriously) of the Thebans, when he saw them pluming themselves upon
their success at Leuctra, "They were just like so many school-boys
rejoicing that they had beaten their master."

It was not, however, the principal design of Lycurgus that his city
should govern many others, but he considered its happiness like that of
a private man, as flowing from virtue and self-consistency: he therefore
so ordered and disposed it, that by the freedom and sobriety of its
inhabitants, and their having a sufficiency within themselves, its
continuance might be the more secure. Plato, Diogenes, Zeno, and other
writers upon government, have taken Lycurgus for their model: and these
have attained great praise, though they left only an idea of something
excellent. Yet he who, not in idea and in words, but in fact produced a
most inimitable form of government, and by showing a whole city of
philosophers, confounded those who imagine that the so much talked of
strictness of a philosophic life is impracticable; he, I say, stands in
the rank of glory far beyond the founders of all the other Grecian
states. Therefore Aristotle is of opinion, that the honours paid him in
Lacedæmon were far beneath his merit. Yet those honours were very great;
for he has a temple there, and they offer him a yearly sacrifice, as a
god. It is also said, that when his remains were brought home, his tomb
was struck with lightning: a seal of divinity which no other man,
however eminent, has had, except Euripides, who died and was buried at
Arethusa in Macedonia. This was matter of great satisfaction and triumph
to the friends of Euripides, that the same thing should befall him after
death, which had formerly happened to the most venerable of men, and the
most favoured of heaven. Some say, Lycurgus died at Cirrha; but
Apollothemis will have it, that he was brought to Elis and died there;
and Timæus and Aristoxenus write, that he ended his days in Crete; nay,
Aristoxenus adds, that the Cretans show his tomb at Pergamia, near the
high road. We are told, he left an only son named Antiorus: and as he
died without issue, the family was extinct. His friends and relations
observed his anniversary, which subsisted for many ages, and the days on
which they met for that purpose they called Lycurgidæ. Aristocrates, the
son of Hipparchus, relates, that the friends of Lycurgus, with whom he
sojourned, and at last died in Crete, burned his body, and, at his
request, threw his ashes into the sea. Thus he guarded against the
possibility of his remains being brought back to Sparta by the
Lacedæmonians, lest they should then think themselves released from
their oath, on the pretence that he was returned, and make innovations
in the government. This is what we had to say of Lycurgus.




SIR THOMAS MORE'S

UTOPIA.




UTOPIA.




