CHAPTER VI

PRENATAL INFLUENCES


=All That a Child Possesses at Birth Not Necessarily Hereditary.--=We come
now to the more specific discussion of what may happen to offspring of
mammals, and particularly man, in the interval between fertilization and
birth; that is, during the intra-maternal period. We have already seen
that anything affecting the offspring during this period has to be
reckoned as environmental, our formula reading, Mammal = germ +
intra-maternal environment + external environment. It is evident, then,
that all that a child possesses at birth is not necessarily hereditary,
since the unborn child may be influenced by conditions prevailing in
either parent.

=The Myth of Maternal Impressions.--=In order to clear the way for more
urgent matters let us first inquire into the question of the production of
changes in the unborn child as a result of "maternal impressions." As the
tale generally goes, structural changes are produced in the unborn child
corresponding to some mental experience of the mother, usually a vivid
impression of strong emotion, but when a given individual is pinned down
to sources, it is usually a case of hearsay.

Stock examples are: The mother sees a mouse with the result that a
mouse-shaped birthmark occurs on the child; or she sees a crushed hand
and in consequence bears a child later with some of the bones of the hand
missing; the mother touches her body when frightened and thus marks the
unborn child on the corresponding part of the body; or she produces beauty
in the child by long contemplation of a picture of a beautiful child; and
so on almost endlessly. The favorite is usually the production of a red
birthmark or marks on the child's body by strong desire on the part of the
mother for strawberries, tomatoes, etc.--the fruit must be red since the
mark is red--or by fright from seeing a fire. As a matter of fact it is
not uncommon for the capillary blood vessels of the skin of a new-born
infant to remain dilated in spots instead of contracting as they normally
should do. The result is more or less of a red or "flame" spot. It is easy
to see, therefore, why such birthmarks are so frequently referred back by
the credulous mother to her desire for or fear of some red object.

An analysis of the case of a child shuddering at the sight of peaches is
of interest in this connection. The child showed the greatest aversion to
peaches, particularly to the fuzzy covering. The mother's explanation was
that peaches were unusually plentiful the year the child was born and that
she had worked hour after hour at peeling and canning peaches shortly
before his birth until she had become thoroughly sick of them. This
acquired aversion on her part she believed had been transferred to the
child. A few questions revealed the fact, however, that the mother,
herself, had never liked peaches and when asked if they were distasteful
to any other member of her own family she exclaimed, "Oh, yes, my mother
would shudder and shake if a peach were brought near her." And there we
have it. The idiosyncrasy was an inherited one as many similar
peculiarities are. The mental impression produced in the mother by her own
experience with peaches had nothing to do with its occurrence in the
child.

Very frequently also one encounters the mother who is sure she has
engendered musical ability in her child by constant practise and study of
music during pregnancy. The child is musical; what better evidence does
one want! It seems never to occur to such a mother that the child is
musically inclined because she herself is, as is evinced by her own desire
in the matter even if she is not a skillful performer.

When we take into account the extreme credulity of many people, the
unconscious tendency of mankind to give a dramatic interpretation to
events where causes are not certainly known, the hosts of coincidences
that occur in life, and the multitude of cases where something should
happen but nothing does, we are compelled to believe that the whole matter
of direct specific influence of the mother's mind on the developing fetus
is a myth. After seeing the conditions which prevail in Mendelism, for
example, it will take strong faith to believe that a mother with duplex
brown eyes can "think" or "will" blue eyes on her baby, yet this would be
a mild procedure compared to some we are asked to accept by believers in
the transmission of maternal impressions. Most of all, however, when we
recall the actual relation between the embryo and the mother--a narrow
umbilical cord is the sole means of communication between the two--the
physical impossibility of a connection between some particular mental
happening of the mother and a corresponding specific modification in the
fetus becomes evident. For there are no nerves in the umbilical cord, the
only path of communication between mother and fetus being the indirect one
by way of the blood stream. Even this method of communication is limited
inasmuch as the mother's blood does not circulate through the blood
vessels of the fetus. Gaseous and dissolved substances are merely
interchanged through the thin walls of the capillary blood vessels in the
placenta.

=Injurious Prenatal Influences.--=However, the denial that a particular
mental impression of the mother is associated with a particular structural
defect in a child does not carry with it the implication that prenatal
influences of all kinds are negligible factors. On the contrary any
deleterious effect which can reach the fetus through absorption from the
blood of the mother may be of grave consequence. There is not the least
doubt that malnutrition or serious ill-health on the part of the mother
often has a prejudicial effect on the unborn offspring. Severe shock or
grief, worry, nervous exhaustion, the influence of certain diseases,
poisons in the blood or tissues of the parent, such as lead, mercury,
phosphorus, alcohol and the like, may all act detrimentally, but they
operate either by rendering nutrition defective, by direct poisoning, or
by generating toxins in the blood of the parent which then poison the
fetus. Among the latter may be mentioned the toxic products of
tuberculosis and certain other bacterial diseases. Such factors operating
on the unborn young or even on the germ-cells may cause malformations,
arrests of development, instabilities of the nervous system, and general
physical or mental weakness. The effects are general, however, and not
specific.

To distinguish certain of these prenatal effects, particularly those of
certain diseases or poisons, from true hereditary influences they are
frequently spoken of as cases of _transmission_ rather than inheritance
from parents. Some writers use the technical term _blastophthoria_, or
false-heredity, extending the meaning so as to include also any damage
that might be inflicted on the germ-cells.

=Lead Poisoning.--=By way of illustration of how certain cumulative
poisons may act we may examine a tabulation of eighty-one cases of lead
poisoning as reported by Constantin Paul (Fig. 29, p. 164).

The table requires little comment. The disastrous effects of such
poisoning are apparent in every class of cases. The sixth class where the
husband alone was exposed to lead shows that the poison can operate
directly through the germ-cell. Other observers note that in the children
of workers in lead, there is a distressing frequency of feeble-mindedness
and epilepsy.

That lead poisoning operating through the germ-cells of the father can
affect the development of the young harmfully is well shown in Fig. 30, p.
165, which is a photograph of two young rabbits from the same litter The
white young one is from a normal albino mother mated to an albino father
which had received lead treatment. The pigmented young one is from the
same albino mother by a normal pigmented father. Although the white
father was considerably larger than the pigmented father, nevertheless the
young of the former, because of the harmful effects of the lead, is
distinctly smaller and less lively. A number of litters, each from the
same mother but in part from a lead-poisoned father and in part from a
normal father, have been secured. All show more or less the same results.
The experiments are still in progress in the department of experimental
breeding at the University of Wisconsin.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                       |Number of cases.
                       |     +----------------------------------------
                       |     |Number of pregnancies.
                       |     |      +---------------------------------
                       |     |      |Abortions, premature labor, and
                       |     |      |  stillbirths.
                       |     |      |     +---------------------------
                       |     |      |     |Infants born living.
                       |     |      |     |      +--------------------
                       |     |      |     |      |Remarks.
  ---------------------|-----|------|-----|------|--------------------
  1. Mother showing    |     |      |     |      |One infant died
  symptoms of plubism  |  4  |  15  |  13 |   2  | within 24 hours.
                       |     |      |     |      |
  2. Mother working in |     |      |     |      |
  type foundry, all    |     |      |     |      |
  of whose previous    |     |      |     |      |
  pregnancies had      |     |      |     |      |Four of these died
  been normal          |  5  |  36  |  29 |   7  | in first year.
                       |     |      |     |      |
  3. Mother who during |     |      |     |      |
  period of work in    |     |      |     |      |After ceasing to
  type foundry had     |     |      |     |      | work had
  five pregnancies     |  1  |   5  |   5 |   0  | healthy child.
                       |     |      |     |      |
  4. Mother working    |     |      |     |      |When away from
  intermittently in    |     |      |     |      | work for some
  type foundry;        |     |      |     |      | period of time
  while working        |     |      |     |      | gave birth to
  there                |  3  |   3  |   3 |   0  | healthy children.
                       |     |      |     |      |
  5. Mother in whom    |     |      |     |      |
  blue line on gum     |     |      |     |      |
  the only sign of     |     |      |     |      |
  lead poisoning       |  6  |  29  |  21 |   8  |
                       |     |      |     |      |Of these, eight died
  6. Husband alone     |     |      |     |      | in first year,
  exposed to lead      |  ?  |  32  |  12 |  20  | four in second,
                       |     |      |     |      | five in third.
  --------------------------------------------------------------------

FIG. 29

Tabulation of eighty-one cases of lead poisoning recorded by Constantin
Paul (from Adami).


[Illustration: Fig. 30

Photograph of young rabbits from the same litter, the smaller one stunted
by lead-poisoning of its father (Courtesy of Professor L. J. Cole).]


=The Expectant Mother Should Have Rest.--=The mere matter of rest on the
part of the pregnant mother is, judging from the work of Pinard, a
Frenchman, and his pupils, an important one. In a number of detailed
investigations they have shown that rest on the part of the working mother
during the last three months before the child is born results in the
production of markedly larger and more robust children than those born of
mothers equally healthy but who have not had such rest. Moreover the
danger of premature birth is considerably lessened.

=Too Short Intervals Between Children.--=Too short an interval between
childbirths would also seem to be an infringement on the rights of the
child as well as of the mother. Thus Doctor R. J. Ewart ("The Influence of
Parental Age on Offspring," _Eugenic Review_, October, 1911) finds that
children born at intervals of less than two years after the birth of the
previous child still show at the age of six a notable deficiency in
height, weight and intelligence, when compared with the children born
after a longer interval, or even with first-born children.

=Our Duty to Safeguard Motherhood.--=Doubtless the unventilated factory
and tenement also do their share, even though we can give no exact
quantitative measure of it. Obviously, it becomes a civic duty to protect
as much as possible all members of our social system from such injurious
factors as have just been discussed. It is particularly necessary to
safeguard mothers before confinement, especially working mothers.

=Expectant Mothers Neglected.--=According to the claims of life insurance
men, expectant mothers are the most neglected members of our population.
Doctor Van Ingen, of New York City, estimates that ninety per cent. of
women in this country are wholly without prenatal care. Yet every
prospective mother should be taught the probable meaning of such symptoms
as headache, hemorrhages, swelling of the feet and disturbed vision. She
should realize the importance of submitting a sample of urine for analysis
at least once a month before childbirth and twice a month for a while
thereafter. She should be specially informed regarding work, exercise,
diet and dress. A recent government bulletin written by Mrs. Max West
which may be had free by writing to the Children's Bureau, Department of
Labor, Washington, D. C., gives much useful information on this subject.


ALCOHOLISM

=Unreliability of Much of the Data.--=One of the most important poisons
that plays a prominent part among ante-natal influences is alcohol. But
when it comes to a study of the problem of alcoholism from the standpoint
of heredity and parental influences we meet with many difficulties,
prominent among which are the inaccuracy and unreliability of many of the
statistics brought forward in this connection. Many of the results are
vitiated by the prejudices of propagandists who propose to make a case
either for or against alcohol as a beverage whether or not the facts
justify their conclusions. When one tries to view the matter with an open
mind he finds that there is a deplorable lack of statistics which are not
susceptible to more than one interpretation. However, using as much as
possible what seems to be unbiased data, the evidence is almost wholly
against alcohol as a beverage, at least to any immoderate extent.

=Alcohol a Germinal or Fetal Poison.--=The bad effects as far as offspring
are concerned reveal themselves in the main under the category of "false
heredity," i. e., germinal or fetal poisonings rather than of heritable
changes induced in the germ-cells. Most investigators feel that there are
too many criminal, imbecile, insane and unhealthy persons among the
offspring of drunkards to dismiss the matter as a coincidence. In an
investigation of Imbault, for example, we find recorded of one hundred
tuberculous children that while forty-one were of tuberculous parentage,
thirty-six per cent, were the offspring of inebriates. Furthermore Imbault
cites the observations of Arrive on 1,506 cases of juvenile meningitis to
the effect that this malady is twice as frequent in the children of
alcoholic as in those of tuberculous parentage. It has been proved by
Nicloux (_L'Obstetrique_, Vol. 99, 1900) that in dogs and guinea-pigs
alcohol passes through the placenta and may be detected in fetal tissues;
hence it is in position to influence the fetus. He found that in a very
short time the amount of alcohol in the blood of the fetus about
paralleled that in the blood of the mother.

=Progressive Increase in Death-Rate of Offspring of Inebriate Women.--=In
an investigation on the effects of parental alcoholism on the offspring,
Sullivan (_Journal of Mental Science_, Vol. 45, 1899) gives some
important figures. To avoid other complications he chose female drunkards
in whom no other degenerative features were evident. He found that among
these the percentage of abortions, still-births and deaths of infants
before their third year was 55.8 per cent. as against 23.9 per cent. in
sober mothers. In answer to the objection that this high percentage may be
due merely to neglect, and not to impairment of the fetus by alcoholism,
he points out the fact based on the history of the successive births, that
there was a progressive increase in the death-rate of offspring in
proportion to the length of time the mother had been an inebriate, thus:

  -------------------------------------------------------------
                   |No. of|Per cent.|Per cent. dying|  Total
                   |cases |born dead|   before 3    |percentage
  -----------------|------|---------|---------------|----------
  First births     |  80  |   6.2   |     27.5      |   33.7
  Second births    |  80  |  11.2   |     40.8      |   50.0
  Third births     |  80  |   7.6   |     45.0      |   52.6
  Fourth and fifth | 111  |  10.8   |     54.9      |   65.7
  Sixth to tenth   |  93  |  17.2   |     54.8      |   72.0
  -------------------------------------------------------------

=Views of a Psychiatrist on Alcohol.--=Forel, who for years was the
psychiatrist at the head of a large insane asylum at Zurich, Switzerland,
has this to say about the effects of narcotic poisons and alcohol in
particular:

    "The offspring tainted with alcoholic blastophthoria suffer various
    bodily and physical anomalies, among which are dwarfism, rickets, a
    predisposition to tuberculosis and epilepsy, moral idiocy, and idiocy
    in general, a predisposition to crime and mental diseases, sexual
    perversions, loss of suckling in women, and many other misfortunes."

In another passage he[6] remarks as follows:

    "But what is of much greater importance is the fact that acute and
    chronic alcoholic intoxication deteriorates the germinal protoplasm of
    the procreators.... The recent researches of Bezzola seem to prove
    that the old belief in the bad quality of children conceived during
    drunkenness is not without foundation. Relying on the Swiss census of
    1900, in which there figure nine thousand idiots, and after careful
    examination of the bulletins concerning them, this author has proved
    that there are two acute annual maximum periods for the conception of
    idiots (calculated from nine months before birth); the periods of
    carnival and vintage, when the people drink most. In the wine-growing
    districts the maximum conception of idiots is enormous, while it is
    almost nil at other periods. Moreover, these two maximum periods come
    at the time of year when conception is at a minimum among the rest of
    the population, the maximum of normal conceptions occurring at the
    beginning of summer."

Another interpretation of Bezzola's results has been suggested to the
effect that the license of these periods enables the defective members of
the community, such as the feeble-minded, an opportunity of mating more
readily and that consequently the result is direct inheritance of idiocy
and allied defects instead of idiocy produced through alcoholic poisoning
of the parental germ-cell.

=Other Views.--=There are indeed many competent investigators who believe
that alcoholism in parents has little or no part in the direct production
of mental defects in children. For instance, Tredgold quotes Doctor
Ireland's observations that although at New Year, when the fishermen
return, the whole population of certain villages in Scotland gets drunk,
there is no noticeable excess of defectives born nine months later, and
remarks further that, "I have histories of idiots conceived under such
circumstances, but so I have of normal children, and my opinion is, that
while this may be a cause in some cases, the number of instances in this
country at any rate is exceedingly small." Again, Goddard, one of our best
known American students of feeble-mindedness, who has made careful study
of this point under especially favorable conditions, feels that his data
do not prove that alcoholism of either the father or the mother causes
feeble-mindedness in the child. He concludes, "Everything seems to
indicate that alcoholism itself is only a symptom; that it for the most
part occurs in families where there is some form of neurotic taint,
especially feeble-mindedness." Goddard, however, in common with many other
observers, notes that miscarriages and deaths in infancy are far higher
among inebriates than among abstainers.

Doctor Mjoeen cites an interesting parallel between the increase of
feeble-mindedness in Norway and a period from 1816 to 1835, when every one
was permitted to distil brandy. In some districts many of the farmers
distilled brandy from corn and potatoes, and in such regions during this
period feeble-mindedness increased nearly one hundred per cent. Later the
home distillation of brandy was stopped. According to Doctor Mjoeen, "The
enormous increase in idiots came and went with the brandy." He is
inclined to believe, however, that the alcohol operated injuriously mainly
on stocks already defective.

=The Affinity of Alcohol for Germinal Tissue.--=Nicloux and Renault have
shown that alcohol has a decided affinity for the reproductive glands. In
individuals who have recently taken alcohol the proportion of alcohol in
the gonads is soon almost equal to the amount found in the blood. Thus in
experiments on mammals it was found that the proportion of alcohol in the
ovary to that in the blood was as three to five, and in the testis as two
to three. This would afford abundant opportunity for alcohol to act
directly on the spermatozoon or the ovum.

A number of different investigators concur in finding that the germ-glands
of the male human inebriate in many cases show more or less atrophy and
other degenerative changes. In guinea-pigs which have been repeatedly
intoxicated with alcohol, Stockard found that while he could detect no
visible abnormality in the gonad, nevertheless their defective and
weakened progeny showed that the germ-cells had been affected.

=Innate Degeneracy Versus the Effects of Alcohol.--=Many observations on
human beings have been brought forward which at first sight seem to
indicate that noticeable defects, particularly mental and nervous, occur
with appalling frequency in children resulting from conception during
intoxication, although, unfortunately, the evidence is rarely clear as to
whether the defects are really due to the effects of the alcohol or to the
fact that the parent or parents were degenerate to begin with.

A very interesting human case cited by Forel on the authority of
Schweighofer is that of a normal woman who had three sound children when
married to a normal man. After the death of this husband she married an
inebriate by whom she had three other children. One of these suffered from
infantilism, one turned out to be a drunkard, and the third became a
social degenerate and drunkard. Moreover the first two contracted
tuberculosis, although hitherto the family stock had been free from this
malady. Ultimately the woman married again and by this third husband, who
was normal, she again had sound children. Similar cases might be cited,
as, for example, a record of eighty-three epileptics, of whom sixty had
drunken parents, but it can be urged against all of them, of course, that
the defective offspring were due to an innate degeneracy of the drunken
parent which made him a drunkard rather than to the effects of the alcohol
he took. While one is skeptical as to the validity of this objection in
all of the many cases which occur with such monotonous frequency in man,
there is no way of escaping such an interpretation with the evidence at
hand. It must be admitted, moreover, that there are many families with one
or both parents alcoholic in which the children are not mentally
defective.

=Experimental Alcoholism in Lower Animals.--=Many of the objections that
exist in the case of man, however, do not apply in that of lower animals.
If normal animals are experimentally alcoholized and are shown to produce
defective offspring under such conditions, then in their cases at least,
the disorders in the offspring must be due to the effects of alcohol and
not to an innately degenerate condition of the parent. Disorders similar
to some of those seen in the children of alcoholics do actually result in
alcoholized animals of one kind or another.

Against the earlier experiments on animals it has been urged that too few
individuals were used to give conclusive results, but this objection can
not be brought against the recent experiments of Stockard. While he has
published accounts of his work in various scientific periodicals lately,
the reader will find a full statement of his own experiments, together
with a review of the whole subject of experimental alcoholism in animals
and the effects on progeny in _The American Naturalist_, Vol. XLVII,
November, 1913, together with a useful bibliography.

Before taking up Stockard's results we may select a few of the more
significant experiments made earlier by other investigators.

Laitinen alcoholized rabbits and guinea-pigs. He found that the treated
individuals had more still-born young than the control, and also that
growth of the living young was retarded. His alcoholized rabbits and
guinea-pigs produced more young than did the normal individuals used as a
control. Laitinen's studies on man, together with three other studies of
the Eugenics Laboratory in London, show that in man also more children are
born to alcoholics than to normal parents. Goddard's investigations in
America corroborate this fact.

Ceni found that only 43 per cent. of the eggs from alcoholized fowls
developed normally, as against 77 per cent. of normal development in the
controls. Moreover the eggs of alcoholic fowls were shown to be less
resistant to adverse conditions than normal eggs from the fact that
fluctuations of temperature at the beginning of incubation kept all the
alcoholic eggs from developing perfectly, while 27 per cent. of the
control eggs developed normally under the same adverse circumstances.

Hodge made a pair of dogs alcoholic. Of 23 pups obtained from the pair, 8
were deformed and 9 were dead; 4 alone were viable. From a control pair of
dogs 45 pups were obtained, of which 4 were deformed, none were born dead,
and 41 were viable.

=Stockard's Experiments on Guinea-Pigs.--=Stockard's experiments
demonstrate that the offspring of mammals may be injured or modified in
their development by treating either parent repeatedly with alcohol. The
guinea-pigs used in the experiment were all first tested by normal matings
and found to yield normal offspring. The alcohol was given to them by
inhalation. It was found to be readily taken into the animals' blood and
to produce intoxication. While guinea-pigs alcoholized in this way as
often as six times a week for two and one-half years would maintain their
own bodily vigor and health apparently, the deleterious effects on their
progeny were marked. The defects were general rather than specific,
although the central nervous system and special sense organs were
apparently affected most.

Out of 119 total young produced by the alcoholic animals, only 52, or less
than 44 per cent., survived, whereas out of 64 young produced from normal
parents used as a control for the experiment, 56, or over 87 per cent.,
survived. In some cases alcoholic males were mated with normal females, in
other, alcoholic females with normal males. In still other instances both
parents were alcoholic.

The results are summarized in the accompanying table (Fig. 31), taken from
Stockard's paper:

  CONDITION OF THE OFFSPRING FROM GUINEA-PIGS TREATED WITH ALCOHOL

  -----------------------------------------------------------------
                      |Number of Matings
                      |     +--------------------------------------
                      |     |Negative Result or Early Abortion
                      |     |    +---------------------------------
                      |     |    |Stillborn Litters
                      |     |    |    +----------------------------
                      |     |    |    |Number Stillborn Young
                      |     |    |    |      +---------------------
                      |     |    |    |      |Living Litters
                      |     |    |    |      |    +----------------
                      |     |    |    |      |    |Young Dying Soon
                      |     |    |    |      |    |  After Birth
                      |     |    |    |      |    |      +---------
  Condition of        |     |    |    |      |    |      |Surviving
   the Animals        |     |    |    |      |    |      |  Young
  --------------------|-----|----|----|------|----|------|---------
  Alcoholic [male] by |     |    |    |      |    |      |
    normal [female]   |  59 | 25 |  8 |  15  | 26 |  21  |  33
  Normal [male] by    |     |    |    |      |    |      |
    alcoholic [female]|  15 |  3 |  3 |   9  |  9 |   9  |  10
  Alcoholic [male] by |     |    |    |      |    |      |
    alcoholic [female]|  29 | 15 |  3 |   6  | 11 |   7  |   9
  SUMMARY             | 103 | 43 | 14 |  30  | 46 |  37  |  52
  Normal [male] by    |     |    |    |      |    |      |
    normal [female]   |  35 |  2 |  1 |   4  | 32 |   4  |  56
  2d generation       |     |    |    |      |    |      |
    by normal         |   3 |  0 |  0 |   0  |  3 |   0  |   4
  2d generation       |     |    |    |      |    |      |
    by alcoholic      |   3 |  0 |  2 |   5  |  1 |   0  |   2
                      |     |    |    |1 def.|    |      |
  2d generation       |     |    |    |      |    |      |
    by 2d generation  |  19 |  7 |  0 |   0  | 12 |   6  |  13
                      |     |    |    |      |    |1 def.|
  Female treated      |     |    |    |      |    |      |
    during pregnancy  |   4 |  0 |  0 |   0  |  4 |   1  |   7
  -----------------------------------------------------------------

FIG. 31

Table showing condition of the offspring from guinea-pigs treated with
alcohol (after Stockard).

Lines four and five give a comparison between the 103 total matings of all
treated individuals and 35 normal matings. In the first case almost 42 per
cent. of the matings gave negative results or early abortions, whereas in
the normal control matings, failure to yield a full-term litter occurred
in only two cases. The 103 matings of alcoholic animals gave only 46
living litters, or about 45 per cent. On the other hand the 35 control
matings produced 32 living litters, or 91-1/2 per cent. It will be
observed also that from such of the 103 matings of alcoholics as produced
young there were 30 still-born, 37 which died soon after birth, and only
52 surviving young, whereas from the 35 matings of normal individuals
there were only 4 still-born young, 4 which died soon after birth, and 56
surviving young.

The bottom line of the table, although, as Stockard points out, containing
too few cases to prove wholly convincing, indicates that alcoholizing
erstwhile normal females during pregnancy was not particularly harmful to
the embryos _in utero_.

Some of the most interesting results were obtained when offspring termed
second generation animals, derived from alcoholic parents though not
themselves treated with alcohol, were mated in various ways. When such
individuals were mated with normal individuals, although the litters were
small, the results were normal, the normal mate having seemingly
counteracted any defects which might have lurked in the second generation
animal. On the other hand, out of three matings of second generation
animals with alcoholic individuals, two produced still-born young, of
which one was markedly deformed, while the third yielded two living young.

However, the most striking results were obtained when two second
generation individuals, the offspring of alcoholic parents, were bred
together. Although themselves untreated, these individuals, of which 19
matings were made, produced as many or more defective young than did their
alcoholic parents. Seven of the matings were unfruitful. The remaining 12
matings gave living litters consisting of 19 individuals in all. Six of
these showed various nerve disorders (spasms, epileptic-like seizures,
etc.) soon after birth; one was eyeless and otherwise deformed.

=Stockard's Interpretation.--=Stockard's interpretation of his experiments
is as follows: "Mammals treated with injurious substances, such as
alcohol, ether, lead, etc., suffer from the treatments by having the
tissues of their bodies injured. When the reproductive glands and
germ-cells become injured in this way they give rise to offspring showing
weak and degenerative conditions of a general nature, and every cell of
these offspring having been derived from the injured egg or sperm-cell are
necessarily similarly injured and can only give rise to other injured
cells and thus the next generation of offspring are equally weak and
injured and so on. The only hope for such a line of individuals is that it
can be crossed by normal stock, in which case the vigor of the normal
germ-cell in the combination may counteract, or at any rate reduce, the
extent of injury in the body cells of the resulting animal."

He also believes that various deformities and developmental arrests such
as harelip and cleft-palate may similarly be cases of transmission rather
than true inheritance, due to the weakening of the germ-cells in some way,
or to some lack of full vigor in the uterine environment.

=Further Remarks on the Situation in Man.--=Returning now to the question
of alcoholism in man, it seems in view of the strong circumstantial
evidence in the case of man himself, together with the result of
experiments on animals, that little doubt remains that excessive
alcoholism might result in the production of defective offspring. On the
other hand an antecedent degeneracy or neural instability undoubtedly
plays an important part in many cases, in the original production of
drunkards, and when such occurs, it, as well as the direct effects of
alcoholic poisoning, must be reckoned with in the effects on progeny.
Studies carried on by Pearson, Elderton and Barrington of the Eugenic
Laboratory in London lead these investigators to the conclusion that
extreme alcoholism is a _result_ not a _cause_ of degeneracy. That is, the
degeneracy is due to the defective stock, not to alcohol. They cite in
evidence their records of four thousand school children of alcoholic and
of sober parents, which fail to show any unfavorable effect of alcohol on
offspring. Some of their critics, however, maintain that they did not
choose subjects who were sufficiently alcoholic to give the injurious
results that might legitimately be expected among the offspring of
excessive drinkers or habitual drunkards.

Where children show a hereditary inclination toward drink, unquestionably
one of the strongest factors is the inheritance of the same disposition,
the same unstable nervous constitution and its accompanying lack of
self-control which led the parent to drink, rather than the inheritance of
the effects of the drink on the parent. For in many cases a parent may not
become a drunkard until after the children who also become drunkards are
born. That the tendency to drink immoderately is frequently due to a
strain of feeble-mindedness or epilepsy becomes more evident every day.
In many of the so-called "periodical" drunkards, the accompanying features
of their periodic attacks of drink-craving, such as clouding of memory,
restlessness and depression, are those commonly associated with ordinary
epileptic attacks.

=Probably Over Fifty Per Cent. of Inebriety in Man Due to Defective
Nervous Constitution.--=Branthwaite, an English authority on drunkenness,
finds that about sixty-three per cent. of the inebriates who come to his
notice are mentally defective. In alcoholic insanities heredity is a
potent factor. It is coming to be realized more and more that pronounced
alcoholism is due in a large percentage of cases, perhaps over half, to a
defective nervous make-up. While it is true that many drunkards would not
develop without free access to alcohol, on the other hand many would never
develop without a bad heredity back of them, which gives them a peculiar
nervous constitution that renders alcohol an undue stimulus. In a recent
report of the New York State Hospital Commission it is stated that in
fifty-four per cent. of the cases of alcoholic insanity, a family history
of insanity, epilepsy or nervous disease exists. Thus in the presence of
alcohol most of these unfortunates are helpless pawns of a hereditary
weakness.

So when the question of alcoholism is viewed from all angles, the children
of the human drunkard would seem to run a double menace of misfortune,
since they may be subject both to the direct poisoning effects of alcohol
and the results of an inheritable degeneracy.

=Factors to Be Reckoned With in the Study of Alcoholism.--=In any
thoroughgoing study of alcoholism in man many factors will have to be
reckoned with. First of all there is the question of inherent lack of
control. This is probably the principal thing inherited where heredity
truly enters as a factor. That example and social environment are
important factors in addition to or in place of heredity is clear, too,
when we observe that often it is the boys only who take after a drunken
father, for there is no evidence that the inherited tendency when it
really exists is at all sex-linked. Again, in certain occupations carried
on under unwholesome influences relief is frequently sought in alcoholic
stimulants, and such custom may easily crystallize into habit.
Furthermore, the accustoming young children to doses of alcohol, or the
unborn young to alcohol through the body of a drunken mother, may be
strongly contributory toward establishing inebriety in certain cases. As
we have seen from an abundance of experimental data on animals, moreover,
the nurture effects on germ-cells may result in the production of weakened
offspring. Such offspring in the case of man are probably less able to
withstand temptations of all kinds and hence readily succumb to the
habit-forming effects of alcohol if once its use is begun. Lastly, it must
not be forgotten that alcoholism in the father usually means poverty and
the subsequent accompaniment of malnutrition and neglect of the children,
and this in itself may not only account for poor development of the
latter, but may also be strongly contributory toward establishing the
habit of alcoholism in them.

An inherent bias plus most of the other conditions just enumerated is the
not unusual lot of the offspring of drunkards.

=Venereal Diseases.--=There is yet another very considerable class of
maritally unfit who in any conscientious discussion of unfitness for
marriage or of racial improvement must be considered. I refer to those who
are afflicted with the diseases which are inseparably associated with the
so-called "social evil." To _gonorrhea_, one of the most prevalent of
these diseases, more than one-fourth of our total one hundred and ten
thousand blind in the United States are said to owe their affliction.
Milder types of eye disease may also result from such infections. As much
as eighty per cent., or some say practically all blindness in children
born blind is caused by it, the infection occurring at the time of birth
or within a few days thereafter. The terrible consequences of this disease
to the innocent wife would alone make its discussion imperative.

=The Seriousness of the Situation.--=Unfortunately the insidious nature of
gonorrheal infections is unknown to most persons. A cure is apparently
effected, yet as a matter of fact the germs may live for years and, if in
the male, later be transmitted to the wife, subjecting her to a future of
invalidism and misery. Reliable statistics from various medical
authorities reveal the appalling fact that seventy-five per cent. or more
of the surgical operations for inflammatory pelvic disorders peculiar to
women, such as pus tubes and peritonitis, are attributable to this
disease, as is also the involuntary sterility of forty-five per cent. of
childless women. Unwelcome as the fact is there is an abundance of
evidence to show that a large percentage of men in particular have at
some period of their life been infected with venereal disease. Of our
fourteen million males in the United States under the age of thirty we
find estimates by some specialists in venereal diseases to the effect that
five million of them, that is, one out of three, suffer from some one of
the social diseases or their consequences. Doctor Hugh Cabot, one of the
chief surgeons of the Massachusetts General Hospital at Boston, a member
of the faculty of the Harvard Medical School and president of the American
Association of Genito-Urinary Surgeons, has this to say about the
situation: "We have of late years heard much about the frequency and
serious consequences of tuberculosis; it has been dubbed the 'white
plague,' and so active has been the campaign that a wide-spread
understanding of this serious disease has resulted. It may safely be
averred that in the urban population at least there are two, and perhaps
three, individuals with syphilis to every one with tuberculosis. The
frequency of gonococcus infection is much higher." He believes that over
half the male population acquire a gonococcus infection at some period of
their career. While as a layman, one can not but feel that a specialist's
estimate may run unduly high because of the fact that he is encountering
an inordinate proportion of such maladies every day, still such
specialists are in position to get at the truth as no other person can and
their calculations are probably not grossly in error. In any event any one
who has progressed in worldly knowledge beyond the naivete of a child must
recognize the appalling prevalence of these maladies.

=Infantile Blindness.--=So serious has the matter of infantile blindness
become that some state boards of health and some city health departments
supply all physicians and midwives with specially prepared packages
containing cotton and nitrate of silver solution for preventive or
curative treatment of the eyes of all new-born children. At the time of
the first bath each eye is carefully washed with a separate pledget of
cotton saturated with boric acid solution. Each then receives a drop of
the silver solution, which is made just strong enough to kill any
gonococci that might be present without itself inflaming the eye. Water
used in bathing the baby's body of course is not allowed to come in
contact with its eyes. Such treatment should be given every child no
matter how unsuspicious the circumstances may be. German authorities who
have been following this method now for some years assure us that
nineteen-twentieths of the blindness of infancy can thus be prevented.

=Syphilis.--=As to _syphilis_, another and even more terrible of these
diseases, we have before us the absurd fact that while thousands upon
thousands of dollars are being spent to establish a rigid inspection and
preventive measures against the spread of a very similar disease in the
horse, this malady in man is allowed to pass unchallenged and we are
confronted by the gruesome certainty that there are hundreds of these
diseased persons about us to-day who, on their mere affirmation that they
are unmarried and of age, will be given the right to marry and thus
produce families of infected children irrevocably doomed to early death or
to lifelong misery.

While syphilis is most commonly spread through relations between the
sexes, it may be acquired in various other ways, as for example, through a
cut in shaving with the same razor an infected individual has used. It is
commonly transmitted from parent to child. Practically every prostitute is
a center of dissemination. Katherine Bement Davis has shown in her studies
made at the New York State Reformatory for Women that while ordinary
clinical tests show that apparently only twenty-one per cent. of these
women are infected with venereal disease, more careful laboratory tests
showed at least ninety per cent. to be infected.

Syphilis is caused by _Treponema pallidum_, a small unicellular animal
parasite. Given access to the blood by any means whatever, possibly even
through an abrasion in the lip by means of a kiss, it multiplies rapidly
and any part or organ of the body may be attacked. Usually a small sore
occurs at the point of entrance to the body, but often it heals up readily
with little indication of the seriousness of the infection.

The development of the malady is insidious and long continued. As a matter
of clinical convenience physicians divide its progress into successive
stages although in reality the transitions are frequently variable and ill
marked. The symptoms that arise within the first few months or even years
are readily controlled by appropriate treatment, but to insure a cure
prolonged and most thoroughgoing treatment is imperative. The symptoms
disappear so completely after a short period of treatment that it is very
difficult to persuade the average patient that he is not yet cured. Two
years at least are none too short a period of treatment, yet the majority
of patients, fully convinced that they are merely being exploited by the
physician as a source of revenue, drift away at the end of a few months.
As a matter of fact, however, the germs usually persist long after the
obvious symptoms of the disease have disappeared, and in consequence many
of the most serious results of syphilis may not manifest themselves for a
period of perhaps ten, twenty or thirty years.

=Some of the Effects.--=It is now known that _paresis_, also termed
general paralysis or softening of the brain, is probably invariably due to
syphilis. The work of Flexner and Noguchi on _paresis_ and _tabes
dorsalis_ show that always in such afflictions the tissues of the central
nervous system have been invaded by the parasite. The original infection,
however, may have occurred so long before as to have been almost forgotten
by the patient. Thus many an apparently robust man is stricken down in the
prime of life. Earlier and prolonged treatment would in all probability
have eradicated the germs and thus prevented the mental breakdown, which
can not be cured by any known treatment. Postmortem examination always
shows that the _Treponema_ has wrought wide-spread damage in the brain.
The frequency of paresis may be realized when one learns that in some
regions it is responsible for about one-fifth of all cases of insanity
sent to hospitals for the insane. It ranks next to the highest as a cause
of insanity. Statistics show that in the state of New York more deaths
result annually from paresis than from smallpox, tetanus, malaria,
dysentery and rabies all combined.

In some cases the disease attacks the membranes of the brain and the small
blood vessels giving rise to a still different type of mental disorder.
Practically all patients with _locomotor ataxia_ owe their condition to an
antecedent syphilis. Moreover it is one of the important causes of
_arterio-sclerosis_, or hardening of the blood vessels, and is also a
prominent factor in certain forms of heart-disease, as well as by no means
an unimportant cause of blindness in children.

As to specific cases of the effects of this disease on descendants the
literature of the subject is crowded full. While it is needless to conduct
the reader through a chamber of horrors by reviewing clinical cases, it is
desirable to point out in a general way some of the effects. Doctor George
H. Kirby, director of Clinical Psychiatry, Manhattan State Hospital, says:

    "We find that when either the father or the mother suffers from
    paresis that many other members of the family may be infected with
    syphilis, and furthermore, we find that a large number of children in
    these families are feeble-minded, nervous, or in other ways abnormal.
    Doctor Plant examined a group of 100 children, the offspring of cases
    of paresis, and found that 45 per cent. were plainly damaged mentally
    or physically, or in both fields; the blood test showed that one-third
    of these 100 children had the syphilitic poison in their systems.

    "Another investigator found in a group of 139 children, the
    descendants of parents who had syphilitic nervous disease, that over
    25 per cent. were definitely feeble-minded or affected with some
    serious nervous disorders.

    "Other studies indicate that there exists a close relation between
    syphilis and many of the hitherto unexplained cases of
    feeble-mindedness, including idiocy, imbecility, infantile paralysis,
    and some forms of epilepsy. While the question is not yet settled, it
    appears that syphilis is the real cause of many of these cases of
    mental defect in children."

Still other investigators give details of physical afflictions and
distortions, of suppressed development, of inordinate percentages of
stillbirths--perhaps the most merciful lot for the little victims--but
sufficient has been said to indicate the full horror of the situation.

Goddard,[7] although not minimizing the terrible nature of the disease,
finds little evidence in his studies that syphilis in parents is a
specific cause of feeble-mindedness.

=A Blood Test.--=Fortunately a delicate blood test known as the Wasserman
test has been discovered by means of which, through an examination of a
few drops of blood, any trace of syphilitic poison which exists in the
body may usually be detected. This is true even though the individual may
at the time show no visible symptoms of syphilis. The test is therefore of
great value in detecting the latent germs of syphilis in individuals who
have apparently been cured, and also often in making an early diagnosis of
paresis. The Wasserman test, however, is reliable only in the hands of a
skilled operator. It may occasionally give a positive reaction when
syphilis does not exist and on the contrary a negative when it is present.
The _luetin_ test is also now applied by some specialists, but is too new
a test to have come into general use. It works on the same principle as
the tuberculin test for tuberculosis. Some army physicians now also give
what is termed a provocative Wasserman. That is, in a suspicious case
which gives only negative results by an ordinary Wasserman, they can get,
if syphilis really exists, a positive reaction after giving small doses of
potassium iodide or salvarsan.

It should be well understood by every one that syphilis is usually curable
provided the patient is given modern scientific treatment by a _competent_
physician. I emphasize competent because there are so many quacks in this
field that one undergoing treatment can not be too careful in assuring
himself of the competency of the physician. In even a case of long
standing, where the symptoms have been in abeyance for a number of years,
the disease can be cured provided it has not developed into an active
cerebro-spinal type, and even the latter can be much benefited by proper
treatment. The great danger of the cerebro-spinal type is that it will
result in paresis or locomotor ataxia.

As long as the blood of a patient shows a _positive_ Wasserman reaction,
marriage should certainly not be consummated. If after a proper course of
treatment by a well-informed physician, the patient shows a _negative_
Wasserman when tested by a competent examiner, he probably would not
infect his wife or offspring, although prudence would require that he wait
at least six months or a year before marriage, and marrying then only if
later tests remain negative.

The only way for a patient to be sure that he is not harboring the
cerebro-spinal form would be to have a spinal puncture made and the
cerebro-spinal fluid examined. While the cerebro-spinal phase often does
not occur until long after the primary infection, cases are known in which
it has appeared within a few weeks. Evidence that the central nervous
system is frequently invaded early in the course of the disease is
increasing. Marriage of an individual suffering from the cerebro-spinal
form should not take place, since such a one is almost sure to become a
burden on the family or the state.

=Many Syphilitics Are Married.--=It may seem to some that in a treatise on
being well-born the subject of syphilis might be ignored as not being
especially pertinent, but the supposition that no considerable percentage
of syphilitics marry is not borne out by the facts. Seventy-five per cent.
of men with insanity due to syphilis who are admitted to hospitals are
married. The insanity in such cases is mainly the result of infections in
earlier years, often long before marriage. While syphilis, strictly
speaking, is not inherited, that is, does not become part and parcel of
the germ-plasm, still the frequency of its direct transmission to
offspring is so appalling that the outcome, as far as the immediate child
is concerned, is quite as disastrous as the most thoroughgoing real
inheritance could be.

=Why Permit Conditions to Continue as They Are?--=When one faces the
easily ascertained facts regarding venereal disease, it seems incredible
that we, an intelligent people, can go on complacently handing our
daughters and sisters over to the surgeon's knife and a life of personal
misery, and even in not a few instances to become mothers of incurably
defective children, yet the dire fact confronts us that we do. We can no
longer excuse ourselves on the plea of ignorance, for the grisly record
may now be read in many medical and not a few popular treatises, and we
find the theme entering even into the modern drama, as witness Brieux's
_Damaged Goods_. Further indifference to these conditions can only be
attributed to culpable apathy or prudery.

The extreme dangers to which parents are subjecting their daughters if
they do not demand a clean bill of health on the part of their prospective
husbands are obvious. Fathers and mothers perfectly willing to inquire
into their future son-in-law's social connections, his income, securities,
or business chances become strangely "modest" when it comes to determining
whether he is physically fit for marriage.

One great cause of ignorance in the past was the prudish taboo against
frank discussions of venereal diseases which has thrown the veil of
silence about the subject. To-day, however, it is coming to be recognized
that these maladies are diseases and not a standard of social propriety,
and that like most other diseases the surest way to secure prevention and
gradual eradication is through the enlightenment of the public. They are
prevalent in all classes of society. Moreover, it must not be forgotten
that there is no form of venereal disease which may not be innocently
acquired. Even where acquired through transgression of moral law an
ignorant attitude toward the sexual instinct is often at the bottom of the
difficulty.

=Medical Inspection Before Marriage.--=Ante-nuptial medical inspection is
certainly as necessary to the welfare of society as the certification of
age and of the single state now required by law. No one objects to a
medical examination pertaining to venereal and other diseases when it
comes to taking out a life insurance policy, and why there should be any
more objection to it as a preliminary to marriage is a mystery. A few
states already have compulsory ante-nuptial medical inspection. The laws
have been enacted too recently to judge adequately of their working. There
has been much debate in Wisconsin as to whether their law (Chapter 738,
Laws of 1913), which went into effect January 1, 1914, is constitutional
and whether it requires a Wasserman test. The Wisconsin law applies to
males only. The Supreme Court of the state has declared it constitutional
and that its requirement of "the application of the recognized clinical
and laboratory tests of scientific search" involves only such examination
as the ordinary licensed physician is equipped to make and can reasonably
be expected to make for three dollars, the maximum fee specified in the
law.

A number of the physicians of the state are still dissatisfied with the
wording, although most do not oppose the principle of the law. Many
believe that it should apply to the women as well as to the men, and
others feel that the law should be extended to cover still other kinds of
marital unfitness. Most of the practitioners with whom I have discussed
the matter appreciate the motive underlying the law and are endeavoring to
make it successful.

The general public of the state as a whole seems to be in favor of the
provision. At least one hears much favorable comment and little
dissension among those who understand its purpose. The very controversy
over it which sprang up after its passage proved to be of great benefit in
the education of the public regarding the necessity of such measures. Such
physicians as I have been able to question report that the candidates for
marriage rarely object to the requirement, but on the contrary strongly
favor it. Especially where they have suffered from venereal disease
earlier in life most are eager to know their condition and to have medical
advice. To my own mind this last fact is the most significant of all, as
it will give every candidate for marriage a chance to know the truth. Most
men are not so much brutal or vicious as ignorant in such matters. The
vast majority of those unfit for marriage as a consequence of venereal
disease will, when they realize the danger their condition imposes on wife
and children, take every possible means to put themselves into proper
condition.

Desirable as the Wasserman test may be, it requires special laboratory
facilities and equipment as well as a specially trained examiner to make
it a reliable test. Moreover it can not be given by the general
practitioner for the very moderate fee that must obtain in a pre-nuptial
examination compelled by law. If it or the serum test for gonorrhea are to
be applied then the legislative body of the state will find it necessary
to establish a special public laboratory or laboratories for their
application. This, however, is not a matter of particular difficulty and
would be capital well invested in any state.

=The Perils of Venereal Disease Must Be Prevented at Any Cost.--=However,
no matter what the cost may be to the state, no matter what the exaction
from the individual, the grave perils of venereal disease to society
_must_ be prevented. We owe it to the cause of humanity that there be
fewer victims born into a world of eternal night, that from a parentage of
polluted blood there spring no longer hosts of children with feeble
misshapen bodies or with tarnished intellects, death-marked at the door of
life.

=Bad Environment Can Wreck Good Germ-Plasm.--=In conclusion it is evident
from our discussion of prenatal influences that not all of being well-born
is concerned with heredity in its proper sense, since the unborn young may
be influenced either directly or indirectly by environmental conditions
which are in no sense products of heredity, although as far as the
immediate child is concerned the result may be quite as disastrous where
the influence is a baneful one. As to the production of beneficial
prenatal effects, while parents can do nothing toward modifying favorably
such qualities as are predetermined in their germ-plasm, nevertheless they
must come to realize that bad environment can wreck good germ-plasm. They
can see to it that they keep themselves in good physical condition by
wholesome temperate living, and thereby insure as far as possible healthy
germ-cells for the conception and good nutrition for the sustenance of
their progeny. Their one sacred obligation to the immortal germ-plasm of
which they are the trustees is to see that they hand it on with its
maximal possibilities undimmed by innutrition, poisons or vice.




