The Project Gutenberg eBook of Being Well-Born: An Introduction to Eugenics
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Being Well-Born: An Introduction to Eugenics

Author: Michael F. Guyer

Editor: M. V. O'Shea


        
Release date: May 21, 2012 [eBook #39751]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/39751

Credits: Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive.)






Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)









BEING WELL-BORN




  BEING WELL-BORN

  AN INTRODUCTION TO EUGENICS


  _By_
  MICHAEL F. GUYER, PH. D.
  Professor of Zoology, The University of Wisconsin


  Childhood and Youth Series

  _Edited by_ M. V. O'SHEA
  Professor of Education, The University of Wisconsin


  INDIANAPOLIS
  THE BOBBS-MERRILL COMPANY
  PUBLISHERS




  COPYRIGHT 1916
  THE BOBBS-MERRILL COMPANY

  PRESS OF
  BRAUNWORTH & CO.
  BOOKBINDERS AND PRINTERS
  BROOKLYN, N. Y.




TO MY WIFE

HELEN M. GUYER




EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION


The writer recalls that when he was a young boy, he heard the grown-up
people in the community earnestly and incessantly debating the question:
Does heredity play a greater part in shaping one's mind and body than does
his environment? From that day to this he has listened to men and women in
every walk of life discussing the relation of heredity to environment in
determining human traits. Teachers and parents are constantly asking: "Are
such and such characteristics in my children due to their inheritance or
to the way they have been trained?" Students of juvenile delinquency and
of mental defect and deficiency are searching everywhere for light on this
matter. It is not to be wondered at that practically all people are
peculiarly interested in this problem, since it concerns intimately one's
personal traits, and it constantly confronts any one who is responsible
for the care and culture of the young.

It is suggestive to note how people differ in their views regarding the
extent to which a child's physical and mental qualities and capacities are
fixed definitely by his inheritance. The writer has often heard students
in university classes discuss the subject; and their handling of the
problem has shown how superficially and even superstitiously most persons
regard the mechanism and functions of heredity. It is significant also to
observe what extreme views many people hold regarding the possibility of
affecting a child's traits and abilities by subjecting him to specific
influences during his prenatal life. In any group of one hundred persons
chosen at random, probably seventy-five will believe in specific prenatal
influence. Many of them will believe in birthmarks due to peculiar
experiences of the mother. A popular book recently published asserts among
other things that if a mother will look upon beautiful pictures and listen
to good music during the prenatal period of her child, the latter will
possess esthetic traits and interests in high degree. On the other hand,
people generally do not seem to think that degenerate parents beget only
degenerate children. Alcoholics, feeble-minded persons and the like are
permitted to bring children into the world.

Very few people have any precise knowledge of the mechanism of heredity.
The whole thing is inscrutable to them, and is shrouded in mystery.
Superstition flourishes among even intelligent persons in respect to
heredity, and errors due to education, and tragedies resulting from
vicious social organization are all alike ascribed to its uncontrollable
forces. Most people are none the wiser because they do not know to what
extent the physical and mental defects and deviations of individuals are
due to inheritance or to the malign influences of the individual's
environment and training.

Professor Guyer, who has studied the whole problem in a thoroughgoing,
scientific way, has prepared this book with a view to illuminating some of
the mysteries that surround the subject of heredity, and to dispelling
the illusions that persist regarding it. He shows the method which nature
follows in the development of the individual. He presents the laws which
have become established respecting the extent to which and the manner in
which immediate and remote ancestors contribute to the child's physical
and mental organism. He answers many questions which those who are engaged
in social work or in education in the home or the school are asking
to-day. He discusses subjects upon which every serious-minded person
wishes to be informed. He has thus made a book which is both of
theoretical and of practical interest.

He has written in a style which should make his book attractive to the
parent and the teacher as well as to the student of the complicated
mechanism of inheritance. Only a few special terms are used, and these
should not give any reader trouble, because the treatment throughout is so
concrete that the meaning of the terms will be easily grasped. Further,
the book is illustrated, with many attractive and instructive
illustrations which will show at a glance the working of the principles of
inheritance which are developed in the text.

This book may be heartily commended to all who are interested in questions
of human nature, education and social reform. It should enable the parent,
the teacher and the legislator to understand more clearly than most of
them now do in how far children's traits and possibilities are or can be
fixed by inheritance as contrasted with environmental conditions and
nurture in home, school, church and institutional life.

M. V. O'SHEA.

Madison, Wisconsin.




PREFACE


One of the most significant processes at work in society to-day is the
awakening of the civilized world to the rights of the child; and it is
coming to be realized that its right of rights is that of being well-born.
Any series of publications, therefore, dealing primarily with the problems
of child nature may very fittingly be initiated by a discussion of the
factor of well-nigh supreme importance in determining this nature,
heredity.

No principles have more direct bearing on the welfare of man than those of
heredity, and yet on scarcely any subject does as wide-spread ignorance
prevail. This is due in part to the complexity of the subject, but more to
the fact that in the past no clear-cut methods of attacking the manifold
problems involved had been devised. Happily this difficulty has at least
in part been overcome.

It is no exaggeration to say that during the last fifteen years we have
made more progress in measuring the extent of inheritance and in
determining its elemental factors than in all previous time. Instead of
dealing wholly now with vague general impressions and speculations,
certain definite principles of genetic transmission have been disclosed.
And since it is becoming more and more apparent that these hold for man as
well as for plants and animals in general, we can no longer ignore the
social responsibilities which the new facts thrust upon us.

Since what a child becomes is determined so largely by its inborn
capacities it is of the greatest importance that teachers and parents
realize something of the nature of such aptitudes before they begin to
awaken them. For education consists in large measure in applying the
stimuli necessary to set going these potentialities and of affording
opportunity for their expression. Of the good propensities, some will
require merely the start, others will need to be fostered and coaxed into
permanence through the stereotyping effects of proper habits; of the
dangerous or bad, some must be kept dormant by preventing improper
stimulation, others repressed by the cultivation of inhibitive tendencies,
and yet others smothered or excluded by filling their place with desirable
traits before they themselves come into expression.

We must see clearly, furthermore, that even the best of pedagogy and
parental training has obvious limits. Once grasp the truth that a child's
fate in life is frequently decided long before birth, and that no amount
of food or hospital service or culture or tears will ever wholly make good
the deficiencies of bad "blood," or in the language of the biologist, a
faulty germ-plasm, and the conviction must surely be borne home to the
intelligent members of society that one thing of superlative importance in
life is the making of a wise choice of a marriage mate on the one hand,
and the prevention of parenthood to the obviously unfit on the other.

In the present volume it is intended to examine into the natural
endowment of the child. And since full comprehension of it requires some
understanding of the nature of the physical mechanism by which hereditary
traits are handed on from generation to generation, a small amount of
space is given to this phase. Then, that the reader may appreciate to
their fullest extent the facts gathered concerning man, a review of the
more significant principles of genetics as revealed through experiments in
breeding plants and animals has been undertaken. The main applications of
these principles to man is pointed out in a general discussion of human
heredity. Finally, inasmuch as all available data indicate that the fate
of our very civilization hangs on the issue, the work concludes with an
account of the new science of eugenics which is striving for the
betterment of the race by determining and promulgating the laws of human
inheritance so that mankind may intelligently go about conserving good and
repressing bad human stocks.

In order to eliminate as many errors as possible and to avoid oversights I
have submitted various chapters to certain of my colleagues and friends
who are authorities in the special field treated therein. While these
gentlemen are in no way responsible for the material of any chapter they
have added greatly to the value of the whole by their suggestions and
comments. Thus I am indebted to Professor Leon J. Cole for reading the
entire manuscript; to Professors A. S. Pearse and F. C. Sharp for reading
Chapter VII; to Professor C. R. Bardeen for reading special parts; to
Doctor J. S. Evans for reading Chapter VI and part of V; to Doctor W. F.
Lorenz, of the Mendota Hospital, for reading Chapter VIII; to Judge E. Ray
Stevens for reading Chapter IX, and to Helen M. Guyer for several readings
of the entire manuscript.

Grateful acknowledgment is made to all of these readers, to various
publishers and periodicals for the use of certain of the illustrations, to
the authors of the numerous books and papers from which much of the
material in such a work as this must necessarily be selected, and to my
artist, Miss H. J. Wakeman, for her painstaking endeavors to make her work
conform to my ideas of what each diagram should show.

M. F. G.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                             PAGE

  I HEREDITY                                                             1

  Blood heritage--Kind determined by origin--Ancestry a network--
  Ancestry in royalty--Offspring derived from one parent only--Dual
  ancestry an aid in studying heredity--Reversion--Telegony--
  Prenatal influences apart from heredity--Parent body and germ not
  identical--A hereditary character defined--Hereditary mingling a
  mosaic rather than a blend--Determiners of characters, not
  characters themselves, transmitted--Our knowledge of heredity
  derived along three lines--The method of experimental breeding--
  The statistical method--Galton's law of regression--Correlations
  between parents and offspring--The biometrical method,
  statistical, not physiological--Mental as well as physical
  qualities inheritable.


  II THE BEARERS OF THE HERITAGE                                        20

  The cell the unit of structure--Unicellular organisms--Importance
  of cell-theory--Heredity in unicellular forms--Reproduction and
  heredity in colonial protozoa--Conjugation--Specialization of
  sex-cells--The fertilized ovum--Advancement seen in the Volvox
  colony--Natural death--Specialization in higher organisms--Sexual
  phenomena in higher forms--Cell-division--Chromosomes constant in
  number and appearance--Significance of the chromosomes--Cleavage
  of the egg--Chief processes operative in building the body--The
  origin of the new germ-cells--Significance of the early setting
  apart of the germ-cells--Individuality of chromosomes--Pairs of
  chromosomes--Reduction of the number of chromosomes by one-half--
  Maturation of the sperm-cell--Maturation of the egg-cell--Parallel
  between the two processes--Fertilization--Significance of the
  behavior of the chromosomes--A single set of chromosomes
  sufficient for the production of an organism--The duality of the
  body and the singleness of the germ--The cytoplasm in
  inheritance--Chromosomes possibly responsible for the
  distinctiveness of given characters--Sex and heredity--Many
  theories of sex determination--The sex-chromosome--Sex-linked
  characters in man--In lower forms.

  III MENDELISM                                                         67

  New discoveries in the field of heredity--Mendel--Rediscovery of
  Mendelian principles--Independence of inheritable characters--
  Illustration in the Andalusian fowl--The cause of the ratio--
  Verification of the hypothesis--Dominant and recessive--
  Segregation in the next generation--Illustrated in guinea-pigs--
  Terminology--The theory of presence and absence--Additional
  terminology--Dominance not always complete--Modifications of
  dominance--Mendel's own work--Dihybrids--Getting new combinations
  of characters--Segregations of the determiners--Four kinds of
  gametes in each sex--The 9:3:3:1 ratio--Phenotype and genotype--
  The question of blended inheritance--Nilsson-Ehle's discoveries--
  Such cases easily mistaken for true blends--Skin-color in man--
  Questionable if real blends exist--The place of the Mendelian
  factors in the germ-cell--Parallel between the behavior of
  Mendelian factors and chromosomes--A single chromosome not
  restricted to carrying a single determiner.

  IV MENDELISM IN MAN                                                   97

  Probably applicable to many characters in man--Difficult to get
  correct data--A generalized presence-absence formula--Indications
  of incomplete dominance--Why after the first generation only half
  the children may show the dominant character--Eye-color in man--
  Hair-color--Hair-shape--Irregularities--Digital malformations--Eye
  defects--Other defects inherited as dominants--Recessive
  conditions more difficult to deal with--Albinism--Other recessive
  conditions in man--Breeding out defects--Other inheritable
  conditions in man.

  V ARE MODIFICATIONS ACQUIRED DIRECTLY BY THE BODY INHERITED?         121

  Which new characters are inherited?--Examples of somatic
  modifications--Use and disuse--The problem stated--Special
  conditions in mammals--Three fundamental questions--External
  influences may directly affect the germ-cells--Such effects
  improbable in warm-blooded animals--Poisons may affect the
  germ-plasm--How can somatic modifications be registered in
  germ-cells?--Persistence of Mendelian factors argues against such
  a mode of inheritance--Experiments on insects--On plants--On
  vertebrates--Epilepsy in guinea-pigs--Effects of mutilations not
  inherited--Transplantation of gonads--Effects of body on germ,
  general not specific--Certain characters inexplicable as inherited
  somatic acquirements--Neuter insects--Origin of new characters in
  germinal variation--Sexual reproduction in relation to new
  characters--Many features of an organism characterized by
  utility--Germinal variation a simpler and more inclusive
  explanation--Analysis of cases--Effects of training--Instincts--
  Disease--Reappearance not necessarily inheritance--Prenatal
  infection not inheritance--Inheritance of a predisposition not
  inheritance of a disease--Tuberculosis--Two individuals of
  tubercular stock should not marry--Special susceptibility less of
  a factor in many diseases--Deaf-mutism--Gout--Nervous and mental
  diseases--Other disorders which have hereditary aspects--Induced
  immunity not inherited--Social, ethical and educational
  significance of non-inheritance of somatic modifications--No cause
  for discouragement--Improved environment will help conserve
  superior strains when they do appear.

  VI PRENATAL INFLUENCES                                               151

  All that a child possesses at birth not necessarily hereditary--
  The myth of maternal impressions--Injurious prenatal influences--
  Lead poisoning--The expectant mother should have rest--Too short
  intervals between children--Expectant mothers neglected--
  Alcoholism--Unreliability of most data--Alcohol a germinal and
  fetal poison--Various views of specialists on the effects of
  alcoholism on progeny--The affinity of alcohol for germinal
  tissue--Innate degeneracy versus the effects of alcohol--
  Experimental alcoholism in lower animals--Further remarks on the
  situation in man--Much inebriety in man due to defective nervous
  constitution--Factors to be reckoned with in the study of
  alcoholism--Venereal diseases--The seriousness of the situation--
  Infantile blindness--Syphilis--Some of the effects--A blood test--
  Many syphilitics married--Why permit existing conditions to
  continue?--Ante-nuptial medical inspection--The perils of venereal
  disease must be prevented at any cost--Bad environment can wreck
  good germ-plasm.

  VII RESPONSIBILITY FOR CONDUCT                                       195

  All mental process accompanied by neural process--Gradations in
  nervous response from lower organisms to man--Behavior of many
  animals often an automatic adjustment to simple external agents--
  Tropisms--Certain apparently complex volitions probably only
  tropisms--Complicating factors--Many tropic responses apparently
  purposeful--Tropisms grade into reflex actions and instincts--
  Adjustability of instincts opens the way for intelligent
  behavior--Modification of habits possible in lower animals--Some
  lower vertebrates profit by experience--Rational behavior--
  Conceptual thought probably an outgrowth of simpler psychic
  states--The capacity for alternative action in higher animals--The
  elemental units of the nervous system are the same in lower and
  higher animals--Neuron theory--Establishment of pathways through
  the nervous system--Characteristic arrangements of nerve cells
  subject to inheritance--Different parts of the cortex yield
  different reactions--Skill acquired in one branch of learning
  probably not transferred to another branch--Preponderance of
  cortex in highest animals--Special fiber tracts in the spinal cord
  of man and higher apes--Great complexity in associations and more
  neurons in the brain of man--The nervous system in the main
  already staged at the time of birth--Many pathways of conduction
  not yet established--The extent of the modifiable zone unknown--
  Various possibilities of reaction in the child--Probable origin of
  altruistic human conduct--Training in motive necessary--Actual
  practise in carrying out projects important--Interest and
  difficulty both essential--The realization of certain
  possibilities of the germ rather than others is subject to
  control--We must afford the opportunity and provide the proper
  stimuli for the development of good traits--Moral responsibility.

  VIII MENTAL AND NERVOUS DEFECTS                                      228

  Prevalence of insanity--Imperfect adjustments of the brain
  mechanism inheritable--Many mental defectives married--
  Disproportionate increase in number of mental defectives--Protests
  voiced by alienists--Examples of hereditary feeble-mindedness--
  Difficult to secure accurate data--Feeble-mindedness and insanity
  not the same--Many types of insanity--Not all insanities of the
  same eugenical significance--Difficulties of getting genealogies
  of specific forms of insanity--Certain forms of insanity seem to
  behave as Mendelian recessives--Grades of feeble-mindedness--About
  two-thirds of feeble-mindedness inherited--Some results of
  non-restraint of the feeble-minded--Not all cases of mental
  deficiency inherited--Epileptics--Feeble-mindedness probably a
  recessive--Many apparently normal people are carriers of
  neuropathic defects--Tests for mental deficiency--The backward
  child in school--The exceptionally able child--Cost of caring for
  our mentally disordered--Importance of rigid segregation of the
  feeble-minded--Importance of early diagnosis of insanity--Opinion
  of competent psychiatrists essential--Some insanities not
  hereditary--Importance of heredity in insanity not appreciated.

  IX CRIME AND DELINQUENCY                                             263

  Heredity and environment in this field--Feeble-mindedness often a
  factor--Many delinquent girls mentally deficient--Institutional
  figures misleading--Many prisoners mentally subnormal--Inhibitions
  necessary to social welfare--The high-grade moron a difficult
  problem--Degenerate strains--Intensification of defects by
  inbreeding--Vicious surroundings not a sufficient explanation in
  degenerate stocks--Not all delinquents defectives--No special
  inheritable crime-factor--What is a born criminal?--Epileptic
  criminal especially dangerous--The mental disorders most
  frequently associated with crime--Bearing of immigration on crime
  and delinquency--Sexual vice--School instruction in sex-hygiene--
  Mere knowledge not the crux of the sex problem--Early training in
  self-restraint an important preventive of crime and delinquency--
  Multiplication of delinquent defectives must be prevented.

  X RACE BETTERMENT THROUGH HEREDITY                                   289

  Questionable charity--Past protests--An increasing flood of
  defectives--Natural elimination of defectives done away with--Why
  not prevent our social maladies?--Eugenics defined--Improved
  environment alone will not cure racial degeneracy--Heredity and
  environment--Inter-racial marriage--Human conservation--Kindness
  in the long run--The problem has two phases--Constructive eugenics
  must be based on education--Inferior increasing more rapidly than
  superior stocks--An unselected population may contain much
  valuable material--The lack of criteria for judging fitness--The
  college graduate--Native ability, independence and energy
  eugenically desirable--Four children to each marriage required to
  maintain a stock--Factors contributing to low birth-rate in
  desirable strains--The educated public must be made to realize the
  situation--Utilization of family pride as a basis for constructive
  eugenics--The tendency for like to marry like--Public opinion as
  an incentive to action--Choosing a marriage mate means choosing a
  parent--The best eugenic marriage also a love match--The
  elimination of the grossly unfit urgent--Suggested remedies--
  Inefficacy of laws which forbid marriage of mental defectives--
  Systems of mating impracticable in the main--Corrective mating
  presupposes knowledge of eugenics--Segregation has many
  advocates--Sterilization as a eugenic measure--To what conditions
  applicable--In insanity--In feeble-mindedness--In cases of
  epilepsy--Sterilization laws--Social dangers in vasectomy--Our
  present knowledge insufficient--Sterilization laws on trial--An
  educated public sentiment the most valuable eugenic agent--The
  question of personal liberty--Education of women in eugenics
  needed--Much yet to be done--A working program--Which shall it be?

  GLOSSARY                                                             343

  REFERENCES FOR FURTHER READING AND STUDY                             355

  INDEX                                                                361




BEING WELL-BORN




