CHAPTER I

HEREDITY


It is a commonplace fact that offspring tend to resemble their parents. So
commonplace, indeed, that few stop to wonder at it. No one misunderstands
us when we say that such and such a young man is "a chip off the old
block," for that is simply an emphatic way of stating that he resembles
one or the other of his parents. The same is true of such familiar
expressions as "what's bred in the bone," "blood will tell," and kindred
catch phrases. All are but recognitions of the same common fact that
offspring exhibit various characteristics similar to those of their
progenitors.

=Blood Heritage.--=To this phenomenon of resemblance in successive
generations based on ancestry the term heredity is applied. In man, for
instance, there is a marked tendency toward the reappearance in offspring
of structures, habits, features, and even personal mannerisms, minute
physical defects, and intimate mental peculiarities like those possessed
by their parents or more remote forebears. These personal characteristics
based on descent from a common source are what we may call the blood
heritage of the child to discriminate it from a wholly different kind of
inheritance, namely, the passing on from one generation to the next of
such material things as personal property or real estate.

=Kind Determined by Origin.--=It is inheritance in the sense of community
of origin that determines whether a given living creature shall be man,
beast, bird, fish, or what not. A given individual is human because his
ancestors were human. In addition to this stock supply of human qualities
he has certain well-marked features which we recognize as characteristics
of race. That is, if he is of Anglo-Saxon or Italian or Mongolian
parentage, naturally his various qualities will be Anglo-Saxon, Italian,
or Mongolian. Still further, he has many distinctive features of mind and
body that we recognize as family traits and lastly, his personal
characteristics such as designate him to us as Tom, Harry, or James must
be added. The latter would include such minutiae as size and shape of ears,
nose or hands; complexion; perhaps even certain defects; voice; color of
eyes; and a thousand other particulars. Although we designate these
manifold items as individual, they are in reality largely more or less
duplicates of similar features that occur in one or the other of his
progenitors, features which he would not have in their existing form but
for the hereditary relation between him and them.

  "O Damsel Dorothy! Dorothy Q.!
  Strange is the gift that I owe to you;

    *       *       *       *       *

  What if a hundred years ago
  Those close-shut lips had answered 'No,'

    *       *       *       *       *

  Should I be I, or would it be
  One-tenth another, to nine-tenths me?"

  "Soft is the breath of a maiden's yes;
  Not the light gossamer stirs with less;
  But never a cable that holds so fast
  Through all the battles of wave and blast,
  And never an echo of speech or song
  That lives in the babbling air so long!
  There were tones in the voice that whispered then
  You may hear to-day in a hundred men."

When life steps into the world of matter there comes with it a sort of
physical immortality, so to speak; not of the individual, it is true, but
of the race. But the important thing to note is that the race is made up,
not of a succession of wholly unrelated forms, but a continuation of the
same kind of living organisms, and this sameness is due to the actual
physical descent of each new individual from a predecessor. In other
words, any living organism is the kind of organism it is in virtue of its
hereditary relation to its ancestors.

It is part of the biologist's task to seek a material basis, a continuity
of actual substance, for this continuity of life and form between an
organism and its offspring. Moreover, inasmuch as the offspring is never
precisely similar to its progenitors he must determine also what qualities
are susceptible of transmission and in what measure.

=Ancestry a Network.--=From the fact that each child has all of the
ancestors of its mother as well as of its father, arises the great
complications which are met with in determining the lineage of an
individual. A person has two parents, four grandparents, eight great
grandparents, and thus following out pedigree it is plain to be seen that
through this process of doubling in each generation, in the course of a
few centuries one's ancestry is apparently enormous. By actual
computation, according to Professor D. S. Jordan, if we count thirty
generations back to the Norman invasion of England in 1066, at this ratio
of duplication, the child of to-day would have had at that time an
ancestry of 8,598,094,592 persons. But we know that the total number of
inhabitants in England during the time of William the Conqueror was but a
small fraction of this enormous aggregate. This means that we shall have
to modify our inference that a child has twice as many ancestors as its
parents; a condition which at first sight seems evident, but which is not
literally true. The fact is that the parents of the child, in all
probability, have many ancestors in common--a state of affairs which is
brought about through the intermarriage of relatives, and this is
especially frequent among remoter descendants of common progenitors. Time
after time in genealogy strains of blood have crossed and recrossed until
it is not improbable that a man of to-day who is of English origin has the
blood in his veins from every inhabitant of England who lived during the
time of William the Conqueror and left fruitful descendants. Instead of
conceiving of ancestry as an ever branching and widening tree-like system
as it recedes into the past, it is more accurate, therefore, to regard it
in the light of an elaborate meshwork. The "family tree" in reality
becomes the family net.

=Ancestry in Royalty.--=The pedigrees of royal families have proved to be
of much importance in the study of human inheritance, not that royal
traits are any more heritable than any other, but simply because the
records have been carefully kept so that they are the most comprehensive
and easily followed pedigrees available. The netlike weave of ancestry is
particularly well exemplified in some of these families because of much
close intermarriage. Their heritage typifies on an intensified scale the
heritage of the mass of mankind. For example, if we go six generations
back in the ancestry of Frederick the Great instead of the expected
sixty-four individual ancestors we find only forty; or in a still more
closely woven stock, in the Spanish royal line of Don Carlos we find in
six generations instead of sixty-four individual ancestors, only
twenty-eight. While the present German emperor might have had four
thousand ninety-six ancestors in the twelfth generation back, it is
estimated that owing to intermarriage he probably had only five hundred
thirty-three.

=Offspring Derived from One Parent Only.--=So far in our reckoning of
heredity we have counted elements from both father and mother, and the
complications which arise from such a double ancestry are manifestly very
perplexing ones. If we could do away with the elements of sex and find
offspring that are derived from one parent only, it would seemingly
simplify our problem very much for we should thus have a direct line of
descent, free from intermingling. This, in fact, occurs to a greater or
less extent among lower animals in a number of instances. There may be
only female forms for a number of generations and the eggs which they
produce develop directly into new individuals. Moreover, many of the
simpler organisms have the power of dividing their bodies into two and
thus giving rise to two new forms, each of which resembles the parent.
This shows plainly that we may have inheritance without the appearance of
any male ancestor at all, hence sex is not always a necessary factor in
reproduction or heredity. The development of eggs asexually, that is,
without uniting first with a male cognate, is termed _parthenogenesis_.
The ordinary plant louse or aphid which is frequently found upon geraniums
is a familiar example of an animal which reproduces largely in this way.
During the summer only the females exist and they are so astonishingly
fertile that one such aphid and her progeny, supposing none dies, will
produce one hundred million in the course of five generations. In the last
broods of the fall, males and females appear and fertile eggs are produced
which lie dormant through the winter to start the cycle of the next year.
Again, the eggs of some kinds of animals which normally have to unite with
a male germ before they develop, can be made to develop by merely treating
them with chemical solutions. The difference between an offspring derived
in such a manner, and one which has developed from an egg fertilized by
the male is that it is made up of characteristics from only one source,
the maternal.

=Dual Ancestry an Aid in Studying Heredity.--=Although we have the factors
of heredity in a more simplified form in the case of asexual
transmission, as a matter of fact most of our insight into the problems
of heredity has been attained from a study of sexually reproducing forms,
because the very existence of two sets of more or less parallel features
offers a kind of checking up system by which we can follow a given
characteristic.

=Reversion.--=Occasionally, however, plants and animals do not develop the
complete individuality we might expect, but stop short at or re-attain
some ancestral stage along the line of descent, and thus come to resemble
some progenitor perhaps many generations back of their own time. Thus it
is well known that as regards one or more characteristics a child may
resemble a grandparent or often some remote ancestor much more closely
than it does its immediate parent. The reappearance of such ancestral
traits the student of heredity designates as _Reversion_ or _Atavism_.

Reversion may occur apparently in any class of plants or animals. It is
especially pronounced among domesticated forms, which through man's
selection have been produced under more or less artificial conditions. For
example, among fancy breeds of pigeons, there may be an occasional return
to the old slaty blue color of the ancestral rock-pigeon, with two dark
cross-bars on the wings, from which all modern breeds have been derived.
This is almost sure to happen if the fancy varieties are inter-crossed for
two or three generations. Another example of reversion frequently cited is
the occasional reappearance in domestic poultry of the reddish or brownish
color pattern of the ancestral jungle-fowl to which, among modern forms,
the Indian game seems most nearly related in color. Still another example
is the cross-bars or stripes occasionally to be seen on the forelegs of
colts, particularly mules, reminiscent of the extinct wild progenitors
which were supposedly striped.

Fig. 1, p. 9, is a picture of a hybrid between the common fowl and the
guinea-fowl. The chevron-like markings on certain feathers show a
reversion to a type of color pattern that is prevalent among both the
primitive pheasants (the domestic chicken is a pheasant) and the primitive
guinea-fowls. Although the common spotted guinea-fowl may be crossed with
a black chicken which shows no trace of barring, nevertheless the hybrid
offspring are likely to bear a chevron-like pattern such as that shown in
the picture.

There has been much quibbling over the relative meanings of reversion and
atavism. The general idea, whichever term we use, is that there is a
"throwing back" in a noticeable degree through inheritance to some
ancestral condition beyond the immediate parents. A few recent authors
have taken the term atavism in a restricted sense and use it to signify
specifically those not uncommon cases in which a particular character of
an offspring resembles the corresponding character of a grandparent
instead of a parent. Such, for example, as the blue eye-color of a child
with brown-eyed parents, each of whom in turn has had a blue-eyed parent.
The tendency of other authors is to abandon the term entirely because of
the diversity of meaning that has been attached to it in the past.


[Illustration: FIG. 1

Hybrid between the guinea-fowl and the common fowl, showing in many
feathers reversion to a primitive chevron-like barring.]


Certain classes of so-called reversions, such as the case of the eye-color
just cited, are readily explicable on Mendelian principles as we shall see
in a later chapter, but probably not all kinds of phenomena described as
reversion can be so explained. For example, some seem to be cases of
suppressed development. The word reversion, indeed, must be looked on as
a convenient descriptive term rather than as the name of a single specific
condition.

=Telegony.--=There is yet a wide-spread belief in the supposed influence
of an earlier sire on offspring born by the same mother to a later and
different sire. This alleged phenomenon is termed _telegony_. For example,
many dog-breeders assert that if a thoroughbred bitch has ever had pups by
a mongrel father, her later offspring, although sired by a thoroughbred,
will show taints of the former mongrel mating. In such cases the female is
believed to be ruined for breeding purposes. Other supposed instances of
such influences have been cited among horses, cattle, sheep, pigs, cats,
birds, pets of various kinds and even men. The historic case most
frequently quoted is that of Lord Morton's mare which bore a hybrid colt
when bred to a quagga, a striped zebra-like animal now extinct. In later
years the same mare bore two colts, sired by a black Arabian horse. Both
colts showed stripes on the neck and other parts of the body, particularly
on the legs. It was inferred that this striping was a sort of after effect
of the earlier breeding with the quagga. In recent times, however,
Professor Ewart has repeated the experiment a number of times with
different mares using a Burchell zebra as the test sire. Although his
experiments have been devised so as to conduce in every way possible to
telegony his results have been negative. Moreover, it has been pointed out
that the stripes on the legs of the two foals alleged to show telegony
could not have been derived from the quagga sire for, unlike zebras,
quaggas did not have their legs striped. Furthermore it is known that the
occurrence of dark brown stripes on the neck, withers and legs of ordinary
colts is not uncommon, some cases of which have exhibited more zebra-like
markings than those of the colts from Lord Morton's mare. It seems much
more probable, therefore, that the alleged instances are merely cases of
ordinary reversion to the striped ancestral color pattern which probably
characterized the wild progenitors of the domesticated horse.

Various experiments on guinea-pigs, horses, mice and other forms,
especially devised to test out this alleged after-influence of an earlier
sire, have all proved negative and the general belief of the biologist
to-day is that telegony is a myth.

=Prenatal Influences Apart from Heredity.--=In discussing the problems of
heredity it is necessary to consider also the possibilities of external
influences apart from lineage which may affect offspring through either
parent. Although modifications derived directly by the parent, and
prenatal influences in general, are of extremely doubtful value as of
permanent inheritable significance, nevertheless they must be reckoned
with in any inventory of a child's endowment at birth. Impaired vitality
on the part of the mother, bad nutrition and physical vicissitudes of
various kinds all enter as factors in the birthright of the child, who,
moreover, may bear in its veins slumbering poisons from some progenitor
who has handed on blood taints not properly attributable to heredity. Of
such importance is this kind of influence to the welfare of the immediate
child that it will be necessary to discuss it in considerable detail in a
later chapter.

=Parent Body and Germ Not Identical.--=Inasmuch as each new individual
appears to arise from material derived from its parent, taking the
evidence at its face value one might suppose that any peculiarity of
organization called forth in the living substance of the parent would
naturally be repeated in the offspring, but a closer study of the
developing organism from its first inception to maturity shows this to be
probably a wrong conclusion. The parent-body and the reproductive
substance contained in that body are by no means identical. It becomes an
important question to decide, in fact, how much effect, if any, either
permanent or temporary, the parent-body really has on the germ.

A given fertile germ (Fig. 2, p. 13) gives rise by a succession of
divisions to a body which we call the individual, but such a germ also
gives rise to a series of new germ-cells which reside in that individual,
and it is these germ-cells, not something derived from the body, that pass
on the determiners of distinguishing features or qualities from generation
to generation. It is only by grasping the significance of this fact that
we can understand how in certain cases a totally different set of
characters may appear in an offspring than those manifested in either
parent.

=An Hereditary Character Defined.--=By a _character_, in discussions in
heredity, is meant simply a trait, feature or other characteristic of an
organism. Where we can pick out a single definable characteristic which
acts as a unit in heredity, for greater accuracy we term it a
_unit-character_. Many traits are known to be inherited on a unit basis or
are capable of being analyzed into factors which are so inherited. These
unit-characters are in large measure inherited independently of one
another apparently, although cases of characters inherited as a unit along
with other characters are known.

=Hereditary Mingling a Mosaic Rather Than a Blend.--=The independence of
unit-characters in inheritance leads us to the important conclusion that
the mingling of two lines of ancestry into a new individual is in no sense
bringing them into the "melting pot," as it has been picturesquely
expressed, but it is rather to be regarded as the mingling of two mosaics,
each particle of which retains its own individuality, and which, even if
overshadowed in a given generation, may nevertheless manifest its
qualities undimmed in later generations when conditions favorable to its
expression transpire.


[Illustration: FIG. 2

Diagram illustrating germinal continuity. Through a series of divisions a
germ-cell gives rise to a body or a soma and to new germ-cells. The
latter, not the body, give rise in turn to the next generation.]


=Determiners of Characters, Not Characters Themselves, Transmitted.--=The
fact should be thoroughly understood that the actual thing which is
transmitted by means of the germ in inheritance is not the character
itself, but something which will _determine_ the character in the
offspring. It is important to remember this, for often these
_determiners_, as they are called, may lie unexpressed for one or more
generations and may become manifest only in later descendants. The truth
of the matter is, the child does not inherit its characters from
corresponding characters in the parent-body, but parent and child are
alike because they are both products of the same line of germ-plasm, both
are chips from the same old block.


METHODS OF STUDYING HEREDITY

Before entering into details it will be well to get some idea of the
methods which are commonly employed in arriving at conclusions in the
field of heredity. Some of these are extremely complex and all that we can
do in an elementary presentation is to get a glimpse of the procedures.

=Our Knowledge of Heredity Derived Along Three Lines.--=Our modern
conceptions of heredity have been derived mainly from three distinct lines
of investigation: First, from the study of embryology, in which the
biologist concerns himself with the genesis of the various parts of the
individual, and the mechanism of the germs which convey the actual
materials from which these parts spring; second, through experimental
breeding of plants and animals to compare particular traits or features in
successive generations; and third, through the statistical treatment of
observations or measurements of a large number of parents and their
offspring with reference to a given characteristic in order to determine
the average extent of resemblance between parents and children in that
particular respect.

=The Method of Experimental Breeding.--=A tremendous impetus was given to
the method of experimental breeding when it was realized that we can
itemize many of the parts or traits of an organism into entities which are
inherited independently one of another. Such traits, or as we have already
termed them, unit-characters, may be not only independently heritable but
independently variable as well. The experimental method seeks to isolate
and trace through successive generations the separate factors which
determine the individual unit-characters of the organism. In this attempt
cross-breeding is resorted to. Forms which differ in one or more respects
are mated and the progeny studied. Next these offspring are mated with
others of their own kind or mated back with the respective parent types.
In this way the behavior of a particular character may often be followed
and the germinal constitutions of the individuals concerned can be
formulated with reference to it. Inasmuch as we shall give much
consideration to this method in the chapter on Mendelism we need not
consider it further here.

=The Statistical Method.--=The statistical method seeks to obtain large
bodies of facts and to deal with evidence as it appears through
mathematical analysis of these facts. The attempt of its followers is to
treat quantitatively all biological processes with which it is concerned.
Historically Sir Francis Galton was the first to make any considerable
application of statistical methods to the problems of heredity and
variation. In his attempts to determine the extent of resemblance between
relatives of different degree as regards bodily, mental and temperamental
traits, he devised new methods of statistical analysis which constitute
the basis of modern statistical biology, or _biometry_ as it is termed by
its votaries. Professor Karl Pearson in particular has extended and
perfected the mathematical methods of this field and stands to-day as
perhaps its most representative exponent. The system is in the main based
on the calculus of probability. The methods often are highly specialized,
requiring the use of higher mathematics, and are therefore only at the
command of specially trained workers.

Just as insurance companies can tell us the probable length of human life
in a given social group, since although uncertain in any particular case,
it is reducible in mass to a predictable constant, so the biometrician
with even greater precision because of his improved methods can often,
when a large number of cases are concerned, give us the intensity of
ancestral influence with reference to particular characters.

For example, it is clear that by measuring a large number of adult human
beings one can compute the average height or determine the height which
will fit the greatest number. There will be some individuals below and
some above it, but the greater the divergence from this standard height
the fewer will be the individuals concerned.

Galton compared the heights of 204 normal English parents and their 928
adult offspring. In order to equalize the measurements of men and women he
found he had to multiply each female height by 1.08. Then, to take both
parents into account when comparing height of parents to that of children
he added the height of the father to the proportionately augmented height
of the mother and divided by two, thus securing the height of what he
termed the "mid-parent." He found that the mid-parental heights of his
subjects ranged from 64.5 to 72.5 inches, and that the general _mode_ was
about 68.5 inches. It should be mentioned that the _mode_, in a given
population, represents the group containing the largest number of
individuals of one kind; it may or may not coincide with the average. The
children of all mid-parents having a given height were measured next and
tabulated with reference to these mid-parents. The results of Galton's
measurements may be expressed simply as follows:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------
                                          |MODE|
  ----------------------------------------|----|-------------------
  Height of mid-parent|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  in inches           |64.5|65.5|66.5|67.5|68.5|69.5|70.5|71.5|72.5
                      |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  Average height of   |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  offspring           |65.8|66.7|67.2|67.6|68.3|68.9|69.5|69.9|72.2
  -----------------------------------------------------------------

=The Law of Regression.--=It is plain from this table that the offspring
of short mid-parents tend to be under average or modal height though not
so far below as their parents. Likewise children of tall parents tend to
be tall but less tall than their parents. This fact illustrates what is
known as Galton's _law of regression_; namely, that if parents in a given
population diverge a certain amount from the mode of the population as a
whole, their children, while tending to resemble them, will diverge less
from this mode. It is clear that the extent of regression is an inverse
measure of the intensity of inheritance from the immediate parents; if the
deviation of the offspring from the general mode were nearly as great as
that of their parents then the intensity of the inheritance must be high;
if but slight--that is, if the offspring regressed nearly to the
mode--then the intensity of the inheritance must be ranked as low. In the
example in question it must be ranked as relatively high. Computations
show that as regards stature the fraction two-thirds represents
approximately the amount of resemblance between the two generations where
both parents are considered.

=Correlations Between Parents and Offspring.--=In modern researches the
conception of mid-parent and mid-grandparent as utilized by Galton has
been largely abandoned. It has been found more convenient as well as more
accurate to keep the measurements of the two parents separate and to deal
with correlations between fathers and sons, fathers and daughters, mothers
and sons, mothers and daughters, brother and brother, etc. Professor
Pearson and his pupils have found for a number of characters that the
correlation between either parent and children, whether sons or daughters,
is relatively close. The correlation between brother and brother, sister
and sister, and brother and sister, usually ranges a little higher than
the corresponding relation between parents and children.

=The Biometrical Method, Statistical, Not Physiological.--=While biometry
may in certain cases go far toward showing us the average intensity of
the inheritance of certain characters it can not replace the method of
the experimental breeder which deals with particular characters in
individual pedigrees. It must be borne in mind that the biometrical method
is a statistical and not a physiological one and that it is applicable
only when large numbers of individuals are considered in mass. It is most
valuable in cases where we are unable sharply to define single characters,
due probably to the concurrent action of a number of independent causes,
or where experiment is impossible so that we have to depend solely on
numerical data gained by observation.

=Mental Qualities Inheritable.--=Galton showed by this method long ago,
and Pearson and his school have extended and more clearly established the
work, that exceptional mental qualities tend to be inherited. While on the
average the children of exceptional parents tend to be less exceptional
than their parents, still they are far more likely to be exceptional than
are the children of average parents. By this method Professor Pearson has
shown that such mental and temperamental attributes as ability, vivacity,
conscientiousness, temper, popularity, handwriting, etc., are as
essentially determined as are physical features through the hereditary
endowment.




