CHAPTER IX.

SINAITIC REVELATION.

   62. Egyptian bondage. Moses.

   63. Preamble of the revelation.

   64. Modality of the revelation

   65. Decalogue.

CHAPTER X.

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.

   66. First Commandment,

   67. Second,

   68. Third,

   69. Fourth,

   70. Fifth,

   71. Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth,

   72. Ninth.

   73. Tenth.

CHAPTER XI.

SUCCESSIVE REVELATIONS.

   74. Their character.

   76. Their twofold direction.

   75. Their sanction.

CHAPTER XII.

REVEALED NOTIONS RESPECTING GOD.

   77. Knowledge of God.

   78. Opportunity of such a knowledge.

   79. Immediate relation between God and man.

   80. Love of God.

   81. Fear of God.

   82. Other duties towards God.

CHAPTER XIII.

DUTIES TOWARDS FELLOW-MEN.

   83. Justice.

   84. Negative duties.

   85. Positive duties.

   86. Other duties.

   87. Charity and benevolence.

   88. Duties toward the animate and inanimate nature.

CHAPTER XIV.

DUTIES TOWARDS ONE'S-SELF.

   89. Fundamental rule.

   91. Sanctification.

   90. Duties towards the body.

   92. Other special obligations.

CHAPTER XV.

JUDAISM.

   93. Religious idea.

   94. Its vicissitudes among the Jews.

   95. Mosaism.

   96. Prophetism.

CHAPTER XVI.

CONCLUSION.

   97. Action, creed, hopes.




NOTICE.


THE name of Isaac Reggio of Goritz, is now a celebrity in the Hebrew
literary world. A man of vast mind, a profound scholar, a philosopher,
and an elegant writer, his numerous works on Theology, Hermeneutics,
Philology, History, and Literature, written in Hebrew, in Italian, and
in German, have tended much to revive the taste for Hebrew literature,
and to reconcile modern education to the study of Jewish antiquities.

The present little book is one of his latest productions in the Italian
language. In a style at once concise and perspicuous, and with a form of
reasoning suited to the scientific requirements of the times, he
introduces the student to an enlarged view of Religion, ascends with him
to the heavenly source from which it emanated, and leads him, through
the paths of virtue and love, to the comprehension and admiration of the
objects contemplated by it. In short, he teaches--if I am permitted the
expression--_the philosophy of religion_.

I humbly, but firmly believe that, in the hands of able Jewish teachers,
this work will considerably assist them to infuse into religious
instruction a little more spirituality, and to impart a more
comprehensive view of religion, than the routine of former days deemed
necessary, and that, by so doing, they will be better able to enlarge
and satisfy the minds, improve the hearts, and generally advance the
moral education of youth.

Notwithstanding the well-intentioned and beneficial efforts of many
friends of education among the British Jews, and the praiseworthy
exertions of some excellent teachers, the education of the mass is, we
must confess, still in a condition, in which the attainment of those
objects has not ceased to be a desideratum. We may or may not be on a
level with our neighbours, but we have very urgent and special calls of
our own for self-improvement, we have a particular mission to fulfil,
with its concomitant duties. Such self-improvement and such duties are
demanded by the spirit--not of _the age_, as is too commonly said and
believed--but of an age which began thirty-two centuries ago, at the
revelation on Mount Sinai--the spirit of Judaism, of well-understood
Judaism. Our age, with all its boasted and undeniable progress, is
still, morally, far below the type designed by Providence for humanity
in the Sinaitic dispensation, far behind the spirit which dictated and
pervades the pages of the sacred volume, and which, when thoroughly
understood and generally acted upon, must bring about the supreme reign
of justice, charity, and universal love, and--as far as attainable--the
ultimate perfection of mankind.

It has appeared to me that these truths find a plain and logical
exposition in this little work, and that its contents may not prove
uninteresting even to the general reader. I also believe that a more
correct apprehension of the true spirit and principles of Judaism by our
Christian brethren, than is commonly arrived at, will have the twofold
effect, of gradually leading to a larger measure of justice being dealt
to the Jew, and inducing the latter to a higher degree of self-respect.
For these several reasons, I have volunteered to translate it for the
use of the English public, while other versions are being prepared in
Germany and France. I trust that those to whose lot has fallen the
honourable but arduous task of educating and informing young minds, and
to whom it is more particularly addressed, will give it their earnest
consideration, for the sake of whatever good they may cull from it, as a
material in aid, while they are laying the foundations of virtue in the
hearts of the rising generation.

That the results may correspond to the intentions is the sincere wish of
THE TRANSLATOR.




AUTHOR'S PREFACE.

TO INSTRUCTORS.


IN the exercise of the sacred mission entrusted to you by
Providence--that of educating our youth to piety and religion--it must
have frequently occurred to you, to wish that such an instruction could
be imparted, not in the shape of dogmas demanding to be admitted without
investigation, but as doctrines addressed to the intellect by proper
demonstrations, and finding their way to the heart by stimulating its
noblest feelings. The little book that I present to you is intended to
satisfy, at least in part, that wish. You will not find in it a complete
treatise on Jewish Theology, or a systematic catechism, but only the
essential elements, which may serve to the future elaboration of both.
You will find deposited in it the rough materials, which some abler
hands will perhaps one day employ in constructing an edifice, in which
our youth may find a safe refuge from the storms of doubt, unbelief, and
irreligion. I have purposed to avoid all exuberant ornaments of style,
all pompous parade of erudition, and contented myself with a plain
diction, and a strict laconism. I have not quoted authors who preceded
me in the same field; I have not called up for investigation what of
valuable or defective could be found in them; in short, I have not
instituted comparisons, scientific disquisitions, or critical
examinations of the opinions of others. A series of aphorisms, simple,
plain, unadorned, of easy understanding, drawn from no other source than
the Divine Word, presented with the greatest possible perspicuity and
precision, progressing in a regular chain of consequential propositions,
and containing in few words the most important points of the Israelitish
creed--that is the form in which I have thought more proper to present
to those, who are already versed in the Bible and in Hebrew literature,
a skeleton of the vast religious science, in which they may perceive at
a glance the principal characteristic of Judaism, its various
ramifications, subsidiary parts, and special tendencies; they may then
easily discover and account for the multifarious phases, in which it
manifested itself in the various epochs of the universal history of
mankind. To supply the deficiencies, to adorn those naked propositions,
to provide them with evidence deduced from the sacred text, to enlarge
them with appropriate applications, to illustrate them with examples, in
fine, to reduce the whole into such a catechistic form as will suit a
sound system of instruction--such is the task which remains entrusted to
your intelligence, and to your zeal. By employing the proffered
materials with that discretion which is peculiar to your ministry, with
that method which the tender minds of your pupils require, and with the
love inspired by the sublimity and importance of the subject, yours will
be the merit of having propagated the seeds of truth that will bring
forth charity and universal edification; to me suffices the happiness of
having, in some degree, contributed to so noble a work.




A GUIDE FOR THE RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION OF JEWISH YOUTH.




