CHAPTER XV. OUR SUMMARY REJECTION OF CURRENT SUPERNATURALISM CONSIDERED IN
ITS BEARING ON THE EVIDENCE FOR MIRACLES.


There can be no doubt that there is an enormous mass of supernatural
beliefs which we feel at once justified in rejecting without troubling
ourselves to inquire into the evidence on which they rest. Others also we
reject because on investigation we find them altogether destitute of
evidence. Others again which rest on evidence which would be sufficient to
establish an ordinary fact, we reject notwithstanding this attestation, on
the ground of their inherent improbability. It has been objected that our
summary rejection of the great mass of current supernaturalism puts the
case of miracles out of court, and renders them so improbable, that it is
unnecessary minutely to examine the evidence which can be adduced in
support of them. I propose therefore in this chapter to consider the
reasons for our summary rejection of the great mass of current
supernaturalism, and its bearing on the credibility of the miracles in the
New Testament.

First: I observe that the stories of current supernaturalism are not the
only ones which we reject in a summary manner. We treat in the same way a
great number of other stories which offend against the principles of
common sense. It is clear that in these latter cases, we do not reject
them merely because they are supernatural, but because they are generally
incredible. The fact therefore that we thus reject a number of absurd
narratives without inquiry into the evidence on which they rest, cannot be
urged as a reason for rejecting other occurrences which are not involved
in any such absurdity. If the principle is valid against miracles, it must
be equally so against other extensive classes of facts. To assert that
miracles are thus absurd or ridiculous is to assume the point which ought
to be proved.

Secondly: We reject the great mass of current supernaturalism because it
is unable to assign any adequate reason for its existence. When it is
alleged that a miracle has been performed as an attestation of a
revelation, if it forms a necessary portion of such attestation, this is
an adequate reason for the miracle. But the great mass of current
supernaturalism is utterly unable to assign any reason for its existence;
or if reasons have been given, they are quite inadequate. Of this the case
of magic is an example. If it were a reality, it would not only interfere
with the order of nature, but no reason could be given for this
interference. If, on the other hand, its phenomena were alleged to be due
to secret forces in nature, then they would belong to an order of
grotesque and monstrous phenomena, which we are justified at once in
refusing to believe to be due to the action of intelligence or goodness;
and on the supposition that there is a moral Governor of the universe, it
is utterly incredible that they would occur either by his agency or with
his permission.

Perhaps the best attested occurrences of current supernaturalism are the
phenomena of spiritualism. It will tend to the illustration of this
subject, if we consider the grounds on which we reject a large portion of
its reported phenomena quite irrespectively of the evidence produced in
favour of their reality, and ascribe the belief in them to the effect of
an excited imagination, and in some cases to imposture. In considering
this subject, it is not necessary to examine whether the phenomena alleged
by spiritualists, if true, would be really supernatural, or belong to an
order of nature hitherto unknown.

Many of the manifestations of spiritualism possess a grotesqueness which
we see in no other class of natural phenomena. If they are alleged to be
the results of the action of natural forces previously unknown, then they
must belong to a class of forces which contrast in a most remarkable
degree with all known ones; that is to say, the known and the unknown
forces of nature must be utterly out of harmony with one another. I am now
speaking on the supposition that such forces are merely natural ones, not
under the guidance of intelligence. In that case they must have been
always in existence, only latent; yet they now for the first time manifest
themselves under very special circumstances and conditions, such as are
highly favourable to the existence of delusion. The abnormal character of
these phenomena, so entirely at variance with the known order of nature,
forms the strongest ground for the conviction that they cannot be the
results of the action of unknown natural forces. It would require an
overwhelming amount of evidence to convince us that these two sets of
natural forces, distinguishable by the strongest possible contrasts, (viz.
those which produce the visible phenomena of nature, and those which
produce another class, intermittent in their action, of which
grotesqueness and monstrosity are the most striking characteristics, and
which only manifest their existence under circumstances calculated to
throw a suspicion on their reality), can be the results of the action of
forces which have been present in nature during all past time.

But further: these phenomena, if natural, must belong to an order of
nature which is not only unlike the visible order, but would throw its
action into confusion. I am here reasoning on the supposition that the
moral order of the universe is due to the action of nothing but physical
forces. If this be so, it must form a portion of the existing order of
nature. But the forces which, on the supposition of the truth of
spiritualism, must be capable of being brought into activity, would
interrupt that moral order of which we are actually conscious. Their
action, if real, would interrupt the entire course of the moral world. No
man would be safe from their intrusion. Even in our deepest retirement we
should never be free from the invasion of their prying curiosity. Such a
power would be incompatible with the moral order of society. It follows,
therefore, that an unknown order of nature, presenting the most violent
contrast to the visible one, whose phenomena do not follow an invariable
but an intermittent law, and are only alleged to manifest themselves under
conditions favourable to imposture, possesses such a degree of inherent
improbability as to justify its rejection, even by those who recognise the
action of none but material forces in the universe.

But to those who recognise the present order of nature as due to the
action of a wise and intelligent Creator, it becomes absolutely incredible
that forces such as the phenomena of spiritualism require for their
production, can form a portion of that order which He has created, as they
contradict every conception which we can rationally form of his character.

But if these phenomena are viewed as due to the action of supernatural
agency, the reality of their occurrence becomes still more inconceivable.
If such agency is capable of being exerted, we can only conceive that its
exertion is permitted for the realization of some known end. Yet the
phenomena of spiritualism serve no purpose whatever. Spiritualists have
been holding their _séances_ for many years; but no one practical result
has yet been realized by them. The spirits of the departed have been
invoked, but they have never yet given a single useful response. Surely if
there be a spirit world, its occupations cannot be the production of the
abnormal, the mean and the grotesque. Its employments must possess some
pretensions to be esteemed dignified. It has been alleged that such
manifestations help to convince the incredulous of the reality of the
immortality of man. On the contrary, the idea that spirits can be guilty
of such phantastic tricks can only help to throw discredit on the
doctrine. It follows, therefore, that if the phenomena of spiritualism are
viewed as due to supernatural causes, it is utterly incredible either that
the Governor of the Universe would permit such a course of action, or that
the spirits themselves, unless deprived of reason, would exhibit
themselves in such a variety of phantastic forms, and for no other
apparent purpose than to effect a number of capricious interferences with
the visible order of nature. This incredibility is so great as to entitle
us summarily to reject the idea that the reputed phenomena can be actual
occurrences. In addition to this, the alleged manifestations are made
under circumstances pre‐eminently suited to excite suspicion.

The phenomena of modern spiritualism are a fair illustration of the
general character of the current supernaturalism of the ancient world. It
was for the most part equally senseless and absurd. The attestation to its
actual occurrence was of a very inferior character to that which can be
urged in favour of the alleged facts of spiritualism. I have merely taken
notice of these latter as an illustration of the general aspect of the
phenomena of current supernaturalism, and as placing before us the reasons
which fully justify us in rejecting a large portion of it without minutely
inquiring into its evidence.

I will now proceed to contrast the entire mass of current supernaturalism
with the miracles of the New Testament for the purpose of still further
illustrating the grounds on which we reject it, while we claim for the
latter that their reality must be tested by the evidence which can be
adduced in favour of their actual occurrence.

Let me again draw attention to the fact that the only correct conception
of a miracle in connection with this controversy, is that of an event
wrought in external nature with a definite moral aim and purpose.
Extraordinary events, to which no such moral aim and purpose can be
assigned, may be unusual occurrences, but are in no proper sense of the
words evidential miracles. An isolated occurrence of an extraordinary
nature, and an event marked with a definite moral purpose, are two wholly
different things. The one may be credible, and the other wholly
incredible. We habitually recognise the distinction in ordinary life, and
it entirely affects our judgment of the probability of an event. We esteem
the action of a particular person quite credible under one set of
circumstances, which we should reject as incredible under another. Thus if
we were informed that a friend with whom we were intimately acquainted,
had precipitated himself from a height into the water, supposing him to be
sane, we should not believe it. But if we received the information that he
had done it to save a person from drowning, and we knew that he was a man
of courage, we should accept the fact without the smallest hesitation. On
this account, therefore, the moral aspect of the alleged miracle is of the
utmost importance; and it is necessary for its correct conception that it
should not only be an extraordinary occurrence in external nature, but
that it should take place at the bidding of another, and in order to
render it credible, that it should be calculated to effectuate some
definite moral purpose.

Alleged supernatural events, which are destitute of these accompaniments,
are always liable to a very high degree of _à priori_ suspicion. In fact
it would be difficult to prove them to be supernatural. All that could be
affirmed respecting them would be that they were very unusual occurrences,
which it was impossible to account for by the action of any known force.
If the universe is under the government of God, all supernatural action
must either be the result of His agency or permission. If He interferes
with the order of occurrences, it is evident that such interference cannot
be capricious, but must have a definite purpose. We are justified,
therefore, in refusing to accept occurrences as supernatural, which are
destitute of all appearance of purpose in their performance.

But further: the alleged miracle must be consistent with the character of
God, before it is possible to attribute it to Him as wrought by His direct
agency. This rests on the same principle on which we refuse to credit the
reports of actions performed by men which are contradictory to their well
known characters. But this is far more certain with respect to God than it
can be of man. Human characters can at best be but imperfectly known, and
there are unseen depths in the human heart which sometimes render actions
possible, which stand in striking contrast to the general character of the
agents. To state the truth generally, as it is impossible that man can act
in opposition to the inmost principles of his moral being, so in a far
higher degree is it impossible that God can contradict the perfections of
His moral nature. This being so, it follows that we are entitled to reject
all miracles alleged to have been wrought by God, which are contrary to
His moral attributes; all which are low, mean, or grotesque, and unfitted
to realize an elevated moral purpose.

It will here be objected that if these positions are true, demoniacal
miracles are rendered impossible. I have already pointed out that if
demoniacal supernaturalism is affirmed in the New Testament to be an
actuality, its action is described as being limited to the human mind, and
that whatever permitted activity is conceded to it, always bears the most
distinctive marks of being from beneath. There is no possibility of
mistaking between such supernatural occurrences and the miracles of God.

Such then are our general principles, the truth of which can hardly be
contested. If they are true, the great mass of current supernaturalism is
worthy of rejection for the following reasons.

1. While it claims to be the result of supernatural agency, it is
destitute of all definite moral purpose, and such moral impress as it
bears is mean and degraded. What end, I ask, was it designed to serve? It
involved an almost continual interference with the order of nature; or if
at times it claimed to be due to occult forces, they were only suited to
confound the visible order of the universe. I am reasoning on the
supposition that there is a God who rules the world. This being so, it is
impossible to conceive that such a mode of acting can be His. Under this
head of supernaturalism fall all the monstrous and the grotesque, and the
entire range of magical phenomena.

2. The whole range of ancient supernaturalism is in contradiction to
everything which we can conceive of the moral character of God. Let us
take as an illustration the phenomena of Soothsaying. Who can believe that
God employed the entrails of slaughtered beasts as the means of revealing
the future? or that it was consistent with his character to manifest his
will through a multitude of monstrous portents? There is perhaps not a
single occurrence of ancient supernaturalism which does not offend against
our primary conception of the Divine character; and, therefore, the whole
is worthy of summary rejection.

3. Ancient supernaturalism assigned its occurrences to no cause adequate
to produce them. Those who asserted its reality, referred it to the action
of deities who possessed very limited power, or to occult powers in
nature. Such occult powers we now know to have no existence, and the power
attributed to the supposed deities was far too limited to be capable of
producing the results in question. All reputed events, the alleged cause
of which is unable to produce them, we are entitled to reject without
further investigation.

4. A large amount of ancient supernaturalism rested on no evidence
whatever. Of those portions for which any reasons were alleged, the
evidence itself was of a character exactly suited to discredit it. Of this
kind was the whole of the supernaturalism connected with the state
religions. These were in the hands of men who used them for the purpose of
acting on the vulgar, and who therefore readily accepted the report of
anything, however incredible, which could subserve their end. Other
portions were palpable impostures worked for the basest and most selfish
purposes. A very brief acquaintance with the nature of the evidence on
which it rests is sufficient to justify us in rejecting it without
entering on any inquiry as to its details.

Such being the general character of ancient supernaturalism, it is absurd
to argue that its existence is a reason for rejecting along with it
another order of supernaturalism, which stands contrasted with it in every
particular. We might as well urge the existence of a vast number of
counterfeits as a reason for rejecting everything which is genuine. We do
not reject it because it is supernatural, but because it is utterly
incredible. A statement of a few particulars will exhibit the contrast
between it and the supernaturalism of the New Testament in a striking
point of view.

1. Christian supernaturalism alleges that its occurrences are the result
of the action of a force which, if present, is certainly adequate to
produce them. Ancient supernaturalism alleges no cause whatever, or one
wholly inadequate.

2. Christian supernaturalism alleges a perfectly adequate purpose for its
production; that purpose being the attestation of the divine mission of
Jesus. Ancient supernaturalism alleges either no purpose at all, or a
degraded one.

3. Christian supernaturalism is made to centre around the greatest and
most exalted character that has ever appeared in history. Ancient
supernaturalism, instead of being connected with the most eminent
characters of the times, directly connects itself with the most
questionable.

4. Christian supernaturalism is stamped throughout with a high moral
character and aspect. This is wholly wanting in the supernaturalism of the
ancient world.

5. Christian supernaturalism belongs to an elevated order and type; the
objects realized by it were for the most part benevolent. The mode of its
action was dignified and the effects produced by it were instantaneous,
following directly on the word of the agent. The mode in which its
miracles were performed is characterized by the utmost simplicity,
destitute alike of anything scenic or fantastic, entirely in harmony with
the great character who performed them. The supernaturalism of the ancient
world is marked by the opposite characteristics.

6. Christian supernaturalism, or to speak more correctly, the greatest
supernatural occurrence which Christianity records, namely the
Resurrection of Christ, has not only left a mighty impression on history,
but has created a civilization of its own which embraces all the
progressive nations of the world, and exerts a powerful influence even on
those who deny its truth. The only result wrought by the supernaturalism
of the ancient world was the moral degradation of those among whom it
prevailed.

7. The supernaturalism of Christianity rests on an attestation which even
unbelievers would allow to be quite sufficient to establish the truth of
any ordinary facts. The other rests either on no testimony at all, or on
one which is open to the gravest suspicion.

Such are some of the striking contrasts which distinguish the
supernaturalism of the New Testament from that of the ancient world. When
two series of events present such opposite features, it is the duty of a
sound philosophy to trace these distinctions to their causes, and to show
what is the nature of the forces which have impressed on each series its
own peculiar characteristics. Instead of this, however, we are invited to
pronounce both alike incredible; that is to say, because one series of
events is deeply impressed with characteristics which render them
incredible, we are invited to pronounce a similar condemnation on another
series, which is distinguished by the most opposite features, and which
has only this point in common with the former, that both belong to an
order of events which we designate as supernatural. Nothing can be more
unphilosophical than such a mode of reasoning. We reject the one series in
a mass, not because the events which it contains are supernatural, but
because they are absolutely incredible. A similar rule we apply to
ordinary, no less than supernatural occurrences.

But it will doubtless be objected that there is another series of
supernatural occurrences which rational men, with a few exceptions, greet
with an equally summary rejection, viz. the long series of ecclesiastical
miracles which extends in an almost unbroken succession from the second
century of our era nearly to the present day. These, it has been urged,
are alleged to have been wrought in attestation of Christianity, and bear
some remarkable analogy, as facts wrought in external nature, to the
miracles recorded in the Gospels. It is argued that if we reject the one,
we are for the same reason bound to reject the others.

The following points may be considered as admitted.

First; That every century from the second downwards has been characterized
by a considerable amount of pretension to the possession of supernatural
power; and during this period one section of the Christian Church claims
to have actually wrought miracles.

Secondly; Several of these miracles, viewed merely as phenomena in outward
nature, are precisely similar to those recorded in the New Testament.

Thirdly; When a miracle is alleged to have been performed at the present
day, as has recently been the case in a neighbouring country, not only all
unbelievers in the possibility of supernatural occurrences, but also all
rational Christians concur in its summary rejection, not merely on the
ground that the evidence is insufficient, but that the event is in itself
incredible.

Fourthly; That rational men reject in a similar manner and for similar
reasons the great mass of ecclesiastical miracles as unworthy of serious
inquiry into their attestation.

With respect to the second point, I have already observed that if we view
miracles merely as phenomena in external nature, and if a similar belief
in a current supernaturalism, which we have seen to be one of the
phenomena of human nature, prevailed in the Church, it was to be expected
that the current forms of ecclesiastical supernaturalism would adopt those
of the New Testament for their basis, and consequently that it would
abound in narratives of resurrections from the dead and the cures of
various diseases. This is actually the case. It may also not only excite
our wonder that the model was not far more exactly copied, but that
ecclesiastical, and especially monkish miracles, which constitute an
overwhelming majority of the miracles of Church history, abound so largely
in features which stand in such marked contrast to the miracles of the New
Testament, their peculiar characteristics being the same as those of
ancient supernaturalism, viz. the monstrous and the grotesque. This point
is one which demands the serious consideration of unbelievers; for if, as
they aver, they are both due to the action of the same causes, this
diversity requires to be accounted for. The truth is, that with the
exception that both series contain reports of miracles which are similar
or mere objective occurrences, in other respects their characteristics
differ widely.

With respect to the fact that rational men concur in the rejection of
modern miracles, it should be observed that this is not because all
supernatural events are believed to be incredible; but because the reputed
events themselves possess characteristics which excite in us the gravest
suspicions of their truth; and especially because by far the greatest
number of them are well known not to have originated in mere credulity,
but in actual imposture. Men or communities who have once lent themselves
to the deliberate coining of miracles, are of blasted reputations, and
whenever marvellous occurrences are reported by such persons, we are
justified in rejecting them without further inquiry. It is evident that
these are the grounds on which such stories are rejected, and not simply
because they are supernatural, since those who believe in the
supernaturalism of the New Testament concur with those who disbelieve in
it, in thus rejecting them.

I must now briefly consider the general grounds on which we reject the
great mass of ecclesiastical miracles, while we accept those in the
Gospels as actual occurrences.

The general ground of our rejection of them is precisely the same as that
on which we reject the supernaturalism of the ancient world. The only
thing which distinguishes them from the latter, is that they contain a
number of events which viewed as bare facts are similar to those recorded
in the Gospels. In every other respect the contrast is complete. I shall
only draw attention to a few considerations which might otherwise escape
the notice of the reader.

The ecclesiastical miracles were not wrought in attestation that the
person working them had a divine commission, but that a divine power
permanently abode in the Church. The qualification which was thought
necessary for the exhibition of this power was the possession of a great
degree of reputed sanctity. The exercise of miraculous power was supposed
to prove, not that its possessor had a divine commission, but that he was
a saint. The saint was supposed to have in himself some inherent power of
working miracles, bearing a considerable analogy to that which the woman
with the issue of blood believed to be possessed by our Lord. A miraculous
power in the shape of a virtue issued from the saint. Hence the
supernatural power which was ascribed to dead men’s bones and to relics.
Such a supernatural power is devoid of everything which presupposes a
divine purpose, and of all evidential value. Its frequency would destroy
the nature of a miracle as an attestation of a divine commission, and
involve an interference with the order of nature, which would destroy the
sense of its regularity, the knowledge of which is so essential to our
well being, as well as to the conception of a miracle. Moreover, the
supernatural agency is not supposed to be due to the direct intervention
of God, but to some imaginary virtue residing in man.

The ecclesiastical miracles of which we have anything like a detailed
account, when they are not simply regarded as due to the direct sanctity
of the person performing them, are never alleged to be performed in proof
of a divine commission; but when they are asserted to have been
evidential, they are affirmed to have been wrought in proof of some
doctrine, or in favour of some particular party in the Church; or, what
invests them with a still greater degree of suspicion, in favour of the
power of a particular order. The last class of alleged miracles may at
once be dismissed as due to simple imposture. The first are strongly
contrasted with those of the New Testament, where we cannot find the
account of a single miracle wrought in attestation of a doctrine, the one
or two apparent exceptions being really performed to attest a divine
commission. But when a miracle is wrought to prove an irrational doctrine,
the credibility of the miracle perishes with the truth of the doctrine. We
are, therefore, justified in rejecting the miracles whenever we have
sufficient evidence that the doctrines which they were alleged to attest
are untrue. Again: whenever a particular party alleges a divine
attestation in its favour, its character may be known by its works. The
parties in the Church who have claimed such miraculous attestation, have
proved by their actions that the idea of a divine interference in their
favour is incredible, as being inconsistent with the divine character.

It is perfectly true that at the present day all rational men, with few
exceptions, concur in rejecting almost the entire mass of ecclesiastical
miracles. They do this, however, not because they believe miracles to be
impossible, but because they are persuaded that God will not work one on a
light or trivial occasion, and because the great mass of such pretended
miracles are characterised by marks which are inconsistent with the idea
that they have been wrought by God. With our larger acquaintance with the
order of nature, we no longer believe that it is possible for miracles to
be wrought by any inherent virtue in things themselves, but that if
performed at all, it can only be by the direct agency or permission of the
Author of Nature. In a word, the general incredibility of the
ecclesiastical miracles, and their repugnance to our conception of the
mode of the divine acting is the reason why we reject them altogether.

It is also unquestionably true that at the present day a great majority
even of religious persons would receive with no little incredulity the
report of a miracle, while such incredulity would not have existed at a
former period. This is due to two causes: first, our increased knowledge
of the permanence of the forces of material Nature; and secondly, our
belief that supernatural occurrences can only take place by the direct
agency and permission of God, and not by means of my supernatural power
inherent in particular persons. From this we draw the inference that
almost all the alleged ecclesiastical miracles must be rejected as
inconsistent with the divine character. We are of opinion, therefore, that
a miracle wrought for any other purpose than the attestation of a
revelation is not credible; and as from the nature of the case revelations
must be rare, we summarily reject all reports of supernatural occurrences
as impostures, or the offspring of a heated and undisciplined imagination.

Now although this is generally the case, yet it is unquestionable that if
a miracle was reported to us with a pre‐eminently strong attestation, no
rational person would refuse to give a serious consideration to the
evidence merely because the event was supernatural. A reported miracle
would doubtless be attended with no inconsiderable degree of antecedent
improbability; but if a man with whom we were intimately acquainted, of
sound intellect, and high moral character were to allege that he had
performed an act which, if real, must have been indisputably miraculous,
it would be altogether irrational to reject his assertion summarily as
unworthy of consideration merely because in all ages miraculous stories
have been extensively believed. The application of such a principle would
lead us into the grossest error.

This question has a very important bearing on the subject before us. It
has been alleged that while nothing has been more common than the
ascription of miracles to eminent men, it is impossible to find a man of
sound judgment and high moral character who has deliberately affirmed that
he has performed one himself. That such affirmations have been very rare
is certain, and for the simple reason, that miracles have been very rare
occurrences. But the assertion that no such cases are to be found is
inaccurate. One, at all events, exists, although probably the only one,
but it is that of a man of the most undoubted veracity, the Apostle Paul.
As I have already observed, four of the most important writings which have
been attributed to him are admitted by a vast majority of those
unbelievers who are competent to form an opinion on the subject, to be his
genuine productions. These are before us, and we can form from them a full
judgment as to the character of the man. In them he distinctly tells us
that he performed miracles. He writes: “I have therefore whereof I may
glory in those things which pertain to God. For I will not dare to speak
of any of those things which Christ hath not wrought by me to make the
Gentiles obedient by word and deed, through mighty signs and wonders, by
the power of the Spirit of God; so that from Jerusalem, and round about
unto Illyricum, I have fully preached the Gospel of Christ.” (Rom. xv. 18,
19.) Here at least we have a direct affirmation on the subject. It is not
the only one made by him. But there is also one which is equivalent to
another affirmation made by One whom unbelievers must admit to have been
the greatest man who ever lived, Jesus Christ Himself. Those with whom I
am reasoning allow that the discourses in the Synoptic Gospels are
accounts of His real utterances. In them He directly affirms that He
performed miracles.

Even those against whose opinions I am arguing, will concede that the
characters of Christ and St. Paul stand at the greatest height of moral
elevation. If there are any other persons whose utterances have been
handed down to us, who have deliberately made this affirmation, their
numbers are unquestionably few. Certainly no other thoroughly great and
elevated character has done so. This is a remarkable fact and well worthy
of consideration. While many of the Fathers have affirmed that miracles
were performed by others, not one of them has affirmed that he has wrought
any himself. The supernaturalism of the New Testament differs, as we have
seen, from all other alleged kinds of supernatural occurrences. It differs
moreover in this respect, that one of the persons through whose agency
these miracles are declared to have been performed, has made a deliberate
affirmation that he wrought them; and that the founder of Christianity, in
recorded utterances which are admitted to be genuine, has likewise
asserted that miracles were wrought by Him.

It follows, therefore, that our summary rejection of all the current
supernaturalism which has been alleged to have taken place at various
periods of history, is quite consistent with our accepting as true the
series of supernatural events recorded in the New Testament, which are
distinguished by characteristics of an entirely different order.





