CHAPTER X


The boat touched the shore, and we all left it as quickly as possible,
and scattered about in the meadows, like birds suddenly set free from
the cage. The reverend gentleman took a hasty leave of us, and strode
off toward the castle. The students repaired to a retired dingle,
where they could shake out their cloaks, wash themselves in the brook,
and shave one another. The new lady's-maid, with her canary-bird and
her bundle, set out for an inn, the hostess of which I had recommended
to her as an excellent person, and where she wished to change her
gown before she presented herself at the castle. As for me--the lovely
evening shone right into my heart, and as soon as all the rest had
disappeared I lost not a moment, but ran directly to the castle
garden.

My toll-house, which I had to pass, was standing on the old spot, the
tall trees in the castle garden were still murmuring above it, and
a yellow-hammer, which always used to sing at sunset in the
chestnut-tree before the window, was singing again, as if nothing in
the world had happened since I last heard him. The toll-house window
was open; I ran up to it with delight and looked in. There was no one
there, but the clock in the corner was ticking away, the writing-table
stood by the window, and the long pipe in the corner as of old. I
could not resist the temptation to climb through the window and seat
myself at the writing-table before the big account-book. Again the
sunlight shone golden-green through the chestnut boughs upon the
figures in the open book, again the bees buzzed in and out of the
window, and again the yellow-hammer's jocund song sounded from the
tree outside. All at once the door of the sleeping-room opened, and a
tall, old Receiver, in my dotted dressing-gown, entered! He paused on
the threshold upon beholding me thus unexpectedly, took his spectacles
quickly from his nose, and looked angrily at me. Not a little alarmed,
I started up, and, without saying a word, ran out of the door and
through the little garden, where I was very nearly tripped up by the
confounded potato-vines which the old Receiver had planted, evidently
by the Porter's advice, in place of my flowers. I heard him as he
came out of the door scolding after me, but I was mounted atop of the
garden wall, and gazing with a throbbing heart over into the castle
garden.

Ah, how the birds were flitting and twittering and singing! The lawns
and paths were deserted, but the gilded tree-tops nodded a welcome to
me in the evening breeze, and on one side, up through masses of dark
green foliage, gleamed the Danube.

Suddenly I heard sung from the depths of the garden--

  "When the yearning heart is stilled
    As in dreams, the forest sighing,
    To the listening earth replying,
  Tells the thoughts with which 'twas filled,
    Days long vanished, soothing sorrow--
    From the Past a light they borrow,
  And the heart is gently thrilled."

The voice and the song were strangely familiar, as if I had heard
them somewhere in a dream. I pondered over and over again, and at last
exclaimed, joyfully, "It is Herr Guido!" swinging myself quickly down
into the garden. It was the selfsame song that he had sung on the
balcony of the Italian inn on that summer evening when I saw him for
the last time.

He went on singing, while I bounded over beds and hedges toward the
singer. But as I emerged from between the last clumps of rose-bushes I
suddenly paused spellbound. For on the green opening beside the little
lake with the swans, clearly illuminated in the ruddy evening light,
on a stone bench sat the lovely Lady fair in a beautiful dress, with
a wreath of red and white roses on her dark-brown hair, and downcast
eyes, tracing lines on the green-sward with her riding-whip, just as
she had sat in the skiff when I was forced to sing her the song of
the Lady fair. Opposite her sat another young lady, with brown curls
clustering on a plump white neck, which was turned toward me; she was
singing to a guitar, while the swans glided in wide circles on the
placid water. All at once the Lady fair raised her eyes, and gave
a scream on perceiving me. The other lady turned round toward me so
quickly that her brown curls fell over her eyes, and when she saw me
she burst into a fit of immoderate laughter, sprang up from the bench,
and clapped her hands thrice. Whereupon a crowd of little girls in
white short skirts with red and green sashes came running out from
among the rose-bushes, so that I could not imagine where they had all
been hiding. They had long garlands of flowers in their hands, and
quickly formed a circle around me, dancing and singing--

  "With ribbons gay of violets blue
    The bridal wreath we bring thee;
  The merry dance we lead thee to,
    And wedding songs we sing thee.
  Ribbons gay of violets blue,
    Bridal wreath we bring thee."

It was from _Der Freischütz_. I recognized some of the little singers;
they were girls from the village. I pinched their cheeks, and tried to
escape from the circle, but the roguish little things would not let
me out. I could not tell what to make of it all, and stood there
perfectly dazed.

Suddenly a young man in hunting costume emerged from the shrubbery.
Hardly could I believe my eyes--it was merry Herr Lionardo! The little
girls now opened the circle and stood as if spell-bound on one foot,
with the other stretched out, holding the garlands of flowers high
above their heads with both hands. Herr Lionardo took the hand of the
lovely Lady fair, who had risen, and had only now and then glanced at
me, and, leading her up to me, said--

"Love--on this point philosophers are unanimous--is one of the most
courageous qualities of the human heart; it shatters with a glance of
fire the barriers of rank and station, the world is too confined for
it, eternity too brief. It is, so to speak, a poet's robe, in which
every dreamer enwraps himself once in this cold world, for a journey
to Arcadia. And the farther two parted lovers wander from each other,
the more beautiful and the richer are the folds of the robe, the more
surprising and wonderful is its extent, as it sweeps behind them, so
that one really cannot travel far without treading on a couple of such
trains. O beloved Herr Receiver, and bridegroom! although wrapped in
this robe you reached the shores of the Tiber, the little hands of
your present bride held you fast by the extreme end of the train, and,
however you might fiddle and fume, you had to return within the magic
influence of her beautiful eyes. And since this is so, you two dear,
foolish people, wrap yourselves both up in this blessed robe, forget
all the rest of the world, love like turtle-doves, and be happy!"

Hardly had Herr Lionardo finished his speech when the other young lady
who had sung the song approached me, crowned me with a wreath of fresh
myrtle, and as she was arranging it, with her face close to my own,
archly sang--

  "And therefore do I crown thee,
  And therefore love thee so,
  Because thou oft hast moved me
  With the music of thy bow."

As she retreated a step or two, "Do you remember the robbers who shook
you down from the tree at night?" said she, courtesying, and giving
me so arch a glance that my heart danced within me. Thereupon, without
waiting for an answer, she walked around me. "Actually just the
same, without any Italian affectations! But no! look, look at his fat
pockets!" she exclaimed suddenly to the lovely Lady fair. "Violin,
linen, razor, portmanteau, everything stuffed together!" She turned
me all round as she spoke, and could scarcely say anything more for
laughing. Meanwhile, the lovely Lady fair was quite silent, and could
hardly raise her eyes for shame and confusion. It seemed to me that
at heart she was provoked at all this jesting talk. At last her eyes
filled with tears, and she hid her face on the breast of the other
lady, who first looked at her in surprise and then clasped her
affectionately in her arms.

I stood there as in a dream. The longer I looked at the strange lady
the more clearly I recognized her; she was in truth no other than--the
young painter, Herr Guido!

I did not know what to say, and was just about to question her, when
Herr Lionardo approached her and spoke in an undertone. "Does he not
know yet?" I heard him ask. She shook her head. He reflected for a
moment, and then said aloud, "No, no, he must be told all immediately,
or there will be all kinds of fresh gossip and confusion."

"Herr Receiver," he said, turning to me, "we have not much time at
present, but do me the favor to exhaust your stock of surprise
and wonder as quickly as possible, that you may not hereafter, by
questions, and wonderings, and head-shakings among the people about
here, revive old tales and give rise to new rumors and suspicions." So
saying, he drew me aside into the shrubbery, while Fräulein Guido made
passes in the air with the Lady fair's riding-whip, and shook all her
curls down over her eyes, which did not prevent my seeing that she was
blushing violently.

"Well, then," said Herr Lionardo, "Fräulein Flora, who is trying
to look as if she neither knew nor had heard anything of the whole
affair, had exchanged hearts in a hurry with somebody. Whereupon
somebody else appears, and with sound of trumpet and drum offers her
his heart, and wishes for hers in return. But her heart is already
bestowed upon somebody, and somebody's heart is in her possession, and
that somebody will neither take back his heart nor give back hers. All
the world exclaims--but have you never read any romances?" I shook my
head. "Well, then, at all events you have taken part in one. In brief,
there was such a jumble with the hearts that somebody--that is, I--had
to take matters in hand. I sprang on my horse one warm summer night,
mounted Fräulein Flora as the painter Guido on another, and rode
toward the south, to conceal her in one of my lonely castles in Italy
till all the fuss about the hearts should be over. But on the way we
were tracked, and from the balcony of the Italian inn before which you
kept, sound asleep, such admirable watch, Flora suddenly caught sight
of our pursuer." "The crooked Signor, then--" "Was a spy. Therefore we
secretly took to the woods, and left you to travel post alone over
our prearranged route. That misled our pursuer, and my people in the
mountain castle besides; they were hourly expecting the disguised
Flora, and with more zeal than penetration they took you for the
Fräulein. Even here at the castle they thought Flora was among the
mountains; they inquired about her, they wrote to her--did you not
receive a note?" In an instant I produced the note from my pocket:
"This letter, then--?" "Is addressed to me," said Fräulein Flora,
who up to this point had seemed to be paying no attention to our
conversation. She snatched the note from me, read it, and put it
into her bosom. "And now," said Herr Lionardo, "we must hasten to the
castle, where they are all waiting for us. In conclusion, as a matter
of course, and as is fitting for every well-bred romance--discovery,
repentance, reconciliation; but we are all happy together once more,
and the wedding takes place the day after tomorrow!"

Just as he had finished, a terrific racket of drums and trumpets,
horns and clarionets, was suddenly heard in the shrubbery; guns were
fired at intervals, loud cheers were given, the little girls began to
dance again, and heads appeared among the bushes as if they had grown
out of the earth. I ran and leaped about in all the hurry and scurry,
but as it began to grow dark I only gradually recognized all the
faces. The old gardener beat the drum, the students from Prague in
their cloaks played away, and among them the Porter fingered his
bassoon like mad. When I suddenly perceived him thus unexpectedly, I
ran to him and embraced him with enthusiasm, causing him to play quite
out of time. "Upon my word, if he should travel to the ends of
the earth he would never be anything but a goose!" he said to the
students, and then went on blowing away at his bassoon in a fury.

Meanwhile, the lovely Lady fair had privately escaped from all the
noise and confusion, and had fled like a startled fawn far into the
depths of the garden.

I caught sight of her in time and hurried after her. In their zeal
the musicians never noticed us; after a while they thought that we had
decamped to the castle, and then the entire band took up the line of
march in that direction.

We, however, almost at the same moment reached a summer-house on the
borders of the garden, whence through the open window there was a
view of the wide, deep valley. The sun had long since set behind the
mountains, a rosy haze glimmered in the warm fading twilight, through
which the murmur of the Danube ascended clearer and clearer the
stiller grew the air. I looked long at the lovely Countess, who stood
before me heated with her flight and so close that I could almost hear
her heart beat. Now that I was alone with her I could find no words to
speak, so great was my awe of her. At last I took heart of grace, and
clasped in mine one of her little white hands--and in one moment her
head lay on my breast and my arms were around her.

In an instant she extricated herself and turned to the window to cool
her glowing cheeks in the evening air. "Ah," I cried, "my heart is
full to bursting, but it all seems like a dream to me!" "And to me
too," said the lovely Lady fair. "When, last summer," she went on
after a while, "I came back with the Countess from Rome where we
fortunately found Fräulein Flora, and had brought her back with us but
could hear nothing of you either there or here, I never thought all
this would come to pass. It was only at noon today that Jocky, the
good, brisk fellow, came breathless into the court-yard and brought
the news that you had come by the mail-boat." Then she laughed quietly
to herself. "Do you remember," she said, "that time when I came out on
the balcony? It was just such an evening as this, and there was music
in the garden." "And he is really dead?" I asked hastily. "Whom do
you mean?" replied the Lady fair, looking at me in surprise. "Your
ladyship's husband," said I, "who was with you on the balcony." She
flushed crimson. "What strange fancies you have in your head!" she
exclaimed. "That was the Countess's son, who had just returned from
his travels, and, since it happened to be my birthday, he led me out
on the balcony with him that I might have a share of the cheers. Was
that why you ran away?" "Good heavens, yes!" I cried, striking my
forehead with my hand. She shook her head and laughed merrily.

I was so happy there beside her while she went on chatting so
confidingly, that I could have sat listening until morning. I found in
my pocket a handful of almonds which I had brought with me from Italy.
She took some, and we sat and cracked them and gazed abroad over the
quiet country. "Do you see that little white villa," she said after a
while, "gleaming over there in the moonlight? The Count has given us
that, with its garden and vineyard; there is where we are to live. He
found out long ago that we cared for each other, and he is very fond
of you, for if he had not had you with them when he was running
off with Fräulein Flora they would both have been caught before the
Countess had become reconciled to him, and everything would have been
spoiled." "Good heavens! fairest, sweetest Countess," I cried out,
"my head is fairly spinning with all this unexpected and amazing
information; are you talking of Herr Lionardo?" "Yes, yes," she
replied; "that is what he called himself in Italy; he owns all that
property over there, and he is going to marry our Countess's daughter,
the lovely Flora. But why do you call me Countess?" I stared at her.
"I am no Countess," she went on. "Our Countess took me into the castle
and had me educated under her care when my uncle, the Porter, brought
me here a poor little orphan child."

Ah, what a stone fell from my heart at these words! "God bless the
Porter," I said in an ecstasy, "for being our uncle! I always set
great store by him." "And he would be very fond of you," she replied,
"if you would only comport yourself with more dignity, as he expresses
it. You must dress with greater elegance." "Oh," I exclaimed,
enchanted, "an English dress-coat, straw hat, long trousers, and
spurs! And as soon as we're married we will take a trip to Italy--to
Rome--where lovely fountains are playing, and we'll take with us the
Prague students, and the Porter!" She smiled quietly, and gave me a
happy glance, while the music echoed in the distance, and rockets flew
up from the castle above the garden in the quiet night, and the Danube
kept murmuring on, and everything, everything was delightful!




ADALBERT VON CHAMISSO

       *       *       *       *       *

  THE CASTLE OF BONCOURT[37] (1827)


  I dream of the days of my childhood,
    And shake my silvery head.
  How haunt ye my brain, O visions,
    Methought ye forgotten and dead!


  From the shades of the forest uprises
    A castle so lofty and great;
  Well know I the battlements, towers,
    The arching stone-bridge, and the gate.

  The lions look down from the scutcheon
    On me with familiar face;
  I greet the old friends of my boyhood,
    And speed through the courtyard space.

  There lies the Sphinx by the fountain;
    The fig-tree's foliage gleams;
  'Twas there, behind yon windows,
    I dreamt the first of my dreams.

  I tread the aisle of the chapel,
    And search for my fathers' graves--
  Behold them! And there from the pillars
    Hang down the old armor and glaives.

  Not yet can I read the inscription;
    A veil hath enveloped my sight,
  What though through the painted windows
    Glows brightly the sunbeam's light.
  Thus gleams, O hall of my fathers,
    Thy image so bright in my mind,
  From the earth now vanished, the ploughshare
    Leaves of thee no vestige behind.

  Be fruitful, lov'd soil, I will bless thee,
    While anguish o'er-cloudeth my brow;
  Threefold will I bless him, whoever
    May guide o'er thy bosom the plough.

  But I will up, up, and be doing;
    My lyre I'll take in my hand;
  O'er the wide, wide earth will I wander,
    And sing from land to land.

[Illustration: ADALBERT VON CHAMISSO]

       *       *       *       *       *

  THE LION'S BRIDE[38]


  With myrtle bedecked and in bridal array,
  Comes the keeper's fair daughter, as blooming as May.
  She enters the cage of the lion; he lies
  Calm and still at her feet and looks up in her eyes.

  The terrible beast, of whom men are afraid,
  Lies peaceful and tame at the feet of the maid,
  While she, in her tender adorable grace,
  Is stroking his head as the tears stain her face.

  "In the days that are gone, we were playmates so true;
  Like brother and sister we played, I and you.
  Our love was still constant in joy or in pain--
  But alas for the days that will ne'er come again!

  "You learned to toss proudly your glorious head,
  And roar, as you tossed it, a warning of dread;
  I grew from a babe to a woman--you see,
  No longer a light-hearted child I can be.

  "Oh, would that those days had had never an end,
  My splendid strong playmate, my noble old friend!
  But soon I must go, so my parents decree,
  Away with a stranger--no more am I free.

  "A man has beheld me, and fancied me fair;
  He has asked for my hand--and the wreath's in my hair!
  Dear faithful old comrade, my girlhood is dead;
  And my sight is bedimmed with the tears I have shed.

  "Do you know what I mean? Ah, your look is a sign!
  I have made up my mind, and you need not repine.
  But yonder he comes who must lead me away--
  So I'll give the last kiss to my playmate today!"

  As the last fond farewell with reluctance she took,
  The huge frame so trembled the bars even shook;
  But when, drawing near a strange man he espied,
  A sudden alarm seized the heart of the bride.

  The lion stands guard by the door of the cage--
  He is lashing his tail, he is roaring with rage.
  With threats, with entreaties she bids him to cease,
  But in vain--in his might he denies her release.

  Without are confusion and cries of despair
  "Bring a gun!" shouts the bridegroom; "our one hope is there!
  I will snatch her away from his horrible claws * * *"
  But the lion defies him with foam-dripping jaws.

  The girl makes a last frenzied dash for the door--
  But his past love the beast seems to measure no more;
  The sweet slender body goes down 'neath his might,
  All bleeding and lifeless, a pitiful sight.

  Then, as if he knew well what a crime he had wrought,
  He throws himself down by her, caring for naught;
  He lies all unheeding what dangers remain,
  Till the bullet avenging speeds swift through his brain.

       *       *       *       *       *

  WOMAN'S LOVE AND LIFE[39] (1830)


  1

  Since mine eyes beheld him,
    Blind I seem to be;
  Wheresoe'er they wander,
    Him alone they see.
  Round me glows his image,
    In a waking dream;
  From the darkness rising
    Brighter doth it beam.

  All is drear and gloomy
    That around me lies;
  Now my sister's pastimes
    I no longer prize;
  In my chamber rather
    Would I weep alone;
  Since my eyes beheld him
    Blind methinks I'm grown.


  2

  He, the best of all, the noblest,
    O how gentle! O how kind
  Lips of sweetness, eyes of brightness,
    Steadfast courage, lucid mind.

  As on high, in Heaven's azure,
    Bright and splendid, beams yon star,
  Thus he in my heaven beameth,
    Bright and splendid, high and far.

  Wander, wander where thou listest,
    I will gaze but on thy beam;
  With humility behold it,
    In a sad, yet blissful dream.

  Hear me not thy bliss imploring
    With prayer's silent eloquence?
  Know me now, a lowly maiden,
    Star of proud magnificence!

  May thy choice be rendered happy
    By the worthiest alone!
  And I'll call a thousand blessings
    Down on her exalted throne.

  Then I'll weep with tears of gladness;
    Happy, happy then my lot!
  If my heart should rive asunder,
    Break, O heart--it matters not!


  3

  Is it true? O, I cannot believe it;
    A dream doth my senses enthrall;
  O can he have made me so happy,
    And exalted me thus above all?

  Meseems as if he had spoken,
    "I am thine, ever faithful and true!"
  Meseems--O still am I dreaming--
    It cannot, it cannot be true!

  O fain would I, rocked on his bosom,
    In the sleep of eternity lie;
  That death were indeed the most blissful,
    In the rapture of weeping to die.


  4

  Help me, ye sisters,
  Kindly to deck me,
    Me, O the happy one, aid me this morn!
  Let the light finger
  Twine the sweet myrtle's
    Blossoming garland, my brow to adorn!

  As on the bosom
  Of my loved one,
    Wrapt in the bliss of contentment, I lay,
  He, with soft longing
  In his heart thrilling,
    Ever impatiently sighed for today.

  Aid me, ye sisters,
  Aid me to banish
    Foolish anxieties, timid and coy,
  That I with sparkling
  Eye may receive him,
    Him the bright fountain of rapture and joy.

  Do I behold thee,
  Thee, my beloved one,
    Dost thou, O sun, shed thy beam upon me?
  Let me devoutly,
  Let me in meekness
    Bend to my lord and my master the knee!

  Strew, ye fair sisters,
  Flowers before him,
    Cast budding roses around at his feet!
  Joyfully quitting
  Now your bright circle,
    You, lovely sisters, with sadness I greet.


  5

  Dearest friend, thou lookest
    On me with surprise,
  Dost thou wonder wherefore
    Tears suffuse mine eyes?
  Let the dewy pearl-drops
    Like rare gems appear,
  Trembling, bright with gladness,
    In their crystal sphere.

  With what anxious raptures
    Doth my bosom swell!
  O had I but language
    What I feel to tell!
  Come and hide thy face, love,
    Here upon my breast,
  In thine ear I'll whisper
    Why I am so blest.

  Now the tears thou knowest
    Which my joy confessed,
  Thou shalt not behold them,
    Thou, my dearest, best;
  Linger on my bosom,
    Feel its throbbing tide;
  Let me press thee firmly,
    Firmly, to my side!

  Here may rest the cradle,
    Close my couch beside,
  Where it may in silence
    My sweet vision hide;
  Soon will come the morning,
    When my dream will wake,
  And thy smiling image
    Will to life awake.


  6

  Upon my heart, and upon my breast,
  Thou joy of all joys, my sweetest, best!
  Bliss, thou art love; O love, thou art bliss--
  I've said it, and seal it here with a kiss.
  I thought no happiness mine could exceed,
  But now I am happy, O happy indeed!
  She only, who to her bosom hath pressed
  The babe who drinketh life at her breast;
  'Tis only a mother the joys can know
  Of love, and real happiness here below.
  How I pity man, whose bosom reveals
  No joys like that which a mother feels!
  Thou look'st on me, with a smile on thy brow,
  Thou dear, dear little angel, thou!
  Upon my heart, and upon my breast,
  Thou joy of all joys, my sweetest, best!


  7

  Ah, thy first wound hast thou inflicted now!
    But oh! how deep!
  Hard-hearted, cruel man, now sleepest thou
    Death's long, long sleep.

  I gaze upon the void in silent grief,
    The world is drear;
  I've lived and loved, but now the verdant leaf
    Of life is sere.

  I will retire within my soul's recess,
    The veil shall fall;
  I'll live with thee and my past happiness,
    O thou, my all!

[Illustration: _Permission Franz Hanfstaengl, New York_ MORITZ VON
SCHWIND THE WEDDING JOURNEY]

       *       *       *       *       *

  THE WOMEN OF WEINSBERG[40] (1831)


  It was the good King Konrad with all his army lay
  Before the town of Weinsberg full many a weary day;
  The Guelph at last was vanquished, but still the town held out;
  The bold and fearless burghers they fought with courage stout.

  But then came hunger, hunger! That was a grievous guest;
  They went to ask for favor, but anger met their quest.
  "Through you the dust hath bitten full many a worthy knight,
  And if your gates you open, the sword shall you requite!"

  Then came the women, praying: "Let be as thou hast said,
  Yet give us women quarter, for we no blood have shed!"
  At sight of these poor wretches the hero's anger failed,
  And soft compassion entered and in his heart prevailed.

  "The women shall be pardoned, and each with her shall bear
  As much as she can carry of her most precious ware;
  The women with their burdens unhindered forth shall go,
  Such is our royal judgment--we swear it shall be so!"

  At early dawn next morning, ere yet the east was bright,
  The soldiers saw advancing a strange and wondrous sight;
  The gate swung slowly open, and from the vanquished town
  Forth swayed a long procession of women weighted down;

  For perched upon her shoulders each did her husband bear--
  That was the thing most precious of all her household ware.
  "We'll stop the treacherous women!" cried all with one intent;
  The chancellor he shouted: "This was not what we meant!"

  But when they told King Konrad, the good King laughed aloud;
  "If this was not our meaning, they've made it so," he vowed,
  "A promise is a promise, our loyal word was pledge;
  It stands, and no Lord Chancellor may quibble or map hedge."

  Thus was the royal scutcheon kept free from stain or blot!
  The story has descended from days now half forgot;
  'Twas eleven hundred and forty this happened, as I've heard,
  The flower of German princes thought shame to break his word.

       *       *       *       *       *

  THE CRUCIFIX[41] (1830)


  In hopeless contemplation of his work
    The master stood, a frown upon his brow,
  Where shame and self-contempt appeared to lurk.

  With all his art and knowledge he had now
    Portrayed the suffering Savior's image there--
  Yet could the marble not with life endow.

  He could not make it live, for all his care--
    What is not flesh knows not to suffer pain;
  Cold stone can none but stone's cold likeness bear.

  Beauty and due proportion though it gain,
    The chisel's marks will never disappear
  And nature wake, howe'er his prayer may strain:

  "Ah, turn not from me, Nature! Thou most dear,
    I long to raise thee to undreamed of height--
  But thou art dumb * * * a sorry bungler's here!"

  There entered then a loyal neophyte,
    Who looked with reverence on the master's art
  And stood beside him, flushed with new delight.

  To the same muse was given his young heart,
    The selfsame quest of beauty filled his days--
  Yet must his soul with endless failure smart.

  To him the master: "Scorn is in thy praise!
    If so this dull, dead stone thy mind can fill,
  To death, not life, thou must have turned thy face!"

  Then boldly spoke the youth: "Admire I will!
    What though thy Christ for death's repose prepare
  So strangely silent and so strangely still,

  Yet at a great thing greatly wrought I stare,
    And long to match the marvel that I see;
  I see what is, and thou what should be there."

  The master looked upon him silently,
    His youthful strength, his limbs so straight and fine,
  And deemed there were no model such as he.

  "A prey thou find'st me to despair malign--
    How get from lifeless marble life and pain?
  Here nature fails, whose secrets else are mine.

  To seek a hireling's aid were all in vain;
    And sought I thine, though partner of my aims,
  Naught but a cold refusal should I gain."

  "Nay," said the youth, "in art's and God's high names,
    I would perform unwearied, unafraid,
  Whate'er of me thy need transcendent claims."

  He spoke, and straight his beauty disarrayed,
    Showing the fair flower of his youthful grace
  Within the guarded workshop's sacred shade.

  Entranced the master gazed, and could not chase
    A thought that rose unbidden to his mind--
  If pain upon that form its lines could trace!

  "The help thou off'rest if I am to find,
    Thee too the cross must raise above the ground * * *"
  Willing, the youth his gracious limbs resigned.

  With tight cords first his prey the sculptor bound,
    Then brought the hammer and the piercing nails--
  A martyr's death must close the destined round!

  The first sharp nail went through, and piteous wails
    Burst from the youth, but no compassion woke;
  An eager eye the look of suffering hails.

  With restless haste redoubled, stroke on stroke
    Achieved the bleeding model that he sought.
  Calmly to work he went; no word he spoke.

  A hideous joy upon his features wrought--
    For nature now each shade of anguished woe
  Upon the expiring lovely form had taught.

  Unceasing worked his hands, above, below;
    His heart was to all human feeling dead--
  But in the marble * * * life began to show!

  Whether in prayer the sufferer bowed his head,
    Or in despairing torment gnashed his teeth,
  Still on the sculptor's flying fingers sped.

  The pale, exhausted victim, nigh to death,
    As night the third long day of agony
  Is ending, murmurs with his last weak breath,

  "My God, my God, hast Thou forsaken me?"
    The eyes, half raised, sink down, the writhings cease,
  The awful crime has reached its term--and see

  There, in its glory, stands a masterpiece!


  II

  "My God, my God, hast Thou forsaken me?"
    At midnight in the minster rang the wail;
  Who could have raised it? 'Twas a mystery.

  At the high altar, where its radiance pale
    A tiny lamp threw out, a form was found
  To move, whence came the faltering accents frail.

  And then it dashed itself upon the ground,
    Its forehead 'gainst the stones, and wildly wept;
  The vaulted roof reëchoed with the sound.

  Long was the vigil that dim figure kept
    That seemed by tears so strangely comforted;
  None dared its tottering footsteps intercept.

  At last the night's mysterious hours were sped
    And day returned; but all was silent now,
  And with the dawn the ghostly form had fled.

  The faithful came before their God to bow,
    The canons to the altar reverently.
  There had been placed above it, none knew how,

  A crucifix whose like none e'er did see;
    Thus, only thus had God His strength put by,
  Thus had He looked upon the blood-stained tree.

  To Him whose suffering brought salvation nigh
    Came sinners for release, a contrite band--
  And "Christ have mercy!" was the general cry.

  It seems not like the work of mortal hand hand--
    Who can have set the godlike image there?
  Who in the dead of night such offering planned?

  It is the master's, who with anxious care
    Has waited, from the public gaze withdrawn,
  To show the utmost that his art can dare.

  What shall we bring him for his ease foregone
    And brain o'ertasked? Gold is but sorry meed--
  His head a crown of laurel shall put on!--

  So soon a great procession was decreed
    Of priests and laymen; marching in the van
  Went one who bore the recompense agreed.

  They came where dwelt the venerated man--
    And found an open door, an empty house;
  They called his name, and naught but echoes ran.

  The drums and cymbals all the neighbors rouse
    And trumpets shrill their joy; but none appears
  To see the grateful people pay their vows.

  He is not there, the grave assemblage hears;
    A neighbor, waking early, like a ghost
  Saw him steal forth, a prey to nameless fears.

  From room to room they went--their pains were lost;
    In all the desolate chambers there was none
  That answered them, or came to play the host.

  They called aloud, let in the cheerful sun
    Through opened windows--in their anxious round
  Into the workshop entrance last they won * * *,

  Ah, speak not of the horror there they found!


  III

  They have brought a captive home, and raging told
    That he is stained with foulest blasphemy,
  Mocks their false prophet with his insults bold.

  It is the pilgrim we were used to see
    For penance roaming 'neath our palm-trees' shade,
  Till at the Holy Grave he might be free.

  Will he, when comes the hangman, unafraid
    A Christian's courage show in face of wrong?
  God strengthen him on whom he cries for aid!

  Ah yes--though life is sweet, his will is strong,
    His mind made up; he yields him to their hands,
  Content to shed his blood in torment long.

  Nay, look not yonder, where the savage bands
    And merciless prepare a hideous deed--
  Perchance a like dread fate before us stands!

  He comes, a victim led * * * yet will he bleed?
    I see a wondrous radiance in his face,
  As though unlooked-for safety were decreed!

  Can he have bought it * * *? No! they stride apace
    Toward the blood-stained spot--it is to be.
  The martyr's palm his confident brow shall grace.

  "Weep not! No tears of pity flowed from me
    When to the cross the tender youth I bound--
  My heart of stone ignored his misery."

  So, hounded by remorse, the sinner found
    The path of expiation, firmly trod,
  Cain's brand upon him, all the dreadful round.

  "Thou who didst die for me, all-pitying God,
    Wilt Thou vouchsafe my tortures now an end?
  I have not asked deliverance from Thy rod,

  Nor hoped Thou shouldst to me Thy mercy lend.
    'Tis life, not death, that is so hard to bear * * *
  Into Thy hands my spirit I commend!"

  So when the ruffian captors seized him there
    And bound him to the cross, he calmly smiled;
  'Twas they that watched whose brows were lined with care.

  And as his limbs were torn with anguish wild,
    And he was lifted 'mid the throng on high,
  White peace came down upon his soul defiled.

  In passionate prayer the faithful watched him die
    That stood beneath the cross; his lips were still--
  His suffering was one long atoning cry.

  The day passed, and the night; with dauntless will
    He yet found strength his torment dire to face.
  The third day's sun sank down behind the hill;

  And as the glory of its parting rays
    He strove with glazing eye once more to see,
  With his last breath he cried in joyful praise

  "My God, my God, Thou hast not forsaken me!"

       *       *       *       *       *

  THE OLD SINGER[42] (1833)


  Once a strange old man went singing,
    Words of scornful admonition
  To the streets and markets bringing:
      "In the wilds a voice am I!
    Slowly, slowly seek your mission;
  Naught in haste, or rash endeavor--
  From the work yet ceasing never
      Slow and sure the hour draws nigh!

  Time's great branches cease from shaking;
    Blind are ye, devoid of reason,
  If its fruit ye would be taking
      When its blossoms have but burst.
    Let it ripen to its season,
  Wind within its branches bluster--
  Of itself the fruits 'twill muster
      For whose juices ripe ye thirst."

  Wild, excited crowds are scorning
    In their guise the gray old singer,
  Thus reward him for his warning,
      Ape his songs in mockery:
    "Shall we let the fellow linger
  To disgrace us? Stone him, beat him,
  With the scorn he merits treat him--
      Let the world his folly see!"

  So the strange old man went singing,
    To the halls of royal splendor
  Scornful admonition bringing:
      "In the wilds a voice am I!
    Doubt not, dream not of surrender:
  Forward, forward, never ceasing,
  Strength in spite of all increasing--
      Slow and sure the hour draws nigh!

  With the stream, before the breezes
    Wouldst thou show thy strength, then teach it
  Both to conquer as it pleases--
      Both are weaker than the grave.
    Choose thy port, and steer to reach it!
  Threatening rocks? The rudder's master;
  Turning back is sure disaster,
      And its end beneath the wave."

  One was seen to blench in terror,
    Flushing first, then sudden paling:
  "Who gave entrance--whose the error
      Let this madman pass along?
    All things show his wits are failing--
  Shall he daze our people's senses?
  Prison him with sure defenses,
      Silence hold his silly song!"

  But the strange old man went singing
    Where within the tower they bound him--
  Calm and clear his answer ringing:
      "In the wilds a voice am I!
    Though the people's hate surround him,
  Must the prophet still endeavor,
  From his mission ceasing never--
      Slow and sure the hour draws nigh!"

       *       *       *       *       *

  THE OLD WASHERWOMAN[43] (1833)


  Among yon lines her hands have laden,
    A laundress with white hair appears,
  Alert as many a youthful maiden,
    Spite of her five-and-seventy years.
  Bravely she won those white hairs, still
    Eating the bread hard toil obtain'd her,
  And laboring truly to fulfil
    The duties to which God ordain'd her.

  Once she was young and full of gladness;
    She loved and hoped, was woo'd and won;
  Then came the matron's cares, the sadness
    No loving heart on earth may shun.
  Three babes she bore her mate; she pray'd
    Beside his sick-bed; he was taken;
  She saw him in the churchyard laid,
    Yet kept her faith and hope unshaken.

  The task her little ones of feeding
    She met unfaltering from that hour;
  She taught them thrift and honest breeding,
    Her virtues were their worldly dower.
  To seek employment, one by one,
    Forth with her blessing they departed,
  And she was in the world alone,
    Alone and old, but still high-hearted.

  With frugal forethought, self-denying,
    She gather'd coin and flax she bought,
  And many a night her spindle plying,
    Good store of fine-spun thread she wrought.
  The thread was fashion'd in the loom;
    She brought it home, and calmly seated
  To work, with not a thought of gloom,
    Her decent grave-clothes she completed.

  She looks on them with fond elation,
    They are her wealth, her treasure rare,
  Her age's pride and consolation,
    Hoarded with all a miser's care.
  She dons the sark each Sabbath day,
    To hear the Word that faileth never;
  Well-pleased she lays it then away,
    Till she shall sleep in it forever.

  Would that my spirit witness bore me
    That, like this woman, I had done
  The work my Master put before me,
    Duly from morn till set of sun.
  Would that life's cup had been by me
    Quaff'd in such wise and happy measure,
  And that I too might finally
    Look on my shroud with such meek pleasure.




THE WONDERFUL HISTORY OF PETER SCHLEMIHL (1814)

By ADALBERT VON CHAMISSO TRANSLATED BY FREDERIC H. HEDGE

