CHAPTER XV

The Journey to Vienna


After this last adventure they lived quietly and happily at the
castle. The knight more and more clearly perceived the heavenly
goodness of his wife, which had been so nobly exhibited by her pursuit
and her rescue in the Black Valley, where Kühleborn's power again
commenced; Undine herself felt that peace and security which is never
lacking to a mind so long as it is distinctly conscious of being on
the right path, and, besides, in the newly-awakened love and esteem of
her husband many a gleam of hope and joy shone upon her. Bertalda, on
the other hand, showed herself grateful, humble, and timid, without
regarding her conduct as anything meritorious. Whenever Huldbrand or
Undine were about to give her any explanation regarding the covering
of the fountain or the adventure in the Black Valley, she would
earnestly entreat them to spare her the recital, as she felt too much
shame at the recollection of the fountain and too much fear at the
remembrance of the Black Valley. She learned therefore nothing further
of either; and for what end was such knowledge necessary? Peace and
joy had visibly taken up their abode at Castle Ringstetten. They felt
secure on this point, and imagined that life could now produce nothing
but pleasant flowers and fruits.

In this happy condition of things winter had come and passed away, and
spring with its fresh green shoots and its blue sky was gladdening
the joyous inmates of the castle. Spring was in harmony with them,
and they with spring; what wonder then that its storks and swallows
inspired them also with a desire to travel? One day when they were
taking a pleasant walk to one of the sources of the Danube, Huldbrand
spoke of the magnificence of the noble river, how it widened as it
flowed through countries fertilized by its waters, how the charming
city of Vienna shone forth on its banks, and how with every step of
its course it increased in power and loveliness. "It must be glorious
to go down the river as far as Vienna!" exclaimed Bertalda, but
immediately relapsing into her present modesty and humility she paused
and blushed deeply.

This touched Undine deeply, and with the liveliest desire to give
pleasure to her friend she asked, "What hinders us from starting on
the little voyage?" Bertalda exhibited the greatest delight, and both
she and Undine began at once to picture in the brightest colors the
tour of the Danube. Huldbrand also gladly agreed to the prospect; only
he once whispered anxiously in Undine's ear, "But Kühleborn becomes
possessed of his power again out there!"

"Let him come," she replied with a smile; "I shall be there, and he
ventures upon none of his mischief before me." The last impediment was
thus removed; they prepared for the journey, and soon after set out
upon it with fresh spirits and the brightest hopes.

But wonder not, O man, if events always turn out different from what
we have intended! That malicious power, lurking for our destruction,
gladly lulls its chosen victim to sleep with sweet songs and golden
fairy tales; while on the other hand the rescuing messenger from
Heaven often knocks sharply and alarmingly at our door.

During the first few days of their voyage down the Danube they were
extremely happy. Everything grew more and more beautiful, as they
sailed further and further down the proudly flowing stream. But in a
region, otherwise so pleasant, and in the enjoyment of which they had
promised themselves the purest delight, the ungovernable Kühleborn
began, undisguisedly, to exhibit his power, which started again at
this point. This was indeed manifested in mere teasing tricks, for
Undine often rebuked the agitated waves or the contrary winds, and
then the violence of the enemy would be immediately submissive; but
again the attacks would be renewed, and again Undine's reproofs
would become necessary, so that the pleasure of the little party was
completely destroyed. The boatmen too were continually whispering to
one another in dismay and looking with distrust at the three strangers
whose servants even began more and more to forebode something uncanny
and to watch their masters with suspicious glances. Huldbrand often
said to himself, "This comes from like not being linked with like,
from a man uniting himself with a mermaid!" Excusing himself, as we
all love to do, he would often think indeed as he said this, "I did
not really know that she was a sea-maiden. Mine is the misfortune that
every step I take is disturbed and haunted by the wild caprices of her
race; but mine is not the guilt." By such thoughts as these he felt
himself in some measure strengthened, but, on the other hand, he felt
increasing ill-humor and almost animosity toward Undine. He would look
at her with an expression of anger, the meaning of which the poor
wife understood well. Wearied with this exhibition of displeasure and
exhausted by the constant effort to frustrate Kühleborn's artifices,
she sank one evening into a deep slumber, rocked soothingly by the
softly gliding bark.

Scarcely, however, had she closed her eyes when every one in the
vessel imagined he saw, in whatever direction he turned, a most
horrible human head; it rose out of the waves, not like that of a
person swimming, but perfectly perpendicular as if invisibly supported
upright on the watery surface and floating along in the same course
with the bark. Each wanted to point out to the other the cause of his
alarm, but each found the same expression of horror depicted on the
face of his neighbor, only that his hands and eyes were directed to a
different point where the monster, half laughing and half threatening,
rose before him. When, however, they all wished to make one another
understand what each saw, and all were crying out, "Look there--!
No--there!" the horrible heads all appeared simultaneously to their
view, and the whole river around the vessel swarmed with the most
hideous apparitions. The universal cry raised at the sight awoke
Undine. As she opened her eyes the wild crowd of distorted visages
disappeared. But Huldbrand was indignant at such unsightly jugglery.
He would have burst forth in uncontrolled imprecations had not Undine
said to him with a humble manner and a softly imploring tone, "For
God's sake, my husband, we are on the water; do not be angry with me
now." The knight was silent, and sat down absorbed in reverie. Undine
whispered in his ear, "Would it not be better, my love, if we gave up
this foolish journey and returned to Castle Ringstetten in peace?"

But Huldbrand murmured moodily, "So I must be a prisoner in my own
castle and be able to breathe only so long as the fountain is closed!
I would your mad kindred--" Undine lovingly pressed her fair hand upon
his lips. He paused, pondering in silence over much that Undine had
before said to him.

Bertalda had meanwhile given herself up to a variety of strange
thoughts. She knew a good deal of Undine's origin, and yet not the
whole, and the fearful Kühleborn especially had remained to her a
terrible but wholly unrevealed mystery. She had indeed never even
heard his name. Musing on these strange things, she unclasped,
scarcely conscious of the act; a gold necklace, which Huldbrand had
lately purchased for her of a traveling trader; half dreamingly she
drew it along the surface of the water, enjoying the light glimmer
it cast upon the evening-tinted stream. Suddenly a huge hand was
stretched out of the Danube, seizing the necklace and vanishing with
it beneath the waters. Bertalda screamed aloud, and a scornful laugh
resounded from the depths of the stream. The knight could now restrain
his anger no longer. Starting up, he inveighed against the river; he
cursed all who ventured to intrude upon his family and his life, and
challenged them, be they spirits or sirens, to show themselves before
his avenging sword.

Bertalda wept meanwhile for her lost ornament, which was so precious
to her, and her tears added fuel to the flame of the knight's anger,
while Undine held her hand over the side of the vessel, dipping it
into the water, softly murmuring to herself, and only now and then
interrupting her strange mysterious whisper, as she entreated her
husband, "My dearly loved one, do not scold me here; reprove others
if you will, but not me here. You know why!" And indeed, he restrained
the words of anger that were trembling on his tongue.

Presently in her wet hand which she had been holding under the waves
she brought up a beautiful coral necklace of so much brilliancy that
the eyes of all were dazzled by it. "Take this," said she, holding it
out kindly to Bertalda; "I have ordered this to be brought for you as
a compensation, and don't be grieved any more, my poor child."

But the knight sprang between them. He tore the beautiful ornament
from Undine's hand, hurled it again into the river, exclaiming in
passionate rage, "Have you then still a connection with them? In the
name of all the witches, remain among them with your presents and
leave us mortals in peace, you sorceress!" Poor Undine gazed at him
with fixed but tearful eyes, her hand still stretched out as when she
had offered her beautiful present so lovingly to Bertalda. She then
began to weep more and more violently, like a dear innocent child,
bitterly afflicted. At last, wearied out, she said: "Alas, sweet
friend, alas! farewell! They shall do you no harm; only remain true,
so that I may be able to keep them from you. I must, alas, go away; I
must go hence at this early stage of life. Oh woe, woe! What have you
done! Oh woe, woe!"

She vanished over the side of the vessel. Whether she plunged into the
stream or flowed away with it, they knew not; her disappearance was
like both and neither. Soon, however, she was completely lost sight of
in the Danube; only a few little waves kept whispering, as if sobbing,
round the boat, and they almost seemed to be saying: "Oh woe, woe! Oh,
remain true! Oh, woe!"

Huldbrand lay on the deck of the vessel, bathed in hot tears, and a
deep swoon presently cast its veil of forgetfulness over the unhappy
man.




_WILHELM HAUFF_

       *       *       *       *       *

  CAVALRYMAN'S MORNING SONG[47] (1826)


    Crimson morn,
  Shalt thou light me o'er Death's bourn?
  Soon will ring the trumpet's call;
  Then may I be marked to fall,
  I and many a comrade brave!
    Scarce enjoyed,
  Pleasure drops into the void.
  Yesterday on champing stallion;
  Picked today for Death's battalion;
  Couched tomorrow in the grave!

    Ah! how soon
  Fleeth grace and beauty's noon!
  Hast thou pride in cheeks aglow,
  Whereon cream and carmine flow?
  Ah! the loveliest rose turns sere!
    Therefore still
  I respond to God's high will.
  To the last stern fight I'll fit me;
  If to Death I must submit me,
  Dies a dauntless cavalier!

       *       *       *       *       *

  THE SENTINEL[48] (1827)


  Lonely at night my watch I keep,
  While all the world is hush'd in sleep.
  Then tow'rd my home my thoughts will rove;
  I think upon my distant love.

[Illustration: WILHELM HAUFF]

  When to the wars I march'd away,
  My hat she deck'd with ribbons gay;
  She fondly press'd me to her heart,
  And wept to think that we must part.

[Illustration: THE SENTINAL]

  Truly she loves me, I am sure,
  So ev'ry hardship I endure;
  My heart beats warm, though cold's the night;
  Her image makes the darkness bright.

  Now by the twinkling taper's gleam,
  Her bed she seeks, of me to dream,
  But ere she sleeps she kneels to pray
  For one who loves her far away.

  For me those tears thou needst not shed;
  No danger fills my heart with dread;
  The pow'rs who dwell in heav'n above
  Are ever watchful o'er thy love.

  The bell peals forth from yon watch-tower;
  The guard it changes at this hour.
  Sleep well! sleep well! my heart's with thee;
  And in your dreams remember me.




FRIEDRICH RÜCKERT

       *       *       *       *       *

  BARBAROSSA[49] (Between 1814 and 1817)


  The ancient Barbarossa,
    Friedrich, the Kaiser great,
  Within the castle-cavern
    Sits in enchanted state.

  He did not die; but ever
    Waits in the chamber deep,
  Where hidden under the castle
    He sat himself to sleep.

  The splendor of the Empire
    He took with him away,
  And back to earth will bring it
    When dawns the promised day.

  The chair is ivory purest
    Whereof he makes his bed;
  The table is of marble
    Whereon he props his head.

  His beard, not flax, but burning
    With fierce and fiery glow,
  Right through the marble table
    Beneath his chair does grow.

  He nods in dreams and winketh
    With dull, half-open eyes,
  And once a page he beckons beckons--
    A page that standeth by.

[Illustration: FRIEDRICH RÜCKERT]

  He bids the boy in slumber
    "O dwarf, go up this hour,
  And see if still the ravens
    Are flying round the tower;

  And if the ancient ravens
    Still wheel above us here,
  Then must I sleep enchanted
    For many a hundred year."

       *       *       *       *       *

  FROM MY CHILDHOOD DAYS[50] (1817, 1818)


  From my childhood days, from my childhood days,
    Rings an old song's plaintive tone--
  Oh, how long the ways, oh, how long the ways
    I since have gone!

  What the swallow sang, what the swallow sang,
    In spring or in autumn warm--
  Do its echoes hang, do its echoes hang
    About the farm?

  "When I went away, when I went away,
    Full coffers and chests were there;
  When I came today, when I came today,
    All, all was bare!"

  Childish lips so wise, childish lips so wise,
    With a lore as rich as gold,
  Knowing all birds' cries, knowing all birds' cries,
    Like the sage of old!

  Ah, the dear old place--ah, the dear old place * * *
    May its sweet consoling gleam
  Shine upon my face, shine upon my face,
    Once in a dream!

  When I went away, when I went away,
    Full of joy the world lay there;
  When I came today, when I came today,
    All, all was bare.

  Still the swallows come, still the swallows come,
    And the empty chest is filled--
  But this longing dumb, but this longing dumb
    Shall ne'er be stilled.

  Nay, no swallow brings, nay, no swallow brings
    Thee again where thou wast before--
  Though the swallow sings, though the swallow sings,
    Still as of yore.

  "When I went away, when I went away,
    Full coffers and chests were there;
  When I came today, when I came today,
    All, all was bare!"

       *       *       *       *       *

  THE SPRING OF LOVE[51] (1821)


  Dearest, thy discourses steal
    From my bosom's deep, my heart
  How can I from thee conceal
    My delight, my sorrow's smart?

  Dearest, when I hear thy lyre
    From its chains my soul is free.
  To the holy angel quire
    From the earth, O let us flee!

[Illustration: MEMORIES OF YOUTH]

  Dearest, how thy music's charms
    Waft me dancing through the sky!
  Let me round thee clasp my arms,
    Lest in glory I should die!

  Dearest, sunny wreaths I wear,
    Twined around me by thy lay.
  For thy garlands, rich and rare,
    O how can I thank thee? Say!

  Like the angels I would be
    Without mortal frame,
  Whose sweet converse is like thought,
    Sounding with acclaim;

  Or like flowers in the dale;
    Like the stars that glow,
  Whose love-song's a beam, whose words
    Like sweet odors flow;

  Or like to the breeze of morn,
    Waving round its rose,
  In love's dallying caress
    Melting as it blows.

  But the love-lorn nightingale
    Melteth not away;
  She doth but with longing tones
    Chant her plaintive lay.

  I am, too, a nightingale,
    Songless though I sing;
  'Tis my pen that speaks, though ne'er
    In the ear it ring.

  Beaming images of thought
    Doth the pen portray;
  But without thy gentle smile
    Lifeless e'er are they.

  As thy look falls on the leaf,
    It begins to sing,
  And the prize that's due to love
    In her ear doth ring.

  Like a Memmon's statue now
    Every letter seems,
  Which in music wakes, when kissed
    By the morning's beams.

       *       *       *       *       *

  "HE CAME TO MEET ME"[52] (1821)


  He came to meet me
    In rain and thunder;
  My heart 'gan beating
    In timid wonder.
  Could I guess whither
  Thenceforth together
    Our path should run, so long asunder?

  He came to meet me
    In rain and thunder,
  With guile to cheat me--
    My heart to plunder.
  Was't mine he captured?
  Or his I raptured?
    Half-way both met, in bliss and wonder!

  He came to meet me
    In rain and thunder;
  Spring-blessings greet me
    Spring-blossoms under.
  What though he leave me?
  No partings grieve me--
    No path can lead our hearts asunder.

       *       *       *       *       *
  THE INVITATION[53] (1821)


  Thou, thou art rest
    And peace of soul--
  Thou woundst the breast
    And makst it whole.

  To thee I vow
    'Mid joy or pain
  My heart, where thou
    Mayst aye remain.

  Then enter free,
    And bar the door
  To all but thee
    Forevermore.

  All other woes
    Thy charms shall lull;
  Of sweet repose
    This heart be full.

  My worshipping eyes
    Thy presence bright
  Shall still suffice,
    Their only light.

       *       *       *       *       *

  MURMUR NOT[54]


  Murmur not and say thou art in fetters holden,
    Murmur not that thou earth's heavy yoke must bear.
  Say not that a prison is this world so golden--
    'Tis thy murmurs only set its harsh walls there.

  Question not how shall this riddle find its reading;
    It will solve itself full soon without thine aid.
  Say not love hath turned his back, and left thee bleeding--
    Whom hath love deserted, hast thou heard it said?

  If death tries to fright thee, fear not beyond measure;
    He will flee from those who boldly face his frown.
  Hunt not thou the fleeting deer of worldly pleasure--
    Lion it will turn, and hunt the hunter down.
  Chain thyself no longer, heart, to any treasure;
    Then thou shalt not say thou art into fetters thrown.

       *       *       *       *       *

  A PARABLE[55] (1822)


  In Syria walked a man one day
  And led a camel on the way.
  A sudden wildness seized the beast,
  And as they strove its rage increased.
  So fearsome grew its savagery
  That for his life the man must flee.
  And as he ran, he spied a cave
  That one last chance of safety gave.
  He heard the snorting beast behind
  Come nearer--with distracted mind
  Leaped where the cooling fountain sprang,
  Yet not to fall, but catch and hang;
  By lucky hap a bramble wild
  Grew where the o'erhanging rocks were piled.
  He saved himself by this alone,
  And did his hapless state bemoan.
  He looked above, and there was yet
  Too close the furious camel's threat
  That still of fearful rage was full.
  He dropped his eyes toward the pool,
  And saw within the shadows dim
  A dragon's jaws agape for him--
  A still more fierce and dangerous foe
  If he should slip and fall below.
  So, hanging midway of the two,
  He spied a cause of terror new:
  Where to the rock's deep crevice clung
  The slender root on which he swung,
  A little pair of mice he spied,
  A black and white one side by side--
  First one and then the other saw
  The slender stem alternate gnaw.
  They gnawed and bit with ceaseless toil,
  And from the roots they tossed the soil.
  As down it ran in trickling stream,
  The dragon's eyes shot forth a gleam
  Of hungry expectation, gazed
  Where o'er him still the man was raised,
  To see how soon the bush would fall,
  The burden that it bore, and all.
  That man in utmost fear and dread
  Surrounded, threatened, hard bested,
  In such a state of dire suspense
  Looked vainly round for some defense.
  And as he cast his bloodshot eye
  First here, then there, saw hanging nigh
  A branch with berries ripe and red;
  Then longing mastered all his dread;
  No more the camel's rage he saw,
  Nor yet the lurking dragon's maw,
  Nor malice of the gnawing mice,
  When once the berries caught his eyes.
  The furious beast might rage above,
  The dragon watch his every move,
  The mice gnaw on--naught heeded he,
  But seized the berries greedily--
  In pleasing of his appetite
  The furious beast forgotten quite.

  You ask, "What man could ever yet,
  So foolish, all his fears forget?"
  Then know, my friend, that man are you--
  And see the meaning plain to view.
  The dragon in the pool beneath
  Sets forth the yawning jaws of death;
  The beast from which you helpless flee
  Is life and all its misery.
  There you must hang 'twixt life and death
  While in this world you draw your breath.
  The mice, whose pitiless gnawing teeth
  Will let you to the pool beneath
  Fall down, a hopeless castaway,
  Are but the change of night and day.
  The black one gnaws concealed from sight
  Till comes again the morning light;
  From dawn until the eve is gray,
  Ceaseless the white one gnaws away.
  And, 'midst this dreadful choice of ills,
  Pleasure of sense your spirit fills
  Till you forget the terrors grim
  That wait to tear you limb from limb,
  The gnawing mice of day and night,
  And pay no heed to aught in sight
  Except to fill your mouth with fruit
  That in the grave-clefts has its root.

       *       *       *       *       *

  EVENING SONG[56] (1823)


  I stood on the mountain summit,
    At the hour when the sun did set;
  I mark'd how it hung o'er the woodland
    The evening's golden net.

  And, with the dew descending,
    A peace on the earth there fell--
  And nature lay hushed in quiet,
    At the voice of the evening bell.

  I said, "O heart, consider
    What silence all things keep,
  And with each child of the meadow
    Prepare thyself to sleep!

  "For every flower is closing
    In silence its little eye;
  And every wave in the brooklet
    More softly murmureth by.

  "The weary caterpillar
    Hath nestled beneath the weeds;
  All wet with dew now slumbers
    The dragon-fly in the reeds.

  "The golden beetle hath laid him
    In a rose-leaf cradle to rock;
  Now went to their nightly shelter
    The shepherd and his flock.

  "The lark from on high is seeking
    In the moistened grass her nest;
  The hart and the hind have laid them
    In their woodland haunt to rest.

  "And whoso owneth a cottage
    To slumber hath laid him down;
  And he that roams among strangers
    In dreams shall behold his own."

  And now doth a yearning seize me,
    At this hour of peace and love,
  That I cannot reach the dwelling,
    The home that is mine, above.

       *       *       *       *       *

  CHIDHER[57] (1824)


  Chidher, the ever youthful, told:
    I passed a city, bright to see;
  A man was culling fruits of gold,
    I asked him how old this town might be.
  He answered, culling as before
  "This town stood ever in days of yore,
  And will stand on forevermore!"
    Five hundred years from yonder day
    I passed again the selfsame way,

  And of the town I found no trace;
    A shepherd blew on a reed instead;
  His herd was grazing on the place.
    "How long," I asked, "is the city dead?"
  He answered, blowing as before
  "The new crop grows the old one o'er,
  This was my pasture evermore!"
    Five hundred years from yonder day
    I passed again the selfsame way.

  A sea I found, the tide was full,
    A sailor emptied nets with cheer;
  And when he rested from his pull,
    I asked how long that sea was here.
  Then laughed he with a hearty roar
  "As long as waves have washed this shore
  They fished here ever in days of yore."
    Five hundred years from yonder day
    I passed again the selfsame way.

  I found a forest settlement,
    And o'er his axe, a tree to fell,
  I saw a man in labor bent.
    How old this wood I bade him tell.
  "'Tis everlasting, long before
  I lived it stood in days of yore,"
  He quoth; "and shall grow evermore."
    Five hundred years from yonder day
    I passed again the selfsame way.

  I saw a town; the market-square
    Was swarming with a noisy throng.
  "How long," I asked, "has this town been there?
    Where are wood and sea and shepherd's song?"
  They cried, nor heard among the roar
  "This town was ever so before,
  And so will live forevermore!"
    "Five hundred years from yonder day
    I want to pass the selfsame way."

       *       *       *       *       *

  AT FORTY YEARS[58] (1832)


  When for forty years we've climbed the rugged mountain,
    We stop and backward gaze;
  Yonder still we see our childhood's peaceful fountain,
    And youth exulting strays.

  One more glance behind, and then, new strength acquiring,
    Staff grasped, no longer stay;
  See, a further slope, a long one, still aspiring
    Ere downward turns the way!

  Take a brave long breath and toward the summit hie thee--
    The goal shall draw thee on;
  When thou think'st it least, the destined end is nigh thee--
    Sudden, the journey's done!

       *       *       *       *       *

  BEFORE THE DOORS[59]


  I went to knock at Riches' door;
  They threw me a farthing the threshold o'er.

  To the door of Love did I then repair--
  But fifteen others already were there.

  To Honor's castle I took my flight--
  They opened to none but to belted knight.

  The house of Labor I sought to win--
  But I heard a wailing sound within.

  To the house of Content I sought the way--
  But none could tell me where it lay.

  One quiet house I yet could name,
  Where last of all, I'll admittance claim;

  Many the guests that have knocked before,
  But still--in the grave--there's room for more.

[Illustration: AUGUST GRAF VON PLATEN-HALLERMUND]





_AUGUST VON PLATEN-HALLERMUND_

       *       *       *       *       *

  THE PILGRIM BEFORE ST. JUST'S[60] (1819)


  'Tis night, and tempests whistle o'er the moor;
  Oh, Spanish father, ope the door!
  Deny me not the little boon I crave,
  Thine order's vesture, and a grave!
  Grant me a cell within thy convent-shrine--
  Half of this world, and more, was mine;
  The head that to the tonsure now stoops down
  Was circled once by many a crown;
  The shoulders fretted now with shirt of hair
  Did once the imperial ermine wear.
  Now am I as the dead, e'er death is come,
  And sink in ruins like old Rome.

       *       *       *       *       *

  THE GRAVE OF ALARIC[61] (1820)


  On Busento's grassy banks a muffled chorus echoes nightly,
  While the swirling eddies answer and the wavelets ripple lightly.

  Up and down the river, shades of Gothic warriors watch are keeping,
  For they mourn their people's hero, Alaric, with sobs of weeping.

  All too soon and far from home and kindred here to rest they laid him,
  While in youthful beauty still his flowing golden curls arrayed him.

  And along the river's bank a thousand hands with eager striving
  Labored long, another channel for Busento's tide contriving.

  Then a cavern deep they hollowed in the river-bed depleted,
  Placed therein the dead king, clad in proof, upon his charger seated.

  O'er him and his proud array the earth they filled, and covered loosely,
  So that on their hero's grave the water-plants would grow profusely.

  And again the course they altered of Busento's waters troubled;
  In its ancient channel rushed the current--foamed, and hissed, and bubbled.

  And the Goths in chorus chanted: "Hero, sleep! Tiny fame immortal
  Roman greed shall ne'er insult, nor break thy tomb's most sacred portal!"

  Thus they sang, and paeans sounded high above the fight's commotion;
  Onward roll, Busento's waves, and bear them to the farthest ocean!

       *       *       *       *       *

  REMORSE[62] (1820)


  How I started up in the night, in the night,
    Drawn on without rest or reprieval!
  The streets with their watchmen were lost to my sight,
        As I wandered so light
        In the night, in the night,
    Through the gate with the arch medieval.

[Illustration: THE MORNING HOUR]

  The mill-brook rushed from its rocky height;
    I leaned o'er the bridge in my yearning;
  Deep under me watched I the waves in their flight,
        As they glided so light
        In the night, in the night,
    Yet backward not one was returning.

  O'erhead were revolving, so countless and bright,
    The stars in melodious existence;
  And with them the moon, more serenely bedight;
        They sparkled so light
        In the night, in the night,
    Through the magical, measureless distance.

  And upward I gazed in the night, in the night,
    And again on the waves in their fleeting;
  Ah woe! thou hast wasted thy days in delight;
        Now silence, thou light,
        In the night, in the night,
    The remorse in thy heart that is beating.

       *       *       *       *       *

  WOULD I WERE FREE AS ARE MY DREAMS[63] (1822)


  Would I were free as are my dreams,
    Sequestered from the garish crowd
  To glide by banks of quiet streams
    Cooled by the shadow-drifting cloud!

  Free to shake off this weary weight
    Of human sin, and rest instead
  On nature's heart inviolate--
    All summer singing o'er my head!

  There would I never disembark,
    Nay, only graze the flowery shore
  To pluck a rose beneath the lark,
    Then go my liquid way once more,

  And watch, far off, the drowsy lines
    Of herded cattle crop and pass,
  The vintagers among the vines,
    The mowers in the dewy grass;

  And nothing would I drink or eat
    Save heaven's clear sunlight and the spring
  Of earth's own welling waters sweet,
    That never make the pulses sting.

       *       *       *       *       *

  SONNET[64] (1822)


  Oh, he whose pain means life, whose life means pain,
    May feel again what I have felt before;
    Who has beheld his bliss above him soar
  And, when he sought it, fly away again;
  Who in a labyrinth has tried in vain,
    When he has lost his way, to find a door;
    Whom love has singled out for nothing more
  Than with despondency his soul to bane;
  Who begs each lightning for a deadly stroke,
    Each stream to drown the heart that cannot heal
  From all the cruel stabs by which it broke;
    Who does begrudge the dead their beds like steel
  Where they are safe from love's beguiling yoke--
    He knows me quite, and feels what I must feel.




FOOTNOTES:


[Footnote 1: From Addresses on Religion (Discourse IV).]

[Footnote 2: This refers to the second book, which takes the form of a
dialogue between the inquirer and a Spirit.]

[Footnote 3: An allusion to the second book.]

[Footnote 4: The audience gathered in the building of the Royal
Academy at Berlin.--ED.]

[Footnote 5: J.G. Hamann. _Hellenistische Briefe_ I, 189.]

[Footnote 6: Goethe. _Werke_ (1840) xxx., 352. Mr. Ward's translation
of Goethe's "Essays on Art," p. 76.]

[Footnote 7: Selections translated by Margarete Münsterberg.]

[Footnote 8: Permission George Bell & Son, London.]

[Footnote 9: Translator: H.W. Dulcken. Permission Ward, Lock & Company,
Ltd., London.]

[Footnote 10: Translator: Margarete Münsterberg.]

[Footnote 11: Translator: C.T. Brooks.]

[Footnote 12: Translator: Herman Montagu Donner.]

[Footnote 13: Translator: C.T. Brooks.]

[Footnote 14: Translator: Margarete Münsterberg.]

[Footnote 15: Translator: Margarete Münsterberg.]

[Footnote 16: Translator: Margarete Münsterberg.]

[Footnote 17: Translator: C.T. Brooks.]

[Footnote 18: Translator: W.W. Skeat.]

[Footnote 19: Translator: Henry W. Longfellow.]

[Footnote 20: Translator: C.T. Brooks.]

[Footnote 21: Translator: Percy Mackaye.]

[Footnote 22: Translator: Alfred Baskerville.]

[Footnote 23: Translator: W.W. Skeat. From _Representative German
Poems_, Henry Holt & Co., New York.]

[Footnote 24: Translator: W.W. Skeat. From _Representative German
Poems_, Henry Holt & Co., New York.]

[Footnote 25: Translator: H.W. Dulcken. Permission Ward, Lock &
Company, Ltd., London.]

[Footnote 26: Translator: W.H. Furness.]

[Footnote 27: Translator: Margarete Münsterberg]

[Footnote 28: Translator: Margarete Münsterberg.]

[Footnote 29: Translator: A.I. du P. Coleman.]

[Footnote 30: Translator: Margarete Münsterberg.]

[Footnote 31: Translator: C.T. Brooks.]

[Footnote 32: Translator: W.H. Furness.]

[Footnote 33: Translator: Henry W. Longfellow. From _Representative
German Poems_, Henry Holt & Co., New York.]

[Footnote 34: Translator: Kate Freiligrath-Kroeker. Permission William
Heinemann, London.]

[Footnote 35: Translator: C.G. Leland. From _Representative German
Poems_, Henry Holt & Co., New York.]

[Footnote 36: Translator: Alfred Baskerville.]

[Footnote 37: Translator: Alfred Baskerville.]

[Footnote 38: Translator: A.I. du P. Coleman]

[Footnote 39: Translator: Alfred Baskerville]

[Footnote 40: Translators: Bayard Taylor and Lilian Bayard Taylor
Kiliani. From _A Sheaf of Poems_, permission R.G. Badger, Boston.]

[Footnote 41: Translator: A.I. du P. Coleman.]

[Footnote 42: Translator: A.I. du P. Coleman.]

[Footnote 43: From the _Foreign Quarterly_]

[Footnote 44: Chapters 2, 6, 8.]

[Footnote 45: An imaginary musical enthusiast of whom Hoffmann has
written much; under the fiery, sensitive, wayward character of this
crazy bandmaster, presenting, it would seem, a shadowy likeness
of himself. The _Kreisleriana_ occupy a large space among these
_Fantasy-pieces_; and Johannes Kreisler is the main figure in _Kater
Murr_, Hoffmann's favorite but unfinished work. In the third and last
volume, Kreisler was to end, not in composure and illumination, as the
critics would have required, but in utter madness: a sketch of a wild,
flail-like scarecrow, dancing vehemently and blowing soap-bubbles, and
which had been intended to front the last title-page, was found
among Hoffmann's papers, and engraved and published in his _Life and
Remains_.]

[Footnote 46: Permission Bernhard Tauchnitz, Leipzig.]

[Footnote 47: Translator: Herman Montagu Donner.]

[Footnote 48: Translator: John Oxenford. From _Representative German
Poems_, Henry Holt & Co., New York.]

[Footnote 49: Translators: Bayard Taylor and Lilian Bayard Taylor
Kiliani.

From _A Sheaf of Poems_, permission R.G. Badger, Boston.]

[Footnote 50: Translator: A.I. du P. Coleman.

This is a working-over of an old popular song in imitation of the
swallow's cry, found in various dialect-forms in different parts of
Germany. The most widespread version is:

  Wenn ich wegzieh', wenn ich wegzieh',
    Sind Kisten and Kasten voll!'
  Wann ich wiederkomm', wann ich wiederkomm',
    Ist alles verzehrt.]

[Footnote 51: Translator: Alfred Baskerville.]

[Footnote 52: Translator: Bayard Taylor. From _Representative German
Poems_, Henry Holt & Co., New York.]

[Footnote 53: Translator: A.I. du P. Coleman.]

[Footnote 54: Translator: A.I. du P. Coleman.]

[Footnote 55: Translator: A.I. du P. Coleman.]

[Footnote 56: Translator: H.W. Dulcken. From _Book of German Songs_,
permission Ward, Lock & Company, Ltd., London.]

[Footnote 57: Translator: Margarete Münsterberg.]

[Footnote 58: Translator: A.I. du P. Coleman.]

[Footnote 59: Translator: H.W. Dulcken. Permission Ward, Lock & Company,
Ltd., London.]

[Footnote 60: Translator: Lord Lindsay. From _Ballads, Songs and
Poems_.]

[Footnote 61: Translators: Bayard Taylor and Lilian Bayard Taylor
Kiliani. From _A Sheaf of Poems_, permission R.G. Badger, Boston.]

[Footnote 62: Translator: Henry W. Longfellow. From _Representative
German Poems_, Henry Holt & Co., New York.]

[Footnote 63: Translator: Percy MacKaye.]

[Footnote 64: Translator: Margarete Münsterberg.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The German Classics of the Nineteenth
and Twentieth Centuries: Masterpieces of German Literature Translated into English, Volume 5., by Various

