
TOM SWIFT AND HIS GIANT CANNON

or

The Longest Shots on Record


by

Victor Appleton



CONTENTS

CHAPTER

      I  ON A LIVE WIRE
     II  "WE'LL TAKE A CHANCE!"
    III  PLANNING A BIG GUN
     IV  KOKU'S BRAVE ACT
      V  OFF TO SANDY HOOK
     VI  TESTING THE WALLER GUN
    VII  THE IMPOSSIBLE OCCURS
   VIII  A BIG PROBLEM
     IX  THE NEW POWDER
      X  SOMETHING WRONG
     XI  FAILURE AND SUCCESS
    XII  A POWERFUL BLAST
   XIII  CASTING THE CANNON
    XIV  A NIGHT INTRUDER
     XV  READY FOR THE TEST
    XVI  A WARNING
   XVII  THE BURSTING DAM
  XVIII  THE DOPED POWDER
    XIX  BLOWING DOWN THE BARRIER
     XX  THE GOVERNMENT ACCEPTS
    XXI  OFF FOR PANAMA
   XXII  AT GATUN LOCKS
  XXIII  NEWS OF THE MINE
   XXIV  THE LONGEST SHOT
    XXV  THE LONG-LOST MINE




TOM SWIFT AND HIS GIANT CANNON



CHAPTER I

ON A LIVE WIRE


"Now, see here, Mr. Swift, you may think it all a sort of dream, and
imagine that I don't know what I'm talking about; but I do! If you'll
consent to finance this expedition to the extent of, say, ten thousand
dollars, I'll practically guarantee to give you back five times that
sum."

"I don't know, Alec, I don't know," slowly responded the aged inventor.
"I've heard those stories before, and in my experience nothing ever
came of them. Buried treasure, and lost vessels filled with gold, are
all well and good, but hunting for an opal mine on some little-heard-of
island goes them one better."

"Then you don't feel like backing me up in this matter, Mr. Swift?"

"No, Alec, I can't say I do. Why, just stop and think for a minute.
You're asking me to put ten thousand dollars into a company, to fit out
an expedition to go to this island--somewhere down near Panama, you say
it is--and try to locate the lost mine from which, some centuries ago,
opals and other precious stones came. It doesn't seem reasonable."

"But I'm sure I can find the mine, Mr. Swift!" persisted Alec Peterson,
who was almost as elderly a man as the one he addressed. "I have the
old documents that tell how rich the mine once was, how the old Mexican
rulers used to get their opals from it, and how all trace of it was
lost in the last century. I have all the landmarks down pat, and I'm
sure I can find it. Come on now, take a chance. Put in this ten
thousand dollars. I can manage the rest. You'll get back more than five
times your investment."

"If you find the mine--yes."

"I tell you I will find it! Come now, Mr. Swift," and the visitor's
voice was very pleading, "you and your son Tom have made a fortune for
yourselves out of your different inventions.  Be generous, and lend me
this ten thousand dollars."

Mr. Swift shook his head.

"I've heard you talk the same way before, Alec," he replied.  "None of
your schemes ever amounted to anything. You've been a fortune-hunter
all your life, nearly; and what have you gotten out of it? Just a bare
living."

"That's right, Mr. Swift, but I've had bad luck. I did find the lost
gold mine I went after some years ago, you remember."

"Yes, only to lose it because the missing heirs turned up, and took it
away from you. You could have made more at straight mining in the time
you spent on that scheme."

"Yes, I suppose I could; but this is going to be a success--I feel it
in my bones."

"That's what you say, every time, Alec. No, I don't believe I want to
go into this thing."

"Oh, come--do! For the sake of old times. Don't you recall how you and
I used to prospect together out in the gold country; how we shared our
failures and successes?"

"Yes, I remember that, Alec. Mighty few successes we had, though, in
those days."

"But now you've struck it rich, pardner," went on the pleader.  "Help
me out in this scheme--do!"

"No, Alec. I'd rather give you three or four thousand dollars for
yourself, if you'd settle down to some steady work, instead of chasing
all over the country after visionary fortunes. You're getting too old
to do that."

"Well, it's a fact I'm no longer young. But I'm afraid I'm too old to
settle down. You can't teach an old dog new tricks, pardner. This is my
life, and I'll have to live it until I pass out. Well, if you won't,
you won't, I suppose. By the way, where is Tom? I'd like to see him
before I go back. He's a mighty fine boy."

"That's what he is!" broke in a new voice. "Bless my overshoes, but he
is a smart lad! A wonderful lad, that's what! Why, bless my necktie,
there isn't anything he can't invent; from a button-hook to a
battleship! Wonderful boy--that's what!"

"I guess Tom's ears would burn if he could hear your praises, Mr.
Damon," laughed Mr. Swift. "Don't spoil him."

"Spoil Tom Swift? You couldn't do it in a hundred years!" cried Mr.
Damon, enthusiastically. "Bless my topknot! Not in a thousand
years--no, sir!"

"But where is he?" asked Mr. Peterson, who was evidently unused to the
extravagant manner of Mr. Damon.

"There he goes now!" exclaimed the gentleman who frequently blessed
himself, some article of his apparel, or some other object. "There he
goes now, flying over the house in that Humming Bird airship of his. He
said he was going to try out a new magneto he'd invented, and it seems
to be working all right. He said he wasn't going to take much of a
flight, and I guess he'll soon be back. Look at him! Isn't he a great
one, though!"

"He certainly is," agreed Mr. Peterson, as he and Mr. Swift went to the
window, from which Mr. Damon had caught a glimpse of the youthful
Inventor in his airship. "A great lad. I wish he could come on this
mine-hunt with me, though I'd never consent to go in an airship.
They're too risky for an old man like me."

"They're as safe as a church when Tom Swift runs them!" declared Mr.
Damon. "I'm no boy, but I'd go anywhere with Tom."

"I'm afraid you wouldn't get Tom to go with you, Alec," went on Mr.
Swift, as he resumed his chair, the young inventor in his airship
having passed out of sight. "He's busy on some new invention now, I
believe. I think I heard him say something about a new rifle."

"Cannon it was, Mr. Swift," said Mr. Damon. "Tom has an idea that he
can make the biggest cannon in the world; but it's only an idea yet."

"Well, then I guess there's no hope of my interesting him in my opal
mine," said the fortune-hunter, with rather a disappointed smile. "Nor
you either, Mr. Swift."

"No, Alec, I'm afraid not. As I said, I'd rather give you outright
three or four thousand dollars, if you wanted it, provided that you
used it for your own personal needs, and promised not to sink it in
some visionary search."

Mr. Peterson shook his head.

"I'm not actually in want," he said, "and I couldn't accept a gift of
money, Mr. Swift. This is a straight business proposition."

"Not much straight business in hunting for a mine that's been lost for
over a century," replied the aged inventor, with a glance at Mr. Damon,
who was still at the window, watching for a glimpse of Tom on his
return trip in the air craft.

"If Tom would go, I'd trail along," said the odd man. "We haven't done
anything worth speaking of since he used his great searchlight to
detect the smugglers. But I don't believe he'll go. That mining
proposition sounds good."

"It is good!" cried Mr. Peterson, with fervor, hoping he had found a
new "prospect" in Mr. Damon.

"But not business-good," declared Mr. Swift, and for some time the
three argued the matter, Mr. Swift continuing to shake his head.

Suddenly into the room there ran an aged colored man, much excited.

"Fo' de land sakes!" he cried. "Somebody oughter go out an' help Massa
Tom!"

"Why, what's the matter, Eradicate?" asked Mr. Swift, leaping to his
feet, an example followed by the other two men. "What has happened to
my son?"

"I dunno, Massa Swift, but I looked up jest now, an' dere he be, in dat
air-contraption ob his'n he calls de Hummin' Burd.  He's ketched up
fast on de balloon shed roof, an' dere he's hangin' wif sparks an'
flames a-shootin' outer de airship suffin' scandalous! It's jest
spittin' fire, dat's what it's a-doin', an' ef somebody don't do
suffin' fo' Massa Tom mighty quick, dere ain't gwin t' be any Massa
Tom; now dat's what I'se a-tellin' you!"

"Bless my shoe buttons!" gasped Mr. Damon. "Come on out, everybody!
We've got to help Tom!"

"Yes!" assented Mr. Swift. "Call someone on the telephone! Get a
doctor! Maybe he's shocked! Where's Koku, the giant? Maybe he can help!"

"Now doan't yo' go t' gittin' all excited-laik," objected Eradicate
Sampson, the aged colored man. "Remember yo' all has got a weak heart,
Massa Swift!"

"I know it; but I must save my son. Hurry!"

Mr. Swift ran from the room, followed by Mr. Damon and Mr. Peterson,
while Eradicate trailed after them as fast as his tottering limbs would
carry him, murmuring to himself.

"There he is!" cried Mr. Damon, as he caught sight of the young
inventor in his airship, in a position of peril. Truly it was as
Eradicate had said. Caught on the slope of the roof of his big balloon
shed, Tom Swift was in great danger.

From his airship there shot dazzling sparks, and streamers of green and
violet fire. There was a snapping, cracking sound that could be heard
above the whir of the craft's propellers, for the motor was still
running.

"Oh, Tom! Tom! What is it? What has happened?" cried his father.

"Keep back! Don't come too close!" yelled the young inventor, as he
clung to the seat of the aeroplane, that was tilted at a dangerous
angle. "Keep away!"

"What's the matter?" demanded Mr. Damon. "Bless my pocket comb--what is
it?"

"A live wire!" answered Tom. "I'm caught in a live wire! The trailer
attached to the wireless outfit on my airship is crossed with the wire
from the power plant. There's a short circuit somewhere. Don't come too
close, for it may burn through any second and drop down. Then it will
twist about like a snake!"

"Land ob massy!" cried Eradicate.

"What can we do to help you?" called Mr. Swift. "Shall I run and shut
off the power?" for in the shop where Tom did most of his inventive
work there was a powerful dynamo, and it was on one of the wires
extending from it, that brought current into the house, that the craft
had caught.

"Yes, shut it off if you can!" Tom shouted back. "But be careful. Don't
get shocked! Wow! I got a touch of it myself that time!" and he could
be seen to writhe in his seat.

"Oh, hurry! hurry! Find Koku!" cried Mr. Swift to Mr. Damon, who had
started for the power house on the run.

The sparks and lances of fire seemed to increase around the young
inventor. The airship could be seen to slip slowly down the sloping
roof.

"Land ob massy! He am suah gwine t' fall!" yelled Eradicate.

"Oh, he'll never get that current shut off in time!" murmured Mr.
Swift, as he started after Mr. Damon.

"Wait! I think I have a plan!" called Mr. Peterson. "I think I can save
Tom!"

He did not waste further time in talk, but, running to a nearby shed,
he got a long ladder that he saw standing under it. With this over his
shoulder he retraced his steps to the balloon hangar and placed the
ladder against the side. Then he started to climb up.

"What are you going to do?" yelled Tom, leaning over from his seat to
watch the elderly fortune-hunter.

"I'm going to cut that wire!" was the answer.

"Don't! If you touch it you'll be shocked to death! I may be able to
get out of here. So far I've only had light shocks, but the insulation
is burning out of my magneto, and that will soon stop. When it does I
can't run the motor, and--"

"I'm going to cut that wire!" again shouted Mr. Peterson.

"But you can't, without pliers and rubber gloves!" yelled Tom.  "Keep
away, I tell you!"

The man on the ladder hesitated. Evidently he had not thought of the
necessity of protecting his hands by rubber covering, in order that the
electricity might be made harmless. He backed down to the ground.

"I saw a pair of old gloves in the shed!" he cried. "I'll get
them--they look like rubber."

"They are!" cried Tom, remembering now that he had been putting up a
new wire that day, and had left his rubber gloves there.  "But you
haven't any pliers!" the lad went. "How can you cut wire without them?
There's a pair in the shop, but--"

"Heah dey be! Heah dey be!" cried Eradicate, as he produced a heavy
pair from his pocket. "I--I couldn't find de can-opener fo' Mrs.
Baggert, an' I jest got yo' pliers, Massa Tom. Oh, how glad I is dat I
did. Here's de pincers, Massa Peterson."

He handed them to the fortune-hunter, who came running back with the
rubber gloves. Mr. Damon was no more than half way to the power house,
which was quite a distance from the Swift homestead. Meanwhile Tom's
airship was slipping more and more, and a thick, pungent smoke now
surrounded it, coming from the burning insulation. The sparks and
electrical flames were worse than ever.

"Just a moment now, and I'll have you safe!" cried the fortune-hunter,
as he again mounted the ladder. Luckily the charged wire was near
enough to be reached by going nearly to the top of the ladder.

Holding the pincers in his rubber-gloved hands, the old man quickly
snipped the wire. There was a flash of sparks as the copper conductor
was severed, and then the shower of sparks about Tom's airship ceased.

In another second he had turned on full power, the propellers whizzed
with the quickness of light, and he rose in the air, off the shed roof,
the live wire no longer entangling him. Then he made a short circuit of
the work-shop yard, and came to the ground safely a little distance
from the balloon hangar.

"Saved! Tom is saved!" cried Mr. Swift, who had seen the act of Mr.
Peterson from a distance. "He saved my boy's life!"

"Thanks, Mr. Peterson!" exclaimed the young inventor, as he left his
seat and walked up to the fortune-hunter. "You certainly did me a good
turn then. It was touch and go! I couldn't have stayed there many
seconds longer. Next time I'll know better than to fly with a wireless
trailer over a live conductor," and he held out his hand to Mr.
Peterson.

"I'm glad I could help you, Tom," spoke the other, warmly. "I was
afraid that if you had to wait until they shut off the power it would
be too late."

"It would--it would--er--I feel--I--"

Tom's voice trailed off into a whisper and he swayed on his feet.

"Cotch him!" cried Eradicate. "Cotch him! Massa Tom's hurt!" and only
just in time did Mr. Peterson clutch the young inventor in his arms.
For Tom, white of face, had fallen back in a dead faint.




