CHAPTER XXI

OFF FOR PANAMA


"Well, Tom, it doesn't seem possible; does it, old man?"

"You're right, Ned--in a way. And yet, after all the hard work we've
done, almost anything is possible."

"Hard work! We? Oh, pshaw! You've done most of it, Tom. I only helped
here and there."

"Indeed, and you did more than that. If it hadn't been for you, Mr.
Damon and Koku we'd never have gotten off as soon as we did.  The
government is the limit for doing things, sometimes."

"Bless my timetable! but I agree with you," put in Mr. Damon.  "But at
last we are on the way, in spite of delays."

This conversation took place on board one of Uncle Sam's warships,
which the President had designated to take Tom's giant cannon to the
Panama Canal.

The big gun had been lashed to the deck of the vessel, and was well
protected from the weather. In the hold the parts of the disappearing
carriage, which Tom had at last succeeded in having made, were securely
stowed. In another part of the warship were the big projectiles, some
arranged to be fired as solid shots, and others with a bursting charge.
There was also a good supply of the powerful explosive, and Tom had
taken extraordinary precautions so that it could not be tampered with.
Koku had been detailed as a sort of guard over it, and to relieve him
was a trustworthy sergeant of marines.

"If anyone tries to dope that powder now, and spoil my test at Panama,"
declared Tom, "he'll wish he'd never tried it."

"Especially if Koku gets hold of him," added Ned, grimly.

"But I don't believe there is any danger," went on the young inventor.
"I spoke about what had happened, and the ordnance board took extra
precautions to see that none but men and officers who could be
implicitly trusted had anything to do with this expedition."

"You don't really believe anything like treachery would be attempted;
do you, Tom?"

"I don't know what to say. Certainly I can't see why anyone connected
with Uncle Sam would want to throw cold water on a plan to fortify the
canal, even if an outsider has invented the gun--I mean someone like
myself, not connected with the army or navy."

"If it's anything it's jealousy," declared Ned, "That General Waller--"

"There you go again, Ned. Let's not talk about it. Come on forward and
see what progress we are making."

It must not be supposed that to get the big gun aboard the vessel,
arrange for a new supply of the explosive, and for many of the great
projectiles, had been easy work. It was a task that taxed the skill and
strength of Tom and his friends to the utmost.

There had been wearying delays, especially in the matter of making the
disappearing carriage. At times it seemed as if the required
projectiles would never be finished. The powder, too, gave trouble, for
sometimes batches would be turned out that were utterly worthless.

But Tom never gave up, even when it seemed that some of the failures
were purposely made. Ned declared that there was a conspiracy against
his chum, but Tom could not see it that way.  It was due to a
combination of circumstances, he insisted.

But finally the gun had been put aboard the ship, having been
transported from the proving ground in the valley, and they were now en
route to Panama. There the giant cannon was to be set up, and tried
again. If it came up to expectations it was to be finally adopted as
the official gun for the protection of the big canal, and Tom would
receive a substantial reward.

"And I'm confident that it will make good," said the young inventor to
his chum, as they paced the deck of the vessel. "In fact, I'm so sure I
have practically engaged the Universal Steel Company to hold itself in
readiness to make several more of the guns."

"But suppose Uncle Sam decides against the cannon on this second test?"

"Well, then I've lost out, that's all," declared Tom, philosophically.
"But I don't believe they will."

"It certainly is a giant cannon," remarked Ned, as he paused to look at
the prostrate monster, lashed to the deck, with its wrappings of
tarpaulins. "It looks bigger here than it did when you fired the shot
that saved the town, Tom."

"Yes, I suppose it does, by contrast. But let's go down and see how the
powder and shells are standing the trip. I told the captain to have
them securely lashed, so if we struck rough weather, and the vessel
rolled, they wouldn't carry away."

"Especially the powder," put in Ned. "If that starts to banging
around--well, I'd rather be somewhere else."

"Bless my rain gauge!" cried Mr. Damon. "Please don't say such things.
You make me nervous. You're as bad as that steel foreman."

"All right, I'll be better," promised Ned, with a laugh.

The two chums found that every precaution had been taken in regard to
the projectiles and powder. Koku was on guard, the giant regarding the
boxes of explosive with a calm but determined eye. It would not be well
for any unauthorized hand to tamper with them.

"Am dere anyt'ing I kin do fo' yo'-all, Massa Tom?" inquired Eradicate,
as the young inventor and Ned prepared to go on deck again. The aged
colored man had insisted on coming as a sort of personal bodyguard to
Tom, and the latter had not the heart to refuse him. Eradicate was
desperately jealous of the giant.

"Huh!" Eradicate had said, "anybody kin sit an' look at a lot ob dem
powder boxes; but 'tain't everybody what kin wait on Massa Tom. I kin,
an' I'se gwine t' do it." And so he had.

It was planned to proceed directly to Colon, the eastern terminus of
the canal, from New York, stopping at Santiago to transact some
government business there. The big gun was to be mounted on a barbette
near the Gatun locks, pointing out to sea, and the trial shots would be
fired over the water.

Eventually the gun would be so mounted as to swing in a circle, so as
to command the land as well as the water; and, in fact, if the
government decided to adopt Tom's giant cannon as the official
protective arm of the canal, they would all be so mounted. For, of
course, it might be possible for land as well as sea forces to attack
and try to capture the big ditch.

The first few days of the voyage were pleasant enough. The weather was
fine, and Tom was kept busy explaining to many of the officers aboard
the ship the principles of his gun, powder and projectiles. Members of
the ordnance board, who had been detailed to witness the test, were
also much interested as Tom modestly described his work on the giant
cannon.

At Santiago de Cuba, when Tom and Ned were standing near the gangway,
watching the officers returning from shore leave, for the ship was to
proceed soon, after a two days' stay, the young inventor started as he
noticed a military man walking aboard.

"Look, Ned!" he exclaimed, in a low voice.

"Where?"

"At that man--an officer in civilian dress, I should judge--haven't you
seen him before?"

"I have, Tom. Now, where was it? I seem to remember his face; and yet
he wasn't dressed like this the last time I saw him."

"I guess not, Ned. He had on a uniform then."

"By jinks! I have it. That German officer--von Brunderger!  That's he!"

"You're right, Ned. And he's got his servant with him, I guess," and
Tom nodded toward a stolid German who was carrying the other's suitcase.

"I wonder what he's doing aboard here?" went on our hero's chum.

"We'll soon know," spoke Tom. "He's seen us and is nodding. We might as
well go meet him."

"Ah, my good friend, Tom Swift!" exclaimed General von Brunderger,
genially, as he grasped the hands of Tom and Ned. "I am glad to see you
both again." He seemed to mean it, though he had not been especially
cordial to them at the first gun test.  "Take my grip below," he said
in German to the man, "and, Rudolph, find Lieutenant Blake and inform
him that I am on board.  I have been invited to go to Panama by
Lieutenant Blake," he added to Tom. "I have never seen the big ditch
that you wonderful Americans have so nearly finished."

"It is going to be a big thing," spoke Tom. "I am proud that my gun is
going to help protect it."

"Ah, so you were successful, then?" and his voice expressed surprise.
"I had not heard. And the big gun; is he here?" Though speaking very
good English, von Brunderger occasionally lapsed into the idioms of his
Fatherland.

"Yes, it's on board," said Tom. "Are you going to Panama for any
special purpose?"

Ned declared afterward that the German started as Tom asked this
question, but if he did the young inventor scarcely noticed it. In an
instant, however, von Brunderger was composed again.

"I go but to see the big ditch before the water is let in," he replied.
"And since your gun is to have a test I shall be glad to witness that.
You see, I am commissioned by my Kaiser to learn all that you Americans
will allow me to in reference to your ways of doing things--in the
army, the navy and in the pursuit of peace. After all, preparation for
war is the best means of securing peace. Your officers have been more
than kind and I have taken advantage of the offer to go to Panama.
Lieutenant Blake said the ship would stop here, and, as I had business
in Cuba, I came and waited. I am delighted to see you both again."

He went below, leaving Tom and Ned staring at one another.

"Well, what do you think of it?" asked Ned.

"I don't see anything to be worried about," declared Tom. "It's true
that a German once tried to make trouble for me, but this von
Brunderger is all right, as far as I can learn. He has the highest
references, and is an accredited representative of the Kaiser. You are
too suspicious, Ned, just as you were in the case of General Waller."

"Maybe so."

From Santiago, swinging around the island of Jamaica, the warship took
her way, with the big gun, to Colon. When half way across the Caribbean
Sea they encountered rough weather.

The storm broke without any unusual preliminaries, but quickly
increased to a hurricane, and when night fell it saw the big ship
rolling and tossing in a tempestuous sea. Tom was anxious about his
big gun, but the captain assured him that double lashings would make it
perfectly safe.

Tom and Ned had seen little of the German officer that day, nor, in
fact, since he came aboard. He kept much in the quarters of the other
officers, and the report was current that he was a "jolly good fellow."

Rather anxious as to the outcome of the storm, Tom turned in late that
night, not expecting to sleep much, for there were many unusual noises.
But he did drop off into a doze, only to be awakened about an hour
later by a commotion on deck.

"What's up, Ned?" he called to his chum, who had an adjoining stateroom.

"I don't know, Tom. Something is going on, though. Hear that thumping
and pounding!"

As Ned spoke there came a tremendous noise from the deck.

"By Jove!" yelled Tom, jumping from his berth. "It's my big gun! It has
torn loose from the lashings and may roll overboard!"




