CHAPTER XIII

THE NURSERY-SCHOOL


In previous chapters, I have tried to give an outline of what can be
done for the young child in the way of creating the habits which will
give happiness and usefulness in later life. But I have not discussed
the question whether parents are to give this training, or whether
it is to be given in schools designed for the purpose. I think the
arguments in favour of the nursery-school are quite overwhelming--not
only for children whose parents are poor, ignorant, and overworked,
but for all children, or, at the very least, for all children who live
in towns. I believe that the children at Miss Margaret McMillan’s
nursery-school in Deptford get something better than any children of
well-to-do parents can at present obtain. I should like to see the
same system extended to all children, rich and poor alike. But before
discussing any actual nursery-school, let us see what reasons there are
for desiring such an institution.

To begin with, early childhood is of immeasurable importance both
medically and psychologically. These two aspects are very closely
intertwined. For example: fear will make a child breathe badly, and
breathing badly will predispose it to a variety of diseases.[17] Such
interrelations are so numerous that no one can hope to succeed with a
child’s character without some medical knowledge, or with its health
without some psychology. In both directions, most of the knowledge
required is very new, and much of it runs counter to time-honoured
traditions. Take for example the question of discipline. The great
principle in a contest with a child is: do not yield, but do not
punish. The normal parent sometimes yields for the sake of a quiet
life, and sometimes punishes from exasperation; the right method, to
be successful, requires a difficult combination of patience and power
of suggestion. This is a psychological example; fresh air is a medical
example. Given care and wisdom, children profit by constant fresh air,
day and night, with not too much clothing. But if care and wisdom are
absent, the risk of chills from wet or sudden cold cannot be ignored.

Parents cannot be expected to possess the skill or the leisure required
for the new and difficult art of dealing with young children. In
the case of uneducated parents, this is obvious; they do not know
the right methods, and if they were taught them they would remain
unconvinced. I live in an agricultural district by the sea, where
fresh food is easy to obtain, and there are no extremes of heat or
cold; I chose it largely because it is ideal for children’s health.
Yet almost all the children of the farmers, shopkeepers, and so on,
are pasty-faced languid creatures, because they are indulged in food
and disciplined in play. They never go to the beach, because wet feet
are thought dangerous. They wear thick woollen coats out-of-doors even
in the hottest summer weather. If their play is noisy, steps are taken
to make their behaviour “genteel”. But they are allowed to stay up
late, and are given all kinds of unwholesome tit-bits of grown-up food.
Their parents cannot understand why my children have not died of cold
and exposure long ago; but no object lesson will convince them that
their own methods are capable of improvement. They are neither poor
nor lacking in parental affection, but they are obstinately ignorant
owing to bad education. In the case of town parents who are poor and
overworked, the evils are of course far greater.

But even in the case of parents who are highly educated, conscientious,
and not too busy, the children cannot get as much of what they need
as in a nursery-school. First and foremost, they do not get the
companionship of other children of the same age. If the family is
small, as such families usually are, the children may easily get too
much attention from their elders, and may become nervous and precocious
in consequence. Moreover, parents cannot have the experience of
multitudes of children which gives a sure touch. And only the rich can
provide the space and the environment that best suits young children.
Such things, if provided privately for one family of children,
produce pride of possession and a feeling of superiority, which are
extraordinarily harmful morally. For all these reasons, I believe
that even the best parents would do well to send their children to a
suitable school from the age of two onwards, at least for part of the
day--provided such a school existed in their neighbourhood.

There are, at present, two kinds of schools, according to the status
of the parents. There are Froebel schools and Montessori schools for
well-to-do-children, and there are a small number of nursery-schools
for very poor children. Of the latter, the most famous is Miss
McMillan’s, of which the above-mentioned book gives an account which
should be read by every lover of children. I am inclined to think that
no existing school for well-to-do children is as good as hers, partly
because she has larger numbers, partly because she is not troubled by
the fussiness which middle-class snobbery obtrudes upon teachers. She
aims at keeping children, if possible, from one year old till seven,
though the education authorities incline to the view that the children
ought to go to an ordinary elementary school at the age of five.
The children come at eight in the morning, and stay till six in the
evening; they have all their meals in the school. They spend as much as
possible of their time out-of-doors, and indoors they have an abnormal
amount of fresh air. Before a child is admitted, he or she is medically
examined, and if possible cured at the clinic or in the hospital if
not healthy. After admission, the children become and remain healthy
with very few exceptions. There is a large, lovely garden, and a good
deal of the time is spent in playing there. The teaching is broadly on
Montessori lines. After dinner the children all sleep. In spite of the
fact that at night, and on Sundays, they have to be in poverty-stricken
homes, perhaps in cellars with drunken parents, their physique and
intelligence become equal to the best that middle-class children
achieve. Here is Miss McMillan’s account of her seven-year-old pupils:

  They are nearly all tall, straight children. All are straight,
  indeed, if not tall, but the average is a big, well-made child with
  clean skin, bright eyes, and silky hair. He or she is a little
  above the average of the best type of well-to-do child of the upper
  middle class. So much for his or her physique. Mentally he is alert,
  sociable, eager for life and new experience. He can read and spell
  perfectly, or almost perfectly. He writes well and expresses himself
  easily. He speaks good English and also French. He can not only help
  himself, but he or she has for years helped younger children: and
  he can count and measure and design and has had some preparation
  for science. His first years were spent in an atmosphere of love
  and calm and _fun_, and his last two years were full of interesting
  experiences and experiment. He knows about a garden, and has planted
  and watered, and taken care of plants as well as animals. The
  seven-year-old can dance, too, and sing and play many games. Such
  are the children who will soon present themselves in thousands at
  the Junior Schools’ doors. What is to be done with them? I want to
  point out, first of all, that the elementary school teachers’ work
  will be changed by this sudden uprush of clean and strong young life
  from below. Either the Nursery-School will be a paltry thing, that
  is to say a new failure, or else it will soon influence not only
  elementary schools but also the secondary. It will provide a new kind
  of children to be educated, and this must react sooner or later, not
  only on all the schools, but on all our social life, on the kind of
  government and laws framed for the people, and on the relation of our
  nation to other nations.

I do not think these claims exaggerated. The nursery-school, if it
became universal, could, in one generation, remove the profound
differences in education which at present divide the classes, could
produce a population all enjoying the mental and physical development
which is now confined to the most fortunate, and could remove the
terrible dead-weight of disease and stupidity and malevolence which
now makes progress so difficult. Under the Education Act of 1918,
nursery-schools were to have been promoted by Government money;
but when the Geddes Axe descended it was decided that it was more
important to build cruisers and the Singapore Dock for the purpose
of facilitating war with the Japanese. At the present moment, the
Government is spending a million a year to induce people to poison
themselves with preservatives in Canadian butter rather than eat pure
butter from Denmark. To secure this end, our children are condemned to
disease and misery and unawakened intelligence, from which multitudes
could be saved by a million a year spent on nursery-schools. The
mothers now have the vote; will they some day learn to use it for the
good of their children?[18]

Apart from these wider considerations, what has to be realized is that
the right care of young children is highly skilled work, which parents
cannot hope to do satisfactorily, and that it is quite different work
from school-teaching in later years. To quote Miss McMillan again:

  The Nursery child has a fairly good physique. Not only do his
  neighbours in the slums fall far short of him: his “betters” in good
  districts, the middle-class children, of a very good type, fall
  short of him. It is clear that something more than parental love
  and “parental responsibility” are wanted. Rules of thumb have all
  broken down. “Parental love” without knowledge has broken down. Child
  nurture has not broken down. It is very highly skilled work.

As regards the finances:

  A Nursery-School of 100 children can be run to-day at an annual cost
  of £12 per head, and of this sum the parents in the poorest quarters
  can pay one-third. A Nursery-School staffed by students will cost
  more, but the greater part of the increased cost would be paid as
  fees and maintenance of future teachers. An open-air nursery and
  training centre, numbering in all about 100 children and thirty
  students, costs as nearly as makes no difference £2,200 per annum.

One more quotation:

  One great result of the Nursery-School will be that the children
  can get faster through the curriculum of to-day. When they are
  half or two-thirds through the present elementary school life they
  will be ready to go on to more advanced work.... In short, the
  Nursery-School, if it is a _real_ place of nurture, and not merely
  a place where babies are “minded” till they are five, will affect
  our whole educational system very powerfully and very rapidly. It
  will quickly raise the possible level of culture and attainment in
  all schools, beginning with the junior schools. It will prove that
  this welter of disease and misery in which we live, and which makes
  the doctor’s service loom bigger than the teacher’s, can be swept
  away. It will make the heavy walls, the terrible gates, the hard
  playground, the sunless and huge class-room look monstrous, as they
  are. It will give teachers a chance.

The nursery-school occupies an intermediate position between early
training of character and subsequent giving of instruction. It carries
on both at once, and each by the help of the other, with instruction
gradually taking a larger share as the child grows older. It was in
institutions having a similar function that Madame Montessori perfected
her methods. In certain large tenement houses in Rome, a large room
was set apart for the children between three and seven, and Madame
Montessori was put in charge of these “Children’s Houses”.[19] As
in Deptford, the children came from the very poorest section of the
population; as in Deptford, the results showed that early care can
overcome the physical and mental disadvantages of a bad home.

It is remarkable that, ever since the time of Séguin, progress in
educational methods with young children has come from study of idiots
and the feeble-minded, who are, in certain respects, still mentally
infants. I believe the reason for the necessity of this detour was that
the stupidities of mental patients were not regarded as blameworthy,
or as curable by chastisement; no one thought that Dr. Arnold’s recipe
of flogging would cure their “laziness”. Consequently they were
treated scientifically, not angrily; if they failed to understand,
no irate pedagogue stormed at them and told them they ought to be
ashamed of themselves. If people could have brought themselves to take
a scientific instead of a moralizing attitude towards children, they
could have discovered what is now known about the way to educate them
without first having to study the mentally deficient. The conception
of “moral responsibility” is “responsible” for much evil. Imagine two
children, one of whom has the good fortune to be in a nursery-school,
while the other is left to unalleviated slum-life. Is the second
child “morally responsible” if he grows up less admirable than the
first? Are his parents “morally responsible” for the ignorance and
carelessness which makes them unable to educate him? Are the rich
“morally responsible” for the selfishness and stupidity which have been
drilled into them at expensive schools, and which make them prefer
their own foolish luxuries to the creation of a happy community? All
are victims of circumstances; all have had characters warped in infancy
and intelligence stunted at school. No good purpose is served by
choosing to regard them as “morally responsible”, and holding them up
to reprobation because they have been less fortunate than they might
have been.

There is only one road to progress, in education as in other human
affairs, and that is: Science wielded by love. Without science, love
is powerless; without love, science is destructive. All that has been
done to improve the education of little children has been done by
those who loved them; all has been done by those who knew all that
science could teach on the subject. This is one of the benefits we
derive from the higher education of women: in former days, science
and love of children were much less likely to coexist. The power of
moulding young minds which science is placing in our possession is a
very terrible power, capable of deadly misuse; if it falls into the
wrong hands, it may produce a world even more ruthless and cruel than
the haphazard world of nature. Children may be taught to be bigoted,
bellicose, and brutal, under the pretence that they are being taught
religion, patriotism, and courage, or communism, proletarianism, and
revolutionary ardour. The teaching must be inspired by love, and must
aim at creating love in the children. If not, it will become more
efficiently harmful with every improvement in scientific technique.
Love for children exists in the community as an effective force; this
is shown by the lowering of the infant death-rate and the improvement
of education. It is still far too weak, or our politicians would not
dare to sacrifice the life and happiness of innumerable children to
their nefarious schemes of bloodshed and oppression; but it exists and
is increasing. Other forms of love, however, are strangely lacking.
The very individuals who lavish care on children cherish passions
which expose those same children, in later life, to death in wars
which are mere collective insanities. Is it too much to hope that love
may gradually be extended from the child to the man he will become?
Will the lovers of children learn to follow their later years with
something of the same parental solicitude? Having given them strong
bodies and vigorous minds, shall we let them use their strength and
vigour to create a better world? Or, when they turn to this work, shall
we recoil in terror, and plunge them back into slavery and drill?
Science is ready for either alternative; the choice is between love and
hate, though hate is disguised beneath all the fine phrases to which
professional moralists do homage.




