CHAPTER XVI

LAST SCHOOL YEARS


After the summer holidays in the fifteenth year, I shall assume that a
boy or girl who so desires is allowed to specialize, and that this will
be done in a large proportion of cases. But where there is no definite
preference, it will be better to prolong an all-round education. And
in exceptional cases specializing may begin earlier. All rules, in
education, should be capable of being broken for special reasons. But I
think that, as a general rule, pupils of more than average intelligence
should begin to specialize at about fourteen, while pupils of less than
average intelligence should usually not specialize at all at school,
unless in the way of vocational training. I am refraining, in this
book, from saying anything on this subject. But I do not believe that
it ought to begin before fourteen, and I do not think that, even then,
it ought to take up the whole of the school time of any pupil. I do
not propose to discuss how much time it should take up, or whether it
should be given to all pupils or only to some. These questions raise
economic and political issues which are only indirectly connected with
education, and which cannot be discussed briefly. I therefore confine
myself to the scholastic education in the years after fourteen.

I should make three broad divisions in school: (1) classics, (2)
mathematics and science, (3) modern humanities. This last should
include modern languages, history, and literature. In each division it
might be possible to specialize somewhat more before leaving school,
which I shall suppose does not occur before eighteen. Obviously all
who take classics must do both Latin and Greek, but some may do more
of the one, and some more of the other. Mathematics and science should
go together at first, but in some sciences it is possible to achieve
eminence without much mathematics, and in fact many eminent men of
science have been bad mathematicians. I should, therefore, at the
age of sixteen, allow a boy or girl to specialize in science or to
specialize in mathematics, without entirely neglecting the branch not
chosen. Similar remarks apply to modern humanities.

Certain subjects, of great utilitarian importance, would have to be
taught to everybody. Among these, I should include anatomy, physiology
and hygiene, to the extent that is likely to be required in adult daily
life. But perhaps these subjects ought to come at an earlier stage,
since they are naturally connected with sex education, which ought to
be given, as far as possible, before puberty. The objection to putting
them very early is that they ought not to be forgotten before they are
needed. I think the only solution is to give them twice over, once,
very simply and in bare outline, before puberty, and again later in
connection with elementary knowledge about health and disease. I should
say that every pupil ought to know something also about Parliament and
the Constitution, but care must be taken to prevent teaching on this
subject from degenerating into political propaganda.

More important than the curriculum is the question of the methods of
teaching and the spirit in which the teaching is given. As to this,
the main problem is to make the work interesting without making it too
easy. Exact and detailed study should be supplemented by books and
lectures on general aspects of the studies concerned. Before sitting
down to a Greek play, I would have the students read a translation, by
Gilbert Murray or some other translator with a poetic gift. Mathematics
should be diversified by an occasional lecture on the history of
mathematical discovery, and on the influence of this or that piece of
mathematics upon science and daily life, with hints of the delightful
things to be found in higher mathematics. Similarly the detailed study
of history should be supplemented by brilliant outlines, even if they
contained questionable generalizations. The students might be told
that the generalizations are doubtful, and be invited to consider
their detailed knowledge as supporting or refuting them. In science,
it is good to read popular books which give an _aperçu_ of recent
research, in order to have some idea of the general scientific purpose
served by particular facts and laws. All these things are useful as
incentives to exact and minute study, but are pernicious if they are
treated as substitutes for it. Pupils must not be encouraged to think
that there are short cuts to knowledge. This is a real danger in
modern education, owing to the reaction against the old severe drill.
The mental work involved in the drill was good; what was bad was the
killing of intellectual interests. We must try to secure the hard work,
but by other methods than those of the old disciplinarian. I do not
believe this is impossible. One finds in America that men who were idle
as undergraduates work hard in the law school or the medical school,
because at last they are doing work which strikes them as important.
That is the essence of the matter: make the school work seem important
to the pupils, and they will work hard. But if you make the work too
easy, they will know, almost by instinct, that you are not giving
them what is really worth having. Clever boys and girls like to test
their minds on difficulties. With good teaching and the elimination of
fear, very many boys and girls would be clever who now seem stupid and
lethargic.

All through education, initiative should come from the pupil as far as
possible. Madame Montessori has shown how this can be done with very
young children, but with older children different methods are required.
It is, I think, generally recognized by progressive educationists that
there should be much more individual work and much less class-work
than has been customary, though the individual work should be done in
a room full of other boys and girls similarly engaged. Libraries and
laboratories should be adequate and roomy. A considerable part of the
working day should be set apart for voluntary self-directed study, but
the pupil should write an account of what he or she is studying, with
an abstract of any information acquired. This helps to fix things in
the memory, to make reading have a purpose instead of being desultory,
and to give the teacher just that amount of control which may be
necessary in each case. The cleverer the pupil, the less control is
required. With those who are not very clever it will be necessary to
give a great deal of guidance; but even with them it should be by way
of suggestion, inquiry, and stimulus rather than by command. There
should, however, also be set themes, giving practice in ascertaining
the facts about some prescribed subject, and in presenting them in an
orderly manner.

In addition to regular work, boys and girls ought to be encouraged to
take an interest in current controversial questions of importance,
political, social, and even theological. They should be encouraged to
read all sides in such controversies, not only the orthodox side. If
any of them have strong feelings on one side or the other, they should
be told how to find out facts which support their view, and should be
set to debate with those who hold the opposite view. Debates, conducted
seriously with a view to ascertaining the truth, could be of great
value. In these, the teacher should learn not to take sides, even if he
or she has strong convictions. If almost all the pupils take one side,
the teacher should take the other, saying that it is only for purposes
of argument. Otherwise, his part should be confined to correcting
mistakes as to facts. By such means, the pupils could learn discussion
as a means of ascertaining truth, not as a contest for rhetorical
victory.

If I were at the head of a school for older boys and girls, I should
consider it equally undesirable to shirk current questions and to do
propaganda about them. It is a good thing to make pupils feel that
their education is fitting them to cope with matters about which the
world is excited; it gives them a sense that scholastic teaching is
not divorced from the practical world. But I should not urge my own
views upon the pupils. What I should do is to put before them the ideal
of a scientific attitude to practical questions. I should expect them
to produce arguments that are arguments, and facts that are facts. In
politics, especially, this habit is as rare as it is valuable. Every
vehement political party generates a cocoon of myth, within which its
mentality peacefully slumbers. Passion, too often, kills intellect;
in intellectuals, on the contrary, intellect not infrequently kills
passion. My aim would be to avoid both these misfortunes. Passionate
feeling is desirable, provided it is not destructive; intellect is
desirable, with the same proviso. I should wish the fundamental
political passions to be constructive, and I should try to make the
intellect serve these passions. But it must serve them genuinely,
objectively, not only in the world of dreams. When the real world is
not sufficiently flattering we all tend to take refuge in an imaginary
world, where our desires are gratified without great effort. This
is the essence of hysteria. It is also the source of nationalist,
theological, and class myths. It shows a weakness of character which
is almost universal in the present world. To combat this weakness
of character should be one of the aims of later school education.
There are two ways of combating it, both necessary, though in a sense
opposites. The one is to increase our sense of what we can achieve in
the world of reality; the other is to make us more sensitive to what
reality can do in the way of dispelling our dreams. Both are comprised
in the principle of living objectively rather than subjectively.

The classic example of subjectivity is Don Quixote. The first time he
made a helmet, he tested its capacity for resisting blows, and battered
it out of shape; next time he did not test it, but “deemed” it to be
a very good helmet. This habit of “deeming” dominated his life. But
every refusal to face unpleasant facts is of the same kind: we are all
Don Quixotes more or less. Don Quixote would not have done as he did
if he had been taught at school to make a really good helmet, and if
he had been surrounded by companions who refused to “deem” whatever he
wished to believe. The habit of living in fancies is normal and right
in early childhood, because young children have an impotence which
is not pathological. But as adult life approaches, there must be a
more and more vivid realization that dreams are only valuable in so
far as they can be translated, sooner or later, into fact. Boys are
admirable in correcting the purely personal claims of other boys; in
a school, it is difficult to cherish illusions as to one’s power in
relation to schoolfellows. But the myth-making faculty remains active
in other directions, often with the co-operation of the masters. One’s
own school is the best in the world; one’s country is always right and
always victorious; one’s social class (if one is rich) is better than
any other class. All these are undesirable myths. They lead us to deem
that we have a good helmet, when in fact some one else’s sword could
cut it in two. In this way they promote laziness and lead ultimately to
disaster.

To cure this habit of mind, it is necessary, as in many other cases,
to replace fear by rational prevision of misfortune. Fear makes people
unwilling to face real dangers. A person afflicted with subjectivity,
if awakened in the middle of the night by the cry of “fire”, might
decide that it must be his neighbour’s house, since the truth would be
too terrifying; he might thus lose the moment when escape was still
possible. This, of course, could only occur in a pathological case; but
in politics the analogous behaviour is normal. Fear, as an emotion, is
disastrous in all cases where the right course can only be discovered
by thinking; we want, therefore, to be able to foresee possibilities of
evil without feeling fear, and to use our intelligence for the purpose
of avoiding what is not inevitable. Evils which are really inevitable
have to be treated with sheer courage; but it is not of them that I am
speaking.

I do not want to repeat what I said about fear in a former chapter;
I am concerned with it now only in the intellectual sphere, as an
obstacle to truthful thinking. In this sphere, it is much easier to
overcome in youth than in later life, because a change of opinion is
less likely to bring grave misfortune to a boy or girl than to an
adult, whose life is built upon certain postulates. For this reason,
I should encourage a habit of intelligent controversy among the older
boys and girls, and I should place no obstacles in their way even if
they questioned what I regarded as important truths. I should make it
my object to teach thinking, not orthodoxy, or even heterodoxy. And I
should absolutely never sacrifice intellect to the fancied interest
of morals. It is generally held that the teaching of virtue demands
the inculcation of falsehood. In politics, we conceal the vices of
eminent statesmen of our own party. In theology, we conceal the sins
of Popes if we are Catholics, and the sins of Luther and Calvin if we
are Protestants. In matters of sex, we pretend before young people that
virtue is much commoner than it is. In all countries, even adults are
not allowed to know certain kinds of facts which the police consider
undesirable, and the censor, in England, does not allow plays to be
true to life, since he holds that the public can only be cajoled into
virtue by deceit. This whole attitude implies a certain feebleness.
Let us know the truth, whatever it is; then we can act rationally.
The holders of power wish to conceal the truth from their slaves,
in order that they may be misled as to their own interests; this is
intelligible. What is less intelligible is that democracies should
voluntarily make laws designed to prevent themselves from knowing
the truth. This is collective Quixotism: they are resolved not to be
told that the helmet is less good than they wish to believe. Such
an attitude of abject funk is unworthy of free men and women. In my
school, no obstacle to knowledge shall exist of any sort or kind. I
shall seek virtue by the right training of passions and instincts,
not by lying and deceit. In the virtue that I desire, the pursuit
of knowledge, without fear and without limitation, is an essential
element, in the absence of which the rest has little value.

What I am saying is no more than this: that I should cultivate the
scientific spirit. Many eminent men of science do not have this spirit
outside their special province; I should seek to make it all-pervasive.
The scientific spirit demands in the first place a wish to find out
the truth; the more ardent this wish, the better. It involves, in
addition, certain intellectual qualities. There must be preliminary
uncertainty, and subsequent decision according to the evidence. We must
not imagine in advance that we already know what the evidence will
prove. Nor must we be content with a lazy scepticism, which regards
objective truth as unattainable and all evidence as inconclusive. We
should admit that even our best-founded beliefs probably stand in need
of _some_ correction; but truth, so far as it is humanly attainable,
is a matter of degree. Our beliefs in physics are certainly less false
now than they were before the time of Galileo. Our beliefs as to child
psychology are certainly nearer to the truth than Dr. Arnold’s were.
In each case, the advance has come through substituting observation
for preconceptions and passions. It is for the sake of this step that
preliminary uncertainty is so important. It is necessary, therefore,
to teach this, and also to teach the skill required for marshalling
evidence. In a world where rival propagandists are perpetually blazing
falsehoods at us, to induce us to poison ourselves with pills or each
other with poison gases, this critical habit of mind is enormously
important. Ready credulity in the face of repeated assertions is one of
the curses of the modern world, and schools should do what they can to
guard against it.

Throughout the later school years, even more than earlier, there
should be a sense of intellectual adventure. Pupils should be given
the opportunity of finding out exciting things for themselves after
their set tasks were done, and therefore the set tasks should not be
too heavy. There must be praise whenever it is deserved, and although
mistakes must be pointed out, it should be done without censure.
Pupils should never be made to feel ashamed of their stupidity. The
great stimulus in education is to feel that achievement is possible.
Knowledge which is felt to be boring is of little use, but knowledge
which is assimilated eagerly becomes a permanent possession. Let the
relation of knowledge to real life be very visible to your pupils, and
let them understand how by knowledge the world could be transformed.
Let the teacher appear always the ally of the pupil, not his natural
enemy. Given a good training in the early years, these precepts will
suffice to make the acquisition of knowledge delightful to the great
majority of boys and girls.




