The Project Gutenberg eBook of Education and the good life, by
Bertrand Russell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Education and the good life

Author: Bertrand Russell

Release Date: March 16, 2023 [eBook #70302]

Language: English

Produced by: Tim Lindell, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive)

LIFE ***





EDUCATION AND THE GOOD LIFE




  EDUCATION
  AND THE
  GOOD LIFE

  BERTRAND RUSSELL

  [Illustration]

  BONI & LIVERIGHT
  NEW YORK      MCMXXVI




  COPYRIGHT 1926 :: BY
  BONI & LIVERIGHT, INC.
  PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES

  [Illustration]

  First printing, May, 1926
  Second printing, May, 1926
  Third printing, June, 1926
  Fourth printing, July, 1926




CONTENTS


                                                      PAGE

    INTRODUCTION                                         7


  PART I

  EDUCATION AND THE GOOD LIFE

  CHAPTER

        I. POSTULATES OF MODERN EDUCATIONAL THEORY      15

       II. THE AIMS OF EDUCATION                        47


  PART II

  EDUCATION OF CHARACTER

      III. THE FIRST YEAR                               87

       IV. FEAR                                        101

        V. PLAY AND FANCY                              123

       VI. CONSTRUCTIVENESS                            136

      VII. SELFISHNESS AND PROPERTY                    147

     VIII. TRUTHFULNESS                                157

       IX. PUNISHMENT                                  166

        X. IMPORTANCE OF OTHER CHILDREN                178

       XI. AFFECTION AND SYMPATHY                      187

      XII. SEX EDUCATION                               209

     XIII. THE NURSERY-SCHOOL                          224


  PART III

  INTELLECTUAL EDUCATION

      XIV. GENERAL PRINCIPLES                          239

       XV. THE SCHOOL CURRICULUM BEFORE FOURTEEN       261

      XVI. LAST SCHOOL YEARS                           278

     XVII. DAY SCHOOLS AND BOARDING SCHOOLS            292

    XVIII. THE UNIVERSITY                              301

      XIX. CONCLUSION                                  314




INTRODUCTION


There must be in the world many parents who, like the present author,
have young children whom they are anxious to educate as well as
possible, but reluctant to expose to the evils of most existing
educational institutions. The difficulties of such parents are not
soluble by any effort on the part of isolated individuals. It is of
course possible to bring up children at home by means of governesses
and tutors, but this plan deprives them of the companionship which
their nature craves, and without which some essential elements of
education must be lacking. Moreover it is extremely bad for a boy or
girl to be made to feel “odd” and different from other boys and girls:
this feeling, when traced to parents as its cause, is almost certain to
rouse resentment against them, leading to a love of all that they most
dislike. The conscientious parent may be driven by these considerations
to send his boys and girls to schools in which he sees grave defects,
merely because no existing schools seem to him satisfactory--or, if any
are satisfactory, they are not in his neighbourhood. Thus the cause of
educational reform is forced upon conscientious parents, not only for
the good of the community, but also for the good of their own children.
If the parents are well-to-do, it is not necessary to the solution of
their private problem that _all_ schools should be good, but only that
there should be some good school geographically available. But for
wage-earning parents nothing suffices except reform in the elementary
schools. As one parent will object to the reforms which another parent
desires, nothing will serve except an energetic educational propaganda,
which is not likely to prove effective until long after the reformer’s
children are grown up. Thus from love for our own children we are
driven, step by step, into the wider sphere of politics and philosophy.

From this wider sphere I desire, in the following pages, to remain
aloof as far as possible. The greater part of what I have to say will
not be dependent upon the views that I may happen to hold as regards
the major controversies of our age. But _complete_ independence in
this regard is impossible. The education we desire for our children
must depend upon our ideals of human character, and our hopes as to
the part they are to play in the community. A pacifist will not desire
for his children the education which seems good to a militarist; the
educational outlook of a communist will not be the same as that
of an individualist. To come to a more fundamental cleavage: there
can be no agreement between those who regard education as a means
of instilling certain definite beliefs and those who think that it
should produce the power of independent judgment. Where such issues
are relevant, it would be idle to shirk them. At the same time, there
is a considerable body of new knowledge in psychology and pedagogy
which is independent of these ultimate questions, and has an intimate
bearing on education. Already it has produced very important results,
but a great deal remains to be done before its teachings have been
fully assimilated. This is especially true of the first five years of
life; these have been found to have an importance far greater than that
formerly attributed to them, which involves a corresponding increase
in the educational importance of parents. My aim and purpose, wherever
possible, will be to avoid controversial issues. Polemical writing is
necessary in some spheres; but in addressing parents one may assume
a sincere desire for the welfare of their offspring, and this alone,
in conjunction with modern knowledge, suffices to decide a very large
number of educational problems. What I have to say is the outcome of
perplexities in regard to my own children; it is therefore not remote
or theoretical, and may, I hope, help to clarify the thoughts of other
parents faced with a like perplexity, whether in the way of agreement
with my conclusions or the opposite. The opinions of parents are
immensely important, because, for lack of expert knowledge, parents are
too often a drag upon the best educationists. If parents desire a good
education for their children, there will, I am convinced, be no lack of
teachers willing and able to give it.

I propose, in what follows, to consider first the aims of education:
the kind of individuals, and the kind of community, that we may
reasonably hope to see produced by education applied to raw material
of the present quality. I ignore the question of the improvement
of the breed, whether by eugenics or by any other process, natural
or artificial, since this is essentially outside the problems
of education. But I attach great weight to modern psychological
discoveries which tend to show that character is determined by early
education to a much greater extent than was thought by the most
enthusiastic educationists of former generations. I distinguish between
education of character and education in knowledge, which may be called
instruction in the strict sense. The distinction is useful, though
not ultimate: some virtues are required in a pupil who is to become
instructed, and much knowledge is required for the successful practice
of many important virtues. For purposes of discussion, however,
instruction can be kept apart from education of character. I shall deal
first with education of character, because it is especially important
in early years; but I shall carry it through to adolescence, and deal,
under this head, with the important question of sex education. Finally,
I shall discuss intellectual education, its aims, its curriculum, and
its possibilities, from the first lessons in reading and writing to
the end of the university years. The further education which men and
women derive from life and the world I shall regard as lying outside my
scope; but to make men and women capable of learning from experience
should be one of the aims which early education should keep most
prominently in view.




PART I

EDUCATION AND THE GOOD LIFE




EDUCATION AND THE GOOD LIFE




CHAPTER I

POSTULATES OF MODERN EDUCATIONAL THEORY


In reading even the best treatises on education written in former
times, one becomes aware of certain changes that have come over
educational theory. The two great reformers of educational theory
before the nineteenth century were Locke and Rousseau. Both deserved
their reputation, for both repudiated many errors which were
wide-spread when they wrote. But neither went as far in his own
direction as almost all modern educationists go. Both, for example,
belong to the tendency which led to liberalism and democracy; yet
both consider only the education of an aristocratic boy, to which one
man’s whole time is devoted. However excellent might be the results
of such a system, no man with a modern outlook would give it serious
consideration, because it is arithmetically impossible for every child
to absorb the whole time of an adult tutor. The system is therefore
one which can only be employed by a privileged caste; in a just world,
its existence would be impossible. The modern man, though he may seek
special advantages for his own children in practice, does not consider
the theoretical problem solved except by some method of education
which could be open to all, or at least to all whose capacities render
them capable of profiting by it. I do not mean that the well-to-do
should, here and now, forego educational opportunities which, in the
existing world, are not open to all. To do that would be to sacrifice
civilization to justice. What I do mean is that the educational system
we must aim at producing in the future is one which gives to every boy
and girl an opportunity for the best that exists. The ideal system of
education must be democratic, although that ideal is not immediately
attainable. This, I think, would, nowadays, be pretty generally
conceded. In this sense, I shall keep democracy in view. Whatever
I shall advocate will be capable of being universal, though the
individual should not meantime sacrifice his children to the badness
of what is common, if he has the intelligence and the opportunity to
secure something better. Even this very attenuated form of democratic
principle is absent from the treatises of Locke and Rousseau. Although
the latter was a disbeliever in aristocracy, he never perceived the
implications of his disbelief where education was concerned.

This matter of democracy and education is one as to which clarity
is important. It would be disastrous to insist upon a dead level of
uniformity. Some boys and girls are cleverer than others, and can
derive more benefit from higher education. Some teachers have been
better trained or have more native aptitude than others, but it is
impossible that everybody should be taught by the few best teachers.
Even if the highest education were desirable for all, which I doubt,
it is impossible that all should have it at present, and therefore a
crude application of democratic principles might lead to the conclusion
that none should have it. Such a view, if adopted, would be fatal to
scientific progress, and would make the general level of education a
hundred years hence needlessly low. Progress should not be sacrificed
to a mechanical equality at the present moment; we must approach
educational democracy carefully, so as to destroy in the process as
little as possible of the valuable products that happen to have been
associated with social injustice.

But we cannot regard a method of education as satisfactory if it is one
which could not possibly be universal. The children of rich people
often have, in addition to their mother, a nurse, a nurserymaid,
and a share in the other domestic servants; this involves an amount
of attention which could never, in any social system, be given to
all children. It is very doubtful whether carefully tended children
really gain by being made unnecessarily parasitic, but in any case
no impartial person can recommend special advantages for the few,
except for special reasons, such as feeble-mindedness or genius. The
wise parent, at the present day, is likely to choose, if he can, some
method of education for his children which is not in fact universal,
and for the sake of experiment it is desirable that parents should
have the opportunity of trying new methods. But they ought to be such
as could be made universal, if found to produce good results, not
such as must from their very nature be confined to a privileged few.
Fortunately, some of the best elements in modern educational theory
and practice have had an extremely democratic origin; for example,
Madame Montessori’s work began with nursery-schools in slums. In
higher education, exceptional opportunity for exceptional ability is
indispensable, but otherwise there is no reason why any child should
suffer from the adoption of systems which might be adopted by all.

There is another modern tendency in education, which is connected
with democracy, but perhaps somewhat more open to question--I mean
the tendency to make education useful rather than ornamental. The
connection of the ornamental with aristocracy has been set forth
searchingly in Veblen’s “Theory of the Leisure Class”, but it is
only the educational aspect of this connection that concerns us. In
male education, the matter is bound up with the controversy between
a classical and a “modern” education; in the education of girls,
it is part of the conflict between the ideal of the “gentlewoman”
and the desire to train girls to be self-supporting. But the whole
educational problem, where women are concerned, has been distorted by
the desire for sex equality: there has been an attempt to acquire the
same education as that given to boys, even where it was by no means
good in itself. Consequently women educators have aimed at giving to
their girls such “useless” knowledge as is given to boys of the same
class, and have been bitter opponents of the notion that some part
of female education should be a technical training for motherhood.
These cross-currents make the tendency that I am considering in some
respects less definite where women are concerned, though the decay of
the ideal of the “fine lady” is one of the most noteworthy examples of
the tendency. In order to avoid confusing the issue, I shall for the
moment confine myself to male education.

Many separate controversies, in all of which other questions arise, are
in part dependent upon our present question. Should boys learn mainly
classics or mainly science? Among other considerations, one is that the
classics are ornamental and science is useful. Should education as soon
as possible become technical instruction for some trade or profession?
Again the controversy between the useful and the ornamental is
relevant, though not decisive. Should children be taught to enunciate
correctly and to have pleasant manners, or are these mere relics of
aristocracy? Is appreciation of art a thing of any value except in
the artist? Should spelling be phonetic? All these and many other
controversies are argued in part in terms of the controversy between
the useful and the ornamental.

Nevertheless, I believe the whole controversy to be unreal. As soon
as the terms are defined, it melts away. If we interpret “useful”
broadly and “ornamental” narrowly, the one side has it; in the contrary
interpretation, the other side has it. In the widest and most correct
sense of the word, an activity is “useful” when it has good results.
And these results must be “good” in some other sense than merely
“useful”, or else we have no true definition. We cannot say that a
useful activity is one which has useful results. The essence of what
is “useful” is that it ministers to some result which is not merely
useful. Sometimes a long chain of results is necessary before the final
result is reached which can be called simply “good”. A plough is useful
because it breaks up the ground. But breaking up the ground is not good
on its own account: it is in turn merely useful because it enables seed
to be sown. This is useful because it produces grain, which is useful
because it produces bread, which is useful because it preserves life.
But life must be capable of some intrinsic value: if life were merely
useful as a means to other life, it would not be useful at all. Life
may be good or bad according to circumstances; it may therefore also be
useful, when it is a means to good life. Somewhere we must get beyond
the chain of successive utilities, and find a peg from which the chain
is to hang; if not, there is no real usefulness in any link of the
chain. When “useful” is defined in this way, there can be no question
whether education should be useful. Of course it should, since the
process of educating is a means to an end, not an end in itself. But
that is not quite what the advocates of utility in education have in
mind. What they are urging is that the _result_ of education should be
useful: put crudely, they would say that an educated man is a man who
knows how to make machines. If we ask what is the use of machines, the
answer is ultimately that they produce necessaries and comforts for the
body--food, clothing, houses, etc. Thus we find that the advocate of
utility, in the sense in which his view is questionable, is a man who
attaches intrinsic value only to physical satisfactions: the “useful”,
for him, is that which helps us to gratify the needs and desires of
the body. When this is what is really meant, the advocate of utility
is certainly in the wrong if he is enunciating an ultimate philosophy,
though in a world where many people are starving he may be right as
a politician, since the satisfaction of physical needs may be at the
moment more urgent than anything else.

Much the same sort of dissection is necessary in considering the other
side of this controversy. To call the other side “ornamental” is, of
course, to concede a point to the advocate of utility, since “ornament”
is understood to be more or less trivial. The epithet “ornamental”
is quite justified as applied to the traditional conception of a
“gentleman” or a “lady”. The eighteenth-century gentleman spoke with a
refined accent, quoted the classics on appropriate occasions, dressed
in the fashion, understood punctilio and knew when a duel would
advance his reputation. There is a man in “The Rape of the Lock” who was

      of amber snuff-box justly vain,
  And the nice conduct of a clouded cane.

His education had been ornamental in the narrowest sense, and in our
age few of us are rich enough to be content with his accomplishments.
The ideal of an “ornamental” education in the old sense is
aristocratic: it presupposes a class with plenty of money and no need
to work. Fine gentlemen and fine ladies are charming to contemplate in
history; their memoirs and their country houses give us a certain kind
of pleasure which we no longer provide for our posterity. But their
excellences, even when real, were by no means supreme, and they were an
incredibly expensive product: Hogarth’s “Gin Lane” gives a vivid idea
of the price that was paid for them. No one nowadays would advocate an
ornamental education in this narrow sense.

But that is not the real issue. The real issue is: should we, in
education, aim at filling the mind with knowledge which has direct
practical utility, or should we try to give our pupils mental
possessions which are good on their own account? It is useful to know
that there are twelve inches in a foot, and three feet in a yard,
but this knowledge has no intrinsic value; to those who live where
the metric system is in use, it is utterly worthless. To appreciate
“Hamlet”, on the other hand, will not be much use in practical life,
except in those rare cases where a man is called upon to kill his
uncle; but it gives a man a mental possession which he would be sorry
to be without, and makes him in some sense a more excellent human
being. It is this latter sort of knowledge that is preferred by the man
who argues that utility is not the sole aim of education.

There appear to be three different substantial issues wrapped up in
the debate between advocates of a utilitarian education and their
opponents. There is first a form of the debate between aristocrats
and democrats, the former holding that the privileged class should be
taught to employ its leisure in ways that are agreeable to itself,
while the subordinate class should be taught to employ its labour in
ways that are useful to others. The opposition of the democrats to
this view tends to be somewhat confused: they dislike the teaching of
what is useless to the aristocrat, and at the same time argue that
the wage-earner’s education should not be confined to what is useful.
Thus we find a democratic opposition to the old-fashioned classical
education in the public schools, combined with a democratic demand
that working men should have opportunities for learning Latin and
Greek. This attitude, even though it may imply some lack of theoretical
clarity, is on the whole right in practice. The democrat does not
wish to divide the community into two sections, one useful and one
ornamental; he will therefore give more merely useful knowledge to
the hitherto merely ornamental classes, and more merely delightful
knowledge to the hitherto merely useful classes. But democracy, _per
se_, does not decide the proportions in which these ingredients should
be mixed.

The second issue is between men who aim only at material goods and
men who care for mental delights. Most modern well-to-do Englishmen
and Americans, if they were transported by magic into the age of
Elizabeth, would wish themselves back in the modern world. The society
of Shakespeare and Raleigh and Sir Philip Sydney, the exquisite
music, the beauty of the architecture would not console them for the
absence of bath-rooms, tea and coffee, motor-cars, and other material
comforts of which that age was ignorant. Such men, except in so far
as they are influenced by conservative tradition, tend to think that
the main purpose of education is to increase the number and variety of
commodities produced. They may include medicine and hygiene, but they
will not feel any enthusiasm for literature or art or philosophy.
Undoubtedly such men have provided a great part of the driving force
for the attack upon the classical curriculum established at the
renaissance.

I do not think it would be fair to meet this attitude by the mere
assertion that mental goods are of more value than such as are purely
physical. I believe this assertion to be true, but not the whole truth.
For, while physical goods have no very high value, physical evils may
be so bad as to outweigh a great deal of mental excellence. Starvation
and disease, and the ever-present fear of them, have overshadowed the
lives of the great majority of mankind since foresight first became
possible. Most birds die of starvation, but they are happy when food
is abundant, because they do not think about the future. Peasants
who have survived a famine will be perpetually haunted by memory and
apprehension. Men are willing to toil long hours for a pittance rather
than die, while animals prefer to snatch pleasure when it is available,
even if death is the penalty. It has thus come about that most men have
put up with a life almost wholly devoid of pleasure, because on any
other terms life would be brief. For the first time in history, it is
now possible, owing to the industrial revolution and its by-products,
to create a world where everybody shall have a reasonable chance of
happiness. Physical evil can, if we choose, be reduced to very small
proportions. It would be possible, by organization and science, to
feed and house the whole population of the world, not luxuriously, but
sufficiently to prevent great suffering. It would be possible to combat
disease, and to make chronic ill-health very rare. It would be possible
to prevent the increase of population from outrunning improvements in
the food supply. The great terrors which have darkened the subconscious
mind of the race, bringing cruelty, oppression, and war in their train,
could be so much diminished as to be no longer important. All this
is of such immeasurable value to human life that we dare not oppose
the sort of education which will tend to bring it about. In such an
education, applied science will have to be the chief ingredient.
Without physics and physiology and psychology, we cannot build the
new world. We can build it without Latin and Greek, without Dante and
Shakespeare, without Bach and Mozart. That is the great argument in
favour of a utilitarian education. I have stated it strongly, because I
feel it strongly. Nevertheless, there is another side to the question.
What will be the good of the conquest of leisure and health, if no one
remembers how to use them? The war against physical evil, like every
other war, must not be conducted with such fury as to render men
incapable of the arts of peace. What the world possesses of ultimate
good must not be allowed to perish in the struggle against evil.

This brings me to the third issue involved in our controversy. Is it
true that only useless knowledge is intrinsically valuable? Is it true
that any intrinsically valuable knowledge is useless? For my part, I
spent in youth a considerable proportion of my time upon Latin and
Greek, which I now consider to have been almost completely wasted.
Classical knowledge afforded me no help whatever in any of the problems
with which I was concerned in later life. Like ninety-nine per cent
of those who are taught the classics, I never acquired sufficient
proficiency to read them for pleasure. I learned such things as the
genitive of “supellex”, which I have never been able to forget. This
knowledge has no more intrinsic value than the knowledge that there
are three feet to a yard; and its utility, to me, has been strictly
confined to affording me the present illustration. On the other hand,
what I learned of mathematics and science has been not only of immense
utility, but also of great intrinsic value, as affording subjects of
contemplation and reflection, and touchstones of truth in a deceitful
world. This is, of course, in part a personal idiosyncrasy; but I
am sure that a capacity to profit by the classics is a still rarer
idiosyncrasy among modern men. France and Germany also have valuable
literatures; their languages are easily learnt, and are useful in many
practical ways. The case for French and German, as against Latin and
Greek, is therefore overwhelming. Without belittling the importance of
the sort of knowledge which has no immediate practical utility, I think
we may fairly demand that, except in the education of specialists,
such knowledge shall be given in ways that do not demand an immense
expenditure of time and energy on technical apparatus such as grammar.
The sum of human knowledge and the complexity of human problems are
perpetually increasing; therefore every generation must overhaul its
educational methods if time is to be found for what is new. We must
preserve the balance by means of compromises. The humanistic elements
in education must remain, but they must be sufficiently simplified to
leave room for the other elements without which the new world rendered
possible by science can never be created.

I do not wish to suggest that the humanistic elements in education are
less important than the utilitarian elements. To know something of
great literature, something of world history, something of music and
painting and architecture, is essential if the life of imagination is
to be fully developed. And it is only through imagination that men
become aware of what the world might be; without it, “progress” would
become mechanical and trivial. But science, also, can stimulate the
imagination. When I was a boy, astronomy and geology did more for me
in this respect than the literatures of England, France and Germany,
many of whose masterpieces I read under compulsion without the faintest
interest. This is a personal matter: one boy or girl will derive
stimulus from one source, another from another. What I suggest is that,
where a difficult technique is indispensable to the mastering of a
subject, it is better, except in training specialists, that the subject
should be useful. In the time of the renaissance, there was little
great literature in modern languages; now there is a great deal. Much
of the value of the Greek tradition can be conveyed to people who do
not know Greek; and as for the Latin tradition, its value is not really
very great. I should, therefore, where boys and girls without special
aptitudes are concerned, supply the humanistic elements of education
in ways not involving a great apparatus of learning; the difficult
part of education, in the later years, I should, as a rule, confine to
mathematics and science. But I should make exceptions wherever a strong
bent or special ability pointed in other directions. Cast-iron rules
are above all things to be avoided.

In a mechanistic civilization, there is grave danger of a crude
utilitarianism, which sacrifices the whole æsthetic side of life to
what is called “efficiency”. Perhaps I am old-fashioned, but I must
confess that I view with alarm the theory that language is merely a
means of communication, and not also a vehicle of beauty. This tendency
is world-wide, but naturally it has advanced in America. In a more or
less authoritative book published by the Children’s Foundation,[1] I
find some remarks on the teaching of English which seem to exemplify
the tendency I deplore. For example:

“Twenty-five years ago pupils learnt from ten to fifteen thousand
words, but as a result of investigations carried on during the past
two decades, it has been found that the typical graduate of a high
school does not need in his school work, and will not need in later
life, to spell more than three thousand words at the outside, unless
he engages in some technical pursuit, when it may be necessary for him
to master a special and technical vocabulary. The typical American in
his correspondence rarely employs more than fifteen hundred different
words; many of us never use more than half this number. In view of
these facts, the course of spelling in the schools to-day is being
constructed on the principle that the words that will be actually
used in daily life should be mastered so that they can be spelled
automatically, and the technical and unusual words that were formerly
taught but that will probably never be used are being eliminated” (p.
384).

This seems to me a most singular inversion. It is still thought that
a man should know how to spell a word he is going to use, although
Shakespeare and Milton could not spell, and the importance of spelling
is purely and solely conventional. But for this trivial purpose there
is a willingness to sacrifice the teaching of a large vocabulary,
without which it is impossible to write well, or even to understand
good writing. The important thing is not to know how to _spell_ words,
but how to _use_ them; evidently this was not taught in the days
when boys learned to spell 15,000 words but men only used 1,500. The
way to learn to _use_ words is to read some good literature often
and carefully, intensively, not extensively. But careful reading is
positively discouraged. The same book says of school-children: “They
are trained to read as rapidly as possible so that they will not be
halted in the gaining of meaning by giving attention to separate words,
since explicit awareness of separate words in one’s reading delays and
often confuses the process of interpreting the thought contained in the
reading” (p. 420). I wonder what pupils so trained would make of

          Sabrina fair,
  Listen where thou art sitting
  Under the glassy, cool, translucent wave,
  In twisted braids of lilies knitting
  The loose train of thy amber-dropping hair.

No doubt it will be said that the modern man has no time for such
trivialities as the appreciation of great poetry. Yet the very men who
say this are prepared to set aside a great deal of time in order to
teach young men how to kill each other scientifically. This is surely
the _reductio ad absurdum_ of a utilitarian philosophy.

So far, we have been considering what sort of knowledge should be
imparted. I come now to a different set of problems, concerned partly
with methods of teaching, partly with moral education and the training
of character. Here we are no longer concerned with politics, but with
psychology and ethics. Psychology was, until fairly lately, a merely
academic study, with very little application to practical affairs.
This is all changed now. We have, for instance, industrial psychology,
clinical psychology, educational psychology, all of the greatest
practical importance. We may hope and expect that the influence of
psychology upon our institutions will rapidly increase in the near
future. In education, at any rate, its effect has already been great
and beneficent.

Let us take first the question of “discipline”. The old idea of
discipline was simple. A child or boy was ordered to do something
he disliked, or abstain from something he liked. When he disobeyed,
he suffered physical chastisement, or, in extreme cases, solitary
confinement on bread and water. Read, for example, the chapter in “The
Fairchild Family” about how little Henry was taught Latin. He was told
that he could never hope to become a clergyman unless he learned that
language, but in spite of this argument the little boy did not apply
himself to his book as earnestly as his father desired. So he was shut
up in an attic, given only bread and water, and forbidden to speak to
his sisters, who were told that he was in disgrace and they must have
nothing to do with him. Nevertheless, one of them brought him some
food. The footman told on her, and she got into trouble too. After a
certain period in prison, the boy, we are told, began to love Latin and
worked assiduously ever after. Contrast with this Chekov’s story about
his uncle who tried to teach a kitten to catch mice. He brought a mouse
into the room where the kitten was, but the kitten’s hunting instinct
was not yet developed, and it paid no attention to the mouse. So he
beat it. The next day the same process was repeated, and the next and
the next. At last the Professor became persuaded that it was a stupid
kitten, and quite unteachable. In later life, though otherwise normal,
it could never see a mouse without sweating in terror and running away.
“Like the kitten,” Chekov concludes, “I had the honour of being taught
Latin by my uncle.” These two stories illustrate the old discipline and
the modern revolt against it.

But the modern educationist does not simply eschew discipline; he
secures it by new methods. On this subject, those who have not studied
the new methods are apt to have mistaken ideas. I had always understood
that Madame Montessori dispensed with discipline, and I had wondered
how she managed a roomful of children. On reading her own account of
her methods, I found that discipline still held an important place, and
that there was no attempt to dispense with it. On sending my little boy
of three to spend his mornings in a Montessori school, I found that he
quickly became a more disciplined human being, and that he cheerfully
acquiesced in the rules of the school. But he had no feeling whatever
of external compulsion: the rules were like the rules of a game, and
were obeyed as a means of enjoyment. The old idea was that children
could not possibly _wish_ to learn, and could only be compelled to
learn by terror. It has been found that this was entirely due to
lack of skill in pedagogy. By dividing what has to be learnt--for
instance, reading and writing--into suitable stages, every stage can
be made agreeable to the average child. And when children are doing
what they like, there is of course no reason for external discipline.
A few simple rules--no child must interfere with another child, no
child must have more than one sort of apparatus at a time--are easily
apprehended, and felt to be reasonable, so that there is no difficulty
in getting them observed. The child thus acquires self-discipline,
which consists partly of good habits, partly of the realization, in
concrete instances, that it is sometimes worth while to resist an
impulse for the sake of some ultimate gain. Everybody has always known
that it is easy to obtain this self-discipline in games, but no one had
supposed that the acquisition of knowledge could be made sufficiently
interesting to bring the same motives into operation. We now know
that this is possible, and it will come to be done, not only in the
education of infants, but at all stages. I do not pretend that it is
easy. The pedagogical discoveries involved have required genius, but
the teachers who are to apply them do not require genius. They require
only the right sort of training, together with a degree of sympathy and
patience which is by no means unusual. The fundamental idea is simple:
that the right discipline consists, not in external compulsion, but
in habits of mind which lead spontaneously to desirable rather than
undesirable activities. What is astonishing is the great success in
finding technical methods of embodying this idea in education. For
this, Madame Montessori deserves the highest praise.

The change in educational methods has been very much influenced by the
decay of the belief in original sin. The traditional view, now nearly
extinct, was that we are all born Children of Wrath, with a nature full
of wickedness; before there can be any good in us, we have to become
Children of Grace, a process much accelerated by frequent castigation.
Most moderns can hardly believe how much this theory influenced the
education of our fathers and grandfathers. Two quotations from the
life of Dr. Arnold by Dean Stanley will show that they are mistaken.
Dean Stanley was Dr. Arnold’s favourite pupil, the good boy Arthur in
“Tom Brown’s School Days”. He was a cousin of the present writer, who
was shown over Westminster Abbey by him as a boy. Dr. Arnold was the
great reformer of our public schools, which are viewed as one of the
glories of England, and are still conducted largely according to his
principles. In discussing Dr. Arnold, therefore, we are dealing, not
with something belonging to the remote past, but with something which
to this day is efficacious in moulding upper-class Englishmen. Dr.
Arnold diminished flogging, retaining it only for the younger boys,
and confining it, so his biographer tells us, to “moral offences, such
as lying, drinking, and habitual idleness”. But when a liberal journal
suggested that flogging was a degrading punishment, which ought to be
abolished altogether, he was amazingly indignant. He replied in print:

  I know well of what feeling this is the expression; it originates
  in that proud notion of personal independence which is neither
  reasonable nor Christian, but essentially barbarian. It visited
  Europe with all the curses of the age of chivalry, and is threatening
  us now with those of Jacobinism.... At an age when it is almost
  impossible to find a true manly sense of the degradation of guilt or
  faults, where is the wisdom of encouraging a fantastic sense of the
  degradation of personal correction? What can be more false, or more
  adverse to the simplicity, sobriety and humbleness of mind, which are
  the best ornament of youth, and the best promise of a noble manhood?

The pupils of his disciples, not unnaturally, believe in flogging
natives of India when they are deficient in “humbleness of mind”.

There is another passage, already quoted in part by Mr. Strachey in
“Eminent Victorians”, but so apt that I cannot forbear to quote it
again. Dr. Arnold was away on a holiday, enjoying the beauties of the
Lake of Como. The form his enjoyment took is recorded in a letter to
his wife, as follows:

  It is almost awful to look at the overwhelming beauty around me, and
  then think of moral evil; it seems as if heaven and hell, instead of
  being separated by a great gulf from one another, were absolutely on
  each other’s confines, and indeed not far from every one of us. Might
  the sense of moral evil be as strong in me as my delight in external
  beauty, for in a deep sense of moral evil, more perhaps than in
  anything else, abides a saving knowledge of God! It is not so much to
  admire moral good; that we may do, and yet not be ourselves conformed
  to it; but if we really do abhor that which is evil, not the persons
  in whom evil resides, but the evil which dwelleth in them, and much
  more manifestly and certainly to our own knowledge, in our own
  hearts--this is to have the feeling of God and of Christ, and to have
  our Spirit in sympathy with the Spirit of God. Alas! how easy to see
  this and say it--how hard to do it and to feel it! Who is sufficient
  for these things? No one, but he who feels and really laments his
  own insufficiency. God bless you, my dearest wife, and our beloved
  children, now and evermore, through Christ Jesus.

It is pathetic to see this naturally kindly gentleman lashing himself
into a mood of sadism, in which he can flog little boys without
compunction, and all under the impression that he is conforming to
the religion of Love. It is pathetic when we consider the deluded
individual; but it is tragic when we think of the generations of
cruelty that he put into the world by creating an atmosphere of
abhorrence of “moral evil”, which, it will be remembered, includes
habitual idleness in children. I shudder when I think of the wars, the
tortures, the oppressions, of which upright men have been guilty, under
the impression that they were righteously castigating “moral evil”.
Mercifully, educators no longer regard little children as limbs of
Satan. There is still too much of this view in dealings with adults,
particularly in the punishment of crime; but in the nursery and the
school it has almost disappeared.

There is an opposite error to Dr. Arnold’s, far less pernicious, but
still scientifically an error, and that is the belief that children
are naturally virtuous, and are only corrupted by the spectacle of
their elders’ vices. This view is traditionally associated with
Rousseau; perhaps he held it in the abstract, but when one reads
“Emile” one finds that the pupil stood in need of much moral training
before he became the paragon that the system was designed to produce.
The fact is that children are not naturally either “good” or “bad”.
They are born with only reflexes and a few instincts; out of these,
by the action of the environment, habits are produced, which may be
either healthy or morbid. Which they are to be, depends chiefly upon
the wisdom of mothers or nurses, the child’s nature being, at first,
almost incredibly malleable. In the immense majority of children,
there is the raw material of a good citizen, and also the raw material
of a criminal. Scientific psychology shows that flogging on weekdays
and sermons on Sundays do not constitute the ideal technique for the
production of virtue. But it is not to be inferred that there is no
technique for this purpose. It is difficult to resist Samuel Butler’s
view that the educators of former times took a pleasure in torturing
children; otherwise it is hard to see how they can have persisted
so long in inflicting useless misery. It is not difficult to make a
healthy child happy, and most children will be healthy if their minds
and bodies are properly tended. Happiness in childhood is absolutely
necessary to the production of the best type of human being. Habitual
idleness, which Dr. Arnold regarded as a form of “moral evil”, will not
exist if the child is made to feel that its education is teaching it
something worth knowing.[2] But if the knowledge imparted is worthless,
and those who impart it appear as cruel tyrants, the child will
naturally behave like Chekov’s kitten. The spontaneous wish to learn,
which every normal child possesses, as shown in its efforts to walk and
talk, should be the driving force in education. The substitution of
this driving force for the rod is one of the great advances of our time.

This brings me to the last point which I wish to notice in this
preliminary survey of modern tendencies--I mean, the greater attention
paid to infancy. This is closely connected with the change in our
ideas as to the training of character. The old idea was that virtue
depends essentially upon _will_: we were supposed to be full of bad
desires, which we controlled by an abstract faculty of volition. It
was apparently regarded as impossible to root out bad desires; all we
could do was to control them. The situation was exactly analogous to
that of the criminal and the police. No one supposed that a society
without would-be criminals was possible; the most that could be done
was to have such an efficient police force that most people would be
afraid to commit crimes, and the few exceptions would be caught and
punished. The modern psychological criminologist is not content with
this view; he believes that the impulse to crime could, in most cases,
be prevented from developing by suitable education. And what applies to
society applies also to the individual. Children, especially, wish to
be liked by their elders and their companions; they have, as a rule,
impulses which can be developed in good or bad directions according
to the situations in which they find themselves. Moreover they are at
an age at which the formation of new habits is still easy; and good
habits can make a great part of virtue almost automatic. On the other
hand, the older type of virtue, which left bad desires rampant, and
merely used will-power to check their manifestations, has been found to
afford a far from satisfactory method of controlling bad conduct. The
bad desires, like a river which has been dammed, find some other outlet
which has escaped the watchful eye of the will. The man who, in youth,
would have liked to murder his father, finds satisfaction later on in
flogging his son, under the impression that he is chastising “moral
evil”. Theories which justify cruelty almost always have their source
in some desire diverted by the will from its natural channel, driven
underground, and at last emerging unrecognized as hatred of sin or
something equally respectable. The control of bad desires by the will,
therefore, though necessary on occasion, is inadequate as a technique
of virtue.

These considerations bring us to the province of psycho-analysis. There
is much in the detail of psycho-analysis which I find fantastic, and
not supported by adequate evidence. But the general method appears to
me very important, and essential to the creation of right methods of
moral training. The importance which many psycho-analysts attach to
early infancy appears to me exaggerated; they sometimes talk as if
character were irrevocably fixed by the time a child is three years
old. This, I am sure, is not the case. But the fault is a fault on the
right side. Infant psychology was neglected in the past; indeed, the
intellectualist methods in vogue made it almost impossible. Take such
a matter as sleep. All mothers wish their children to sleep, because
it is both healthy and convenient when they do. They had developed a
certain technique: rocking the cradle and singing lullabys. It was left
for males who investigated the matter scientifically to discover that
this technique is ideally wrong, for though it is likely to succeed on
any given day, it creates bad habits. Every child loves to be made a
fuss of, because its sense of self-importance is gratified. If it finds
that by not sleeping it secures attention, it will soon learn to adopt
this method. The result is equally damaging to health and character.
The great thing here is the formation of habit: the association of
the cot with sleep. If this association has been adequately produced,
the child will not lie awake unless it is ill or in pain. But the
production of the association requires a certain amount of discipline;
it is not to be achieved by mere indulgence, since that causes
pleasurable associations with lying awake. Similar considerations apply
to the formation of other good and bad habits. This whole study is
still in its infancy, but its importance is already very great, and
almost sure to become greater. It is clear that education of character
must begin at birth, and requires a reversal of much of the practice of
nurses and ignorant mothers. It is also clear that definite instruction
can begin earlier than was formerly thought, because it can be made
pleasant and no strain upon the infant’s powers of attention. In both
these respects educational theory has been radically transformed in
recent years, with beneficent effects which are likely to become more
and more evident as the years go by. Accordingly I shall begin, in
what follows, with a fairly detailed consideration of the training of
character in infancy, before discussing the instruction to be given in
later years.




