CHAPTER XV

THE SCHOOL CURRICULUM BEFORE FOURTEEN


The questions: what should be taught? and how should it be taught?
are intimately connected, because, if better methods of teaching are
devised, it is possible to learn more. In particular, more can be
learnt if the pupils wish to learn than if they regard work as a bore.
I have already said something about methods, and I shall say more in a
later chapter. For the present, I shall assume that the best possible
methods are employed, and I shall consider what ought to be taught.

When we consider what an adult ought to know, we soon realize that
there are things which everybody ought to know, and other things which
it is necessary that some should know, though others need not. Some
must know medicine, but for the bulk of mankind it is sufficient to
have an elementary knowledge of physiology and hygiene. Some must
know higher mathematics, but the bare elements suffice for those to
whom mathematics is distasteful. Some should know how to play the
trombone, but mercifully it is not necessary that every school-child
should practise this instrument. In the main, the things taught at
school before the age of fourteen should be among those that every
one ought to know; apart from exceptional cases, specialization ought
to come later. It should, however, be one of the aims of education
before fourteen to discover special aptitudes in boys and girls, so
that, where they exist, they may be carefully developed in the later
years. For this reason, it is well that everybody should learn the bare
beginnings of subjects which need not be further pursued by those who
are bad at them.

When we have decided what every adult ought to know, we have to decide
the order in which subjects are to be taught; here we shall naturally
be guided by relative difficulty, teaching the easiest subjects first.
To a great extent, these two principles determine the curriculum in the
early school years.

I shall assume that, by the time a child is five years old, he knows
how to read and write. This should be the business of the Montessori
school, or whatever improvement upon it may hereafter be devised.
There, also, the child learns a certain accuracy in sense-perception,
the rudiments of drawing and singing and dancing, and the power to
concentrate upon some educational occupation in the middle of a
number of other children. Of course the child will not be very perfect
in these respects at five years old, and will need further teaching
in all of them for some years to come. I do not think that anything
involving severe mental effort should be undertaken before the age
of seven, but by sufficient skill difficulties can be enormously
diminished. Arithmetic is a bugbear of childhood--I remember weeping
bitterly because I could not learn the multiplication table--but if it
is tackled gradually and carefully, as it is by means of the Montessori
apparatus, there is no need of the sense of blank despair which its
mysteries used to inspire. In the end, however, there must be a good
deal of rather tiresome mastering of rules if sufficient facility is
to be acquired. This is the most awkward of early school subjects
to fit into a curriculum intended to be interesting; nevertheless,
a certain degree of proficiency is necessary for practical reasons.
Also, arithmetic affords the natural introduction to accuracy: the
answer to a sum is either right or wrong, and never “interesting” or
“suggestive”. This makes arithmetic important as one element in early
education, quite apart from its practical utility. But its difficulties
should be carefully graded and spread out thin; not too much time at a
stretch should be devoted to them.

Geography and history were, when I was young, among the worst taught
of all subjects. I dreaded the geography lesson, and if I tolerated
the history lesson it was only because I have always had a passion
for history. Both subjects might be made fascinating to quite young
children. My little boy, though he has never had a lesson, already
knows far more geography than his nurse. He has acquired his knowledge
through the love of trains and steamers which he shares with all boys.
He wants to know of journeys that his imaginary steamers are to make,
and he listens with the closest attention while I tell him the stages
of the journey to China. Then, if he wishes it, I show him pictures of
the various countries on the way. Sometimes he insists upon pulling
out the big Atlas and looking at the journey on the map. The journey
between London and Cornwall in the train, which he makes twice a year,
interests him passionately, and he knows all the stations where the
train stops or where carriages are slipped. He is fascinated by the
North Pole and the South Pole, and puzzled because there is no East
Pole or West Pole. He knows the directions of France and Spain and
America over the sea, and a good deal about what is to be seen in those
countries. None of this has come by way of instruction, but all in
response to an eager curiosity. Almost every child becomes interested
in geography as soon as it is associated with the idea of travel. I
should teach geography partly by pictures and tales about travellers,
but mainly by the cinema, showing what the traveller sees on his
journey. The knowledge of geographical facts is useful, but without
intrinsic intellectual value; when, however, geography is made vivid
by pictures, it has the merit of giving food for imagination. It is
good to know that there are hot countries and cold countries, flat
countries and mountainous countries, black men, yellow men, brown men,
and red men, as well as white men. This kind of knowledge diminishes
the tyranny of familiar surroundings over the imagination, and makes it
possible in later life to _feel_ that distant countries really exist,
which otherwise is very difficult except by travelling. For these
reasons, I should give geography a large place in the teaching of very
young children, and I should be astonished if they did not enjoy the
subject. Later on, I should give them books with pictures, maps, and
elementary information about different parts of the world, and get
them to put together little essays about the peculiarities of various
countries.

What applies to geography applies even more strongly to history,
though at a slightly more advanced age, because the sense of time is
rudimentary at first. I think history can profitably be begun at about
five years old, at first with interesting stories of eminent men,
abundantly illustrated. I myself had, at that age, a picture-history
of England. Queen Matilda crossing the Thames at Abingdon on the ice
made such a profound impression upon me that I still felt thrilled
when I did the same thing at the age of eighteen, and quite imagined
that King Stephen was after me. I believe hardly any boy of five years
old would fail to be interested by the life of Alexander. Columbus
perhaps belongs more to geography than to history; I can testify that
he becomes interesting before the age of two, at least to children who
know the sea. By the time a child is six years old, he ought to be ripe
for an outline of world history, treated more or less on Mr. Wells’s
or Mr. Van Loon’s lines, with the necessary simplifications, and with
pictures, or the cinema if possible. If he lives in London, he can see
the strange beasts in the Natural History Museum; but I should not
take him to the British Museum before the age of ten or thereabouts.
It is necessary to be careful, in teaching history, not to obtrude
aspects which are interesting to us until the child is ripe for them.
The two aspects which are first interesting are: the general pageant
and procession, from geology to man, from savage man to civilized man,
and so on; and the dramatic story-telling interest of incidents which
have a sympathetic hero. But I think we should keep in our own minds,
as a guiding thread, the conception of gradual chequered progress,
perpetually hampered by the savagery which we inherit from the brutes,
and yet gradually leading on towards mastery of ourselves and our
environment through knowledge. The conception is that of the human
race as a whole, fighting against chaos without and darkness within,
the little tiny lamp of reason growing gradually into a great light
by which the night is dispelled. The divisions between races, nations
and creeds should be treated as follies, distracting us in the battle
against Chaos and Old Night, which is our one truly human activity.

I should give first the illustrations of this theme, and only
afterwards, if ever, the theme itself. I should show savage man
cowering in the cold, gnawing the raw fruits of the earth. I should
show the discovery of fire, and its effects; in this connection, the
story of Prometheus would be in place. I should show the beginnings
of agriculture in the Nile Valley, and the domestication of sheep
and cows and dogs. I should show the growth of ships from canoes
to the largest liners, and the growth of cities from colonies of
cave-dwellers to London and New York. I should show the gradual
growth of writing and of numerals. I should show the brief gleam of
Greece, the diffused magnificence of Rome, the subsequent darkness,
and the coming of science. The whole of this could be made interesting
in detail even to very young children. I should not keep silence
about wars and persecutions and cruelties, but I should not hold
up military conquerors to admiration. The true conquerors, in my
teaching of history, should be those who did something to dispel the
darkness within and without--Buddha and Socrates, Archimedes, Galileo
and Newton, and all the men who have helped to give us mastery over
ourselves or over nature. And so I should build up the conception of a
lordly splendid destiny for the human race, to which we are false when
we revert to wars and other atavistic follies, and true only when we
put into the world something that adds to our human dominion.

In the early years at school, there should be a time set apart for
dancing, which is good for the body and a training for the æsthetic
sense, besides being a great pleasure to the children. Collective
dances should be taught after the elements have been learnt; this is a
form of co-operation which young children easily appreciate. Similar
remarks apply to singing, though it should begin a little later than
dancing, both because it does not afford the same muscular delight, and
because its rudiments are more difficult. Most children, though not
all, will enjoy singing, and after nursery rhymes they should learn
really beautiful songs. There is no reason to corrupt their taste
first and try to purify it afterwards. At the best, this makes people
precious. Children, like adults, differ enormously in musical capacity,
so that the more difficult singing classes would have to be reserved
for a selection among the older children. And among them singing ought
to be voluntary, not enforced.

The teaching of literature is a matter as to which it is easy to make
mistakes. There is not the slightest use, either for young or old, in
being well-informed _about_ literature, knowing the dates of the poets,
the names of their works, and so on. Everything that can be put into
a handbook is worthless. What is valuable is great familiarity with
certain examples of good literature--such familiarity as will influence
the style, not only of writing, but of thought. In old days the Bible
supplied this to English children, certainly with a beneficial effect
upon prose style; but few modern children know the Bible intimately.
I think the good effect of literature cannot be fully obtained without
learning by heart. This practice used to be advocated as a training for
the memory, but psychologists have shown that it has little, if any,
effect in this way. Modern educationists give it less and less place.
But I think they are mistaken, not because of any possible improvement
of memory, but on account of the effect upon beauty of language in
speech and writing. This should come without effort, as a spontaneous
expression of thought; but in order to do so, in a community which has
lost the primitive æsthetic impulses, it is necessary to produce a
habit of thought which I believe is only to be generated by intimate
knowledge of good literature. That is why learning by heart seems to me
important.

But mere learning of set pieces, such as “the quality of mercy” and
“all the world’s a stage”, seems tedious and artificial to most
children, and therefore fails of its purpose. It is much better that
learning by heart should be associated with acting, because then it
is a necessary means to something which every child loves. From the
age of three onwards, children delight in acting a part; they do it
spontaneously, but are overjoyed when more elaborate ways of doing it
are put in their way. I remember the exquisite amusement with which I
acted the quarrel scene between Brutus and Cassius, and declaimed:

  I had rather be a dog and bay the moon
  Than such a Roman.

Children who take part in performing _Julius Cæsar_ or _The Merchant
of Venice_ or any other suitable play will not only know their own
parts, but most of the other parts as well. The play will be in their
thoughts for a long time, and all by way of enjoyment. After all, good
literature is intended to give pleasure, and if children cannot be got
to derive pleasure from it they are hardly likely to derive benefit
either. For these reasons, I should confine the teaching of literature,
in early years, to the learning of parts for acting. The rest should
consist of voluntary reading of well-written stories, obtainable in
the school library. People nowadays write silly sentimental stuff for
children, which insults them by not taking them seriously. Contrast
the intense seriousness of “Robinson Crusoe”. Sentimentality, in
dealing with children and elsewhere, is a failure of dramatic sympathy.
No child thinks it charming to be childish; he wants, as soon as
possible, to learn to behave like a grown-up person. Therefore a book
for children ought never to display a patronizing pleasure in childish
ways. The artificial silliness of many modern children’s books is
disgusting. It must either annoy a child, or puzzle and confuse his
impulse towards mental growth. For this reason, the best books for
children are those that happen to suit them, though written for
grown-up people. The only exceptions are books written for children but
delightful also to grown-up people, such as Lear and Lewis Carroll.

The question of modern languages is one which is not altogether easy.
In childhood it is possible to learn to speak a modern language
perfectly, which can never be achieved in later years; there are
therefore strong grounds for teaching languages at an early age, if
at all. Some people seem to fear that knowledge of one’s own language
suffers if others are learnt too soon. I do not believe this. Tolstoy
and Turgenev were quite competent in Russian, though they learnt
English, French and German in infancy. Gibbon could write in French
as easily as in English, but this did not spoil his English style.
All through the eighteenth century, all English aristocrats learnt
French in early youth as a matter of course, and many also learnt
Italian; yet their English was vastly better than that of their modern
descendants. A child’s dramatic instinct prevents it from confusing one
language with another, provided it speaks them to different people. I
learnt German at the same time as English, and spoke it to nurses and
governesses up to the age of ten; then I learnt French, and spoke it
to governesses and tutors. Neither language ever confused itself with
English, because it had different personal associations. I think that
if a modern language is to be taught, it should be taught by a person
whose native language it is, not only because it will be better taught,
but because children feel less artificiality in talking a foreign
language to a foreigner than in talking it to a person whose natural
language is the same as their own. I think, therefore, that every
school for children ought to have a French mistress, and if possible a
German mistress too, who should not formally instruct the children in
her language, except quite at first, but should play games with them
and talk to them, and make the success of the games depend upon their
understanding and answering. She could start with _Frère Jacques_ and
_Sur le pont d’Avignon_, and go on gradually to more complicated games.
In this way the language could be acquired without any mental fatigue,
and with all the pleasure of play-acting. And it can be acquired then
far more perfectly and with less waste of valuable educational time
than at any subsequent period.

The teaching of mathematics and science can only be begun towards
the end of the years that we are considering in this chapter--say at
the age of twelve. Of course I assume that arithmetic has already
been taught, and that there have been popular talks about astronomy
and geology, about prehistoric animals, famous explorers, and such
naturally interesting matters. But I am thinking now of formal
teaching--geometry and algebra, physics and chemistry. A few boys and
girls like geometry and algebra, but the great majority do not. I
doubt if this is wholly due to faulty methods of teaching. A sense for
mathematics, like musical capacity, is mainly a gift of the gods, and I
believe it to be quite rare, even in a moderate degree. Nevertheless,
every boy and girl should have a taste of mathematics, in order to
discover those who have a talent for it. Also, even those who learn
little profit by the knowledge that there is such a subject. And by
good methods almost everybody can be made to understand the elements
of geometry. Of algebra I cannot say the same; it is more abstract
than geometry, and essentially unintelligible to those whose minds are
incapable of detachment from the concrete. A taste for physics and
chemistry, properly taught, would probably be found to be less rare
than a taste for mathematics, though still existing only in a minority
of young people. Both mathematics and science, in the years from
twelve to fourteen, ought only to be pursued to the point at which it
becomes clear whether a boy or girl has any aptitude for them. This,
of course, is not immediately evident. I loathed algebra at first,
although afterwards I had some facility in it. In some cases, it would
still be doubtful at the age of fourteen whether there was ability or
not. In these cases, tentative methods would have to be continued for
a while. But in most cases a decision could be made at fourteen. Some
would definitely like the subjects and be good at them, others would
dislike them and be bad at them. It would very seldom happen that a
clever pupil disliked them or a stupid pupil liked them.

What has been said about mathematics and science applies equally to
the classics. Between twelve and fourteen, I should give just so much
instruction in Latin as would suffice to show which boys and girls
had a love of the subject and facility for it. I am assuming that
at fourteen education should begin to be more or less specialized,
according to the tastes and aptitudes of the pupil. The last years
before this moment arrives should be spent in finding out what it will
be best to teach in subsequent years.

All through the school years, education in outdoor things should
continue. In the case of well-to-do children, this can be left to the
parents, but with other children it will have to be partly the business
of the school. When I speak of education in outdoor things, I am not
thinking of games. They, of course, have their importance, which is
sufficiently recognized; but I am thinking of something different:
knowledge of agricultural processes, familiarity with animals and
plants, gardening, habits of observation in the country, and so on.
I have been amazed to discover that town-bred people seldom know
the points of the compass, never know which way the sun goes round,
cannot find out which side of the house is out of the wind, and are
generally destitute of knowledge which every cow or sheep possesses.
This is the result of life exclusively in towns. Perhaps I shall be
thought fanciful if I say that it is one reason why the labour party
cannot win rural constituencies. But it certainly is the reason why
town-bred people are so utterly divorced from everything primitive
and fundamental. It has to do with something trivial and superficial
and frivolous in their attitude to life--not of course always, but
very often. The seasons and the weather, sowing and harvest, crops and
flocks and herds, have a certain human importance, and ought to be
intimate and familiar to everybody if the divorce from mother earth is
not to be too complete. All this knowledge can be acquired by children
in the course of activities which are of immense value to health,
and deserve to be undertaken for that reason alone. And the pleasure
of town children in the country shows that a profound need is being
satisfied. So long as it is not satisfied, our educational system is
incomplete.




