CHAPTER XVIII

THE UNIVERSITY


In previous chapters, we have considered the education in character and
knowledge which, in a good social system, should be open to everybody,
and should in fact be enjoyed by everybody, except for serious special
reasons such as musical genius. (It would have been unfortunate if
Mozart had been obliged to learn ordinary school subjects up to the age
of eighteen.) But even in an ideal community there would, I think, be
many people who would not go to the university. I am convinced that, at
present, only a minority of the population can profit by a scholastic
education prolonged to the age of twenty-one or twenty-two. Certainly
the idle rich who at present infest the older universities very often
derive no benefit from them, but merely contract habits of dissipation.
We have therefore to ask on what principle we are to select those
who should go to the university. At present, they are in the main
those whose parents can afford to send them, though this principle of
selection is being increasingly modified by the scholarship system.
Obviously, the principle of selection ought to be educational, not
financial. A boy or girl of eighteen, who has had a good school
education, is capable of doing useful work. If he or she is to be
exempted for a further period of three or four years, the community has
a right to expect that the time will be profitably employed. But before
deciding who is to go to the university, we must have some view as to
the function of the university in the life of the community.

British universities have passed through three stages, of which,
however, the second is not yet wholly displaced by the third. At first,
they were training colleges for the clergy, to whom, in the Middle
Ages, learning was almost wholly confined. Then, with the renaissance,
the idea gained ground that every well-to-do person ought to be
educated, though women were supposed to need less education than men.
“The education of a gentleman” was given at the universities throughout
the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and is still
given at Oxford. For reasons which we considered in Chapter I, this
ideal, which was formerly very useful, is now out-of-date; it depended
upon aristocracy, and cannot flourish either in a democracy or in an
industrial plutocracy. If there is to be an aristocracy, it had better
be composed of educated gentlemen; but it is better still to have no
aristocracy. I need not argue this question, since it was decided in
England by the Reform Bill and the repeal of the Corn Laws, and in
America by the War of Independence. It is true that we still have in
England the forms of aristocracy, but the spirit is that of plutocracy,
which is quite a different thing. Snobbery makes successful business
men send their sons to Oxford to be turned into “gentlemen”, but the
result is to give them a distaste for business, which reduces their
children again to comparative poverty and the need of earning a living.
The “education of a gentleman” has therefore ceased to be an important
part of the life of the nation, and may be ignored in considering the
future.

The universities are thus reverting to a position more analogous to
that which they occupied in the Middle Ages; they are becoming training
schools for the professions. Barristers, clergymen and medical men have
usually had a university education; so have the first division of the
civil service. An increasing number of engineers and technical workers
in various businesses are university men. As the world grows more
complicated and industry becomes more scientific, an increasing number
of experts are required, and in the main they are supplied by the
universities. Old-fashioned people lament the intrusion of technical
schools into the haunts of pure learning, but it continues none the
less, because it is demanded by plutocrats who care nothing for
“culture”. It is they, much more than the insurgent democracy, who are
the enemies of pure learning. “Useless” learning, like “art for art’s
sake”, is an aristocratic, not a plutocratic, ideal; where it lingers,
it is because the renaissance tradition is not yet dead. I regret the
decay of this ideal profoundly; pure learning was one of the best
things associated with aristocracy. But the evils of aristocracy were
so great as easily to outweigh this merit. In any case, industrialism
must kill aristocracy, whether we desire it or not. We may as well make
up our minds, therefore, to save what we can by attaching it to new
and more potent conceptions; so long as we cling to mere tradition, we
shall be fighting a losing battle.

If pure learning is to survive as one of the purposes of universities,
it will have to be brought into relation with the life of the community
as a whole, not only with the refined delights of a few gentlemen
of leisure. I regard disinterested learning as a matter of great
importance, and I should wish to see its place in academic life
increased, not diminished. Both in England and in America, the main
force tending to its diminution has been the desire to get endowments
from ignorant millionaires. The cure lies in the creation of an
educated democracy, willing to spend public money on objects which our
captains of industry are unable to appreciate. This is by no means
impossible, but it demands a general raising of the intellectual level.
It would be much facilitated if our learned men would more frequently
emancipate themselves from the attitude of hangers-on of the rich,
which they have inherited from a time when patrons were their natural
source of livelihood. It is of course possible to confound learning
with learned men. To take a purely imaginary example, a learned man may
improve his financial position by teaching brewing instead of organic
chemistry; he gains, but learning suffers. If the learned man had a
more genuine love of learning, he would not be politically on the side
of the brewer who endows a professorship of brewing. And if he were on
the side of democracy, democracy would be more ready to see the value
of his learning. For all these reasons, I should wish to see learned
bodies dependent upon public money rather than upon the benefactions
of rich men. This evil is greater in America than in England, but it
exists in England, and may increase.

Leaving aside these political considerations, I shall assume that
universities exist for two purposes: on the one hand, to train men and
women for certain professions; on the other hand, to pursue learning
and research without regard to immediate utility. We shall therefore
wish to see at the universities those who are going to practise these
professions, and those who have that special kind of ability which will
enable them to be valuable in learning and research. But this does
not decide, by itself, how we are to select the men and women for the
professions.

At present, it is very difficult to enter upon such a profession as
law or medicine unless one’s parents have a certain amount of money,
since the training is expensive and earnings do not begin at once.
The consequence is that the principle of selection is social and
hereditary, not fitness for the work. Take medicine as illustrative.
A community which wished to have its doctoring done efficiently would
select for medical training those young people who showed most keenness
and aptitude for the work. At present this principle is applied
partially, to select among those who can afford the training; but it
is quite probable that many of those who would make the best doctors
are too poor to take the course. This involves a deplorable waste of
talent. Let us take another example of a somewhat different kind.
England is a very thickly populated country, which imports most of
its food. From a number of points of view, but especially from that of
safety in war, it would be a boon if more of our food were produced
at home. Yet no measures are taken to see that our very limited area
is efficiently cultivated. Farmers are selected mainly by heredity:
as a rule, they are the sons of farmers. The others are men who have
bought farms, which implies some capital but not necessarily any
agricultural skill. It is known that Danish methods of agriculture
are more productive than ours, but no steps are taken to cause our
farmers to know about them. We ought to insist that every person
allowed to cultivate more than a small holding should have a diploma
in scientific agriculture, just as we insist on a motorist having a
licence. The hereditary principle has been abandoned in government, but
it lingers in many other departments of life. Wherever it exists, it
promotes the inefficiency to which it formerly led in public affairs.
We must replace it by two correlative rules: first, that no one shall
be allowed to undertake important work without having acquired the
necessary skill; secondly, that this skill shall be taught to the
ablest of those who desire it, quite independently of their parents’
means. It is obvious that these two rules would enormously increase
efficiency.

University education should therefore be regarded as a privilege for
special ability, and those who possess the skill but no money should be
maintained at the public expense during their course. No one should be
admitted unless he satisfies the tests of ability, and no one should be
allowed to remain unless he satisfies the authorities that he is using
his time to advantage. The idea of the university as a place of leisure
where rich young men loaf for three or four years is dying, but, like
Charles II, it is an unconscionable time about it.

When I say that a young man or woman at the university should not
be allowed to be idle, I must hasten to add that the tests of work
must not consist in a mechanical conformity to system. In the newer
universities in England and America there is a regrettable tendency
to insist upon attendance at innumerable lectures. The arguments in
favour of individual work, which are allowed to be strong in the case
of infants in a Montessori school, are very much stronger in the case
of young people of twenty, particularly when, as we are assuming,
they are keen and exceptionally able. When I was an undergraduate, my
feeling, and that of most of my friends, was that lectures were a pure
waste of time. No doubt we exaggerated, but not much. The real reason
for lectures is that they are obvious work, and therefore business men
are willing to pay for them. If university teachers adopted the best
methods, business men would think them idle, and insist upon cutting
down the staff. Oxford and Cambridge, because of their prestige, are to
some extent able to apply the right methods; but the newer universities
are unable to stand up against business men, and so are most American
universities. The teacher should, at the beginning of the term, give
a list of books to be read carefully, and a slight account of other
books which some may like and others not. He should set papers, which
can only be answered by noticing the important points in the books
intelligently. He should see the pupils individually when they have
done their papers. About once a week or once a fortnight, he should see
such as care to come in the evening, and have desultory conversation
about matters more or less connected with their work. All this is not
very different from the practice at the older universities. If a pupil
chooses to set himself a paper, different from that of the teacher but
equally difficult, he shall be at liberty to do so. The industry of the
pupils can be judged by their papers.

There is, however, one point of great importance. Every university
teacher should be himself engaged in research, and should have
sufficient leisure and energy to know what is being done in his subject
in all countries. In university teaching, skill in pedagogy is no
longer important; what is important is knowledge of one’s subject and
keenness about what is being done in it. This is impossible for a man
who is overworked and nervously exhausted by teaching. His subject is
likely to become distasteful to him, and his knowledge is almost sure
to be confined to what he learnt in youth. Every university teacher
ought to have a Sabbatical year (one in every seven), to be spent in
foreign universities or in otherwise acquiring knowledge of what is
being done abroad. This is common in America, but European countries
have too much intellectual pride to admit that it is necessary. In this
they are quite mistaken. The men who taught me mathematics at Cambridge
were almost wholly untouched by the Continental mathematics of the
previous twenty or thirty years; throughout my undergraduate time, I
never heard the name of Weierstrass. It was only by subsequent travel
that I came in contact with modern mathematics. This was no rare or
exceptional circumstance. Of many universities at many periods similar
things could be said.

There is in universities a certain opposition between those who care
most for teaching and those who care most for research. This is almost
entirely due to a wrong conception of teaching, and to the presence of
a number of students whose industry and capacity are below the level
which ought to be exacted as a condition of residence. The idea of the
old-fashioned schoolmaster persists to some extent at universities.
There is a desire to have a good moral effect on students, and a wish
to drill them in old-fashioned worthless information, largely known to
be false but supposed to be morally elevating. Students ought not to
be exhorted to work, but they should not be allowed to remain if they
are found to be wasting their time, whether from idleness or from lack
of ability. The only morality which can be profitably exacted is that
of work; the rest belongs to earlier years. And the morality of work
should be exacted by sending away those who do not possess it, since
evidently they had better be otherwise employed. A teacher should not
be expected to work long hours at teaching, and should have abundant
leisure for research; but he should be expected to employ this leisure
wisely.

Research is at least as important as education, when we are considering
the functions of universities in the life of mankind. New knowledge
is the chief cause of progress, and without it the world would soon
become stationary. It could continue, for a time, to improve by the
diffusion and wider use of existing knowledge, but this process, by
itself, could not last long. And even the pursuit of knowledge, if
it is utilitarian, is not self-sustaining. Utilitarian knowledge
needs to be fructified by disinterested investigation, which has no
motive beyond the desire to understand the world better. All the great
advances are at first purely theoretical, and are only afterwards found
to be capable of practical applications. And even if some splendid
theory never has any practical use, it remains of value on its own
account; for the understanding of the world is one of the ultimate
goods. If science and organization had succeeded in satisfying the
needs of the body and in abolishing cruelty and war, the pursuit of
knowledge and beauty would remain to exercise our love of strenuous
creation. I should not wish the poet, the painter, the composer or
the mathematician to be preoccupied with some remote effect of his
activities in the world of practice. He should be occupied, rather,
in the pursuit of a vision, in capturing and giving permanence to
something which he has first seen dimly for a moment, which he has
loved with such ardour that the joys of this world have grown pale
by comparison. All great art and all great science springs from the
passionate desire to embody what was at first an unsubstantial phantom,
a beckoning beauty luring men away from safety and ease to a glorious
torment. The men in whom this passion exists must not be fettered by
the shackles of a utilitarian philosophy, for to their ardour we owe
all that makes man great.




