CHAPTER II

THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


Before considering how to educate, it is well to be clear as to the
sort of result which we wish to achieve. Dr. Arnold wanted “humbleness
of mind”, a quality not possessed by Aristotle’s “magnanimous man”.
Nietzsche’s ideal is not that of Christianity. No more is Kant’s: for
while Christ enjoins love, Kant teaches that no action of which love
is the motive can be truly virtuous. And even people who agree as to
the ingredients of a good character may differ as to their relative
importance. One man will emphasize courage, another learning, another
kindliness, and another rectitude. One man, like the elder Brutus, will
put duty to the State above family affection; another, like Confucius,
will put family affection first. All these divergences will produce
differences as to education. We must have some conception of the kind
of person we wish to produce, before we can have any definite opinion
as to the education which we consider best.

Of course an educator may be foolish, in the sense that he produces
results other than those at which he was aiming. Uriah Heep was the
outcome of lessons in humility at a Charity School, which had had an
effect quite different from what was intended. But in the main the
ablest educators have been fairly successful. Take as examples the
Chinese literati, the modern Japanese, the Jesuits, Dr. Arnold, and the
men who direct the policy of the American public schools. All these,
in their various ways, have been highly successful. The results aimed
at in the different cases were utterly different, but in the main the
results were achieved. It may be worth while to spend a few moments on
these different systems, before attempting to decide what we should
ourselves regard as the aims which education should have in view.

Traditional Chinese education was, in some respects, very similar to
that of Athens in its best days. Athenian boys were made to learn
Homer by heart from beginning to end; Chinese boys were made to learn
the Confucian classics with similar thoroughness. Athenians were
taught a kind of reverence for the gods which consisted in outward
observances, and placed no barrier in the way of free intellectual
speculation. Similarly the Chinese were taught certain rites connected
with ancestor-worship, but were by no means obliged to have the
beliefs which the rites would seem to imply. An easy and elegant
scepticism was the attitude expected of an educated adult: anything
might be discussed, but it was a trifle vulgar to reach very positive
conclusions. Opinions should be such as could be discussed pleasantly
at dinner, not such as men would fight for. Carlyle calls Plato “a
lordly Athenian gentleman, very much at his ease in Zion”. This
characteristic of being “at his ease in Zion” is also found in Chinese
sages, and is, as a rule, absent from the sages produced by Christian
civilizations, except when, like Goethe, they have deeply imbibed the
spirit of Hellenism. The Athenians and the Chinese alike wished to
enjoy life, and had a conception of enjoyment which was refined by an
exquisite sense of beauty.

There were, however, great differences between the two civilizations,
owing to the fact that, broadly speaking, the Greeks were energetic
and the Chinese were lazy. The Greeks devoted their energies to art
and science and mutual extermination, in all of which they achieved
unprecedented success. Politics and patriotism afforded practical
outlets for Greek energy: when a politician was ousted, he led a band
of exiles to attack his native city. When a Chinese official was
disgraced, he retired to the hills and wrote poems on the pleasures of
country life. Accordingly the Greek civilization destroyed itself, but
the Chinese civilization could only be destroyed from without. These
differences, however, seem not wholly attributable to education, since
Confucianism in Japan never produced the indolent cultured scepticism
which characterized the Chinese literati, except in the Kyoto nobility,
who formed a kind of Faubourg Saint Germain.

Chinese education produced stability and art; it failed to produce
progress or science. Perhaps this may be taken as what is to be
expected of scepticism. Passionate beliefs produce either progress or
disaster, not stability. Science, even when it attacks traditional
beliefs, has beliefs of its own, and can scarcely flourish in an
atmosphere of literary scepticism. In a pugnacious world which has
been unified by modern inventions, energy is needed for national
self-preservation. And without science, democracy is impossible: the
Chinese civilization was confined to the small percentage of educated
men, and the Greek civilization was based on slavery. For these
reasons, the traditional education of China is not suited to the modern
world, and has been abandoned by the Chinese themselves. Cultivated
eighteenth-century gentlemen, who in some respects resembled Chinese
literati, have become impossible for the same reasons.

Modern Japan affords the clearest illustration of a tendency which is
prominent among all the Great Powers--the tendency to make national
greatness the supreme purpose of education. The aim of Japanese
education is to produce citizens who shall be devoted to the State
through the training of their passions, and useful to it through
the knowledge they have acquired. I cannot sufficiently praise the
skill with which this double purpose has been pursued. Ever since
the advent of Commodore Perry’s squadron, the Japanese have been in
a situation in which self-preservation was very difficult; their
success affords a justification of their methods, unless we are to hold
that self-preservation itself may be culpable. But only a desperate
situation could have justified their educational methods, which would
have been culpable in any nation not in imminent peril. The Shinto
religion, which must not be called in question even by university
professors, involves history which is just as dubious as Genesis; the
Dayton trial pales into insignificance beside the theological tyranny
in Japan. There is an equal ethical tyranny: nationalism, filial piety,
Mikado-worship, etc., must not be called in question, and therefore
many kinds of progress are scarcely possible. The great danger of a
cast-iron system of this sort is that it may provoke revolution as the
sole method of progress. This danger is real, though not immediate, and
is largely caused by the educational system.

We have thus in modern Japan a defect opposite to that of ancient
China. Whereas the Chinese literati were too sceptical and lazy, the
products of Japanese education are likely to be too dogmatic and
energetic. Neither acquiescence in scepticism nor acquiescence in dogma
is what education should produce. What it should produce is a belief
that knowledge is attainable in a measure, though with difficulty; that
much of what passes for knowledge at any given time is likely to be
more or less mistaken, but that the mistakes can be rectified by care
and industry. In acting upon our beliefs, we should be very cautious
where a small error would mean disaster; nevertheless it is upon our
beliefs that we must act. This state of mind is rather difficult:
it requires a high degree of intellectual culture without emotional
atrophy. But though difficult it is not impossible; it is in fact the
scientific temper. Knowledge, like other good things, is difficult,
but not impossible; the dogmatist forgets the difficulty, the sceptic
denies the possibility. Both are mistaken, and their errors, when
wide-spread, produce social disaster.

The Jesuits, like the modern Japanese, made the mistake of
subordinating education to the welfare of an institution--in their
case, the Catholic Church. They were not concerned primarily with the
good of the particular pupil, but with making him a means to the good
of the Church. If we accept their theology, we cannot blame them: to
save souls from hell is more important than any merely terrestrial
concern, and is only to be achieved by the Catholic Church. But those
who do not accept this dogma will judge Jesuit education by its
results. These results, it is true, were sometimes quite as undesired
as Uriah Heep: Voltaire was a product of Jesuit methods. But on the
whole, and for a long time, the intended results were achieved: the
counter-reformation, and the collapse of Protestantism in France, must
be largely attributed to Jesuit efforts. To achieve these ends, they
made art sentimental, thought superficial, and morals loose; in the
end, the French Revolution was needed to sweep away the harm that they
had done. In education, their crime was that they were not actuated by
love of their pupils, but by ulterior ends.

Dr. Arnold’s system, which has remained in force in English public
schools to the present day, had another defect, namely that it was
aristocratic. The aim was to train men for positions of authority
and power, whether at home or in distant parts of the empire. An
aristocracy, if it is to survive, needs certain virtues; these were
to be imparted at school. The product was to be energetic, stoical,
physically fit, possessed of certain unalterable beliefs, with high
standards of rectitude, and convinced that it had an important mission
in the world. To a surprising extent, these results were achieved.
Intellect was sacrificed to them, because intellect might produce
doubt. Sympathy was sacrificed, because it might interfere with
governing “inferior” races or classes. Kindliness was sacrificed for
the sake of toughness; imagination, for the sake of firmness. In an
unchanging world, the result might have been a permanent aristocracy,
possessing the merits and defects of the Spartans. But aristocracy
is out-of-date, and subject populations will no longer obey even the
most wise and virtuous rulers. The rulers are driven into brutality,
and brutality further encourages revolt. The complexity of the modern
world increasingly requires intelligence, and Dr. Arnold sacrificed
intelligence to “virtue”. The battle of Waterloo may have been won
on the playing-fields of Eton, but the British Empire is being lost
there. The modern world needs a different type, with more imaginative
sympathy, more intellectual suppleness, less belief in bulldog courage
and more belief in technical knowledge. The administrator of the
future must be the servant of free citizens, not the benevolent ruler
of admiring subjects. The aristocratic tradition embedded in British
higher education is its bane. Perhaps this tradition can be eliminated
gradually; perhaps the older educational institutions will be found
incapable of adapting themselves. As to that, I do not venture an
opinion.

The American public schools achieve successfully a task never before
attempted on a large scale: the task of transforming a heterogeneous
selection of mankind into a homogeneous nation. This is done so ably,
and is on the whole such a beneficent work, that on the balance great
praise is due to those who accomplish it. But America, like Japan, is
placed in a peculiar situation, and what the special circumstances
justify is not necessarily an ideal to be followed everywhere and
always. America has had certain advantages and certain difficulties.
Among the advantages were: a higher standard of wealth; freedom from
the danger of defeat in war; comparative absence of cramping traditions
inherited from the Middle Ages. Immigrants found in America a generally
diffused sentiment of democracy and an advanced stage of industrial
technique. These, I think, are the two chief reasons why almost all
of them came to admire America more than their native countries. But
actual immigrants, as a rule, retain a dual patriotism: in European
struggles they continue to take passionately the side of the nation
to which they originally belonged. Their children, on the contrary,
lose all loyalty to the country from which their parents have come,
and become merely and simply Americans. The attitude of the parents is
attributable to the general merits of America; that of the children
is very largely determined by their school education. It is only the
contribution of the school that concerns us.

In so far as the school can rely upon the genuine merits of America,
there is no need to associate the teaching of American patriotism with
the inculcation of false standards. But where the Old World is superior
to the New, it becomes necessary to instil a contempt for genuine
excellences. The intellectual level in Western Europe and the artistic
level in Eastern Europe are, on the whole, higher than in America.
Throughout Western Europe, except in Spain and Portugal, there is
less theological superstition than in America. In almost all European
countries the individual is less subject to herd domination than in
America: his inner freedom is greater even where his political freedom
is less. In these respects, the American public schools do harm. The
harm is essential to the teaching of an exclusive American patriotism.
The harm, as with the Japanese and the Jesuits, comes from regarding
the pupils as means to an end, not as ends in themselves. The teacher
should love his children better than his State or his Church; otherwise
he is not an ideal teacher.

When I say that pupils should be regarded as ends, not as means, I
may be met by the retort that, after all, everybody is more important
as a means than as an end. What a man is as an end perishes when he
dies; what he produces as a means continues to the end of time. We
cannot deny this, but we can deny the consequences deduced from it. A
man’s importance as a means may be for good or for evil; the remote
effects of human actions are so uncertain that a wise man will tend to
dismiss them from his calculations. Broadly speaking, good men have
good effects, and bad men bad effects. This, of course, is not an
invariable law of nature. A bad man may murder a tyrant because he has
committed crimes which the tyrant intends to punish; the effects of
his act may be good, though he and his act are bad. Nevertheless, as a
broad general rule, a community of men and women who are intrinsically
excellent will have better effects than one composed of people who are
ignorant and malevolent. Apart from such considerations, children
and young people feel instinctively the difference between those who
genuinely wish them well and those who regard them merely as raw
material for some scheme. Neither character nor intelligence will
develop as well or as freely where the teacher is deficient in love;
and love of this kind consists essentially in _feeling_ the child as an
end. We all have this feeling about ourselves: we desire good things
for ourselves without first demanding a proof that some great purpose
will be furthered by our obtaining them. Every ordinarily affectionate
parent feels the same sort of thing about his or her children. Parents
want their children to grow, to be strong and healthy, to do well at
school, and so on, in just the same way in which they want things for
themselves; no effort of self-denial and no abstract principle of
justice is involved in taking trouble about such matters. This parental
instinct is not always strictly confined to one’s own children. In
its diffused form, it must exist in any one who is to be a good
teacher of little boys and girls. As the pupils grow older, it grows
less important. But only those who possess it can be trusted to draw
up schemes of education. Those who regard it as one of the purposes
of male education to produce men willing to kill and be killed for
frivolous reasons are clearly deficient in diffused parental feeling;
yet they control education in all civilized countries except Denmark
and China.

But it is not enough that the educator should love the young; it
is necessary also that he should have a right conception of human
excellence. Cats teach their kittens to catch mice and play with them;
militarists do likewise with the human young. The cat loves the kitten,
but not the mouse; the militarist may love his own son, but not the
sons of his country’s enemies. Even those who love all mankind may err
through a wrong conception of the good life. I shall try, therefore,
before going any further, to give an idea of what I consider excellent
in men and women, quite without regard to practicality, or to the
educational methods by which it might be brought into being. Such a
picture will help us afterwards, when we come to consider the details
of education; we shall know the direction in which we wish to move.

We must first make a distinction: some qualities are desirable in
a certain proportion of mankind, others are desirable universally.
We want artists, but we also want men of science. We want great
administrators, but we also want ploughmen and millers and bakers. The
qualities which produce a man of great eminence in some one direction
are often such as might be undesirable if they were universal. Shelley
describes the day’s work of a poet as follows:

  He will watch from dawn to gloom
  The lake-reflected sun illume
  The honey-bees in the ivy bloom,
  Nor heed nor see what things they be.

These habits are praiseworthy in a poet, but not--shall we say--in a
postman. We cannot therefore frame our education with a view to giving
every one the temperament of a poet. But some characteristics are
universally desirable, and it is these alone that I shall consider at
this stage.

I make no distinction whatever between male and female excellence. A
certain amount of occupational training is desirable for a woman who
is to have the care of babies, but that only involves the same sort
of difference as there is between a farmer and a miller. It is in no
degree fundamental, and does not demand consideration at our present
level.

I will take four characteristics which seem to me jointly to form
the basis of an ideal character: vitality, courage, sensitiveness,
and intelligence. I do not suggest that this list is complete, but I
think it carries us a good way. Moreover I firmly believe that, by
proper physical, emotional and intellectual care of the young, these
qualities could all be made very common. I shall consider each in turn.

Vitality is rather a physiological than a mental characteristic; it
is presumably always present where there is perfect health, but it
tends to ebb with advancing years, and gradually dwindles to nothing
in old age. In vigorous children it quickly rises to a maximum before
they reach school age, and then tends to be diminished by education.
Where it exists, there is pleasure in feeling alive, quite apart
from any specific pleasant circumstance. It heightens pleasures and
diminishes pains. It makes it easy to take an interest in whatever
occurs, and thus promotes objectivity, which is an essential of sanity.
Human beings are prone to become absorbed in themselves, unable to
be interested in what they see and hear or in anything outside their
own skins. This is a great misfortune to themselves, since it entails
at best boredom and at worst melancholia; it is also a fatal barrier
to usefulness, except in very exceptional cases. Vitality promotes
interest in the outside world; it also promotes the power of hard
work. Moreover it is a safeguard against envy, because it makes one’s
own existence pleasant. As envy is one of the great sources of human
misery, this is a very important merit in vitality. Many bad qualities
are of course compatible with vitality--for example, those of a
healthy tiger. And many of the best qualities are compatible with its
absence: Newton and Locke, for example, had very little. Both these
men, however, had irritabilities and envies from which better health
would have set them free. Probably the whole of Newton’s controversy
with Leibniz, which ruined English mathematics for over a hundred
years, would have been avoided if Newton had been robust and able to
enjoy ordinary pleasures. In spite of its limitations, therefore, I
reckon vitality among the qualities which it is important that all men
should possess.

Courage--the second quality on our list--has several forms, and all
of them are complex. Absence of fear is one thing, and the power of
controlling fear is another. And absence of fear, in turn, is one thing
when the fear is rational, another when it is irrational. Absence
of irrational fear is clearly good; so is the power of controlling
fear. But absence of rational fear is a matter as to which debate is
possible. However, I shall postpone this question until I have said
something about the other forms of courage.

Irrational fear plays an extraordinarily large part in the instinctive
emotional life of most people. In its pathological forms, as
persecution mania, anxiety complex, or what not, it is treated by
alienists. But in milder forms it is common among those who are
considered sane. It may be a general feeling that there are dangers
about, more correctly termed “anxiety”, or a specific dread of things
that are not dangerous, such as mice or spiders.[3] It used to be
supposed that many fears were instinctive, but this is now questioned
by most investigators. There are apparently a few instinctive
fears--for instance, of loud noises--but the great majority arise
either from experience or from suggestion. Fear of the dark, for
example, seems to be entirely due to suggestion. Most vertebrates,
there is reason to think, do not feel instinctive fear of their natural
enemies, but catch this emotion from their elders. When human beings
bring them up by hand, the fears usual among the species are found to
be absent. But fear is exceedingly infectious: children catch it from
their elders even when their elders are not aware of having shown it.
Timidity in mothers or nurses is very quickly imitated by children
through suggestion. Hitherto, men have thought it attractive in women
to be full of irrational terrors, because it gave men a chance to seem
protective without incurring any real danger. But the sons of these
men have acquired the terrors from their mothers, and have had to be
afterwards trained to regain a courage which they need never have lost
if their fathers had not desired to despise their mothers. The harm
that has been done by the subjection of women is incalculable; this
matter of fear affords only one incidental illustration.

I am not at the moment discussing the methods by which fear and anxiety
may be minimized; that is a matter which I shall consider later. There
is, however, one question which arises at this stage, namely: can we
be content to deal with fear by means of repression, or must we find
some more radical cure? Traditionally, aristocracies have been trained
not to show fear, while subject nations, classes, and sexes have been
encouraged to remain cowardly. The test of courage has been crudely
behavioristic: a man must not run away in battle; he must be proficient
in “manly” sports; he must retain self-command in fires, shipwrecks,
earthquakes, etc. He must not merely do the right thing, but he must
avoid turning pale, or trembling, or gasping for breath, or giving
any other easily observed sign of fear. All this I regard as of great
importance: I should wish to see courage cultivated in all nations,
in all classes, and in both sexes. But when the method adopted is
repressive, it entails the evils always associated with that practice.
Shame and disgrace have always been potent weapons in producing the
appearance of courage; but in fact they merely cause a conflict of
terrors, in which it is hoped that the dread of public condemnation
will be the stronger. “Always speak the truth except when something
frightens you” was a maxim taught to me in childhood. I cannot admit
the exception. Fear should be overcome not only in action, but in
feeling; and not only in conscious feeling, but in the unconscious
as well. The purely external victory over fear, which satisfies the
aristocratic code, leaves the impulse operative underground, and
produces evil twisted reactions which are not recognized as the
offspring of terror. I am not thinking of “shell-shock”, in which the
connection with fear is obvious. I am thinking rather of the whole
system of oppression and cruelty by which dominant castes seek to
retain their ascendancy. When recently in Shanghai a British officer
ordered a number of unarmed Chinese students to be shot in the back
without warning, he was obviously actuated by terror just as much as
a soldier who runs away in battle. But military aristocracies are not
sufficiently intelligent to trace such actions to their psychological
source; they regard them rather as showing firmness and a proper spirit.

From the point of view of psychology and physiology, fear and rage are
closely analogous emotions: the man who feels rage is not possessed
of the highest kind of courage. The cruelty invariably displayed in
suppressing negro insurrections, communist rebellions, and other
threats to aristocracy, is an offshoot of cowardice, and deserves the
same contempt as is bestowed upon the more obvious forms of that vice.
I believe that it is possible so to educate ordinary men and women that
they shall be able to live without fear. Hitherto, only a few heroes
and saints have achieved such a life; but what they have done others
could do if they were shown the way.

For the kind of courage which does not consist in repression, a number
of factors must be combined. To begin with the humblest: health and
vitality are very helpful, though not indispensable. Practice and
skill in dangerous situations are very desirable. But when we come to
consider, not courage in this and that respect, but universal courage,
something more fundamental is wanted. What is wanted is a combination
of self-respect with an impersonal outlook on life. To begin with
self-respect: some men live from within, while others are mere mirrors
of what is felt and said by their neighbours. The latter can never have
true courage: they must have admiration, and are haunted by the fear
of losing it. The teaching of “humility”, which used to be thought
desirable, was the means of producing a perverted form of this same
vice. “Humility” suppressed self-respect, but not the desire for the
respect of others; it merely made nominal self-abasement the means
of acquiring credit. Thus it produced hypocrisy and falsification of
instinct. Children were taught unreasoning submission, and proceeded
to exact it when they grew up; it was said that only those who have
learned to obey know how to command. What I suggest is that no one
should learn how to obey, and no one should attempt to command. I do
not mean, of course, that there should not be leaders in co-operative
enterprises; but their authority should be like that of a captain of
a football team, which is suffered voluntarily in order to achieve
a common purpose. Our purposes should be our own, not the result of
external authority; and our purposes should never be forcibly imposed
upon others. This is what I mean when I say no one should command and
no one should obey.

There is one thing more required for the highest courage, and that
is what I called just now an impersonal outlook on life. The man
whose hopes and fears are all centred upon himself can hardly view
death with equanimity, since it extinguishes his whole emotional
universe. Here, again, we are met by a tradition urging the cheap
and easy way of repression: the saint must learn to renounce Self,
must mortify the flesh and forego instinctive joys. This can be done,
but its consequences are bad. Having renounced pleasure for himself,
the ascetic saint renounces it for others also, which is easier. Envy
persists underground, and leads him to the view that suffering is
ennobling, and may therefore be legitimately inflicted. Hence arises
a complete inversion of values: what is good is thought bad, and what
is bad is thought good. The source of all the harm is that the good
life has been sought in obedience to a negative imperative, not in
broadening and developing natural desires and instincts. There are
certain things in human nature which take us beyond Self without
effort. The commonest of these is love, more particularly parental
love, which in some is so generalized as to embrace the whole human
race. Another is knowledge. There is no reason to suppose that Galileo
was particularly benevolent, yet he lived for an end which was not
defeated by his death. Another is art. But in fact every interest
in something outside a man’s own body makes his life to that degree
impersonal. For this reason, paradoxical as it may seem, a man of
wide and vivid interests finds less difficulty in leaving life than
is experienced by some miserable hypochondriac whose interests are
bounded by his own ailments. Thus the perfection of courage is found
in the man of many interests, who _feels_ his ego to be but a small
part of the world, not through despising himself, but through valuing
much that is not himself. This can hardly happen except where instinct
is free and intelligence is active. From the union of the two grows
a comprehensiveness of outlook unknown both to the voluptuary and to
the ascetic; and to such an outlook personal death appears a trivial
matter. Such courage is positive and instinctive, not negative and
repressive. It is courage in this positive sense that I regard as one
of the major ingredients in a perfect character.

Sensitiveness, the third quality in our list, is in a sense a
corrective of mere courage. Courageous behaviour is easier for a man
who fails to apprehend dangers, but such courage may often be foolish.
We cannot regard as satisfactory any way of acting which is dependent
upon ignorance or forgetfulness: the fullest possible knowledge and
realization are an essential part of what is desirable. The cognitive
aspect, however, comes under the head of intelligence; sensitiveness,
in the sense in which I am using the term, belongs to the emotions. A
purely theoretical definition would be that a person is emotionally
sensitive when many stimuli produce emotions in him; but taken thus
broadly the quality is not necessarily a good one. If sensitiveness is
to be good, the emotional reaction must be in some sense _appropriate_:
mere intensity is not what is needed. The quality I have in mind is
that of being affected pleasurably or the reverse by many things, and
by the right things. What are the right things, I shall try to explain.
The first step, which most children take at the age of about five
months, is to pass beyond mere pleasures of sensation, such as food
and warmth, to the pleasure of social approbation. This pleasure, as
soon as it has arisen, develops very rapidly: every child loves praise
and hates blame. Usually the wish to be thought well of remains one of
the dominant motives throughout life. It is certainly very valuable
as a stimulus to pleasant behaviour, and as a restraint upon impulses
of greed. If we were wiser in our admirations, it might be much more
valuable. But so long as the most admired heroes are those who have
killed the greatest number of people, love of admiration cannot alone
be adequate to the good life.

The next stage in the development of a desirable form of sensitiveness
is sympathy. There is a purely physical sympathy: a very young child
will cry because a brother or sister is crying. This, I suppose,
affords the basis for the further developments. The two enlargements
that are needed are: first, to feel sympathy even when the sufferer
is not an object of special affection; secondly, to feel it when the
suffering is merely known to be occurring, not sensibly present. The
second of these enlargements depends mainly upon intelligence. It may
only go so far as sympathy with suffering which is portrayed vividly
and touchingly, as in a good novel; it may, on the other hand, go so
far as to enable a man to be moved emotionally by statistics. This
capacity for abstract sympathy is as rare as it is important. Almost
everybody is deeply affected when some one he loves suffers from
cancer. Most people are moved when they see the sufferings of unknown
patients in hospitals. Yet when they read that the death-rate from
cancer is such-and-such, they are as a rule only moved to momentary
personal fear lest they or some one dear to them should acquire the
disease. The same is true of war: people think it dreadful when their
son or brother is mutilated, but they do not think it a million
times as dreadful that a million people should be mutilated. A man
who is full of kindliness in all personal dealings may derive his
income from incitement to war or from the torture of children in
“backward” countries. All these familiar phenomena are due to the fact
that sympathy is not stirred, in most people, by a merely abstract
stimulus. A large proportion of the evils in the modern world would
cease if this could be remedied. Science has greatly increased our
power of affecting the lives of distant people, without increasing
our sympathy for them. Suppose you are a shareholder in a company
which manufactures cotton in Shanghai. You may be a busy man, who has
merely followed financial advice in making the investment; neither
Shanghai nor cotton interests you, but only your dividends. Yet you
become part of the force leading to massacres of innocent people, and
your dividends would disappear if little children were not forced into
unnatural and dangerous toil. You do not mind, because you have never
seen the children, and an abstract stimulus cannot move you. That is
the fundamental reason why large-scale industrialism is so cruel, and
why oppression of subject races is tolerated. An education producing
sensitiveness to abstract stimuli would make such things impossible.

Cognitive sensitiveness, which should also be included, is practically
the same thing as a habit of observation, and this is more naturally
considered in connection with intelligence. Æsthetic sensitiveness
raises a number of problems which I do not wish to discuss at this
stage. I will therefore pass on to the last of the four qualities we
enumerated, namely, intelligence.

One of the great defects of traditional morality has been the low
estimate it placed upon intelligence. The Greeks did not err in this
respect, but the Church led men to think that nothing matters except
virtue, and virtue consists in abstinence from a certain list of
actions arbitrarily labelled “sin”. So long as this attitude persists,
it is impossible to make men realize that intelligence does more good
than an artificial conventional “virtue”. When I speak of intelligence,
I include both actual knowledge and receptivity to knowledge. The two
are, in fact, closely connected. Ignorant adults are unteachable;
on such matters as hygiene or diet, for example, they are totally
incapable of believing what science has to say. The more a man has
learnt, the easier it is for him to learn still more--always assuming
that he has not been taught in a spirit of dogmatism. Ignorant people
have never been compelled to change their mental habits, and have
stiffened into an unchangeable attitude. It is not only that they are
credulous where they should be sceptical; it is just as much that they
are incredulous where they should be receptive. No doubt the word
“intelligence” properly signifies rather an aptitude for acquiring
knowledge than knowledge already acquired; but I do not think this
aptitude is acquired except by exercise, any more than the aptitude
of a pianist or an acrobat. It is, of course, possible to impart
information in ways that do not train intelligence; it is not only
possible, but easy, and frequently done. But I do not believe that it
is possible to train intelligence without imparting information, or at
any rate causing knowledge to be acquired. And without intelligence our
complex modern world cannot subsist; still less can it make progress. I
regard the cultivation of intelligence, therefore, as one of the major
purposes of education. This might seem a commonplace, but in fact it is
not. The desire to instil what are regarded as correct beliefs has made
educationists too often indifferent to the training of intelligence.
To make this clear, it is necessary to define intelligence a little
more closely, so as to discover the mental habits which it requires.
For this purpose I shall consider only the aptitude for acquiring
knowledge, not the store of actual knowledge which might legitimately
be included in the definition of intelligence.

The instinctive foundation of the intellectual life is curiosity, which
is found among animals in its elementary forms. Intelligence demands an
alert curiosity, but it must be of a certain kind. The sort that leads
village neighbours to try to peer through curtains after dark has no
very high value. The wide-spread interest in gossip is inspired, not by
a love of knowledge, but by malice: no one gossips about other people’s
secret virtues, but only about their secret vices. Accordingly most
gossip is untrue, but care is taken not to verify it. Our neighbours’
sins, like the consolations of religion, are so agreeable that we do
not stop to scrutinize the evidence closely. Curiosity properly so
called, on the other hand, is inspired by a genuine love of knowledge.
You may see this impulse, in a moderately pure form, at work in a
cat which has been brought to a strange room, and proceeds to smell
every corner and every piece of furniture. You will see it also in
children, who are passionately interested when a drawer or cupboard,
usually closed, is open for their inspection. Animals, machines,
thunderstorms, and all forms of manual work, arouse the curiosity of
children, whose thirst for knowledge puts the most intelligent adult
to shame. This impulse grows weaker with advancing years, until at
last what is unfamiliar inspires only disgust, with no desire for a
closer acquaintance. This is the stage at which people announce that
the country is going to the dogs, and that “things are not what they
were in my young days”. The thing which is not the same as it was in
that far-off time is the speaker’s curiosity. And with the death of
curiosity we may reckon that active intelligence, also, has died.

But although curiosity lessens in intensity and in extent after
childhood, it may for a long time improve in quality. Curiosity
about general propositions shows a higher level of intelligence than
curiosity about particular facts; broadly speaking, the higher the
order of generality the greater is the intelligence involved. (This
rule, however, must not be taken too strictly.) Curiosity dissociated
from personal advantage shows a higher development than curiosity
connected (say) with a chance of food. The cat that sniffs in a new
room is not a wholly disinterested scientific inquirer, but probably
also wants to find out whether there are mice about. Perhaps it is not
quite correct to say that curiosity is best when it is disinterested,
but rather that it is best when the connection with other interests is
not direct and obvious, but discoverable only by means of a certain
degree of intelligence. This point, however, it is not necessary for us
to decide.

If curiosity is to be fruitful, it must be associated with a certain
technique for the acquisition of knowledge. There must be habits of
observation, belief in the possibility of knowledge, patience and
industry. These things will develop of themselves, given the original
fund of curiosity and the proper intellectual education. But since our
intellectual life is only a part of our activity, and since curiosity
is perpetually coming into conflict with other passions, there is need
of certain intellectual virtues, such as open-mindedness. We become
impervious to new truth both from habit and from desire: we find it
hard to disbelieve what we have emphatically believed for a number of
years, and also what ministers to self-esteem or any other fundamental
passion. Open-mindedness should therefore be one of the qualities that
education aims at producing. At present, this is only done to a very
limited extent, as is illustrated by the following paragraph from “The
Daily Herald”, July 31, 1925:

  A special committee, appointed to inquire into the allegations of
  the subversion of children’s minds in Bootle schools by their school
  teachers, has placed its findings before the Bootle Borough Council.
  The Committee was of opinion that the allegations were substantiated,
  but the Council deleted the word “substantiated”, and stated that
  “the allegations gave cause for reasonable inquiry”. A recommendation
  made by the Committee, and adopted by the Council, was that in future
  appointments of teachers, they shall undertake to train the scholars
  in habits of reverence towards God and religion, and of respect for
  the civil and religious institutions of the country.

Thus whatever may happen elsewhere, there is to be no open-mindedness
in Bootle. It is hoped that the Borough Council will shortly send a
deputation to Dayton, Tennessee, to obtain further light upon the
best methods of carrying out their programme. But perhaps that is
unnecessary. From the wording of the resolution, it would seem as if
Bootle needed no instruction in obscurantism.

Courage is essential to intellectual probity, as well as to physical
heroism. The real world is more unknown than we like to think; from the
first day of life we practise precarious inductions, and confound our
mental habits with laws of external nature. All sorts of intellectual
systems--Christianity, Socialism, Patriotism, etc.--are ready, like
orphan asylums, to give safety in return for servitude. A free mental
life cannot be as warm and comfortable and sociable as a life enveloped
in a creed: only a creed can give the feeling of a cosy fireside while
the winter storms are raging without.

This brings us to a somewhat difficult question: to what extent
should the good life be emancipated from the herd? I hesitate to use
the phrase “herd instinct”, because there are controversies as to
its correctness. But, however interpreted, the phenomena which it
describes are familiar. We like to stand well with those whom we feel
to be the group with which we wish to co-operate--our family, our
neighbours, our colleagues, our political party, or our nation. This is
natural, because we cannot obtain any of the pleasures of life without
co-operation. Moreover, emotions are infectious, especially when they
are felt by many people at once. Very few people can be present at
an excited meeting without getting excited: if they are opponents,
their opposition becomes excited. And to most people such opposition
is only possible if they can derive support from the thought of a
different crowd in which they will win approbation. That is why the
Communion of Saints has afforded such comfort to the persecuted. Are
we to acquiesce in this desire for co-operation with a crowd, or shall
our education try to weaken it? There are arguments on both sides, and
the right answer must consist in finding a just proportion, not in a
whole-hearted decision for either party.

I think myself that the desire to please and to co-operate should be
strong and normal, but should be capable of being overcome by other
desires on certain important occasions. The desirability of a wish to
please has already been considered in connection with sensitiveness.
Without it, we should all be boors, and all social groups, from the
family upwards, would be impossible. Education of young children would
be very difficult if they did not desire the good opinion of their
parents. The contagious character of emotions also has its uses,
when the contagion is from a wiser person to a more foolish one. But
in the case of panic fear and panic rage it is of course the very
reverse of useful. Thus the question of emotional receptivity is by
no means simple. Even in purely intellectual matters, the issue is
not clear. The great discoverers have had to withstand the herd, and
incur hostility by their independence. But the average man’s opinions
are much less foolish than they would be if he thought for himself: in
science, at least, his respect for authority is on the whole beneficial.

I think that in the life of a man whose circumstances and talents are
not very exceptional there should be a large sphere where what is
vaguely termed “herd instinct” dominates, and a small sphere into which
it does not penetrate. The small sphere should contain the region of
his special competence. We think ill of a man who cannot admire a woman
unless everybody else also admires her: we think that, in the choice
of a wife, a man should be guided by his own independent feelings, not
by a reflection of the feelings of his society. It is no matter if his
judgments of people in general agree with those of his neighbours, but
when he falls in love he ought to be guided by his own independent
feelings. Much the same thing applies in other directions. A farmer
should follow his own judgment as to the capacities of the fields
which he cultivates himself, though his judgment should be formed
after acquiring a knowledge of scientific agriculture. An economist
should form an independent judgment on currency questions, but an
ordinary mortal had better follow authority. Wherever there is special
competence, there should be independence. But a man should not make
himself into a kind of hedgehog, all bristles to keep the world at a
distance. The bulk of our ordinary activities must be co-operative,
and co-operation must have an instinctive basis. Nevertheless, we
should all learn to be able to think for ourselves about matters that
are particularly well known to us, and we ought all to have acquired
the courage to proclaim unpopular opinions when we believe them to be
important. The application of these broad principles in special cases
may, of course, be difficult. But it will be less difficult than it
is at present in a world where men commonly have the virtues we have
been considering in this chapter. The persecuted saint, for instance,
would not exist in such a world. The good man would have no occasion
to bristle and become self-conscious; his goodness would result
from following his impulses, and would be combined with instinctive
happiness. His neighbours would not hate him, because they would not
fear him: the hatred of pioneers is due to the terror they inspire, and
this terror would not exist among men who had acquired courage. Only a
man dominated by fear would join the Ku Klux Klan or the Fascisti. In
a world of brave men, such persecuting organizations could not exist,
and the good life would involve far less resistance to instinct than
it does at present. The good world can only be created and sustained
by fearless men, but the more they succeed in their task the fewer
occasions there will be for the exercise of their courage.

A community of men and women possessing vitality, courage,
sensitiveness, and intelligence, in the highest degree that education
can produce, would be very different from anything that has hitherto
existed. Very few people would be unhappy. The main causes of
unhappiness at present are: ill-health, poverty, and an unsatisfactory
sex-life. All of these would become very rare. Good health could
be almost universal, and even old age could be postponed. Poverty,
since the industrial revolution, is only due to collective stupidity.
Sensitiveness would make people wish to abolish it, intelligence would
show them the way, and courage would lead them to adopt it. (A timid
person would rather remain miserable than do anything unusual.) Most
people’s sex-life, at present, is more or less unsatisfactory. This is
partly due to bad education, partly to persecution by the authorities
and Mrs. Grundy. A generation of women brought up without irrational
sex fears would soon make an end of this. Fear has been thought the
only way to make women “virtuous”, and they have been deliberately
taught to be cowards, both physically and mentally. Women in whom love
is cramped encourage brutality and hypocrisy in their husbands, and
distort the instincts of their children. One generation of fearless
women could transform the world, by bringing into it a generation of
fearless children, not contorted into unnatural shapes, but straight
and candid, generous, affectionate, and free. Their ardour would
sweep away the cruelty and pain which we endure because we are lazy,
cowardly, hard-hearted and stupid. It is education that gives us these
bad qualities, and education that must give us the opposite virtues.
Education is the key to the new world.

But it is time to have done with generalities and come to the concrete
detail in which our ideals are to be embodied.




