CHAPTER XIX

CONCLUSION


At the end of our journey, let us look back over the road, to obtain a
bird’s-eye view of the country we have traversed.

Knowledge wielded by love is what the educator needs and what his
pupils should acquire. In earlier years, love towards the pupils is the
most important kind; in later years, love of the knowledge imparted
becomes increasingly necessary. The important knowledge at first is
knowledge of physiology, hygiene, and psychology, of which the last
more especially concerns the teacher. The instincts and reflexes with
which a child is born can be developed by the environment into the
most diverse habits, and therefore into the most diverse characters.
Most of this happens in very early childhood; consequently it is at
this period that we can most hopefully attempt to form character.
Those who like existing evils are fond of asserting that human nature
cannot be changed. If they mean that it cannot be changed after six
years old, there is a measure of truth in what they say. If they mean
that nothing can be done to alter the instincts and reflexes with
which an infant is born, they are again more or less in the right,
though of course eugenics could, and perhaps will, produce remarkable
results even here. But if they mean, as they usually do, that there
is no way of producing an adult population whose behaviour will be
radically different from that of existing populations, they are flying
in the face of all modern psychology. Given two infants with the same
character at birth, different early environments may turn them into
adults with totally different dispositions. It is the business of early
education to train the instincts so that they may produce a harmonious
character, constructive rather than destructive, affectionate rather
than sullen, courageous, frank, and intelligent. All this can be done
with a great majority of children; it is actually being done where
children are rightly treated. If existing knowledge were used and
tested methods applied, we could, in a generation, produce a population
almost wholly free from disease, malevolence, and stupidity. We do not
do so, because we prefer oppression and war.

The crude material of instinct is, in most respects, equally capable
of leading to desirable and to undesirable actions. In the past,
men did not understand the training of instinct, and therefore were
compelled to resort to repression. Punishment and fear were the great
incentives to what was called virtue. We now know that repression is
a bad method, both because it is never really successful, and because
it produces mental disorders. The training of instincts is a totally
different method, involving a totally different technique. Habits and
skill make, as it were, a channel for instinct, leading it to flow one
way or another according to the direction of the channel. By creating
the right habits and the right skill, we cause the child’s instincts
themselves to prompt desirable actions. There is no sense of strain,
because there is no need to resist temptation. There is no thwarting,
and the child has a sense of unfettered spontaneity. I do not mean
these statements to be taken in an absolute sense; there will always be
unforeseen contingencies in which older methods may become necessary.
But the more the science of child psychology is perfected, and the more
experience we acquire in nursery-schools, the more perfectly the new
methods can be applied.

I have tried to bring before the reader the wonderful possibilities
which are now open to us. Think what it would mean: health, freedom,
happiness, kindness, intelligence, all nearly universal. In one
generation, if we chose, we could bring the millennium.

But none of this can come about without love. The knowledge exists;
lack of love prevents it from being applied. Sometimes the lack of
love towards children brings me near to despair--for example, when I
find almost all our recognized moral leaders unwilling that anything
should be done to prevent the birth of children with venereal disease.
Nevertheless, there is a gradual liberation of love of children, which
surely is one of our natural impulses. Ages of fierceness have overlaid
what is naturally kindly in the dispositions of ordinary men and
women. It is only lately that many Christians have ceased to teach the
damnation of unbaptized infants. Nationalism is another doctrine which
dries up the springs of humanity; during the war, we caused almost all
German children to suffer from rickets. We must let loose our natural
kindliness; if a doctrine demands that we should inflict misery upon
children, let us reject it, however dear it may be to us. In almost all
cases, the psychological source of cruel doctrines is fear; that is one
reason why I have laid so much stress upon the elimination of fear in
childhood. Let us root out the fears that lurk in the dark places of
our own minds. The possibilities of a happy world that are opened up by
modern education make it well worth while to run some personal risk,
even if the risk were more real than it is.

When we have created young people freed from fear and inhibitions and
rebellious or thwarted instincts, we shall be able to open to them the
world of knowledge, freely and completely, without dark hidden corners;
and if instruction is wisely given, it will be a joy rather than a task
to those who receive it. It is not important to increase the amount of
what is learnt above that now usually taught to the children of the
professional classes. What is important is the spirit of adventure and
liberty, the sense of setting out upon a voyage of discovery. If formal
education is given in this spirit, all the more intelligent pupils will
supplement it by their own efforts, for which every opportunity should
be provided. Knowledge is the liberator from the empire of natural
forces and destructive passions; without knowledge, the world of our
hopes cannot be built. A generation educated in fearless freedom will
have wider and bolder hopes than are possible to us, who still have to
struggle with the superstitious fears that lie in wait for us below
the level of consciousness. Not we, but the free men and women whom we
shall create, must see the new world, first in their hopes, and then at
last in the full splendour of reality.

The way is clear. Do we love our children enough to take it? Or shall
we let them suffer as we have suffered? Shall we let them be twisted
and stunted and terrified in youth, to be killed afterwards in futile
wars which their intelligence was too cowed to prevent? A thousand
ancient fears obstruct the road to happiness and freedom. But love can
conquer fear, and if we love our children nothing can make us withhold
the great gift which it is in our power to bestow.


THE END




FOOTNOTES:

[1] “The Child: His Nature and His Needs.” Prepared under the editorial
supervision of M. V. O’Shea, Professor of Education, University of
Wisconsin, 1924. I shall allude to this book as “O’Shea”.

[2] Probably many of Dr. Arnold’s pupils suffered from adenoids, for
which medical men do not usually prescribe flogging, although they
cause habitual idleness.

[3] On fear and anxiety in childhood, see _e.g._ William Stern,
“Psychology of Early Childhood”, Chap. XXXV. (Henry Holt, 1924).

[4] If it be objected that, after all, the world progressed, the reply
is that it did not progress nearly as fast as it might have done, or as
it will do if children are wisely handled.

[5] This is perhaps not strictly accurate. Most children have periods
of apparent stagnation, which cause anxiety to inexperienced parents.
But probably throughout these periods there is progress in ways that
are not easily perceptible.

[6] “Studies in Infant Psychology”, _Scientific Monthly_, December,
1921, p. 506.

[7] I came to know of these passages from a quotation in Dr. Paul
Bousfield’s “Sex and Civilization”, where the same point of view is
strongly advocated.

[8] I think this fear was the same as the fear of mechanical toys. He
saw her first asleep, and thought she was a doll; when she moved he was
startled.

[9] The method adopted with me at the same age was to pick me up by the
heels and hold my head under water for some time. This method, oddly
enough, succeeded in making me like the water; nevertheless I do not
recommend it.

[10] See Bousfield, “Sex and Civilization”, _passim_.

[11] Cf. “The Nervous Child” by Dr. H. C. Cameron (3rd ed., Oxford,
1924), p. 32 ff.

[12] See _e.g._ “The Secret Corps”, by Captain Ferdinand Tuohy, Chap.
VI, (Murray, 1920).

[13] Hodder and Stoughton, 1925.

[14] “The Montessori Method” (Heinemann, 1912), p. 103.

[15] See Dr. H. C. Cameron, “The Nervous Child”, Chaps. IV and V.

[16] In very rare instances, it does a little harm, but this is easily
cured and is not more serious than the results of thumb-sucking.

[17] On this subject, _cf._ “The Nursery-School”, by Margaret McMillan
(Dent, 1919), p. 197.

[18] Although Miss McMillan is American, I understand that the
importance of nursery-schools is even less appreciated in America than
in England. As, however, there are not the financial difficulties which
exist in Europe, it may be hoped that the movement will soon become
wide-spread in the United States. There is no mention of it in O’Shea’s
book, though the need of it is evident from his remarks on p. 182.

[19] See Montessori, “The Montessori Method” (Heinemann, 1912), p. 42
ff.

[20] O’Shea, p. 386.

[21] Are we to infer that culture consists in carrying a hip-flask? The
definition seems applicable.

[22] In those days, in England, the State bore only part of the expense
of the school; this part was called a “grant”, and depended upon the
success of the children in examinations.

[23] The arguments in favour of segregating the able children are well
stated in O’Shea, Chap. XIV.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.

  The cover image for this eBook was created by the transcriber and is
    entered into the public domain.

