CHAPTER VIII.

_On the Physical Agency of the Deity._


1. We are not to expect that physical investigation can enable us
to conceive the manner in which God acts upon the members of the
universe. The question, “Canst thou by searching find out God?”
must silence the boastings of science as well as the repinings
of adversity. Indeed, science shows us, far more clearly than
the conceptions of every day reason, at what an immeasurable
distance we are from any faculty of conceiving _how_ the universe,
material and moral, is the work of the Deity. But with regard
to the material world, we can at least go so far as this;--we
can perceive that events are brought about, not by insulated
interpositions of divine power exerted in each particular case,
but by the establishment of general laws. This, which is the view
of the universe proper to science, whose office it is to search
out these laws, is also the view which, throughout this work, we
have endeavoured to keep present to the mind of the reader. We
have attempted to show that it combines itself most readily and
harmoniously with the doctrines of Natural Theology; that the
arguments for those doctrines are strengthened, the difficulties
which affect them removed, by keeping it steadily before us. We
conceive, therefore, that the religious philosopher will do well to
bear this conception in his mind. God is the author and governor of
the universe through the laws which he has given to its parts, the
properties which he has impressed upon its constituent elements;
these laws and properties are, as we have already said, the
instruments with which he works; the institution of such laws, the
selection of the quantities which they involve, their combination
and application, are the modes in which he exerts and manifests his
power, his wisdom, his goodness: through these attributes, thus
exercised, the Creator of all, shapes, moves, sustains, and guides
the visible creation.

This has been the view of the relation of the Deity to the universe
entertained by the most sagacious and comprehensive minds ever
since the true object of natural philosophy has been clearly and
steadily apprehended. The great writer who was the first to give
philosophers a distinct and commanding view of this object, thus
expresses himself in his “Confession of Faith:” “I believe--that
notwithstanding God hath rested and ceased from creating since the
first Sabbath, yet, nevertheless, he doth accomplish and fulfil his
divine will in all things, great and small, singular and general,
as fully and exactly by providence, as he could by miracle and
new creation, though his working be not immediate and direct, but
by compass; not violating nature, which is his own law upon the
creature.”

And one of our own time, whom we can no longer hesitate to place
among the worthiest disciples of the school of Bacon, conveys the
same thought in the following passage: “The Divine Author of the
universe cannot be supposed to have laid down particular laws,
enumerating all individual contingencies, which his materials
have understood and obey--this would be to attribute to him the
imperfections of human legislation;--but rather, by creating them
endued with certain fixed qualities and powers, he has impressed
them in their origin with the _spirit_, not the letter of his law,
and made all their subsequent combinations and relations inevitable
consequences of this first impression.”[43]

2. This, which thus appears to be the mode of the Deity’s operation
in the material world, requires some attention on our part in
order to understand it with proper clearness. One reason of this
is, that it is a mode of operation altogether different from that
in which we are able to make matter fulfil our designs. Man can
construct exquisite machines, can call in vast powers, can form
extensive combinations, in order to bring about results which he
has in view. But in all this he is only taking advantage of laws
of nature which already exist; he is applying to his use qualities
which matter already possesses. Nor can he by any effort do more.
He can establish no new law of nature which is not a result of the
existing ones. He can invest matter with no new properties which
are not modifications of its present attributes. His greatest
advances in skill and power are made when he calls to his aid
forces which before existed unemployed, or when he discovers so
much of the habits of some of the elements as to be able to bend
them to his purpose. He navigates the ocean by the assistance of
the winds which he cannot raise or still: and even if we suppose
him able to control the course of these, his yet unsubjugated
ministers, this could only be done by studying their characters, by
learning more thoroughly the laws of air and heat and moisture. He
cannot give the minutest portion of the atmosphere new relations,
a new course of expansion, new laws of motion. But the Divine
operations, on the other hand, include something much higher. They
take in the establishment of the laws of the elements, as well
as the combination of these laws and the determination of the
distribution and quantity of the materials on which they shall
produce their effect. We must conceive that the Supreme Power has
ordained that air shall be rarefied, and water turned into vapour,
by heat; no less than that he has combined air and water so as to
sprinkle the earth with showers, and determined the quantity of
heat and air and water, so that the showers shall be as beneficial
as they are.

We may and must, therefore, in our conceptions of the Divine
purpose and agency, go beyond the analogy of human contrivances. We
must conceive the Deity, not only as constructing the most refined
and vast machinery, with which, as we have already seen, the
universe is filled; but we must also imagine him as establishing
those properties by which such machinery is possible: as giving to
the materials of his structure the qualities by which the material
is fitted to its use. There is much to be found, in natural
objects, of the same kind of contrivance which is common to these
and to human inventions; there are mechanical devices, operations
of the atmospheric elements, chemical processes;--many such have
been pointed out, many more exist. But besides these cases of the
combination of means, which, we seem able to understand without
much difficulty, we are led to consider the Divine Being as the
_author of the laws_ of chemical, of physical, and of mechanical
action, and of such other laws as make matter what it is;--and
this is a view which no analogy of human inventions, no knowledge
of human powers, at all assists us to embody or understand.
Science, therefore, as we have said, while it discloses to us the
mode of instrumentality employed by the Deity, convinces us, more
effectually than ever, of the impossibility of conceiving God’s
actions by assimilating them to our own.

3. The laws of material nature, such as we have described them,
operate at all times, and in all places; affect every province of
the universe, and involve every relation of its parts. Wherever
these laws appear, we have a manifestation of the intelligence by
which they were established. But a law supposes an agent, and a
power; for it is the mode according to which the agent proceeds,
the order according to which the power acts. Without the presence
of such an agent, of such a power, conscious of the relations
on which the law depends, producing the effects which the law
prescribes, the law can have no efficacy, no existence. Hence we
infer that the intelligence by which the law is ordained, the
power by which it is put in action, must be present at all times
and in all places where the effects of the law occur; that thus the
knowledge and the agency of the Divine Being pervade every portion
of the universe, producing all action and passion, all permanence
and change. The laws of nature are the laws which he, in his
wisdom, prescribes to his own acts; his universal presence is the
necessary condition of any course of events, his universal agency
the only origin of any efficient force.

This view of the relation of the universe to God has been
entertained by many of the most eminent of those who have combined
the consideration of the material world with the contemplation of
God himself. It may therefore be of use to illustrate it by a few
quotations, and the more so, as we find this idea remarkably dwelt
upon in the works of that writer whose religious views must always
have a peculiar interest for the cultivators of physical science,
the great Newton.

Thus, in the observations on the nature of the Deity with which
he closes the “Opticks,” he declares the various portions of the
world, organic and inorganic, “can be the effect of nothing else
than the wisdom and skill of a powerful ever living Agent, who
being in all places, is more able by his will to move the bodies
within his boundless uniform _sensorium_, and thereby to form and
reform the parts of the universe, than we are by our will to move
the parts of our own bodies.” And in the Scholium at the end of
the “Principia,” he says, “God is one and the same God always and
every where. He is omnipresent, not by means of his _virtue_ alone,
but also by his _substance_, for virtue cannot subsist without
substance. In him all things are contained, and move, but without
mutual passion: God is not acted upon by the motions of bodies;
and they suffer no resistance from the omnipresence of God.” And
he refers to several passages confirmatory of this view, not only
in the Scriptures, but also in writers who hand down to us the
opinions of some of the most philosophical thinkers of the pagan
world. He does not disdain to quote the poets, and among the rest,
the verses of Virgil;

      Principio cœlum ac terras camposque liquentes
      Lucentemque globum lunæ, Titaniaque astra,
      Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus
      Mens agitat molem et magno se corpore miscet:

warning his reader, however, against the doctrine which such
expressions as these are sometimes understood to express. “All
these things he rules, not as _the soul of the world_, but as the
Lord of all.”

Clarke, the friend and disciple of Newton, is one of those who has
most strenuously put forwards the opinion of which we are speaking,
“All things which we commonly say are the effects of the natural
powers of matter and laws of motion, are indeed (if we will speak
strictly and properly,) the effects of God’s acting upon matter
continually and at every moment, either immediately by himself, or
mediately by some created intelligent being. Consequently there is
no such thing as the course of nature, or the power of nature,”
independent of the effects produced by the will of God.

Dugald Stewart has adopted and illustrated the same opinion, and
quotes with admiration the well-known passage of Pope, concerning
the Divine Agency, which

      “Lives through all life, extends through all extent,
      Spreads undivided, operates unspent.”

Mr. Stewart, with no less reasonableness than charity, asserts the
propriety of interpreting such passages according to the scope
and spirit of the reasonings with which they are connected;[44]
since, though by a captious reader they might be associated with
erroneous views of the Deity, a more favourable construction will
often see in them only the results of the necessary imperfection
of our language, when we dwell upon the omnipresence and universal
activity of God.

Finally, we may add that the same opinions still obtain the assent
of the best philosophers and divines of our time. Sir John Herschel
says, (Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy, p. 37.) “We
would no way be understood to deny the constant exercise of His
direct power in maintaining the system of nature; or the ultimate
emanation, of every energy which material agents exert, from his
immediate will, acting in conformity with his own laws.” And the
Bishop of London, in a note to his “Sermon on the duty of combining
religious instruction with intellectual culture,” observes, “the
student in natural philosophy will find rest from all those
perplexities which are occasioned by the obscurity of causation, in
the supposition, which although it was discredited by the patronage
of Malebranche and the Cartesians, has been adopted by Clarke and
Dugald Stewart, and which is by far the most simple and sublime
account of the matter; that all the events, which are continually
taking place in the different parts of the material universe, are
the _immediate_ effects of the divine agency.”




