CHAPTER VI.

_The Stability of the Ocean._


What is meant by the stability of the ocean may perhaps be
explained by means of the following illustration. If we suppose
the whole globe of the Earth to be composed of water, a sphere
of cork, immersed in any part of it, would come to the surface
of the water, except it were placed exactly at the centre of the
earth; and even if it were the slightest displacement of the cork
sphere would end in its rising and floating. This would be the case
whatever were the size of the cork sphere, and even if it were so
large as to leave comparatively little room for the water; and the
result would be nearly the same, if the cork sphere, when in its
central position, had on its surface prominences which projected
above the surface of the water. Now this brings us to the case in
which we have a globe resembling our present earth, composed like
it of water and of a solid centre, with islands and continents,
but having these solid parts all made of cork. And it appears by
the preceding reasoning, that in this case, if there were any
disturbance either of the solid or fluid parts, the solid parts
would rise from the centre of the watery sphere as far as they
could: that is, all the water would run to one side and leave the
land on the other. Such an ocean would be in _unstable_ equilibrium.

Now a question naturally occurs, is the equilibrium of our present
ocean of this unstable kind, or is it stable? The sea, after its
most violent agitations, appears to return to its former state of
repose; but may not some extraordinary cause produce in it some
derangement which may go on increasing till the waters all rush one
way, and thus drown the highest mountains? And if we are safe from
this danger, what are the conditions by which we are so secured?

The illustration which we have employed obviously suggests the
answer to this question; namely, that the equilibrium is unstable,
so long as the solid parts are of such a kind as to float in the
fluid parts; and of course we should expect that the equilibrium
will be stable whenever the contrary is the case, that is, when
the solid parts of the earth are of greater specific gravity than
the sea. A more systematic mathematical calculation has conducted
Laplace to a demonstration of this result.

The mean specific gravity of the earth appears to be about _five_
times that of water, so that the condition of the stability of the
ocean is abundantly fulfilled. And the provision by which this
stability is secured was put in force through the action of those
causes, whatever they were, which made the density of the solid
materials and central parts of the earth greater than the density
of the incumbent fluid.

When we consider, however, the manner in which the wisdom of the
Creator, even in those cases in which his care is most apparent,
as in the structure of animals, works by means of intermediate
causes and general laws, we shall not be ready to reject all belief
of an end in such a case as this, merely because the means are
mechanical agencies. Laplace says, “in virtue of gravity, the most
dense of the strata of the earth are those nearest to the centre;
and thus the mean density exceeds that of the waters which cover
it; which suffices to secure the stability of the equilibrium of
the seas, and to put a bridle upon the fury of the waves.” This
statement, if exact, would not prove that He who subjected the
materials of the earth to the action of gravity did not _intend_
to restrain the rage of the waters: but the statement is not true
in fact. The lower strata, so far as man has yet examined, are
very far from being constantly, or even generally, heavier than
the superincumbent ones. And certainly solidification by no means
implies a greater density than fluidity: the density of Jupiter
is one fourth, that of Saturn less than one seventh, of that of
the earth. If an ocean of water were poured into the cavities upon
the surface of Saturn, its equilibrium would _not_ be stable. It
would leave its bed on one side of the globe; and the planet would
finally be composed of one hemisphere of water and one of land.
If the Earth had an ocean of a fluid six times as heavy as water,
(quicksilver is thirteen times as heavy,) we should have, in like
manner, a dry and a fluid hemisphere. Our inland rivers would
probably never be able to reach the shores, but would be dried up
on their way, like those which run in torrid desarts; perhaps the
evaporation from the ocean would never reach the inland mountains,
and we should have no rivers at all. Without attempting to imagine
the details of such a condition, it is easy to see, that to secure
the existence of a different one is an end which is in harmony with
all that we see of the preserving care displayed in the rest of
creation.[20]




CHAPTER VII.

_The Nebular Hypothesis._


We have referred to Laplace, as a profound mathematician, who has
strongly expressed the opinion, that the arrangement by which
the stability of the solar system is secured is not the result
of chance; that “_a primitive cause_ has directed the planetary
motions.” This author, however, having arrived, as we have done,
at this conviction, does not draw from it the conclusion which has
appeared to us so irresistible, that “the admirable arrangement
of the solar system cannot but be the work of an intelligent and
most powerful being.” He quotes these expressions, which are
those of Newton, and points at them as instances where that great
philosopher had deviated from the method of true philosophy.
He himself proposes an hypothesis concerning the nature of the
_primitive cause_ of which he conceives the existence to be thus
probable: and this hypothesis, on account of the facts which it
attempts to combine, the view of the universe which it presents,
and the eminence of the person by whom it is propounded, deserves
our notice.

1. Laplace conjectures that in the original condition of the solar
system, the sun revolved upon his axis, surrounded by an atmosphere
which, in virtue of an excessive heat, extended far beyond the
orbits of all the planets, the planets as yet having no existence.
The heat gradually diminished, and as the solar atmosphere
contracted by cooling, the rapidity of its rotation increased by
the laws of rotatory motion, and an exterior zone of vapour was
detached from the rest, the central attraction being no longer able
to overcome the increased centrifugal force. This zone of vapour
might in some cases retain its form, as we see it in Saturn’s
ring; but more usually the ring of vapour would break into several
masses, and these would generally coalesce into one mass, which
would revolve about the sun. Such portions of the solar atmosphere,
abandoned successively at different distances, would form “planets
in the state of vapour.” These planets, it appears from mechanical
considerations, would have each its rotatory motion, and as the
cooling of the vapour still went on, would each produce a planet,
which might have satellites and rings, formed from the planet in
the same manner as the planets were formed from the atmosphere of
the sun.

It may easily be conceived that all the primary motions of a system
so produced would be nearly circular, nearly in the plane of the
original equator of the solar rotation, and in the direction of
that rotation. Reasons are offered also to show that the motions
of the satellites thus produced and the motions of rotation of the
planets must be in the same direction. And thus it is held that the
hypothesis accounts for the most remarkable circumstances in the
structure of the solar system: namely, the motions of the planets
in the same direction, and almost in the same plane; the motions
of the satellites in the same direction as those of the planets;
the motions of rotation of these different bodies still in the same
direction as the other motions, and in planes not much different;
the small eccentricity of the orbits of the planets, upon which
condition, along with some of the preceding ones, the stability of
the system depends; and the position of the source of light and
heat in the centre of the system.

It is not necessary for the purpose, nor suitable to the plan
of the present treatise, to examine, on physical grounds, the
probability of the above hypothesis. It is proposed by its author,
with great diffidence, as a conjecture only. We might, therefore,
very reasonably put off all discussion of the bearings of this
opinion upon our views of the government of the world, till the
opinion itself should have assumed a less indistinct and precarious
form. It can be no charge against our doctrines, that there is
a difficulty in reconciling with them arbitrary guesses and
half-formed theories. We shall, however, make a few observations
upon this _nebular hypothesis_, as it may be termed.

2. If we grant, for a moment, the hypothesis, it by no means proves
that the solar system was formed without the intervention of
intelligence and design. It only transfers our view of the skill
exercised, and the means employed, to another part of the work.
For, how came the sun and its atmosphere to have such materials,
such motions, such a constitution, that these consequences
followed from their primordial condition? How came the parent
vapour thus to be capable of coherence, separation, contraction,
solidification? How came the laws of its motion, attraction,
repulsion, condensation, to be so fixed, as to lead to a beautiful
and harmonious system in the end? How came it to be neither too
fluid nor too tenacious, to contract neither too quickly nor too
slowly, for the successive formation of the several planetary
bodies? How came that substance, which at one time was a luminous
vapour, to be at a subsequent period, solids and fluids of many
various kinds? What but design and intelligence prepared and
tempered this previously existing element, so that it should by its
natural changes produce such an orderly system?

And if in this way we suppose a planet to be produced, what sort
of a body would it be?--something, it may be presumed, resembling
a large meteoric stone. How comes this mass to be covered with
motion and organization, with life and happiness? What primitive
cause stocked it with plants and animals, and produced all the
wonderful and subtle contrivances which we find in their structure,
all the wide and profound mutual dependencies which we trace in
their economy? Was man, with his thought and feeling, his powers
and hopes, his will and conscience, also produced as an ultimate
result of the condensation of the solar atmosphere? Except we allow
a prior purpose and intelligence presiding over this material
“primitive cause,” how irreconcilable is it with the evidence which
crowds in upon us from every side!

3. In the next place, we may observe concerning this hypothesis,
that it carries us back to the beginning of the present system
of things; but that it is impossible for our reason to stop at
the point thus presented to it. The sun, the earth, the planets,
the moons were brought into their present order out of a previous
state, and, as is supposed in the theory, by the natural operation
of laws. But how came that previous state to exist? We are
compelled to suppose that it, in like manner, was educed from a
still prior state of things; and this, again, must have been the
result of a condition prior still. Nor is it possible for us to
find, in the tenets of the nebular hypothesis, any resting place or
satisfaction for the mind. The same reasoning faculty, which seeks
for the origin of the present system of things, and is capable
of assenting to, or dissenting from the hypothesis propounded
by Laplace as an answer to this inquiry, is necessarily led to
seek, in the same manner, for the origin of any previous system
of things, out of which the present may appear to have grown: and
must pursue this train of inquiries unremittingly, so long as the
answer which it receives describes a mere assemblage of matter and
motion; since it would be to contradict the laws of matter and the
nature of motion, to suppose such an assemblage to be the _first_
condition.

The reflection just stated, may be illustrated by the further
consideration of the Nebular Hypothesis. This opinion refers us,
for the origin of the solar system, to a sun surrounded with an
atmosphere of enormously elevated temperature, revolving and
cooling. But as we ascend to a still earlier period, what state
of things are we to suppose?--a still higher temperature, a still
more diffused atmosphere. Laplace conceives that, in its primitive
state, the sun consisted in a diffused luminosity so as to resemble
those nebulæ among the fixed stars, which are seen by the aid of
the telescope, and which exhibit a nucleus, more or less brilliant,
surrounded by a cloudy brightness. “This anterior state was itself
preceded by other states, in which the nebulous matter was more and
more diffuse, the nucleus being less and less luminous. We arrive,”
Laplace says, “in this manner, at a nebulosity so diffuse, that its
existence could scarcely be suspected.”

“Such is,” he adds, “in fact, the first state of the nebulæ which
Herschel carefully observed by means of his powerful telescopes.
He traced the progress of condensation, not indeed on one nebula,
for this progress can only become perceptible to us in the course
of centuries; but in the assemblage of nebulæ; much in the same
manner as in a large forest we may trace the growth of trees among
the examples of different ages which stand side by side. He saw in
the first place the nebulous matter dispersed in patches, in the
different parts of the sky. He saw in some of these patches this
matter feebly condensed round one or more faint nuclei. In other
nebulæ, these nuclei were brighter in proportion to the surrounding
nebulosity; when by a further condensation the atmosphere of each
nucleus becomes separate from the others, the result is multiple
nebulous stars, formed by brilliant nuclei very near each other,
and each surrounded by an atmosphere: sometimes the nebulous matter
condensing in a uniform manner has produced nebulous systems
which are called _planetary_. Finally, a still greater degree of
condensation transforms all these nebulous systems into stars. The
nebulæ, classed according to this philosophical view, indicate with
extreme probability their future transformation into stars, and
the anterior nebulous condition of the stars which now exist.”

It appears then that the highest point to which this series of
conjectures can conduct us, is, “an extremely diffused nebulosity,”
attended, we may suppose, by a far higher degree of heat, than that
which, at a later period of the hypothetical process, keeps all the
materials of our earth and planets in a state of vapour. Now is it
not impossible to avoid asking, whence was this light, this heat,
this diffusion? How came the laws which such a state implies, to be
already in existence? Whether light and heat produce their effects
by means of fluid vehicles or otherwise, they have complex and
varied laws which indicate the existence of some subtle machinery
for their action. When and how was this machinery constructed?
Whence too that enormous expansive power which the nebulous matter
is supposed to possess? And if, as would seem to be supposed in
this doctrine, all the material ingredients of the earth existed
in this diffuse nebulosity, either in the state of vapour, or in
some state of still greater expansion, whence were they and their
properties? how came there to be of each simple substance which
now enters into the composition of the universe, just so much and
no more? Do we not, far more than ever, require an origin of this
origin? an explanation of this explanation? Whatever may be the
merits of the opinion as a physical hypothesis, with which we do
not here meddle, can it for a moment prevent our looking beyond
the hypothesis, to a First Cause, an Intelligent Author, an origin
proceeding from free volition, not from material necessity?

But again: let us ascend to the highest point of the hypothetical
progression: let us suppose the nebulosity diffused throughout
all space, so that its course of running into patches is not yet
begun. How are we to suppose it distributed? Is it equably diffused
in every part? clearly not; for if it were, what should cause it
to gather into masses, so various in size, form and arrangement?
The separation of the nebulous matter into distinct nebulæ implies
necessarily some original inequality of distribution; some
determining circumstances in its primitive condition. Whence were
these circumstances? this inequality? we are still compelled to
seek some ulterior agency and power.

Why must the primeval condition be one of change at all? Why should
not the nebulous matter be equably diffused throughout space, and
continue for ever in its state of equable diffusion, as it must
do, from the absence of all cause to determine the time and manner
of its separation? why should this nebulous matter grow cooler and
cooler? why should it not retain for ever the same degree of heat,
whatever heat be? If heat be a fluid, if to cool be to part with
this fluid, as many philosophers suppose, what becomes of the fluid
heat of the nebulous matter, as the matter cools down? Into what
unoccupied region does it find its way?

Innumerable questions of the same kind might be asked, and the
conclusion to be drawn is, that every new physical theory which
we include in our view of the universe, involves us in new
difficulties and perplexities, if we try to erect it into an
ultimate and final account of the existence and arrangement of
the world in which we live. With the evidence of such theories,
considered as scientific generalizations of ascertained facts,
with their claims to a place in our natural philosophy, we have
here nothing to do. But if they are put forwards as a disclosure
of the ultimate cause of that which occurs, and as superseding
the necessity of looking further or higher; if they claim a place
in our Natural Theology, as well as our Natural Philosophy;
we conceive that their pretensions will not bear a moment’s
examination.

Leaving then to other persons and to future ages to decide upon the
scientific merits of the nebular hypothesis, we conceive that the
final fate of this opinion cannot, in sound reason, affect at all
the view which we have been endeavouring to illustrate;--the view
of the universe as the work of a wise and good Creator. Let it be
supposed that the point to which this hypothesis leads us, is the
ultimate point of physical science: that the farthest glimpse we
can obtain of the material universe by our natural faculties, shows
it to us occupied by a boundless abyss of luminous matter: still we
ask, how space came to be thus occupied, how matter came to be thus
luminous? If we establish by physical proofs, that the first fact
which can be traced in the history of the world, is that “there
was light;” we shall still be led, even by our natural reason,
to suppose that before this could occur, “God said, let there be
light.”




