
  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Footnote anchors are denoted by [number], and the footnotes have been
  placed at the end of the book.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.




                        BRIDGEWATER TREATISES.


                        CAREY, LEA & BLANCHARD

                            HAVE PUBLISHED,


ASTRONOMY AND GENERAL PHYSICS, considered with reference to Natural
Theology, by the Rev. WILLIAM WHEWELL, M. A., Fellow and Tutor
of Trinity College, Cambridge; being the _Third Part_ of the
Bridgewater Treatises on the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God, as
manifested in the Creation.

  The series of Treatises, of which the present is one, is
  published under the following circumstances:--

  The Right Honourable and Rev. FRANCIS HENRY, Earl of Bridgewater,
  died in the month of February, 1825; he directed certain
  trustees therein named, to invest in the public funds, the sum
  of eight thousand pounds sterling; this sum, with the accruing
  dividends thereon, to be held at the disposal of the President,
  for the time being, of the Royal Society of London, to be paid
  to the person or persons nominated by him. The Testator farther
  directed, that the person or persons selected by the said
  President, should be appointed to write, print and publish one
  thousand copies of a work, on the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness
  of God, as manifested in the Creation; illustrating such work,
  by all reasonable arguments, as, for instance, the variety and
  formation of God’s creatures in the Animal, Vegetable, and
  Mineral Kingdoms; the effect of digestion, and, thereby, of
  conversion; the construction of the hand of man, and an infinite
  variety of other arguments; as also by discoveries, ancient and
  modern, in arts, sciences, and the whole extent of literature.

  He desired, moreover, that the profits arising from the sale of
  the works so published, should be paid to the authors of the
  works.

  The late President of the Royal Society, DAVIES GILBERT, Esq.,
  requested the assistance of his Grace, the Archbishop of
  Canterbury, and of the Bishop of London, in determining upon
  the best mode of carrying into effect, the intentions of the
  Testator. Acting with their advice, and with the concurrence of
  a nobleman immediately connected with the deceased, Mr. Davies
  Gilbert appointed the following eight gentlemen to write separate
  Treatises in the different branches of the subjects here stated:--

  I. The Adaptation of External Nature to the Moral and
  Intellectual Constitution of Man, by the Rev. THOMAS CHALMERS, D.
  D., Professor of Divinity in the University of Edinburgh.

  II. The Adaptation of External Nature to the Physical Condition
  of Man, by JOHN KIDD, M. D., F. R. S., Regius Professor of
  Medicine in the University of Oxford.

  III. Astronomy and General Physics, considered with reference to
  Natural Theology, by the Rev. WILLIAM WHEWELL, M. A., F. R. S.,
  Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge.

  IV. The Hand: its Mechanism and Vital Endowments as evincing
  Design, by Sir CHARLES BELL, K. H., F. R. S.

  V. Animal and Vegetable Physiology, by PETER MARK ROGET, M. D.,
  Fellow of and Secretary to the Royal Society.

  VI. Geology and Mineralogy, by the Rev. WILLIAM BUCKLAND, D. D.,
  F. R. S., Canon of Christ Church, and Professor of Geology in the
  University of Oxford.

  VII. The History, Habits, and Instincts of Animals, by the Rev.
  WILLIAM KIRBY, M. A., F. R. S.

  VIII. Chemistry, Meteorology, and the Function of Digestion, by
  WILLIAM PROUT, M. D., F. R. S.

  _The whole of these Treatises are nearly finished, and will be
  put to press as soon as received, and published in a cheap and
  handsome form._


THE PRINCIPLES OF CHRISTIAN PHILOSOPHY; containing the Doctrines,
Duties, Admonitions, and Consolations of the Christian Religion, by
JOHN BURNS, M. D., F. R. S. From the fourth London edition. In the
press.


CONVERSATIONS WITH LORD BYRON ON THE SUBJECT OF RELIGION. By J.
KENNEDY, M. D. 12mo.


GLEANINGS IN NATURAL HISTORY, WITH LOCAL RECOLLECTIONS. By EDWARD
JESSE, Esq. To which are added, Maxims and Hints for Anglers. From
the second London edition, in one volume, being a Companion to the
Journal of a Naturalist.

  We have occasionally selected a paragraph from a very pretty
  volume, by Mr. Jesse, published under the above title. The
  author lives in the neighbourhood of Kew, and like Mr. White
  of Selborne,--who made a small village of Hampshire one of the
  most interesting spots to the lover of nature, by his ample
  descriptions of the natural objects which he saw around him,--Mr.
  Jesse has rendered his walks a vehicle for much instruction and
  amusement to himself and to others. He principally confines
  his attention to zoology--the most generally attractive of the
  departments of natural history; and he looks upon the animal
  world with so much practical wisdom, being disposed to be happy
  himself, and to see every creature around him happy, that there
  are few persons who will not read his slight sketches with
  improvement to their hearts and understandings.--_Penny Magazine._


THE MECHANISM OF THE HEAVENS. By Mrs. SOMERVILLE. In 18mo.

  Is it asking too much of Mrs. Somerville to express a hope that
  she will allow this beautiful preliminary Dissertation to be
  printed separately for the delight and instruction of thousands
  of readers, young and old, who cannot understand, or are too
  indolent to apply themselves to the more elaborate parts of the
  work? If she will do this, we hereby promise to exert our best
  endeavours to make its merits known.--_Literary Gazette._


SALMONIA; OR, DAYS OF FLY FISHING. By Sir H. DAVY.

  We are surprised in meeting with an American reprint of this
  delightful volume, that a work so universally popular has not
  been before republished in this country.--_N. Y. American._

  One of the most delightful labours of leisure ever seen; not a
  few of the most beautiful phenomena of nature are here lucidly
  explained.--_Gent. Magazine._


THE NATURAL HISTORY OF SELBORNE. By the late Rev. GILBERT WHITE,
A. M., Fellow of the Oriel College, Oxford; with additions by Sir
WILLIAM JARDINE, Bart. F. R. S., E. F. L. S., M. W. S., author of
“Illustrations of Ornithology.”

  White’s History of Selborne, the most fascinating piece of rural
  writing and sound English philosophy that has ever issued from
  the press.--_Athenæum._


JOURNAL OF A NATURALIST. With Plates.

      ----Plants, trees, and stones we note;
      Birds, insects, beasts and rural things.

  We again most strongly recommend this little unpretending volume
  to the attention of every lover of nature, and more particularly
  of our country readers. It will induce them, we are sure, to
  examine more closely than they have been accustomed to do, into
  the objects of animated nature, and such examination will prove
  one of the most innocent, and the most satisfactory sources of
  gratification and amusement. It is a book that ought to find its
  way into every rural drawing-room in the kingdom, and one that
  may safely be placed in every lady’s boudoir, be her rank and
  station in life what they may.--_Quart. Review_, No. LXXVIII.

  This is a most delightful book on the most delightful of all
  studies. We are acquainted with no previous work which bears
  any resemblance to this, except “White’s History of Selborne,”
  the most fascinating piece of rural writing and sound English
  philosophy that ever issued from the press.--_Athenæum._


THE FAMILY CABINET ATLAS, constructed upon an original plan: being
a Companion to the Encyclopædia Americana, Cabinet Cyclopædia,
Family Library, Cabinet Library, &c.

[This Atlas comprises, in a volume of the Family Library size,
nearly one hundred Maps and Tables, which present equal to _fifty
thousand names of places_; a body of information three times as
extensive as that supplied by the generality of _Quarto Atlases_.]

  This beautiful and most useful little volume, says the Literary
  Gazette, is a perfect picture of elegance, containing a vast sum
  of geographical information. A more instructive little present,
  or a gift better calculated to be long preserved and often
  referred to, could not be offered to favoured youth of either
  sex. Its cheapness, we must add, is another recommendation; for,
  although this elegant publication contains one hundred beautiful
  engravings, it is issued at a price that can be no obstacle to
  its being procured by every parent and friend to youth.

  This Atlas far surpasses any thing of the kind which we have
  seen, and is made to suit the popular libraries which Dr.
  Lardner and Mr. Murray are now sending into every family in the
  empire.--_Monthly Review._

  Its very ingenious method of arrangement secures to the
  geographical student the information for which hitherto
  he has been obliged to resort to works of the largest
  dimensions.--_Athenæum._


THE RECTORY OF VALEHEAD. By the Rev. ROBERT WILSON EVANS, M. A.

  Universally and cordially do we recommend this delightful volume.
  Impressed with the genuine spirit of Christianity; a diary, as it
  were, of the feelings, hopes, and sorrows of a family,--it comes
  home to all, either in sympathy or example. It is a beautiful
  picture of a religious household, influencing to excellence all
  within its sphere. We believe no person could read this work, and
  not be better for its pious touching lessons.--_Literary Gaz._

  We fearlessly pronounce this delightful little volume to be
  not only one of the most faultless, but every way valuable
  works it has ever fallen to our lot to recommend to public
  perusal.--_Stamford Herald._

  The Rectory of Valehead is a beautiful model of domestic life
  in the Christian home of a well-regulated family, and combines
  literary amusement with the most refined and intellectual
  improvement.--_Scotsman._


A GENERAL VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF ETHICAL PHILOSOPHY, chiefly
during the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries. By Sir JAMES
MACKINTOSH, M. P. In 8vo.

  The best offspring of the pen of an author who in philosophical
  spirit, knowledge and reflection, richness of moral sentiment,
  and elegance of style, has altogether no superior--perhaps no
  equal--among his contemporaries. Some time ago we made copious
  extracts from the beautiful work. We could not recommend the
  whole too earnestly.--_National Gazette._


THE BOOK OF THE SEASONS; OR THE CALENDAR OF NATURE. By WILLIAM
HOWITT. In one volume, 12mo.




                      THE BRIDGEWATER TREATISES

              ON THE POWER, WISDOM, AND GOODNESS OF GOD
                    AS MANIFESTED IN THE CREATION.


                            TREATISE III.

                   ON ASTRONOMY AND GENERAL PHYSICS.

                        BY THE REV. W. WHEWELL.




  ET HÆC DE DEO, DE QUO UTIQUE EX PHÆNOMENIS DISSERERE AD
  PHILOSOPHIAM NATURALEM PERTINET.

                        NEWTON, CONCLUSION OF THE PRINCIPIA.




                     ASTRONOMY AND GENERAL PHYSICS

                      CONSIDERED WITH REFERENCE TO

                           NATURAL THEOLOGY.


                                BY THE

                       REV. WILLIAM WHEWELL, M. A.
                  FELLOW AND TUTOR OF TRINITY COLLEGE,
                               CAMBRIDGE.


                             Philadelphia:
                        CAREY, LEA & BLANCHARD,
                            CHESTNUT STREET.

                                1833.




                               TO THE

                  RIGHT HONOURABLE AND RIGHT REVEREND

                           CHARLES JAMES,

                       LORD BISHOP OF LONDON.


  MY LORD--

I owe it to you that I was selected for the task attempted in the
following pages, a distinction which I feel to be honourable;
and on this account alone I should have a peculiar pleasure in
dedicating the work to your lordship. I do so with additional
gratification on another account: the Treatise has been written
within the walls of the College of which your lordship was formerly
a resident member, and its merits, if it have any, are mainly
due to the spirit and habits of the place. The society is always
pleased and proud to recollect that a person of the eminent talents
and high character of your lordship is one of its members; and I
am persuaded that any effort in the cause of letters and religion
coming from that quarter, will have for you an interest beyond what
it would otherwise possess.

The subject proposed to me was limited: my prescribed object is to
lead the friends of religion to look with confidence and pleasure
on the progress of the physical sciences, by showing how admirably
every advance in our knowledge of the universe harmonizes with
the belief of a most wise and good God. To do this effectually
may be, I trust, a useful labour. Yet, I feel most deeply, what
I would take this occasion to express, that this, and all that
the speculator concerning Natural Theology can do, is utterly
insufficient for the great ends of Religion; namely, for the
purpose of reforming men’s lives, of purifying and elevating their
characters, of preparing them for a more exalted state of being. It
is the need of something fitted to do this, which gives to religion
its vast and incomparable importance; and this can, I well know, be
achieved only by that Revealed Religion of which we are ministers,
but on which the plan of the present work did not allow me to dwell.

That Divine Providence may prosper the labours of your lordship,
and of all who are joined with you in the task of maintaining and
promoting _this_ Religion, is, my lord, the earnest wish and prayer
of

                                       Your very faithful
                                       And much obliged servant,

                                       WILLIAM WHEWELL.

  Trinity College, Cambridge,
  Feb. 25, 1833.




NOTICE.


The series of Treatises, of which the present is one, is published
under the following circumstances:

  The RIGHT HONOURABLE and REVEREND FRANCIS HENRY, EARL OF
  BRIDGEWATER, died in the month of February, 1829; and by his last
  Will and Testament, bearing date the 25th of February, 1825, he
  directed certain Trustees therein named to invest in the public
  funds the sum of Eight thousand pounds sterling; this sum, with
  the accruing dividends thereon, to be held at the disposal of the
  President, for the time being, of the Royal Society of London, to
  be paid to the person or persons nominated by him. The Testator
  further directed, that the person or persons selected by the said
  President should be appointed to write, print, and publish one
  thousand copies of a work _On the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of
  God, as manifested in the Creation; illustrating such work by all
  reasonable arguments, as for instance the variety and formation
  of God’s creatures in the animal, vegetable, and mineral
  kingdoms; the effect of digestion, and thereby of conversion;
  the construction of the hand of man, and an infinite variety of
  other arguments; as also by discoveries ancient and modern, in
  arts, sciences, and the whole extent of literature_. He desired,
  moreover, that the profits arising from the sale of the works so
  published should be paid to the authors of the works.

  The late President of the Royal Society, Davies Gilbert,
  Esq. requested the assistance of his Grace the Archbishop of
  Canterbury and of the Bishop of London, in determining upon
  the best mode of carrying into effect the intentions of the
  Testator. Acting with their advice, and with the concurrence of
  a nobleman immediately connected with the deceased, Mr. Davies
  Gilbert appointed the following eight gentlemen to write separate
  Treatises on the different branches of the subject as here stated:


  THE REV. THOMAS CHALMERS, D. D.

  Professor of Divinity in the University of Edinburgh.

  ON THE ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TO THE MORAL AND
  INTELLECTUAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN.


  JOHN KID, M. D. F. R. S.

  Regius Professor of Medicine in the University of Oxford.

  ON THE ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TO THE PHYSICAL
  CONDITION OF MAN.


  THE REV. WILLIAM WHEWELL, M. A. F. R. S.

  Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge.

  ON ASTRONOMY AND GENERAL PHYSICS.


  SIR CHARLES BELL, K. H. F. R. S,

  THE HAND: ITS MECHANISM AND VITAL ENDOWMENTS AS EVINCING
  DESIGN.


  PETER MARK ROGET, M. D.

  Fellow of and Secretary to the Royal Society.

  ON ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE PHYSIOLOGY.


  THE REV. WILLIAM BUCKLAND, D. D. F. R. S.

  Canon of Christ Church, and Professor of Geology in the University of Oxford.

  ON GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY.


  THE REV. WILLIAM KIRBY, M. A. F. R. S.

  ON THE HISTORY, HABITS, AND INSTINCTS OF ANIMALS.


  WILLIAM PROUT, M. D. F. R. S.

  ON CHEMISTRY, METEOROLOGY, AND THE FUNCTION OF DIGESTION.

  HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUKE OF SUSSEX, President of the Royal
  Society, having desired that no unnecessary delay should take
  place in the publication of the above mentioned treatises, they
  will appear at short intervals, as they are ready for publication.




CONTENTS.

[Within the last year or two, several works have been published in
this country on subjects more or less closely approaching to that
here treated. It may, therefore, be not superfluous to say that the
author of the following pages believes that he has not borrowed
any of his views or illustrations from recent English writers on
Natural Theology.]


                                                                 Page.
  INTRODUCTION.
    CHAPTER I. Object of the Present Treatise                      13
           II. On Laws of Nature                                   17
          III. Mutual Adaptation of Laws of Nature                 20
           IV. Division of the Subject                             23

  BOOK I. TERRESTRIAL ADAPTATIONS                                  25
    CHAPTER I. The Length of the Year                              28
           II. The Length of the Day                               37
          III. The Mass of the Earth                               43
           IV. The Magnitude of the Ocean                          50
            V. The Magnitude of the Atmosphere                     51
           VI. The Constancy and Variety of Climates               52
          VII. The Variety of Organization corresponding
                 to the Variety of Climate                         57
         VIII. The Constituents of Climate                         66
               The Laws of Heat with respect to the Earth          67
           IX. The Laws of Heat with respect to Water              70
            X. The Laws of Heat with respect to Air                81
           XI. The Laws of Electricity                             91
          XII. The Laws of Magnetism                               93
         XIII. The Properties of Light with regard to
                 Vegetation                                        94
          XIV. Sound                                               96
           XV. The Atmosphere                                     102
          XVI. Light                                              104
         XVII. The Ether                                          111
        XVIII. Recapitulation                                     113

  BOOK II. COSMICAL ARRANGEMENTS                                  119
    CHAPTER I. The Structure of the Solar System                  121
           II. The Circular Orbits of the Planets round the Sun   123
          III. The Stability of the Solar System                  127
           IV. The Sun in the Centre                              134
            V. The Satellites                                     137
           VI. The Stability of the Ocean                         140
          VII. The Nebular Hypothesis                             143
         VIII. The Existence of a Resisting Medium in the
                 Solar System                                     150
           IX. Mechanical Laws                                    163
            X. The Law of Gravitation                             166
           XI. The Laws of Motion                                 178
          XII. Friction                                           183

  BOOK III. RELIGIOUS VIEWS                                       193
    CHAPTER I. The Creator of the Physical World is the
                 Governor of the Moral World                      195
           II. On the Vastness of the Universe                    205
          III. On Man’s Place in the Universe                     212
           IV. On the Impression produced by the Contemplation
                 of Laws of Nature; or, on the Conviction
                 that Law implies Mind                            223
            V. On Inductive Habits; or, on the impression
                 produced on Men’s Minds by discovering
                 Laws of Nature                                   230
           VI. On Deductive Habits; or, on the Impression
                 produced on Men’s Minds by tracing
                 the Consequences of ascertained Laws             243
          VII. On Final Causes                                    257
         VIII. On the Physical Agency of the Deity                267
           IX. On the Impression produced by considering
                 the Nature and Prospects of Science;
                 or, on the Impossibility of the Progress
                 of our Knowledge ever enabling us to
                 comprehend the Nature of the Deity               273




ON

ASTRONOMY

AND

GENERAL PHYSICS.




INTRODUCTION.




CHAPTER I.

_Object of the Present Treatise._


The examination of the material world brings before us a number
of things and relations of things which suggest to most minds
the belief of a creating and presiding Intelligence. And this
impression, which arises with the most vague and superficial
consideration of the objects by which we are surrounded, is, we
conceive, confirmed and expanded by a more exact and profound study
of external nature. Many works have been written at different
times with the view of showing how our knowledge of the elements
and their operation, of plants and animals and their construction,
may serve to nourish and unfold our idea of a Creator and Governor
of the world. But though this is the case, a new work on the same
subject may still have its use. Our views of the Creator and
Governor of the world, as collected from or combined with our
views of the world itself, undergo modifications, as we are led by
new discoveries, new generalizations, to regard nature in a new
light. The conceptions concerning the Deity, his mode of effecting
his purposes, the scheme of his government, which are suggested
by one stage of our knowledge of natural objects and operations,
may become manifestly imperfect or incongruous, if adhered to and
applied at a later period, when our acquaintance with the immediate
causes of natural events has been greatly extended. On this account
it may be interesting, after such an advance, to show how the views
of the creation, preservation, and government of the universe,
which natural science opens to us, harmonize with our belief in
a Creator, Governor, and Preserver of the world. To do this with
respect to certain departments of Natural Philosophy is the object
of the following pages; and the author will deem himself fortunate,
if he succeeds in removing any of the difficulties and obscurities
which prevail in men’s minds, from the want of a clear mutual
understanding between the religious and the scientific speculator.
It is needless here to remark the necessarily imperfect and scanty
character of Natural Religion; for most persons will allow that,
however imperfect may be the knowledge of a Supreme Intelligence
which we gather from the contemplation of the natural world, it
is still of most essential use and value. And our purpose on this
occasion is, not to show that Natural Theology is a perfect and
satisfactory scheme, but to bring up our Natural Theology to the
point of view in which it may be contemplated by the aid of our
Natural Philosophy.

Now the peculiar point of view which at present belongs to Natural
Philosophy, and especially to the departments of it which have been
most successfully cultivated, is, that nature, so far as it is an
object of scientific research, is a collection of facts governed by
_laws_: our knowledge of nature is our knowledge of laws; of laws
of operation and connexion, of laws of succession and co-existence,
among the various elements and appearances around us. And it must
therefore here be our aim to show how this view of the universe
falls in with our conception of the Divine Author, by whom we hold
the universe to be made and governed.

_Nature acts by general laws_; that is, the occurrences of the
world in which we find ourselves, result from causes which operate
according to fixed and constant rules. The succession of days,
and seasons, and years, is produced by the motions of the earth;
and these again are governed by the attraction of the sun, a
force which acts with undeviating steadiness and regularity. The
changes of winds and skies, seemingly so capricious and casual,
are produced by the operation of the sun’s heat upon air and
moisture, land and sea; and though in this case we cannot trace
the particular events to their general causes, as we can trace
the motions of the sun and moon, no philosophical mind will doubt
the generality and fixity of the rules by which these causes act.
The variety of the effects takes place, because the circumstances
in different cases vary; and not because the action of material
causes leaves anything to chance in the result. And again, though
the vital movements which go on in the frame of vegetables and
animals depend on agencies still less known, and probably still
more complex, than those which rule the weather, each of the powers
on which such movements depend has its peculiar laws of action,
and these are as universal and as invariable as the law by which a
stone falls to the earth when not supported.

The world then is governed by general laws; and in order to
collect from the world itself a judgment concerning the nature
and character of its government, we must consider the import and
tendency of such laws, so far as they come under our knowledge. If
there be, in the administration of the universe, intelligence and
benevolence, superintendence and foresight, grounds for love and
hope, such qualities may be expected to appear in the constitution
and combination of those fundamental regulations by which the
course of nature is brought about, and made to be what it is.

If a man were, by some extraordinary event, to find himself in a
remote and unknown country, so entirely strange to him that he
did not know whether there existed in it any law or government at
all; he might in no long time ascertain whether the inhabitants
were controlled by any superintending authority; and with a little
attention he might determine also whether such authority were
exercised with a prudent care for the happiness and well-being
of its subjects, or without any regard and fitness to such ends;
whether the country were governed by laws at all, and whether the
laws were good. And according to the laws which he thus found
prevailing, he would judge of the sagacity, and the purposes of the
legislative power.

By observing the laws of the material universe and their operation,
we may hope, in a somewhat similar manner, to be able to direct
our judgment concerning the government of the universe: concerning
the mode in which the elements are regulated and controlled, their
effects combined and balanced. And the general tendency of the
results thus produced may discover to us something of the character
of the power which has legislated for the material world.

We are not to push too far the analogy thus suggested. There is
undoubtedly a wide difference between the circumstances of man
legislating for man, and God legislating for matter. Still we
shall, it will appear, find abundant reason to admire the wisdom
and the goodness which have established _the Laws of Nature_,
however rigorously we may scrutinize the import of this expression.




