CHAPTER VII.

_On Final Causes._


We have pointed out a great number of instances where the mode in
which the arrangements of nature produce their effect, suggests,
as we conceive, the belief that this effect is to be considered as
the _end_ and _purpose_ of these arrangements. The impression which
thus arises, of design and intention exercised in the formation of
the world, or of the reality of _Final Causes_, operates on men’s
minds so generally, and increases so constantly on every additional
examination of the phenomena of the universe, that we cannot but
suppose such a belief to have a deep and stable foundation. And we
conceive that in several of the comparatively few cases in which
such a belief has been rejected, the averseness to it has arisen
from the influence of some of the causes mentioned in the last
chapter; the exclusive pursuit, namely, of particular trains and
modes of reasoning, till the mind becomes less capable of forming
the conceptions and making the exertions which are requisite for
the apprehension of truths not included among its usual subjects of
thought.

1. This seems to be the case with those who maintain that purpose
and design cannot be _inferred_ or _deduced_ from the arrangements
which we see around us by any process of reasoning. We can reason
from effects to causes, say such writers, only in cases where we
know something of the nature of the cause. We can infer from the
works of men, the existence of design and purpose, because we
know, from past observation, what kind of works human design and
purpose can produce. But the universe, considered as the work of
God, cannot be compared with any corresponding work, or judged
of by any analogy with known examples. How then can we, in this
case, they ask, infer design and purpose in the artist of the
universe? On what principles, on what axioms, can we proceed, which
shall include this necessarily singular instance, and thus give
legitimacy and validity to our reasonings?

What has already been said on the subject of the two different
processes by which we obtain principles, and by which we reason
from them, will suggest the reply to these questions. When we
collect design and purpose from the arrangements of the universe,
we do not arrive at our conclusion by a train of deductive
reasoning, but by the conviction which such combinations as we
perceive immediately and directly impress upon the mind. “Design
must have had a designer.” But such a principle can be of no avail
to one whom the contemplation or the description of the world does
not impress with the perception of design. It is not, therefore, at
the end, but at the beginning of our syllogisms, not among remote
conclusions, but among original principles, that we must place the
truth, that such arrangements, manifestations, and proceedings
as we behold about us imply a Being endowed with consciousness,
design, and will, from whom they proceed.

This is inevitably the mode in which such a conviction is acquired;
and that it is so, we may the more readily believe, when we
consider that it is the case with the design and will which we
ascribe to man, no less than in that which we believe to exist in
God. At first sight we might perhaps be tempted to say, that we
infer design and purpose from the works of man in one case, because
we have known these attributes in other cases produce effects in
some measure similar. But to this we must reply, by asking how we
come to know the existence of human design and purpose _at first_,
and _at all_? What we see around us are certain appearances,
things, successions of events; how come we ever to ascribe to other
men the thought and will of which we are conscious ourselves? How
do we come to believe that there are other men? How are we led
to elevate, in our conceptions, some of the _objects_ which we
perceive into _persons_? No doubt their actions, their words induce
us to do this. We see that the manifestations which we observe must
be so understood, and not otherwise. We feel that such actions,
such events must be connected by consciousness and personality;
that the actions are not the actions of things, but of persons;
not necessary and without significance, like the falling of a
stone, but voluntary and with purpose like what we do ourselves.
But this is not a result of reasoning: we do not infer this from
any similar case which we have known; since we are now speaking of
the _first_ conception of a will and purpose different from our
own. In arriving at such knowledge, we are aided only by our own
consciousness of what thought, purpose, will, are: and possessing
this regulative principle, we so decipher and interpret the complex
appearances which surround us, that we receive irresistibly the
persuasion of the existence of other men, with thought and will
and purpose like our own. And just in the same manner, when we
examine attentively the adjustment of the parts of the human frame
to each other and to the elements, the relation of the properties
of the earth to those of its inhabitants, or of the physical to
the moral nature of man, the thought must arise and cling to our
perceptions, however little it be encouraged, that this system,
every where so full of wonderful combinations, suited to the
preservation, and well-being of living creatures, is also the
expression of the intention, wisdom, and goodness of a personal
creator and governor.

We conceive then that it is so far from being an unsatisfactory
or unphilosophical process by which we collect the existence of
a Deity from the works of creation, that the process corresponds
most closely with that on which rests the most steadfast of our
convictions, next to that of our own existence, the belief of
the existence of other human beings. If any one ever went so far
in scepticism as to doubt the existence of any other person than
himself, he might, so far as the argument from final causes is
concerned, reject the being of God as well as that of man; but,
without dwelling on the possibility of such fantasies, when we
consider how impossible it is for men in general not to attribute
personality, purpose, thought, will to each other, in virtue of
certain combinations of appearances and actions, we must deem them
most consistent and reasonable in attributing also personality and
purpose to God, in virtue of the whole assemblage of appearances
and actions which constitute the universe, full as it is of
combinations from which such a suggestion springs. The vividness,
the constancy of the belief of a wise and good Being, thus
governing the world, may be different in different men, according
to their habit of directing their thoughts to the subject; but such
a belief is undoubtedly capable of becoming lively and steadfast
in the highest degree. It has been entertained and cherished by
enlightened and well-regulated minds in all ages; and has been,
at least since the rise of Christianity, not only the belief, but
a pervading and ruling principle of action of many men, and of
whole communities. The idea may be rendered more faint by turning
the mind away from it, and perhaps by indulging too exclusively in
abstract and general speculations. It grows stronger by an actual
study of the details of the creation; and, as regards the practical
consequences of such a belief, by a habit of referring our actions
and hopes to such a Governor. In this way it is capable of becoming
as real and fixed an impression as that of a human friend and
master; and all that we can learn, by observing the course of men’s
feelings and actions, tends to convince us, that this belief of
the being and presence and government of God, leads to the most
elevated and beneficial frame of mind of which man is capable.

2. How natural and almost inevitable is this persuasion of the
reality of Final Causes and consequent belief in the personality
of the Deity, we may gather by observing how constantly it recurs
to the thoughts, even of those who, in consequence of such
peculiarities of mental discipline as have been described, have
repelled and resisted the impression.

Thus, Laplace, of whom we have already spoken, as one of the
greatest mathematicians of modern times, expresses his conviction
that the supposed evidence of final causes will disappear as our
knowledge advances, and that they only seem to exist in those cases
where our ignorance leaves room for such a mistake. “Let us run
over,” he says, “the history of the progress of the human mind and
its errors: we shall perpetually see final causes pushed away to
the bounds of its knowledge. These causes, which Newton removed
to the limits of the solar system, were not long ago conceived to
obtain in the atmosphere, and employed in explaining meteors: they
are, therefore, in the eyes of the philosopher nothing more than
the expression of the ignorance in which we are of the real causes.”

We may observe that we have endeavoured to give a very different,
and, as we believe, a far truer view of the effect which philosophy
has produced on our knowledge of final causes. We have shown, we
trust, that the notion of design and end is transferred by the
researches of science, not from the domain of our knowledge to that
of our ignorance, but merely from the region of facts to that of
laws. We hold that, in this form, final causes in the atmosphere
are still to be conceived to obtain, no less than in an earlier
state of meteorological knowledge; and that Newton was right, when
he believed that he had established their reality in the solar
system, not expelled them from it.

But our more peculiar business at present is to observe that
Laplace himself, in describing the arrangements by which the
stability of the solar system is secured, uses language which
shows how irresistibly these arrangements suggest an adaptation
to its preservation as an _end_. If in his expressions we were to
substitute the Deity for the abstraction “nature” which he employs,
his reflection would coincide with that which the most religious
philosopher would entertain. “It seems that ‘God’ has ordered
every thing in the heavens to ensure the duration of the planetary
system, by _views_ similar to those which He appears to us so
admirably to follow upon the earth, for the preservation of animals
and the perpetuity of species.[40] This consideration alone would
explain the disposition of the system, if it were not the business
of the geometer to go further.” It may be possible for the geometer
to go further; but he must be strangely blinded by his peculiar
pursuits, if, when he has discovered the mode in which these views
are answered, he supposes himself to have obtained a proof that
there are no views at all. It would be as if the savage, who had
marvelled at the steady working of the steam engine, should cease
to consider it a work of art, as soon as the self-regulating part
of the mechanism had been explained to him.

The unsuccessful struggle in which those persons engage, who
attempt to throw off the impression of design in the creation,
appears in an amusing manner through the simplicity of the ancient
Roman poet of this school. Lucretius maintains that the eye was not
made for seeing, nor the ear for hearing. But the terms in which he
recommends this doctrine show how hard he knew it to be for men to
entertain such an opinion. His advice is,--

      Illud in his rebus vitium _vehementer_ et istum
      Effugere errorem, vitareque _præmeditator_,
      Lumina ne facias oculorum clara creata,
      Prospicere ut possimus. iv. 823.

      ’Gainst their preposterous error guard thy mind
      Who say each organ was for use design’d;
      Think not the visual orbs, so clear, so bright,
      Were furnish’d for the purposes of sight.

Undoubtedly the poet is so far right, that a most “vehement”
caution and vigilant “premeditation” are necessary to avoid the
“vice and error” of such a persuasion. The study of the adaptations
of the human frame is so convincing, that it carries the mind with
it, in spite of the resistance suggested by speculative systems.
Cabanis, a modern French physiological writer of great eminence,
may be selected as a proof of this. Both by the general character
of his own speculations, and by the tone of thinking prevalent
around him, the consideration of design in the works of nature was
abhorrent from his plan. Accordingly, he joins in repeating Bacon’s
unfavourable mention of final causes. Yet when he comes to speak
of the laws of reproduction of the human race, he appears to feel
himself compelled to admit the irresistible manner in which such
views force themselves on the mind. “I regard,” he says, “with the
great Bacon, the philosophy of final causes as barren; but I have
elsewhere acknowledged that it was very difficult for the most
cautious man (l’homme le plus reservé) never to have recourse to
them in his explanations.”[41]

3. It may be worth our while to consider for a moment the opinion
here referred to by Cabanis, of the propriety of excluding the
consideration of final causes from our natural philosophy. The
great authority of Bacon is usually adduced on this subject.
“The handling of final causes,” says he, “mixed with the rest
in physical inquiries, hath intercepted the severe and diligent
inquiry of all real and physical causes, and given men the occasion
to stay upon these satisfactory and specious causes, to the great
arrest and prejudice of farther discovery.”[42]

A moment’s attention will show how well this representation agrees
with that which we have urged, and how far it is from dissuading
the reference to final causes in reasonings like those on which
we are employed. Final causes are to be excluded _from physical
inquiry_; that is, we are not to assume that we know the objects
of the Creator’s design, and put this assumed purpose in the
place of a physical cause. We are not to think it a sufficient
account of the clouds that they are for watering the earth, (to
take Bacon’s examples,) or “that the solidness of the earth is
for the station and mansion of living creatures.” The physical
philosopher has it for his business to trace clouds to the laws of
evaporation and condensation; to determine the magnitude and mode
of action of the forces of cohesion and crystallization by which
the materials of the earth are made solid and firm. This he does,
making no use of the notion of final causes: and it is precisely
because he has thus established his theories independently of any
assumption of an end, that the end, when after all, it returns upon
him and cannot be evaded, becomes an irresistible evidence of an
intelligent legislator. He finds that the effects, of which the
use is obvious, are produced by most simple and comprehensive laws;
and when he has obtained this view, he is struck by the beauty of
the means, by the refined and skilful manner in which the useful
effects are brought about;--points different from those to which
his researches were directed. We have already seen, in the very
case of which we have been speaking, namely, the laws by which the
clouds are formed and distribute their showers over the earth, how
strongly those who have most closely and extensively examined the
arrangements there employed (as Howard, Dalton, and Black) have
been impressed with the harmony and beauty which these contrivances
manifest.

We may find a further assertion of this view of the proper use of
final causes in philosophy, by referring to the works of one of
the greatest of our philosophers, and one of the most pious of
our writers, Boyle, who has an Essay on this subject. “I am by
all means,” says he, “for encouraging the contemplation of the
celestial part of the world, and the shining globes that adorn it,
and especially the sun and moon, in order to raise our admiration
of the stupendous power and wisdom of him who was able to frame
such immense bodies; and notwithstanding their vast bulk and
scarce conceivable rapidity, keep them for so many ages constant
both to the lines and degrees of their motion, without interfering
with one another. And doubtless we ought to return thanks and
praises to the divine goodness for having so placed the sun and
moon, and determined the former, or else the earth, to move in
particular lines for the good of men and other animals; and how
disadvantageous it would have been to the inhabitants of the earth
if the luminaries had moved after a different manner. I dare not,
however, affirm that the sun, moon, and other celestial bodies
were made solely for the use of man: _much less presume to prove
one system of the world to be true and another false; because the
former is better fitted to the convenience of mankind, or the
other less suited, or perhaps altogether useless to that end_.”

This passage exhibits, we conceive, that combination of feelings
which ought to mark the character of the religious natural
philosopher; an earnest piety ready to draw nutriment from the
contemplation of established physical truths; joined with a
philosophical caution, which is not seduced by the anticipation
of such contemplations, to pervert the strict course of physical
inquiry.

It is precisely through this philosophical care and scrupulousness
that our views of final causes acquire their force and value as
aids to religion. The object of such views is not to lead us to
physical truth, but to connect such truth, obtained by its proper
processes and methods, with our views of God, the master of the
universe, through those laws and relations which are thus placed
beyond dispute.

Bacon’s comparison of final causes to the vestal virgins is one of
those poignant sayings, so frequent in his writings, which it is
not easy to forget. “Like them,” he says, “they are dedicated to
God, and are barren.” But to any one who reads his work it will
appear in what spirit this was meant. “Not because those final
causes are not true and worthy to be inquired, being kept within
their own province.” (Of the Advancement of Learning, b. ii. p.
142.) If he had had occasion to develope his simile, full of latent
meaning as his similes so often are, he would probably have said,
that to these final causes barrenness was no reproach, seeing they
ought to be, not the mothers but the daughters of our natural
sciences; and that they were barren, not by imperfection of their
nature but in order that they might be kept pure and undefiled, and
so fit ministers in the temple of God.




