BOOK I.

TERRESTRIAL ADAPTATIONS.


We proceed in this book to point out relations which subsist
between the laws of the inorganic world, that is, the general facts
of astronomy and meteorology; and the laws which prevail in the
organic world, the properties of plants and animals.

With regard to the first kind of laws, they are in the highest
degree various and unlike each other. The intensity and activity
of natural influences follow in different cases the most different
rules. In some instances they are _periodical_, increasing and
diminishing alternately, in a perpetual succession of equal
intervals of time. This is the case with the heat at the earth’s
surface, which has a period of a year; with the light, which has a
period of a day. Other qualities are _constant_, thus the force of
gravity at the same place is always the same. In some cases, a very
simple cause produces very complicated effects; thus the globular
form of the earth, and the inclination of its axis during its
annual motion, give rise to all the variety of climates. In other
cases a very complex and variable system of causes produces effects
comparatively steady and uniform; thus solar and terrestrial heat,
air, moisture, and probably many other apparently conflicting
agents, join to produce our weather, which never deviates very far
from a certain average standard.

Now a general fact, which we shall endeavour to exemplify in the
following chapters, is this:--That those properties of plants and
animals which have reference to agencies of a periodical character,
have also by their nature a periodical mode of working; while
those properties which refer to agencies of constant intensity,
are adjusted to this constant intensity: and again, there are
peculiarities in the nature of organized beings which have
reference to a variety in the conditions of the external world,
as, for instance, the difference of the organized population of
different regions: and there are other peculiarities which have
a reference to the constancy of the average of such conditions,
and the limited range of the deviations from that average; as for
example, that constitution by which each plant and animal is fitted
to exist and prosper in its usual place in the world.

And not only is there this general agreement between the nature of
the laws which govern the organic and inorganic world, but also
there is a coincidence between the _arbitrary magnitudes_ which
such laws involve on the one hand and on the other. Plants and
animals have, in their construction, certain periodical functions,
which have a reference to alternations of heat and cold; the
length of the period which belongs to these functions by their
construction, appears to be that of the period which belongs to the
actual alternations of heat and cold, namely, a year. Plants and
animals have again in their construction certain other periodical
functions, which have a reference to alternations of light and
darkness; the length of the period of such functions appears to
coincide with the natural day. In like manner the other arbitrary
magnitudes which enter into the laws of gravity, of the effects of
air and moisture, and of other causes of permanence, and of change,
by which the influences of the elements operate, are the same
arbitrary magnitudes to which the members of the organic world are
adapted by the various peculiarities of their construction.

The illustration of this view will be pursued in the succeeding
chapters; and when the coincidence here spoken of is distinctly
brought before the reader, it will, we trust, be found to convey
the conviction of a wise and benevolent design, which has been
exercised in producing such an agreement between the internal
constitution and the external circumstances of organized beings.
We shall adduce cases where there is an apparent relation between
the course of operation of the elements and the course of vital
functions; between some fixed measure of time or space, traced
in the lifeless and in the living world; where creatures are
constructed on a certain plan, or a certain scale, and this plan
or this scale is exactly the single one which is suited to their
place on the earth; where it was necessary for the Creator (if we
may use such a mode of speaking) _to take account_ of the weight
of the earth, or the density of the air, or the measure of the
ocean, and where these quantities are rightly taken account of in
the arrangements of creation. In such cases we conceive that we
trace a Creator, who, in producing one part of his work, was not
forgetful or careless of another part; who did not cast his living
creatures into the world to prosper or perish as they might find it
suited to them or not; but fitted together, with the nicest skill,
the world and the constitution which he gave to its inhabitants;
so fashioning it and them, that light and darkness, sun and air,
moist and dry, should become their ministers and benefactors, the
unwearied and unfailing causes of their well-being.

We have spoken of the mutual adaptation of the organic and the
inorganic world. If we were to conceive the contrivance of the
world as taking place in an order of time in the contriving mind,
we might also have to conceive this adaptation as taking place
in one of two ways: we might either suppose the laws of inert
nature to be accommodated to the foreseen wants of living things,
or the organization of life to be accommodated to the previously
established laws of nature. But we are not forced upon any such
mode of conception, or upon any decision between such suppositions:
since, for the purpose of our argument, the consequence of either
view is the same. There is an adaptation somewhere or other,
on either supposition. There is account taken of one part of
the system in framing the other: and the mind which took such
account can be no other than that of the Intelligent Author of the
universe. When indeed we come to see the vast number, the variety,
the extent, the interweaving, the reconciling of such adaptations,
we shall readily allow, that all things are so moulded upon and
locked into each other, connected by such subtilty and profundity
of design, that we may well abandon the idle attempt to trace the
_order_ of thought in the mind of the Supreme Ordainer.




