CHAPTER III.

_Mutual Adaptation in the Laws of Nature._


To ascertain such laws of nature as we have been describing, is
the peculiar business of science. It is only with regard to a very
small portion of the appearances of the universe, that science, in
any strict application of the term, exists. In very few departments
of research have men been able to trace a multitude of known facts
to causes which appear to be the ultimate material causes, or to
discern the laws which seem to be the most general laws. Yet, in
one or two instances, they have done this, or something approaching
to this; and most especially in the instance of that part of
nature, which it is the object of this treatise more peculiarly to
consider.

The apparent motions of the sun, moon, and stars have been more
completely reduced to their causes and laws than any other class of
phenomena. Astronomy, the science which treats of these, is already
a wonderful example of the degree of such knowledge which man may
attain. The forms of its most important laws may be conceived to
be certainly known; and hundreds of observers in all parts of the
world are daily employed in determining, with additional accuracy,
the arbitrary magnitudes which these laws involve.

The inquiries in which the mutual effects of heat, moisture,
air, and the like elements are treated of, including, among
other subjects, all that we know of the causes of the weather
(meteorology) is a far more imperfect science than astronomy. Yet,
with regard to these agents, a great number of laws of nature have
been discovered, though, undoubtedly, a far greater number remain
still unknown.

So far, therefore, as our knowledge goes, astronomy and meteorology
are parts of natural philosophy in which we may study the order
of nature with such views as we have suggested; in which we may
hope to make out the adaptations and aims which exist in the laws
of nature; and thus to obtain some light on the tendency of this
part of the legislation of the universe, and on the character and
disposition of the Legislator.

The number and variety of the laws which we find established in
the universe is so great, that it would be idle to endeavour
to enumerate them. In their operation they are combined and
intermixed in incalculable and endless perplexity, influencing
and modifying each other’s effects in every direction. If we
attempt to comprehend at once the whole of this complex system,
we find ourselves utterly baffled and overwhelmed by its extent
and multiplicity. Yet, in so far as we consider the bearing of
one part upon another, we receive an impression of adaptation, of
mutual fitness, of conspiring means, of preparation and completion,
of purpose and provision. This impression is suggested by the
contemplation of every part of nature; but the grounds of it, from
the very circumstances of the case, cannot be conveyed in a few
words. It can only be fully educed by leading the reader through
several views and details, and must grow out of the combined
influence of these on a sober and reflecting frame of mind. However
strong and solemn be the conviction which may be derived from a
contemplation of nature, concerning the existence, the power, the
wisdom, the goodness of our Divine Governor, we cannot expect that
this conviction, as resulting from the extremely complex spectacle
of the material world, should be capable of being irresistibly
conveyed by a few steps of reasoning, like the conclusion of
a geometrical proposition, or the result of an arithmetical
calculation.

We shall, therefore, endeavour to point out cases and circumstances
in which the different parts of the universe exhibit this mutual
adaptation, and thus to bring before the mind of the reader the
evidence of wisdom and providence, which the external world
affords. When we have illustrated the correspondencies which
exist in every province of nature, between the qualities of brute
matter and the constitution of living things, between the tendency
to derangement and the conservative influences by which such a
tendency is counteracted, between the office of the minutest speck
and of the most general laws; it will, we trust, be difficult or
impossible to exclude from our conception of this wonderful system,
the idea of a harmonizing, a preserving, a contriving, an intending
Mind; of a Wisdom, Power, and Goodness far exceeding the limits of
our thoughts.




CHAPTER IV.

_Division of the Subject._


In making a survey of the universe, for the purpose of pointing
out such correspondencies and adaptations as we have mentioned, we
shall suppose the general leading facts of the course of nature
to be known, and the explanations of their causes now generally
established among astronomers and natural philosophers to be
conceded. We shall assume therefore that the earth is a solid
globe of ascertained magnitude, which travels round the sun, in
an orbit nearly circular, in a period of about three hundred and
sixty-five days and a quarter, and in the mean time revolves, in an
inclined position, upon its own axis in about twenty-four hours,
thus producing the succession of appearances and effects which
constitute seasons and climates, day and night;--that this globe
has its surface furrowed and ridged with various inequalities,
the waters of the ocean occupying the depressed parts:--that it
is surrounded by an atmosphere, or spherical covering of air;
and that various other physical agents, moisture, electricity,
magnetism, light, operate at the surface of the earth, according to
their peculiar laws. This surface is, as we know, clothed with a
covering of plants, and inhabited by the various tribes of animals,
with all their variety of sensations, wants, and enjoyments. The
relations and connexions of the larger portions of the world, the
sun, the planets, and the stars, the _cosmical_ arrangements of
the system, as they are sometimes called, determine the course
of events among these bodies; and the more remarkable features
of these arrangements are therefore some of the subjects for our
consideration. These cosmical arrangements, in their consequences,
affect also the physical agencies which are at work at the surface
of the earth, and hence come in contact with _terrestrial_
occurrences. They thus influence the functions of plants and
animals. The circumstances in the cosmical system of the universe,
and in the organic system of the earth, which have thus a bearing
on each other, form another of the subjects of which we shall
treat. The former class of considerations attends principally to
the stability and other apparent perfections of the solar system;
the latter to the well-being of the system of organic life by which
the earth is occupied. The two portions of the subject may be
treated as Cosmical Arrangements and Terrestrial Adaptations.

We shall begin with the latter class of adaptations, because in
treating of these the facts are more familiar and tangible, and the
reasonings less abstract and technical, than in the other division
of the subject. Moreover, in this case men have no difficulty
in recognizing as desirable the end which is answered by such
adaptations, and they therefore the more readily consider it _as
an end_. The nourishment, the enjoyment, the diffusion of living
things, are willingly acknowledged to be a suitable object for
contrivance; the simplicity, the permanence, of an inert mechanical
combination might not so readily be allowed to be a manifestly
worthy aim of a Creating Wisdom. The former branch of our argument
may therefore be best suited to introduce to us the Deity as the
institutor of Laws of Nature, though the latter may afterwards give
us a wider view and a clearer insight into one province of his
legislation.




