CHAPTER IV.

_The Sun in the Centre._


The next circumstance which we shall notice as indicative of design
in the arrangement of the material portions of the solar system,
is the position of the sun, the source of light and heat, in the
centre of the system. This could hardly have occurred by any
thing which we can call chance. Let it be granted, that the law of
gravitation is established, and that we have a large mass, with
others much smaller in its comparative vicinity. The small bodies
may then move round the larger, but this will do nothing towards
making it a _sun_ to them. Their motions might take place, the
whole system remaining still utterly dark and cold, without day or
summer. In order that we may have something more than this blank
and dead assemblage of moving clods, the machine must be lighted
up and warmed. Some of the advantages of placing the lighting
and warming apparatus in the centre are obvious to us. It is in
this way only that we could have those regular periodical returns
of solar influence, which, as we have seen, are adapted to the
constitution of the living creation. And we can easily conceive,
that there may be other incongruities in a system with a travelling
sun, of which we can only conjecture the nature. No one probably
will doubt that the existing system, with the sun in the centre, is
better than any one of a different kind would be.

Now this lighting and warming by a central sun are something
superadded to the mere mechanical arrangements of the universe.
There is no apparent reason why the largest mass of gravitating
matter should diffuse inexhaustible supplies of light and heat in
all directions, while the other masses are merely passive, with
respect to such influences. There is no obvious connexion between
mass and luminousness, or temperature. No one, probably, will
contend that the materials of our system are necessarily luminous
or hot. According to the conjectures of astronomers, the heat and
light of the sun do not reside in its mass, but in a coating which
lies on its surface. If such a coating were fixed there by the
force of universal gravitation, how could we avoid having a similar
coating on the surface of the earth, and of all the other globes of
the system. If light consist in the vibrations of an ether, which
we have mentioned as a probable opinion, why has the sun alone the
power of exciting such vibrations? If light be the emission of
material particles, why does the sun alone emit such particles?
Similar questions may be asked, with regard to heat, whatever be
the theory we adopt on that subject. Here then we appear to find
marks of contrivance. The sun might become, we will suppose, the
centre of the motions of the planets by mere mechanical causes:
but what caused the centre of their motions to be also the source
of those vivifying influences? Allowing that no interposition was
requisite to regulate the revolutions of the system, yet observe
what a peculiar arrangement in other respects was necessary, in
order that these revolutions might produce days and seasons! The
machine will move of itself, we may grant: but who constructed the
machine, so that its movements might answer the purposes of life?
How was the candle placed upon the candlestick? How was the fire
deposited on the hearth, so that the comfort and well-being of the
family might be secured? Did these too fall into their places by
the casual operation of gravity? And, if not, is there not here
a clear evidence of intelligent design, of arrangement with a
benevolent end?

This argument is urged with great force by Newton himself. In his
first letter to Bentley, he allows that matter might form itself
into masses by the force of attraction. “And thus,” says he, “might
the sun and fixed stars be formed, supposing the matter were of
a lucid nature. But how the matter should divide itself into two
sorts; and that part of it which is fit to compose a shining body
should fall down into one mass, and make a sun; and the rest, which
is fit to compose an opaque body, should coalesce, not into one
great body, like the shining matter, but into many little ones; or
if the sun at first were an opake body like the planets, or the
planets lucid bodies like the sun, how he alone should be changed
into a shining body, whilst all they continue opake; or all they
be changed into opake ones, while he continued unchanged: I do not
think explicable by mere natural causes, but am forced to ascribe
it to the counsel and contrivance of a voluntary Agent.”




CHAPTER V.

_The Satellites._


1. A person of ordinary feelings, who, on a fine moonlight night,
sees our satellite pouring her mild radiance on field and town,
path and moor, will probably not only be disposed to “bless the
useful light,” but also to believe that it was “ordained” for that
purpose;--that the lesser light was made to rule the night as
certainly as the greater light was made to rule the day.

Laplace, however, does not assent to this belief. He observes,
that “some partisans of final causes have imagined that the moon
was given to the earth to afford light during the night:” but he
remarks that this cannot be so, for that we are often deprived at
the same time of the light of the sun and the moon; and he points
out how the moon might have been placed so as to be always “full.”

That the light of the moon affords, _to a certain extent_, a
supplement to the light of the sun, will hardly be denied. If
we take man in a condition in which he uses artificial light
scantily only, or not at all, there can be no doubt that the
moonlight nights are for him a very important addition to the time
of daylight. And as a small proportion only of the whole number
of nights are without some portion of moonlight, the fact that
sometimes both luminaries are invisible very little diminishes the
value of this advantage. Why we have not more moonlight, either in
duration or in quantity, is an inquiry which a philosopher could
hardly be tempted to enter upon, by any success which has attended
previous speculations of a similar nature. Why should not the moon
be ten times as large as she is? Why should not the pupil of man’s
eye be ten times as large as it is, so as to receive more of the
light which does arrive? We do not conceive that our inability
to answer the latter question prevents our knowing that the eye
was made for seeing: nor does our inability to answer the former,
disturb our persuasion that the moon was made to give light upon
the earth.

Laplace suggests that if the moon had been placed at a certain
distance beyond the earth, it would have revolved about the sun in
the same time as the earth does, and would have always presented
to us a full moon. For this purpose it must have been about four
times as far from us as it really is; and would therefore, other
things remaining unchanged, have only been _one sixteenth_ as
large to the eye as our present full moon. We shall not dwell on
the discussion of this suggestion, for the reason just intimated.
But we may observe that in such a system as Laplace proposes,
it is not yet proved, we believe, that the arrangement would be
stable under the influence of the disturbing forces. And we may add
that such an arrangement, in which the motion of one body has a
_co-ordinate_ reference to two others, as the motion of the moon on
this hypothesis would have to the sun and the earth, neither motion
being subordinate to the other, is contrary to the whole known
analogy of cosmical phenomena, and therefore has no claim to our
notice as a subject of discussion.

2. In turning our consideration to the satellites of the other
planets of our system, there is one fact which immediately arrests
our attention;--the number of such attendant bodies appears to
increase as we proceed to planets farther and farther from the
sun. Such at least is the general rule. Mercury and Venus, the
planets nearest the sun, have no such attendants: the Earth has
one. Mars, indeed, who is still farther removed, has none; nor
have the minor planets, Juno, Vesta, Ceres, Pallas; so that the
rule is only approximately verified. But Jupiter, who is at five
times the earth’s distance, has four satellites; and Saturn, who
is again at a distance nearly twice as great, has seven, besides
that most extraordinary phenomenon his ring, which, for purposes of
illumination, is equivalent to many thousand satellites. Of Uranus
it is difficult to speak, for his great distance renders it almost
impossible to observe the smaller circumstances of his condition.
It does not appear at all probable that he has a ring, like Saturn;
but he has at least five satellites which are visible to us, at the
enormous distance of nine hundred millions of miles; and we believe
that the astronomer will hardly deny that he may possibly have
thousands of smaller ones circulating about him.

But leaving conjecture, and taking only the ascertained cases
of Venus, the Earth, Jupiter, and Saturn, we conceive that a
person of common understanding will be strongly impressed with
the persuasion that the satellites are placed in the system
with a view to compensate for the diminished light of the sun
at greater distances. The smaller planets, Juno, Vesta, Ceres,
and Pallas, differ from the rest in so many ways, and suggest so
many conjectures of reasons for such differences, that we should
almost expect to find them exceptions to such a rule. Mars is a
more obvious exception. Some persons might conjecture from his
case, that the arrangement itself, like other useful arrangements,
has been brought about by some wider law which we have not yet
detected. But whether or not we entertain such a guess, (it can be
nothing more,) we see in other parts of creation, so many examples
of apparent exceptions to rules, which are afterwards found to be
explained, or provided for by particular contrivances, that no one,
familiar with such contemplations, will, by one anomaly, be driven
from the persuasion that the end which the arrangements of the
satellites seem suited to answer is really one of the ends of their
creation.




