CHAPTER IV.

  _On the Impression produced by the Contemplation of Laws of
  Nature; or, on the Conviction that Law implies Mind._


The various trains of thought and reasoning which lead men from
a consideration of the natural world to the conviction of the
existence, the power, the providence of God, do not require, for
the most part, any long or laboured deduction, to give them their
effect on the mind. On the contrary, they have, in every age and
country, produced their impression on multitudes who have not
instituted any formal reasonings upon the subject, and probably
upon many who have not put their conclusions in the shape of any
express propositions. The persuasion of a superior intelligence and
will, which manifests itself in every part of the material world,
is, as is well known, so widely diffused and deeply infixed, as to
have made it a question among speculative men whether the notion
of such a power is not universal and innate. It is our business to
show only how plainly and how universally such a belief results
from the study of the appearances about us. That in many nations,
in many periods, this persuasion has been mixed up with much that
was erroneous and perverse in the opinions of the intellect or
the fictions of fancy, does not weaken the force of such consent.
The belief of a supernatural and presiding power runs through all
these errors: and while the perversions are manifestly the work
of caprice and illusion, and vanish at the first ray of sober
inquiry, the belief itself is substantial and consistent, and grows
in strength upon every new examination. It was the firmness and
solidity of the conviction of _something_ Divine which gave a
hold and permanence to the figments of so many false divinities.
And those who have traced the progress of human thought on other
subjects, will not think it strange, that while the fundamental
persuasion of a Deity was thus irremovably seated in the human
mind, the developement of this conception into a consistent, pure,
and steadfast belief in one Almighty and Holy Father and God,
should be long missed, or never attained, by the struggle of the
human faculties; should require long reflection to mature it, and
the aid of revelation to establish it in the world.

The view of the universe which we have principally had occasion to
present to the reader, is that in which we consider its appearances
as reducible to certain fixed and general laws. Availing ourselves
of some of the lights which modern science supplies, we have
endeavoured to show that the adaptation of such laws to each other,
and their fitness to promote the harmonious and beneficial course
of the world, may be traced, wherever we can discover the laws
themselves; and that the conceptions of the Divine Power, Goodness
and Superintendence which we thus form, agree in a remarkable
manner with the views of the Supreme Being, to which reason,
enlightened by the divine revelation, has led.

But we conceive that the general impressions of mankind would
go further than a mere assent to the argument as we have thus
stated it. To most persons it appears that the mere existence of
a law connecting and governing any class of phenomena, implies a
presiding intelligence which has preconceived and established the
law. When events are regulated by precise rules of time and space,
of number and measure, men conceive these rules to be the evidence
of thought and mind, even without discovering in the rules any
peculiar adaptations, or without supposing their purpose to be
known.

The origin and the validity of such an impression on the human
mind may appear to some matters of abstruse and doubtful
speculation: yet the tendency to such a belief prevails strongly
and widely, both among the common class of minds whose thoughts
are casually and unsystematically turned to such subjects, and
among philosophers to whom laws of nature are habitual subjects
of contemplation. We conceive therefore that such a tendency may
deserve to be briefly illustrated; and we trust also that some
attention to this point may be of service in throwing light upon
the true relation of the study of nature to the belief in God.

1. A very slight attention shows us how readily order and
regularity suggest to a common apprehension the operation of a calm
and untroubled intelligence presiding over the course of events.
Thus the materialist poet, in accounting for the belief in the
Gods, though he does not share it, cannot deny the habitual effect
of this manifestation.

      Præterea cœli rationes _ordine certo_
      Et _varia_ annorum cernebant _tempora_ vorti;
      Nec poterant quibus id fieret cognoscere caussis.
      Ergo perfugium sibi habebant Omnia Divis
      Tradere et illorum nutu facere omnia flecti.
                                       LUCRET. v. 1182.

      They saw the skies in constant order run,
      The varied seasons and the circling sun,
      Apparent rule, with unapparent cause,
      And thus they sought in Gods the source of laws.

The same feeling may be traced in the early mythology of a large
portion of the globe. We might easily, taking advantage of the
labours of learned men, exemplify this in the case of the oriental
nations, of Greece, and of many other countries. Nor does there
appear much difficulty in pointing out the error of those who
have maintained that all religion had its _origin_ in the worship
of the stars and the elements; and who have insinuated that all
such impressions are unfounded, inasmuch as these are certainly
not right objects of human worship. The religious feeling, the
conviction of a supernatural power, of an intelligence connecting
and directing the phenomena of the world, had not its _origin_
in the worship of sun, or stars, or elements; but was itself the
necessary though unexpressed foundation of all worship, and all
forms of false, as well as true, religion. The contemplation of
the earth and heavens called into action this religious tendency
in man; and to say that the worship of the material world formed
or suggested this religious feeling, is to invert the order of
possible things in the most unphilosophical manner. Idolatry is
not the source of the belief in God, but is a compound of the
persuasion of a supernatural government, with certain extravagant
and baseless conceptions as to the manner in which this government
is exercised.

We will quote a passage from an author who has illustrated at
considerable length the hypothesis that all religious belief is
derived from the worship of the elements.

“Light, and darkness its perpetual contrast; the succession of
days and nights, the periodical order of the seasons; the career
of the brilliant luminary which regulates their course; that of
the moon his sister and rival; night, and the innumerable fires
which she lights in the blue vault of heaven; the revolutions of
the stars, which exhibit them for a longer or a shorter period
above our horizon; the constancy of this period in the fixed stars,
its variety in the wandering stars, the planets; their direct and
retrograde course, their momentary rest; the phases of the moon
waxing, full, waning, divested of all light; the progressive motion
of the sun upwards, downwards; the successive order of the rising
and setting of the fixed stars, which mark the different points of
the course of the sun, while the various aspects which the earth
itself assumes mark, here below also, the same periods of the sun’s
annual motion; * * * all these different pictures, displayed before
the eyes of man, formed the great and magnificent spectacle by
which I suppose him surrounded at the moment when _he is about to
create his gods_.”[31]

What is this (divested of its wanton levity of expression) but to
say, that when man has so far traced the course of nature as to be
irresistibly impressed with the existence of order, law, variety in
constancy, and fixity in change; of relations of form and space,
duration and succession, cause and consequence, among the objects
which surround him; there springs up in his breast, unbidden
and irresistibly, the thought of superintending intelligence,
of a mind which comprehended from the first and completely that
which he late and partially comes to know? The worship of earth
and sky, of the host of heaven and the influences of nature, is
not the ultimate and fundamental fact in the early history of
the religious impressions of mankind. These are but derivative
streams, impure and scanty, from the fountain of religious feeling
which appears to be disclosed to us by the contemplation of the
universe, as the seat of law and the manifestation of intellect.
Time suggests to man the thought of eternity; space of infinity;
law of intelligence; order of purpose; and however difficult and
long a task it may be to develope these suggestions into clear
convictions, these thoughts are the real parents of our natural
religious belief. The only relation between true religion and
the worship of the elemental world is, that the latter is the
partial and gross perversion, the former the consistent and pure
developement of the same original idea.

2. The connexion of the laws of the material world with an
intelligence which preconceived and instituted the law, which
is thus, as we perceive, so generally impressed on the common
apprehension of mankind, has also struck no less those who have
studied nature with a more systematic attention, and with the
peculiar views which belong to science. The laws which such
persons learn and study, seem, indeed, most naturally to lead to
the conviction of an intelligence which originally gave to the law
its form.

What we call a general law is, in truth, a form of expression
including a number of facts of like kind. The facts are separate;
the unity of view by which we associate them, the character of
generality and of law, resides in those relations which are the
object of the intellect. The law once apprehended by us, takes
in our minds the place of the facts themselves, and is said to
_govern_ or determine them, because it determines our anticipations
of what they will be. But we cannot, it would seem, conceive a law,
founded on such intelligible relations, to govern and determine
the facts themselves, any otherwise than by supposing also an
intelligence by which these relations are contemplated, and these
consequences realized. We cannot then represent to ourselves the
universe governed by general laws otherwise than by conceiving an
intelligent and conscious Deity, by whom these laws were originally
contemplated, established, and applied.

This perhaps will appear more clear, when it is considered that
the laws of which we speak are often of an abstruse and complex
kind, depending upon relations of space, time, number, and other
properties, which we perceive by great attention and thought.
These relations are often combined so variously and curiously,
that the most subtle reasonings and calculations which we can form
are requisite in order to trace their results. Can such laws be
conceived to be instituted without any exercise of knowledge and
intelligence? Can material objects apply geometry and calculation
to themselves? Can the lenses of the eye, for instance, be formed
and adjusted with an exact suitableness to their refractive
powers, while there is in the agency which has framed them, no
consciousness of the laws of light, of the course of rays, of
the visible properties of things? This appears to be altogether
inconceivable.

Every particle of matter possesses an almost endless train of
properties, each acting according to its peculiar and fixed
laws. For every atom of the same kind of matter these laws are
invariably and perpetually the same, while for the different kinds
of matter the difference of these properties is equally constant.
This constant and precise resemblance, this variation equally
constant and equally regular, suggest irresistibly the conception
of some cause, independent of the atoms themselves, by which their
similarity and dissimilarity, the agreement and difference of their
deportment under the same circumstances, have been determined. Such
a view of the constitution of matter, as is observed by an eminent
writer of our own time, effectually destroys the idea of its
eternal and self-existent nature, “by giving to each of its atoms
the essential characters, at once, of a _manufactured article_ and
a _subordinate agent_.”[32]

That such an impression, and the consequent belief in a divine
Author of the universe, by whom its laws were ordained and
established, does result from the philosophical contemplation of
nature, will, we trust, become still more evident by tracing the
effect produced upon men’s minds by the discovery of such laws and
properties as those of which we have been speaking; and we shall
therefore make a few observations on this subject.




