BOOK II.

COSMICAL ARRANGEMENTS.


When we turn our attention to the larger portions of the universe,
the sun, the planets, and the earth as one of them, the moon and
other satellites, the fixed stars and other heavenly bodies;--the
views which we obtain concerning their mutual relations,
arrangement and movements, are called, as we have already
stated, _cosmical_ views. These views will, we conceive, afford
us indications of the wisdom and care of the Power by which the
objects which we thus consider, were created and are preserved: and
we shall now proceed to point out some circumstances in which these
attributes may be traced.

It has been observed by writers on Natural Theology, that the
arguments for the being and perfections of the Creator, drawn
from cosmical considerations, labour under some disadvantages
when compared with the arguments founded on those provisions
and adaptations which more immediately affect the well-being of
organized creatures. The structure of the solar system has far less
analogy with such machinery as we can construct and comprehend,
than we find in the structure of the bodies of animals, or even in
the causes of the weather. Moreover, we do not see the immediate
bearing of cosmical arrangements on that end which we most readily
acknowledge to be useful and desirable, the support and comfort
of sentient natures. So that, from both causes, the impression of
benevolent design in this case is less striking and pointed than
that which results from the examination of some other parts of
nature.

But in considering the universe, according to the view we have
taken, as a collection of _laws_, astronomy, the science which
teaches us the laws of the motions of the heavenly bodies,
possesses some advantages, among the subjects from which we may
seek to learn the character of the government of the world. For our
knowledge of the laws of the motions of the planets and satellites
is far more complete and exact, far more thorough and satisfactory,
than the knowledge which we possess in any other department of
Natural Philosophy. Our acquaintance with the laws of the solar
system is such, that we can calculate the precise place and motion
of most of its parts at any period, past or future, however
remote; and we can refer the changes which take place in these
circumstances to their proximate cause, the attraction of one mass
of matter to another, acting between all the parts of the universe.

If, therefore, we trace indications of the Divine care, either in
the form of the laws which prevail among the heavenly bodies, or
in the arbitrary quantities which such laws involve; (according
to the distinction explained in the former part of this work;) we
may expect that our examples of such care, though they may be less
numerous and obvious, will be more precise than they can be in
other subjects, where the laws of facts are imperfectly known, and
their causes entirely hid. We trust that this will be found to be
the case with regard to some of the examples which we shall adduce.




CHAPTER I.

_The Structure of the Solar System._


In the cosmical considerations which we have to offer, we shall
suppose the general truths concerning the structure of the solar
system and of the universe, which have been established by
astronomers and mathematicians, to be known to the reader. It is
not necessary to go into much detail on this subject. The five
planets known to the ancients, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter,
Saturn, revolve round the sun, at different distances, in orbits
nearly circular, and nearly in one plane. Between Venus and Mars,
our Earth, herself one of the planets, revolves in like manner.
Beyond Saturn, Uranus has been discovered describing an orbit of
the same kind; and between Mars and Jupiter, four smaller bodies
perform their revolutions in orbits somewhat less regular than
the rest. These planets are all nearly globular, and all revolve
upon their axis. Some of them are accompanied by satellites, or
attendant bodies which revolve about them; and these bodies also
have their orbits nearly circular, and nearly in the same plane as
the others. Saturn’s ring is a solitary example, so far as we know,
of such an appendage to a planet.

These circular motions of the planets round the sun, and of the
satellites round their primary planets, are all kept going by the
_attraction_ of the respective central bodies, which restrains the
corresponding revolving bodies from flying off. It is perhaps not
very easy to make this operation clear to common apprehension. We
cannot illustrate it by a comparison with any machine of human
contrivance and fabrication: in such machines every thing goes
on by contact and impulse: pressure, and force of all kinds, is
exercised and transferred from one part to another, by means of a
material connexion; by rods, ropes, fluids, gases. In the machinery
of the universe there is, so far as we know, no material connexion
between the parts which act on each other. In the solar system no
part touches or drives another: all the bodies affect each other
_at a distance_, as the magnet affects the needle. The production
and regulation of such effects, if attempted by our mechanicians,
would require great skill and nicety of adjustment; but our artists
have not executed any examples of this sort of machinery, by
reference to which we can illustrate the arrangements of the solar
system.

Perhaps the following comparison may serve to explain the kind of
adjustments of which we shall have to speak. If there be a wide
shallow round basin of smooth marble, and if we take a smooth ball,
as a billiard ball or a marble pellet, and throw it along the
surface of the inside of the basin, the ball will generally make
many revolutions round the inside of the bowl, gradually tending to
the bottom in its motion. The gradual diminution of the motion, and
consequent tendency of the ball to the bottom of the bowl, arises
from the friction; and in order to make the motion correspond to
that which takes place through the action of a central force,
we must suppose this friction to be got rid of. In this case,
the ball, once set a going, would run round the basin for ever,
describing either a circle, or various kinds of ovals, according to
the way in which it was originally thrown; whether quick or slow,
and whether more or less obliquely along the surface.

Such a motion would be capable of the same kind of variety, and the
same sort of adjustments, as the motion of a body revolving about
a larger one by means of a central force. Perhaps the reader may
understand what kind of adjustments these are, by supposing such a
bowl and ball to be used for a game of skill. If the object of the
players be to throw the pellet along the surface of the basin, so
that after describing its curved path it shall pass through a small
hole in a barrier at some distance from the starting point, it will
easily be understood that some nicety in the regulation of the
force and direction with which the ball is thrown will be necessary
for success. In order to obtain a better image of the solar system,
we must suppose the basin to be very large and the pellet very
small. And it will easily be understood that as many pellets as
there are planets might run round the bowl at the same time with
different velocities. Such a contrivance might form a _planetarium_
in which the mimic planets would be regulated by the laws of motion
as the real planets are; instead of being carried by wires and
wheels, as is done in such machines of the common construction:
and in this planetarium the tendency of the planets to the sun is
replaced by the tendency of the representative pellets to run down
the slope of the bowl. We shall refer again to this basin, thus
representing the solar system with its loose planetary balls.




