CHAPTER XVII.

_The Ether._


In what has just been said, we have spoken of light, only with
respect to its power of illuminating objects, and conveying the
impression of them to the eye. It possesses, however, beyond all
doubt, many other qualities. Light is intimately connected with
heat, as we see in the case of the sun and of flame; yet it is
clear that light and heat are not identical. Light is evidently
connected too with electricity and galvanism; and perhaps, through
these, with magnetism: it is, as has already been mentioned,
indispensably necessary to the healthy discharge of the functions
of vegetable life; without it plants cannot duly exercise their
vital powers: it manifests also chemical action in various ways.

The luminiferous _ether_ then, if we so call the medium in which
light is propagated, must possess many other properties besides
those mechanical ones on which the illuminating power depends. It
must not be merely like a fluid poured into the vacant spaces and
interstices of the material world, and exercising no action on
objects; it must affect the physical, chemical and vital powers of
what it touches. It must be a great and active agent in the work
of the universe, as well as an active reporter of what is done
by other agents. It must possess a number of complex and refined
contrivances and adjustments which we cannot analyze, bearing upon
plants and chemical compounds, and the imponderable agents; as well
as those laws which we conceive that we have analyzed, by which it
is the vehicle of illumination and vision.

We have had occasion to point out how complex is the machinery of
the atmosphere, and how varied its objects; since, besides being
the means of communication as the medium of sound, it has known
laws which connect it with heat and moisture; and other laws, in
virtue of which it is decomposed by vegetables. It appears, in
like manner, that the ether is not only the vehicle of light,
but has also laws, at present unknown, which connect it with
heat, electricity, and other agencies; and other laws through
which it is necessary to vegetables, enabling them to decompose
air. All analogy leads us to suppose that if we knew as much of
the constitution of the luminiferous ether as we know of the
constitution of the atmosphere, we should find it a machine as
complex and artificial, as skilfully and admirably constructed.

We know at present very little indeed of the construction of this
machine. Its _existence_ is, perhaps, satisfactorily made out;
in order that we may not interrupt the progress of our argument,
we shall refer to other works for the reasonings which appear to
lead to this conclusion. But whether heat, electricity, galvanism,
magnetism, be fluids; or effects or modifications of fluids; and
whether such fluids or _ethers_ be the same with the luminiferous
ether, or with each other; are questions of which all or most
appear to be at present undecided, and it would be presumptuous and
premature here to take one side or the other.

The mere fact, however, that there is such an ether, and that
it has properties related to other agents, in the way we have
suggested, is well calculated to extend our views of the structure
of the universe, and of the resources, if we may so speak, of the
Power by which it is arranged. The solid and fluid matter of the
earth is the most obvious to our senses; over this, and in its
cavities, is poured an invisible fluid, the air, by which warmth
and life are diffused and fostered, and by which men communicate
with men: over and through this again, and reaching, so far as we
know, to the utmost bounds of the universe, is spread another most
subtle and attenuated fluid, which, by the play of another set of
agents, aids the energies of nature, and which, filling all parts
of space, is a means of communication with other planets and other
systems.

There is nothing in all this like any material necessity,
compelling the world to be as it is and no otherwise. How should
the properties of these three great classes of agents, visible
objects, air, and light, so harmonize and assist each other, that
order and life should be the result. Without all the three, and
all the three constituted in their present manner, and subject to
their present laws, living things could not exist. If the earth had
no atmosphere, or if the world had no ether, all must be inert and
dead. Who constructed these three extraordinary complex pieces of
machinery, the earth with its productions, the atmosphere, and the
ether? Who fitted them into each other in many parts, and thus made
it possible for them to work together? We conceive there can be but
one answer; a most wise and good God.




CHAPTER XVIII.

_Recapitulation._


1. It has been shown in the preceding chapters that a great number
of quantities and laws appear to have been _selected_ in the
construction of the universe; and that by the adjustment to each
other of the magnitudes and laws thus selected, the constitution
of the world is what we find it, and is fitted for the support
of vegetables and animals, in a manner in which it could not have
been, if the properties and quantities of the elements had been
different from what they are. We shall here recapitulate the
principal of the laws and magnitudes to which this conclusion has
been shown to apply.

  1. The Length of the Year, which depends on the force of the
  attraction of the sun, and its distance from the earth.

  2. The Length of the Day.

  3. The Mass of the Earth, which depends on its magnitude and
  density.

  4. The Magnitude of the Ocean.

  5. The Magnitude of the Atmosphere.

  6. The Law and Rate of the Conducting Power of the Earth.

  7. The Law and Rate of the Radiating Power of the Earth.

  8. The Law and Rate of the Expansion of Water by Heat.

  9. The Law and Rate of the Expansion of Water by Cold, below 40
  degrees.

  10. The Law and Quantity of the Expansion of Water in Freezing.

  11. The Quantity of Latent Heat absorbed in Thawing.

  12. The Quantity of Latent Heat absorbed in Evaporation.

  13. The Law and Rate of Evaporation with regard to Heat.

  14. The Law and Rate of the Expansion of Air by Heat.

  15. The Quantity of Heat absorbed in the Expansion of Air.

  16. The Law and Rate of the Passage of Aqueous Vapour through Air.

  17. The Laws of Electricity; its relations to Air and Moisture.

  18. The Fluidity, Density, and Elasticity of the Air, by means of
  which its vibrations produce Sound.

  19. The Fluidity, Density, and Elasticity of the Ether, by means
  of which its vibrations produce Light.

2. These are the _data_, the _elements_, as astronomers call
the quantities which determine a planet’s orbit, on which the
mere _inorganic_ part of the universe is constructed. To these,
the constitution of the organic world is adapted in innumerable
points, by laws of which we can trace the results, though we cannot
analyze their machinery. Thus, the vital functions of vegetables
have periods which correspond to the length of the year, and of
the day; their vital powers have forces which correspond to the
force of gravity; the sentient faculties of man are such that
the vibrations of air (within certain limits,) are perceived as
sound, those of ether, as light. And while we are enumerating these
correspondencies, we perceive that there are thousands of others,
and that we can only select a very small number of those where
the relation happens to be most clearly made out or most easily
explained.

Now, in the list of the mathematical _elements_ of the universe
which has just been given, why have we such laws and such
quantities as there occur, and no other? For the most part, the
data there enumerated are independent of each other, and might be
altered separately, so far as the mechanical conditions of the case
are concerned. Some of these data probably depend on each other.
Thus the latent heat of aqueous vapour is perhaps connected with
the difference of the rate of expansion of water and of steam. But
all natural philosophers will, probably, agree, that there must be,
in this list, a great number of things entirely without any mutual
dependence, as the year and the day, the expansion of air and the
expansion of steam. There are, therefore, it appears, a number
of things which, in the structure of the world, might have been
otherwise, and which are what they are in consequence of choice or
of chance. We have already seen, in many of the cases separately,
how unlike chance every thing looks:--that substances, which might
have existed any how, so far as they themselves are concerned,
exist exactly in such a manner and measure as they should, to
secure the welfare of other things:--that the laws are tempered
and fitted together in the only way in which the world could have
gone on, according to all that we can conceive of it. This must,
therefore, be the work of choice; and if so, it cannot be doubted,
of a most wise and benevolent Chooser.

3. The appearance of choice is still further illustrated by the
variety as well as the number of the laws selected. The laws are
unlike one another. Steam certainly expands at a very different
_rate_ from air by the application of heat, probably according to a
different _law_: water expands in freezing, but mercury contracts:
heat travels in a manner quite different through solids and fluids.
Every separate substance has its own density, gravity, cohesion,
elasticity, its relations to heat, to electricity, to magnetism;
besides all its chemical affinities, which form an endless throng
of laws, connecting every one substance in creation with every
other, and different for each pair anyhow taken. Nothing can
look less like a world formed of atoms operating upon each other
according to some universal and inevitable laws, than this does: if
such a system of things be conceivable, it cannot be our system.
We have, it may be, fifty simple substances in the world; each of
which is invested with properties, both of chemical and mechanical
action, altogether different from those of any other substance.
Every portion, however minute, of any of these, possesses all
the properties of the substance. Of each of these substances
there is a certain unalterable quantity in the universe; when
combined, their compounds exhibit new chemical affinities, new
mechanical laws. Who gave these different laws to the different
substances? who proportioned the quantity of each? But suppose
this done. Suppose these substances in existence; in contact, in
due proportion to each other. Is _this_ a world, or at least our
world? No more than the mine and the forest are the ship of war and
the factory. These elements, with their constitution perfect, and
their proportion suitable, are still a mere chaos. They must be put
in their places. They must not be where their own properties would
place them. They must be made to assume a particular arrangement,
or we can have no regular and permanent course of nature. This
arrangement must again have additional peculiarities, or we can
have no organic portion of the world. The millions of millions
of particles which the world contains, must be finished up in
as complete a manner, and fitted into their places with as much
nicety, as the most delicate wheel or spring in a piece of human
machinery. What are the habits of thought to which it can appear
possible that this could take place without design, intention,
intelligence, purpose, knowledge?

In what has just been said, we have spoken only of the constitution
of the inorganic part of the universe. The mechanism, if we may
so call it, of vegetable and animal life, is so far beyond our
comprehension, that though some of the same observations might be
applied to it, we do not dwell upon the subject. We know that in
these processes also, the mechanical and chemical properties of
matter are necessary, but we know too that these alone will not
account for the phenomena of life. There is something more than
these. The lowest stage of vitality and irritability appears to
carry us beyond mechanism, beyond affinity. All that has been said
with regard to the exactness of the adjustments, the combination of
various means, the tendency to continuance, to preservation, is
applicable with additional force to the organic creation, so far
as we can perceive the means employed. These, however, belong to a
different province of the subject, and must be left to other hands.




