CHAPTER II.

_On Laws of Nature._


When we speak of material nature as being governed by _laws_, it
is sufficiently evident that we use the term in a manner somewhat
metaphorical. The laws to which man’s attention is primarily
directed are _moral_ laws; rules laid down for his actions; rules
for the conscious actions of a person; rules which, as a matter
of possibility, he may obey or may transgress; the latter event
being combined, not with an impossibility, but with a penalty. But
the _Laws of Nature_ are something different from this; they are
rules for that which _things_ are to do and suffer; and this by
no consciousness or will of theirs. They are rules describing the
mode in which things _do_ act; they are invariably obeyed; their
transgression is not punished, it is excluded. The language of a
moral law is, man _shall_ not kill; the language of a Law of Nature
is, a stone _will_ fall to the earth.

These two kinds of laws direct the actions of persons and of
things, by the sort of control of which persons and things are
respectively susceptible; so that the metaphor is very simple; but
it is proper for us to recollect that it is a metaphor, in order
that we may clearly apprehend what is implied in speaking of the
Laws of Nature.

In this phrase are included all properties of the portions of
the material world; all modes of action and rules of causation,
according to which they operate on each other. The whole course of
the visible universe therefore is but the collective result of such
laws; its movements are only the aggregate of _their_ working. All
natural occurrences, in the skies and on the earth, in the organic
and in the inorganic world, are determined by the relations of the
elements and the actions of the forces of which the rules are thus
prescribed.

The relations and rules by which these occurrences are thus
determined necessarily depend on measures of time and space,
motion and force; on quantities which are subject to numerical
measurement, and capable of being connected by mathematical
properties. And thus all things are ordered by number and weight
and measure. “God,” as was said by the ancients, “works by
geometry:” the legislation of the material universe is necessarily
delivered in the language of mathematics; the stars in their
courses are regulated by the properties of conic sections, and
the winds depend on arithmetical and geometrical progressions of
elasticity and pressure.

The constitution of the universe, so far as it can be clearly
apprehended by our intellect, thus assumes a shape involving an
assemblage of mathematical propositions: certain algebraical
formulæ, and the knowledge when and how to apply them, constitute
the last step of the physical science to which we can attain.
The labour and the endowments of ages have been employed in
bringing such science into the condition in which it now exists;
and an exact and extensive discipline in mathematics, followed
by a practical and profound study of the researches of natural
philosophers, can alone put any one in possession of the knowledge
concerning the course of the material world, which is at present
open to man. The general impression, however, which arises from
the view thus obtained of the universe, the results which we
collect from the most careful scrutiny of its administration, may,
we trust, be rendered intelligible without this technical and
laborious study, and to do this is our present object.

It will be our business to show that the laws which really prevail
in nature are, by their _form_, that is, by the nature of the
connexion which they establish among the quantities and properties
which they regulate, remarkably adapted to the office which is
assigned them; and thus offer evidence of selection, design, and
goodness, in the power by which they were established. But these
characters of the legislation of the universe may also be seen, in
many instances, in a manner somewhat different from the selection
of the law. The _nature of the connexion_ remaining the same, the
quantities which it regulates may also in their _magnitude_ bear
marks of selection and purpose. For the law may be the same while
the quantities to which it applies are different. The law of the
gravity which acts to the earth and to Jupiter, is the same; but
the intensity of the force at the surfaces of the two planets is
different. The law which regulates the density of the air at any
point, with reference to the height from the earth’s surface,
would be the same, if the atmosphere were ten times as large, or
only one-tenth as large as it is; if the barometer at the earth’s
surface stood at three inches only, or if it showed a pressure of
thirty feet of mercury.

Now this being understood, the adaptation of a law to its purpose,
or to other laws, may appear in two ways:--either in the form of
the law, or in the amount of the magnitudes which it regulates,
which are sometimes called _arbitrary magnitudes_.

If the attraction of the sun upon the planets did not vary
inversely as the square of the distance, the _form_ of the law
of gravitation would be changed; if this attraction were, at the
earth’s orbit, of a different _value_ from its present one, the
arbitrary magnitude would be changed; and it will appear, in a
subsequent part of this work, that either change would, so far as
we can trace its consequences, be detrimental. The form of the law
determines in what manner the facts shall take place; the arbitrary
magnitude determines how fast, how far, how soon; the one gives a
model, the other a measure of the phenomenon; the one draws the
plan, the other gives the scale on which it is to be executed; the
one gives the rule, the other the rate. If either were wrongly
taken, the result would be wrong too.




