PART II


THE TWO GUN MAN


CHAPTER ONE

THE CATTLE RUSTLERS

Buck Johnson was American born, but with a black beard and a dignity of
manner that had earned him the title of Senor.  He had drifted into
southeastern Arizona in the days of Cochise and Victorio and Geronimo.
He had persisted, and so in time had come to control the water--and
hence the grazing--of nearly all the Soda Springs Valley.  His troubles
were many, and his difficulties great.  There were the ordinary
problems of lean and dry years.  There were also the extraordinary
problems of devastating Apaches; rivals for early and ill-defined range
rights--and cattle rustlers.

Senor Buck Johnson was a man of capacity, courage, directness of
method, and perseverance.  Especially the latter.  Therefore he had
survived to see the Apaches subdued, the range rights adjusted, his
cattle increased to thousands, grazing the area of a principality.
Now, all the energy and fire of his frontiersman's nature he had turned
to wiping out the third uncertainty of an uncertain business.  He found
it a task of some magnitude.

For Senor Buck Johnson lived just north of that terra incognita filled
with the mystery of a double chance of death from man or the flaming
desert known as the Mexican border.  There, by natural gravitation,
gathered all the desperate characters of three States and two
republics.  He who rode into it took good care that no one should ride
behind him, lived warily, slept light, and breathed deep when once he
had again sighted the familiar peaks of Cochise's Stronghold.  No one
professed knowledge of those who dwelt therein.  They moved, mysterious
as the desert illusions that compassed them about.  As you rode, the
ranges of mountains visibly changed form, the monstrous, snaky,
sea-like growths of the cactus clutched at your stirrup, mock lakes
sparkled and dissolved in the middle distance, the sun beat hot and
merciless, the powdered dry alkali beat hotly and mercilessly back--and
strange, grim men, swarthy, bearded, heavily armed, with red-rimmed
unshifting eyes, rode silently out of the mists of illusion to look on
you steadily, and then to ride silently back into the desert haze.
They might be only the herders of the gaunt cattle, or again they might
belong to the Lost Legion that peopled the country.  All you could know
was that of the men who entered in, but few returned.

Directly north of this unknown land you encountered parallel fences
running across the country.  They enclosed nothing, but offered a check
to the cattle drifting toward the clutch of the renegades, and an
obstacle to swift, dashing forays.

Of cattle-rustling there are various forms.  The boldest consists quite
simply of running off a bunch of stock, hustling it over the Mexican
line, and there selling it to some of the big Sonora ranch owners.
Generally this sort means war.  Also are there subtler means, grading
in skill from the re-branding through a wet blanket, through the crafty
refashioning of a brand to the various methods of separating the cow
from her unbranded calf.  In the course of his task Senor Buck Johnson
would have to do with them all, but at present he existed in a state of
warfare, fighting an enemy who stole as the Indians used to steal.

Already he had fought two pitched battles and had won them both.  His
cattle increased, and he became rich.  Nevertheless he knew that
constantly his resources were being drained.  Time and again he and his
new Texas foreman, Jed Parker, had followed the trail of a stampeded
bunch of twenty or thirty, followed them on down through the Soda
Springs Valley to the cut drift fences, there to abandon them.  For, as
yet, an armed force would be needed to penetrate the borderland.  Once
he and his men bad experienced the glory of a night pursuit.  Then, at
the drift fences, he had fought one of his battles.  But it was
impossible adequately to patrol all parts of a range bigger than some
Eastern States.

Buck Johnson did his best, but it was like stopping with sand the
innumerable little leaks of a dam.  Did his riders watch toward the
Chiricahuas, then a score of beef steers disappeared from Grant's Pass
forty miles away.  Pursuit here meant leaving cattle unguarded there.
It was useless, and the Senor soon perceived that sooner or later he
must strike in offence.

For this purpose he began slowly to strengthen the forces of his
riders.  Men were coming in from Texas.  They were good men, addicted
to the grass-rope, the double cinch, and the ox-bow stirrup.  Senor
Johnson wanted men who could shoot, and he got them.

"Jed," said Senor Johnson to his foreman, "the next son of a gun that
rustles any of our cows is sure loading himself full of trouble.  We'll
hit his trail and will stay with it, and we'll reach his
cattle-rustling conscience with a rope."

So it came about that a little army crossed the drift fences and
entered the border country.  Two days later it came out, and mighty
pleased to be able to do so.  The rope had not been used.

The reason for the defeat was quite simple.  The thief had run his
cattle through the lava beds where the trail at once became difficult
to follow.  This delayed the pursuing party; they ran out of water,
and, as there was among them not one man well enough acquainted with
the country to know where to find more, they had to return.

"No use, Buck," said Jed.  "We'd any of us come in on a gun play, but
we can't buck the desert.  We'll have to get someone who knows the
country."

"That's all right--but where?" queried Johnson.

"There's Pereza," suggested Parker. "It's the only town down near that
country."

"Might get someone there," agreed the Senor.

Next day he rode away in search of a guide.  The third evening he was
back again, much discouraged.

"The country's no good," he explained. "The regular inhabitants 're a
set of Mexican bums and old soaks.  The cowmen's all from north and
don't know nothing more than we do.  I found lots who claimed to know
that country, but when I told 'em what I wanted they shied like a colt.
I couldn't hire 'em, for no money, to go down in that country.  They
ain't got the nerve.  I took two days to her, too, and rode out to a
ranch where they said a man lived who knew all about it down there.
Nary riffle.  Man looked all right, but his tail went down like the
rest when I told him what we wanted.  Seemed plumb scairt to death.
Says he lives too close to the gang.  Says they'd wipe him out sure if
he done it.  Seemed  plumb SCAIRT."  Buck Johnson grinned. "I told him
so and he got hosstyle right off.  Didn't seem no ways scairt of me.  I
don't know what's the matter with that outfit down there.  They're
plumb terrorised."

That night a bunch of steers was stolen from the very corrals of the
home ranch.  The home ranch was far north, near Fort Sherman itself,
and so had always been considered immune from attack.  Consequently
these steers were very fine ones.

For the first time Buck Johnson lost his head and his dignity.  He
ordered the horses.

"I'm going to follow that -- -- into Sonora," he shouted to Jed Parker.
"This thing's got to stop!"

"You can't make her, Buck," objected the foreman. "You'll get held up
by the desert, and, if that don't finish you, they'll tangle you up in
all those little mountains down there, and ambush you, and massacre
you.  You know it damn well."

"I don't give a --" exploded Senor Johnson, "if they do.  No man can
slap my face and not get a run for it."

Jed Parker communed with himself.

"Senor," said he, at last, "it's no good; you can't do it.  You got to
have a guide.  You wait three days and I'll get you one."

"You can't do it," insisted the Senor. "I tried every man in the
district."

"Will you wait three days?" repeated the foreman.

Johnson pulled loose his latigo.  His first anger had cooled.

"All right," he agreed, "and you can say for me that I'll pay five
thousand dollars in gold and give all the men and horses he needs to
the man who has the nerve to get back that bunch of cattle, and bring
in the man who rustled them.  I'll sure make this a test case."

So Jed Parker set out to discover his man with nerve.




CHAPTER TWO

THE MAN WITH NERVE

At about ten o'clock of the Fourth of July a rider topped the summit of
the last swell of land, and loped his animal down into the single
street of Pereza.  The buildings on either side were flat-roofed and
coated with plaster.  Over the sidewalks extended wooden awnings,
beneath which opened very wide doors into the coolness of saloons.
Each of these places ran a bar, and also games of roulette, faro,
craps, and stud poker.  Even this early in the morning every game was
patronised.

The day was already hot with the dry, breathless, but exhilarating,
heat of the desert.  A throng of men idling at the edge of the
sidewalks, jostling up and down their centre, or eddying into the
places of amusement, acknowledged the power of summer by loosening
their collars, carrying their coats on their arms.  They were as yet
busily engaged in recognising acquaintances.  Later they would drink
freely and gamble, and perhaps fight.  Toward all but those whom they
recognised they preserved an attitude of potential suspicion, for here
were gathered the "bad men" of the border countries.  A certain
jealousy or touchy egotism lest the other man be considered quicker on
the trigger, bolder, more aggressive than himself, kept each strung to
tension.  An occasional shot attracted little notice. Men in the
cow-countries shoot as casually as we strike matches, and some subtle
instinct told them that the reports were harmless.

As the rider entered the one street, however, a more definite cause of
excitement drew the loose population toward the centre of the road.
Immediately their mass blotted out what had interested them.  Curiosity
attracted the saunterers; then in turn the frequenters of the bars and
gambling games.  In a very few moments the barkeepers, gamblers, and
look-out men, held aloof only by the necessities of their calling,
alone of all the population of Pereza were not included in the
newly-formed ring.

The stranger pushed his horse resolutely to the outer edge of the crowd
where, from his point of vantage, he could easily overlook their heads.
He was a quiet-appearing young fellow, rather neatly dressed in the
border costume, rode a "centre fire," or single-cinch, saddle, and wore
no chaps.  He was what is known as a "two-gun man":  that is to say, he
wore a heavy Colt's revolver on either hip.  The fact that the lower
ends of his holsters were tied down, in order to facilitate the easy
withdrawal of the revolvers, seemed to indicate that he expected to use
them.  He had furthermore a quiet grey eye, with the glint of steel
that bore out the inference of the tied holsters.

The newcomer dropped his reins on his pony's neck, eased himself to an
attitude of attention, and looked down gravely on what was taking
place.  He saw over the heads of the bystanders a tall, muscular,
wild-eyed man, hatless, his hair rumpled into staring confusion, his
right sleeve rolled to his shoulder, a wicked-looking nine-inch knife
in his hand, and a red bandana handkerchief hanging by one corner from
his teeth.

"What's biting the locoed stranger?" the young man inquired of his
neighbour.

The other frowned at him darkly.

"Dare's anyone to take the other end of that handkerchief in his teeth,
and fight it out without letting go."

"Nice joyful proposition," commented the young man.

He settled himself to closer attention.  The wild-eyed man was talking
rapidly.  What he said cannot be printed here.  Mainly was it
derogatory of the southern countries.  Shortly it became boastful of
the northern, and then of the man who uttered it.

He swaggered up and down, becoming always the more insolent as his
challenge remained untaken.

"Why don't you take him up?" inquired the young man, after a moment.

"Not me!" negatived the other vigorously.  "I'll go yore little old
gunfight to a finish, but I don't want any cold steel in mine.  Ugh! it
gives me the shivers.  It's a reg'lar Mexican trick!  With a gun it's
down and out, but this knife work is too slow and searchin'."

The newcomer said nothing, but fixed his eye again on the raging man
with the knife.

"Don't you reckon he's bluffing?" he inquired.

"Not any!" denied the other with emphasis. "He's jest drunk enough to
be crazy mad."

The newcomer shrugged his shoulders and cast his glance searchingly
over the fringe of the crowd. It rested on a Mexican.

"Hi, Tony! come here," he called.

The Mexican approached, flashing his white teeth.

"Here," said the stranger, "lend me your knife a minute."

The Mexican, anticipating sport of his own peculiar kind, obeyed with
alacrity.

"You fellows make me tired," observed the stranger, dismounting.  "He's
got the whole townful of you bluffed to a standstill.  Damn if I don't
try his little game."

He hung his coat on his saddle, shouldered his way through the press,
which parted for him readily, and picked up the other corner of the
handkerchief.

"Now, you mangy son of a gun," said he.




CHAPTER THREE

THE AGREEMENT

Jed Parker straightened his back, rolled up the bandana handkerchief,
and thrust it into his pocket, hit flat with his hand the touselled
mass of his hair, and thrust the long hunting knife into its sheath.

"You're the man I want," said he.

Instantly the two-gun man had jerked loose his weapons and was covering
the foreman.

"Am I!" he snarled.

"Not jest that way," explained Parker.  "My gun is on my hoss, and you
can have this old toad-sticker if you want it.  I been looking for you,
and took this way of finding you.  Now, let's go talk."

The stranger looked him in the eye for nearly a half minute without
lowering his revolvers.

"I go you," said he briefly, at last.

But the crowd, missing the purport, and in fact the very occurrence of
this colloquy, did not understand.  It thought the bluff had been
called, and naturally, finding harmless what had intimidated it, gave
way to an exasperated impulse to get even.

"You -- -- -- bluffer!" shouted a voice, "don't you think you can run
any such ranikaboo here!"

Jed Parker turned humorously to his companion.

"Do we get that talk?" he inquired gently.

For answer the two-gun man turned and walked steadily in the direction
of the man who had shouted.  The latter's hand strayed uncertainly
toward his own weapon, but the movement paused when the stranger's
clear, steel eye rested on it.

"This gentleman," pointed out the two-gun man softly, "is an old friend
of mine.  Don't you get to calling of him names."

His eye swept the bystanders calmly.

"Come on, Jack," said he, addressing Parker.

On the outskirts he encountered the Mexican from whom he had borrowed
the knife.

"Here, Tony," said he with a slight laugh, "here's a peso.  You'll find
your knife back there where I had to drop her."

He entered a saloon, nodded to the proprietor, and led the way through
it to a boxlike room containing a board table and two chairs.

"Make good," he commanded briefly.

"I'm looking for a man with nerve," explained Parker, with equal
succinctness. "You're the man."

"Well?"

"Do you know the country south of here?"

The stranger's eyes narrowed.

"Proceed," said he.

"I'm foreman of the Lazy Y of Soda Springs Valley range," explained
Parker.  "I'm looking for a man with sand enough and sabe of the
country enough to lead a posse after cattle-rustlers into the border
country."

"I live in this country," admitted the stranger.

"So do plenty of others, but their eyes stick out like two raw oysters
when you mention the border country.  Will you tackle it?"

"What's the proposition?"

"Come and see the old man.  He'll put it to you."

They mounted their horses and rode the rest of the day.  The desert
compassed them about, marvellously changing shape and colour, and every
character, with all the noiselessness of phantasmagoria.  At evening
the desert stars shone steady and unwinking, like the flames of
candles.  By moonrise they came to the home ranch.

The buildings and corrals lay dark and silent against the moonlight
that made of the plain a sea of mist.  The two men unsaddled their
horses and turned them loose in the wire-fenced "pasture," the
necessary noises of their movements sounding sharp and clear against
the velvet hush of the night.  After a moment they walked stiffly past
the sheds and cook shanty, past the men's bunk houses, and the tall
windmill silhouetted against the sky, to the main building of the home
ranch under its great cottonwoods.  There a light still burned, for
this was the third day, and Buck Johnson awaited his foreman.

Jed Parker pushed in without ceremony.

"Here's your man, Buck," said he.

The stranger had stepped inside and carefully closed the door behind
him.  The lamplight threw into relief the bold, free lines of his face,
the details of his costume powdered thick with alkali, the shiny butts
of the two guns in their open holsters tied at the bottom.  Equally it
defined the resolute countenance of Buck Johnson turned up in inquiry.
The two men examined each other--and liked each other at once.

"How are you," greeted the cattleman.

"Good-evening," responded the stranger.

"Sit down," invited Buck Johnson.

The stranger perched gingerly on the edge of a chair, with an
appearance less of embarrassment than of habitual alertness.

"You'll take the job?" inquired the Senor.

"I haven't heard what it is," replied the stranger.

"Parker here--?"

"Said you'd explain."

"Very well," said Buck Johnson.  He paused a moment, collecting his
thoughts. "There's too much cattle-rustling here.  I'm going to stop
it.  I've got good men here ready to take the job, but no one who knows
the country south.  Three days ago I had a bunch of cattle stolen right
here from the home-ranch corrals, and by one man, at that.  It wasn't
much of a bunch--about twenty head--but I'm going to make a starter
right here, and now.  I'm going to get that bunch back, and the man who
stole them, if I have to go to hell to do it.  And I'm going to do the
same with every case of rustling that comes up from now on.  I don't
care if it's only one cow, I'm going to get it back--every trip.  Now,
I want to know if you'll lead a posse down into the south country and
bring out that last bunch, and the man who rustled them?"

"I don't know--" hesitated the stranger.

"I offer you five thousand dollars in gold if you'll bring back those
cows and the man who stole 'em," repeated Buck Johnson.  "And I'll give
you all the horses and men you think you need."

"I'll do it," replied the two-gun man promptly.

"Good!" cried Buck Johnson, "and you better start to-morrow."

"I shall start to-night--right now."

"Better yet.  How many men do you want, and grub for how long?"

"I'll play her a lone hand."

"Alone!" exclaimed Johnson, his confidence visibly cooling.

"Alone!  Do you think you can make her?"

"I'll be back with those cattle in not more than ten days."

"And the man," supplemented the Senor.

"And the man.  What's more, I want that money here when I come in.  I
don't aim to stay in this country over night."

A grin overspread Buck Johnson's countenance.  He understood.

"Climate not healthy for you?" he hazarded.  "I guess you'd be safe
enough all right with us.  But suit yourself.  The money will be here."

"That's agreed?" insisted the two-gun man.

"Sure."

"I want a fresh horse--I'll leave mine--he's a good one.  I want a
little grub."

"All right.  Parker'll fit you out."

The stranger rose.

"I'll see you in about ten days."

"Good luck," Senor Buck Johnson wished him.




CHAPTER FOUR

THE ACCOMPLISHMENT

The next morning Buck Johnson took a trip down into the "pasture" of
five hundred wire-fenced acres.

"He means business," he confided to Jed Parker, on his return.  "That
cavallo of his is a heap sight better than the Shorty horse we let him
take.  Jed, you found your man with nerve, all right.  How did you do
it?"

The two settled down to wait, if not with confidence, at least with
interest.  Sometimes, remembering the desperate character of the
outlaws, their fierce distrust of any intruder, the wildness of the
country, Buck Johnson and his foreman inclined to the belief that the
stranger had undertaken a task beyond the powers of any one man.
Again, remembering the stranger's cool grey eye, the poise of his
demeanour, the quickness of his movements, and the two guns with tied
holsters to permit of easy withdrawal, they were almost persuaded that
he might win.

"He's one of those long-chance fellows," surmised Jed. "He likes
excitement.  I see that by the way he takes up with my knife play.
He'd rather leave his hide on the fence than stay in the corral."

"Well, he's all right," replied Senor Buck Johnson, "and if he ever
gets back, which same I'm some doubtful of, his dinero'll be here for
him."

In pursuance of this he rode in to Willets, where shortly the overland
train brought him from Tucson the five thousand dollars in double
eagles.

In the meantime the regular life of the ranch went on.  Each morning
Sang, the Chinese cook, rang the great bell, summoning the men.  They
ate, and then caught up the saddle horses for the day, turning those
not wanted from the corral into the pasture.  Shortly they jingled away
in different directions, two by two, on the slow Spanish trot of the
cow-puncher.  All day long thus they would ride, without food or water
for man or beast, looking the range, identifying the stock, branding
the young calves, examining generally into the state of affairs, gazing
always with grave eyes on the magnificent, flaming, changing,
beautiful, dreadful desert of the Arizona plains.  At evening when the
coloured atmosphere, catching the last glow, threw across the
Chiricahuas its veil of mystery, they jingled in again, two by two,
untired, unhasting, the glory of the desert in their deep-set, steady
eyes.

And all the day long, while they were absent, the cattle, too, made
their pilgrimage, straggling in singly, in pairs, in bunches, in long
files, leisurely, ruminantly, without haste.  There, at the long
troughs filled by the windmill of the blindfolded pump mule, they
drank, then filed away again into the mists of the desert.  And Senor
Buck Johnson, or his foreman, Parker, examined them for their
condition, noting the increase, remarking the strays from another
range.  Later, perhaps, they, too, rode abroad.  The same thing
happened at nine other ranches from five to ten miles apart, where
dwelt other fierce, silent men all under the authority of Buck Johnson.

And when night fell, and the topaz and violet and saffron and amethyst
and mauve and lilac had faded suddenly from the Chiricahuas, like a
veil that has been rent, and the ramparts had become slate-grey and
then black--the soft-breathed night wandered here and there over the
desert, and the land fell under an enchantment even stranger than the
day's.

So the days went by, wonderful, fashioning the ways and the characters
of men.  Seven passed.  Buck  Johnson and his foreman began to look for
the stranger.  Eight, they began to speculate.  Nine, they doubted.  On
the tenth they gave him up--and he came.

They knew him first by the soft lowing of cattle.  Jed Parker, dazzled
by the lamp, peered out from the door, and made him out dimly turning
the animals into the corral.  A moment later his pony's hoofs impacted
softly on the baked earth, he dropped from the saddle and entered the
room.

"I'm late," said he briefly, glancing at the clock, which indicated
ten; "but I'm here."

His manner was quick and sharp, almost breathless, as though he had
been running.

"Your cattle are in the corral: all of them.  Have you the money?"

"I have the money here," replied Buck Johnson, laying his hand against
a drawer, "and it's ready for you when you've earned it.  I don't care
so much for the cattle.  What I wanted is the man who stole them.  Did
you bring him?"

"Yes, I brought him," said the stranger. "Let's see that money."

Buck Johnson threw open the drawer, and drew from it the heavy canvas
sack.

"It's here.  Now bring in your prisoner."

The two-gun man seemed suddenly to loom large in the doorway.  The
muzzles of his revolvers covered the two before him.  His speech came
short and sharp.

"I told you I'd bring back the cows and the one who rustled them," he
snapped.  "I've never lied to a man yet.  Your stock is in the corral.
I'll trouble you for that five thousand.  I'm the man who stole your
cattle!"




