CHAPTER XVIII.

MATERIAL LIFE A LESSON

At the expense of what may appear as painful reiteration it is my
desire to impress upon the readers of this book this Truth: Material
life is necessary to unfold character, to develop the real self, the
Divine part in man: the only principle that endures forever.

There is a lesson in every phase of work, in every joy, in every
sorrow.  That lesson is LOVE.  Until you have fully realized this truth
you will not become full heirs in the Kingdom of God.  "He that loveth
is born of God."

Christ taught that the Kingdom was not of your Earth, and that all
material things are transitory and would ultimately vanish like mist.

The story of Mars is a lesson to you as to what may be accomplished
towards a more harmonious relation with the Father: towards a truer
realization of God's real Kingdom.  But in any event you should not
idolize the Mars people, for the Father's Kingdom is more perfect.
Mars' idealism is only a degree in the progress in the Cosmic Family of
worlds.  The soul must really strive for a higher goal.

The Martians, after ages of time, have mastered their natural passions
in suppressing self, but they have other heights to scale.  But he who
conquers a sordid environment; he who rises from a black pool of
iniquity; he who finds the Father's Kingdom amidst an uncompromising
warfare with sin deserves more credit than he who is favored by
circumstances of birth with more congenial surroundings and a higher
Spiritual environment.

You must remember that the individual on Mars, although living amidst
an idealism, is beset with problems of life also.  Our problems are
more subtle and of a very different character than you are accustomed
to deal with.  Every plane of life has its complexities.  If this were
not so, the stimulus for growth would be weak indeed.  Your most
apparent problems are material only to your understanding, since you
are living under a most pernicious social and economic system, a system
which puts a premium on selfishness.

All sentient entities are functioning in a universe of Relativity, and
the perfectness of the Martian character and the ideal material and
spiritual aspects of the planet are so by comparison only.

Martians are self-conscious of their shortcomings and aspire to higher
things in God's Kingdom, for progress is eternal and the ultimate goal
is never reached on the material plane of action, for the pinnacle of
all progress is God.  "BE YE PERFECT, EVEN AS YOUR FATHER IN HEAVEN IS
ALSO PERFECT."



CHAPTER XIX.

A MARTIAN HOME

The HOME is the moulder of Character in the individual, and in most
cases the Home influences determine the future of the man.

Home influences are the most lasting and abide by the individual unto
the end of his material career.

All the habitations of the people of Mars are beautiful, and a brief
description of one will give our reader an understanding of the other
millions of homes on the planet.

I will take you into a Martian home in the city of Urid the Beautiful.
The rooms are large and commodious.  Sunlight, which has been filtered
through translucent glass to temper and rob it of its glare, floods
every room.

There are no stairs to climb, for the five or six rooms--depending on
the size of the family--form a rectangle with a court in the center.
There is a fountain in the center of the court, and beautiful flowers
grow in profusion.  Birds of vivid plumage fill the air with their song.

In one of the large rooms a mother sits at a sewing machine making a
garment.  For the Martians use these machines too, although they are a
great improvement on yours.  Not all the clothing is made in the homes,
but much of it is, and this is easily understood when you recall that
the Martians are true artists and possessed of great originality.

The mother's attention is now and then centered on a very small child
who sits on a velvety carpet.  This carpet would be a most wonderful
acquisition in the home of a man of wealth on your Earth.  It has a
soft, fluffy pile two inches thick, and makes a most comfortable floor
for the baby to play upon.  This baby is about 18 months old, and plays
with toys just as your Earth babies do.

A beautiful young girl enters the room.  She is dressed in a simple
becoming gown of white, and she carries her school books with her.
After removing her hat and putting her books away she begins to tell
her mother of the wonderful things learned at school that day.  She is
studying the Harmony of Music, particularly the relationship between
Electro-Magnetic Vibrations and Music.

The mother shows much interest, and from her store of knowledge clears
up many doubtful points in the mind of her daughter.  And so the hours
pass quickly until the father comes home and joins the family circle.

The walls of the room are white, and are relieved here and there by the
most beautiful tapestries.  The few furnishings of the room express
beauty through the artistry that is born of Love.

There is a lack of useless furniture and bric-a-brac in the room.

A table, a few chairs and a receptacle for books, also a couch,
complete the furnishings.  But this simplicity in the matter of
furniture adds a spirit of freedom to the home.

There is no kitchen drudgery in store for the Housewife.  The family
repair to a dining-room where food is served by the mother.  The food
has just arrived from a central depot in a mechanical contrivance which
runs underground.  After the meal has been partaken of, the soiled
dishes are returned in the same manner by which they were conveyed to
the home.

Later in the evening the family prepares to attend a lecture or musical
concert nearby.  Or perhaps a visit to some distant part is considered,
in which case an airship is ordered from a public aerodrome.



