Chapter VI.-Trade and Barter are unknown.  Transportation is by Flying
Ships, and Gravitational Pull has been overcome.  Also, they use Cosmic
or Universal Energy.  All Distribution is from immense Warehouses.

Chapter VII.-A great many Clairvoyant Visions were seen by the
Shorthand Recorder, which make most interesting reading.

Chapter VIII.-Knowledge of God comes from within.  Selfishness has been
eliminated; and the Martians require no Policemen, Watchmen or other
Guardians of the Peace.  Christ is known to the Martians as one of the
great Powers in the Universe.

Chapter IX.-Mars has no Political System; yet it is controlled by the
very Acme of System.  Each Individual of their vast population is
guided by "The Light Within" and by "LOVE."

Chapter X.-Mars is ruled by LOVE, their only law.  There is no Evil,
for all are Good; all are Equal.  Truth is simple.  The people of Mars
are ready to  stimulate the living of the Christ-Life on other Planets.
(This is a wonderful and most Inspiring chapter.)

Chapter XI.-Education and Training of the Individual.  They have a
Spoken and a Written Language; but Telepathy is often used.  Set Rules
of Discipline are not required.  There are References to Jupiter,
Neptune, Uranus, Venus, Mercury, and the two Moons of Mars.

Chapter XII.-Education and Training of the Individual (contd).
Vocational Determination.  School Age.  Marriage.  Science and Domestic
Science.  Relativity of Time, Space, Motion and Matter. All in the
whole Universe is ETERNAL MOTION.

Chapter XIII.-Music is an Expression of the Father.  "All around us is
a beautiful RAINBOW UNIVERSE".  About Music of the Spheres, and that
Singing is highly developed.

Chapter XIV.-Aeronautics.  Inhabited Planets.  Sectarianism.  No Sound,
no Discordant Vibrations disturb the Atmosphere of Mars.

Chapter XV.-Life is an Attribute of the entire Universe.  The Planet
Jupiter is enveloped in deep gloom and Darkness.  Gives much
information.  Vesta, an Asteroid, is about 500 miles in diameter. Says
that communications between Planets of our Solar System and our Earth
will soon be realized, and that the initial Message will be from Mars.
It will herald a New Era for the people of Earth, and will break down
our narrow-minded Theology.

Chapter XVI.-The Risen Christ.  All the Mars people have lived on other
Planets before, except your Earth.  On Mars they live the Christ-Life
every day.  10,000 years ago the Mars people accepted Christ as their
Savior WITHOUT MURDER.

Chapter XVII.-Physical Environment is the result of Spiritual Causes,
and is the Result of our Mental Attitude.

Chapter XVIII.-Material Life is a Lesson, and is necessary for the
unfolding of Character.  The Martians have mastered their Natural
Passions.

Chapter XIX.-Eros gives a graphic Description of a Martian Home and
Surroundings, then shows how the Food is manipulated.  It is brought
from a Central Depot in a Mechanical Contrivance which is run
underground, thence up into the Dining room.  The Soiled Dishes are run
down and off the same way.  No Drudgery for the Housewife!

Chapter XX.-"ART." The Martians have beautiful productions in Painting,
Sculpture and Tapestries, some of which depict the Scenes and Episodes
incident on Christ's Visit to Mars ten thousand years ago.

Chapter XXI.-Eros Urides has a good deal to write on the subject of
"Scientific Sophistry," which has mostly to do with our Earth.



FOREWORD

It was Eros Urides, the real Martian behind the scenes, who dictated
the contents of this book through the medium to Mr. Kennon.  It was
further stated that "The medium was held in trance for short periods
only, as the medium must necessarily experience the atmosphere of Mars
which is more rarified than that of your Earth." Writes also that the
medium seemed to have some difficulty, and at first pain in breathing
while in the trance condition.

Mr. Kennon also wrote in his foreword of the original book that it was
not until January 4, 1920, it was decided to write the book in which
the Planet Mars, its people, its form of government, its Art,
Industries, Philosophy of life, etc. would for the first time in the
history of this world be given.

It appears that Jesus the Christed One of God visited the planets of
our Solar system, the planet Mars being one of those visited and
investigated.  And, as a proof of this it was Jesus Christ who
functioned as chairman or presidentat the great Peace Conference held
in the vast coliseum on the first sphere of the Heavens of our Earth.
That was in the year 1912, as fully reported in "World of Tomorrow,"
page 98.  It was at that conference He stated that Universal Peace must
be speeded up, as there were other planets to be investigated: and that
the Earth stood in the way and was becoming a menace to neighboring
planets.



