CHAPTER XVI

THE RISEN CHRIST

Easter Sunday, April 4, 1920

Your Earth's inhabitants are celebrating today the Resurrection of your
Savior--by gratifying the desires of Self.

We of Mars do not have such events to commemorate for we never
crucified Him.  We opened the door to His wonderful Truth.

Not one of your Earth's inhabitants can perform the miracles Christ
did, but we can.  Our leaders, who are our advisers, guides and
Spiritual teachers are Christlike men who can do all the works that
Christ and His disciples did.  He said.  "These signs do follow them
that believe," and we have never stopped believing.

Your condition is pitiful.  There is nothing but darkness between you
and the Truth Christ tried to give you.  Christ is only an idea on your
planet and not a reality in the hearts of your people.  Their whole
thought, for weeks past, has been devoted to their personal adornment,
and in preparing festivals for this occasion.

In your churches, where they seem to observe the period of Christ's
suffering, it is only a form.  They go through their vain repetition of
prayers, that have no soul in them, and your six weeks of so-called
Lent is only a mockery of its real significance.

If you would live the Christ life you would not crucify Him daily in
the flesh, but would come to that consciousness that He is risen in
your soul.  You are continually crucifying Christ all over your planet
in the same way that you crucified Jesus Christ, for you either deny
Him or pervert His Truth to suit your selfishness.

All of the people on Mars have lived on other planets before, except
your Earth.  The Earth has not advanced enough to be placed in the line
of progression yet.  However, the time is near when you will experience
that progression.  It will be after you are high enough spiritually to
receive word from the Martians through mediums.  This work evidences
the fact that you are beginning that experience now.  Take hope, for
after the obscure darkness must come the dawn.  Your whole Earth is now
in terrible travail, but the result will be the birth of the new Christ
Spirit.

You get glimpses now and then of the real Christ Life, but do you, or
can you realize what life on a planet is like when all the inhabitants
live the Christ Life every day? That is why we have the wonderful
manifestations of the Father's Love in our intricate and delicate
mechanisms, and in our utilization of Cosmic Energy.  It is thus that
we receive the Father's wondrous gifts.  But Mars never became what it
is until God purified it by His Son's example, and we accepted Him as
our Savior WITHOUT MURDER.  Your planet damned itself to many bloody
aeons by the rejection of Him, and your Religion has been blood, blood,
blood! In your last five years you have been given enough blood to
drown all the martyrs you have given to your bloody god.

Your planet is in slavery.  You are slaves to your conventionalities.
They are like shackles on your souls: like bands of iron.  And yet you
cling to them until it seems you do not want freedom.

It is only Truth that will free you; and as long as you cling to false
ideals and sham systems you must expect to be slaves.

Pin your faith not in material money, but in Spiritual Wealth. "Take no
heed of the morrow."  Be of good cheer.  MAKE WIDE THE OPENING TO THE
SPIRIT! HE WILL ENTER!



CHAPTER XVII.

PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT THE RESULT OF SPIRITUAL CAUSES

  "For they have sown the wind
  and they shall reap the whirlwind." (Hosea, 8:7)

The Creator and Dominator of the entire Universe is DIVINE MENTALITY.

The only real actuality that confronts sentient beings is MIND. We are
born, live and have our being amidst physical surroundings that in
final analysis are mere illusions.  This idea is not new.

It forms the base of most systems of philosophy from the dawn of
civilization to the present day.

Our physical environment is the result of our mental attitude. Mars is
blessed with a climatic tranquility that would surpass the
understanding of an Earth dweller.  But this was not always so.

In proportion to the spiritual unfoldment of the inhabitants of a
planet so is the degree of climatic tranquility enjoyed by them. This
may, at first reading, appear far-fetched, but it is true nevertheless.

Those who live on a material plane are immersed in the Effect world.
The dominating and primary influence that gives rise to all material
phenomena have their inception in the Cause world--the world of Spirit.
Hence the turbulence of the elements originate, through the law of
Vibration, deep down in the mentalities of those who make up the
population of a planet. Cloudbursts, severe wind storms and other
disturbances of Nature are all adjuncts of the spirit of war and rapine.

When a race has discarded the pursuit of false ideals and comes into
harmony with the Father then there occurs a corresponding change in its
physical environment by reason of the vibratory influences at work.
These influences have their inception in the mentalities of sentient
beings who are doing the Father's work in the advancement of the races
of men throughout the entire physical universe.

This same vibratory law is at work throughout all physical planes, and
a knowledge of this law was referred to by Christ when He said: "THE
KINGDOM OF GOD IS WITHIN YOU."

On Mars, owing to the high spiritual state of its inhabitants, who are
in harmony with their Creator, climatic conditions are, compared with
your world, most perfect.  However, there was a time, measured in terms
of your millions of years, when the elements on Mars were as agitated
and capricious as they are today on your blood-stained globe.  That was
before man on Mars had enfolded spiritually.

As the Martians progressed and unfolded spiritually there occurred a
subsidence in the roughness of the elements: and today our planet is
blessed with a tranquility proportionate to the high Mental state of
its inhabitants.



