CHAPTER XX.

ART

As Harmony is an expression of the Father, its coexistent, Art, is an
expression of the laws of Rhythm through the individual when
permanently registered in a material way.

The more a created object conforms to the laws of Harmony the more
pleasing it is to the eye.

The artist gives expression to his soul within with paint brush, chisel
or loom, and the quality of his production is proportionate to the
development of his spiritual nature.

All of God's creatures are artists, although only a small percentage of
His evolutionary creatures are able to express materially what lies
hidden in the soul.  Hence, a beautifully executed painting, statue or
tapestry appeals to and interests almost everyone, even though few are
able to execute their own artistic impressions.

The reason for this is that the average physical makeup is defective
and therefore affords a poor vehicle for the expression of the real
entity.  Then again, artistic ability is a question of individual
development.

Primordial man's efforts to depict that which delighted his soul were
crude indeed, compared with the creations of your world's foremost
artists today.  But in a relative sense only, for the state of your art
is as far behind the art of the Martians as are the carvings of your
prehistoric cavemen behind the productions of your Michael Angelos.  As
man unfolds spiritually there is a corresponding advance in his
artistic point of view.

This is evidenced by the fact that art has flourished more on your
Earth among those races and individuals who are spiritually inclined.
The products of the monastery and cloister in the Middle Ages are
witness to this fact.

Amongst a materially inclined people whose selfish instincts have
stultified their souls; a people whose ultimate goal is the acquisition
of material things; a people whose only ambition is to satisfy self: a
people whose ideas of real happiness are the pursuit of material
pleasures, art has little place except as a fad.

This is the condition today in many parts of your world, and especially
so on your Western continent.  Prize fights and the sensualities of the
stage interest many more people than do Art galleries and the beauties
of Nature.

The fact that God is the Supreme Artist of the Universe can be
established not only with the microscope, but with one's natural eyes.
Divine Art is expressed in every atom comprising the universe; and poor
indeed is he in Spiritual gifts who fails to feast his eyes on God's
handiwork.

As Art is an expression of God's law of Harmony it can be said that its
development on Mars has been a stimulus to the development of every
line of planetary activity and enters into every phase of Martian
social and industrial system.

As every one of God's creatures is an artist in the making, every
Martian is a developed artist.  Hence, every product of the loom or
forge on our planet is an artistic production, and reflects in a
material way the soul of the creator.

The incentive before the Martian is to work for the pleasure of
working, which in ultimate analysis is God's work.  Of course such a
system of industrial activity would be impossible among a partially
developed people.

Art on Mars typifies man's spiritual and material progress on this
planet.  This planet's past history and present achievements are woven
into the products of the looms.  The warp and woof of our beautiful
tapestries, so much in evidence in every home, express the Spirituality
of the Martian people; as do also the creations of the Martian
sculptors, and the works of those who use brush and paint.

Some of the most beautiful productions of Mars art in painting,
sculpture or tapestry depict the scenes and various episodes incident
to Christ's visit to Mars 10,000 years ago.  They show many wonderful
works of the Master, but we do not call them Miracles for, as later art
shows, the leaders of Martian spiritual attainment were and are true
disciples and do also the works of the Master.

Mars' past has been one of achievement spiritually, and naturally in a
material way also, so when the Martian artist weaves the story of the
past in his loom there are no misgivings, for the Martian past is not
fraught with hate, sin and suffering.



CHAPTER XXI.

SCIENTIFIC SOPHISTRY

   "For we are of yesterday, and know nothing,
   because our days upon Earth are a shadow."
                                    Job 8:9.

The term "Scientific Sophistry" well fits your multitude of theories
concerning Truth.

Science which connotes a higher wisdom of hidden things has degenerated
on your Earth from its original purpose (the overthrow of ignorance and
superstition and the development among intelligent beings of a near
approximation of Ultimate Truth) to an orthodox dogmatism, which today
is on a par with the unreality which this selfsame science has sought
to eliminate from the shallowness of the human mind.

It is quite true that the modern scientific method of investigation:
that is, along the lines of Observation, followed by the formation of a
theory, and finally by demonstration, has resulted in the release of
millions of souls from a darker thraldom than that which now besets
them, but nevertheless, the human race on your planet now undergoing
its probationary experience, is to be pitied for its blindness in
matters of real import, namely SPIRITUAL TRUTHS.

Your scientific methods instead of leading you onward towards the
Central Sun of Spiritual enlightenment has so beclouded your vision
that your race today--that is, the so-called enlightened and learned
portions of your population--have been deflected from the main path,
and they will soon find themselves pursuing an illusionary
will-o'-the-wisp.

Another result of the adoption of the modern scientific method has been
the tendency of those endeavoring to bring light into the dark nooks
and crannies of human existence, to immerse themselves in an abysmal
materialism from which rescue is almost hopeless.

This condition is the result of a loss of Spiritual vision, and is the
final effort on the part of scientists to explain the riddle of human
existence in accordance with a cleverly thought out, but most amazingly
deficient, mechanistic conception of life.

Since the inception of modern Science on your Earth, based on the
scientific method of investigation, its devotees adopted a spirit of
skepticism concerning all problems of human activity not susceptible to
measurement with the foot-rule, or analysis with the test tube, with
the result that the newer Science of Psychology was invented to supply
a reasonable and material explanation for the subtle and mystifying
phenomena of the human mind.

That the conceivers of this science of Psychology have been successful
is attested by the many remarkable explanations given to account for
everyday manifestations of human and animal mentality.

I will venture to say that this idea applies to all branches of modern
science as there seems to be no class of phenomena in the entire
universe, whether in the realm of chemistry, physics or psychology but
what can be clearly elucidated to the satisfaction of all scientists
with the aid of an adequate terminology.  So, today your Science in
final analysis, has degenerated into a system of clever word-juggling.

It is true there are today in the ranks of your foremost investigators
and God-inspired men who are seeking Truth.  Their names and their
achievements will be treasured by a grateful posterity, and it is to be
regretted that their declarations, based upon tireless investigation
and honest opinion, are derided by their fellow-workers in the Realm of
Truth.

All your scientific theories are based upon certain postulates that in
time are out of agreement with observed facts, and you are compelled to
cast those postulates aside, adopt others and theorize anew.  This
fruitless search for Truth must go on until a divergence is made from
the blind trail and the right path is found that will lead you to the
ultimate goal.

Be not surprised, then, that the revelations in this book will meet
with the usual criticisms launched at every new idea of Truth that has
been given to your world from the time man first walked erect and
beheld the stars in the firmament of God. Error must and will dissolve
presently in the presence of Truth, which will abide with you for all
time.  HELP HASTEN THE DAY OF THE LORD.











