The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Planet Mars and Its Inhabitants, a Psychic Revelation
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Planet Mars and Its Inhabitants, a Psychic Revelation

Author: J. L. Kennon


        
Release date: June 1, 1996 [eBook #563]
                Most recently updated: January 1, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/563

Credits: Produced by Charles Keller.  HTML version by Al Haines.






Produced by Charles Keller.  HTML version by Al Haines.









THE PLANET MARS AND ITS INHABITANTS


BY

EROS URIDES

(A MARTIAN)




  DEDICATION

  To the millions of God's children on
  this earth enthralled in darkness, for whom
  the solicitude of the Father is now in
  evidence, this book is dedicated.


  May it be a beacon to light the way of
  weary searchers after TRUTH.



One hemisphere of Mars showing the North Polar Cap and the main Canal
System covering the planet.  The many thousands of small lateral
canals, radiating from the larger waterways, and which form an
important part of the general plan, have been purposely omitted from
the above to avoid confusion.  The circular spots and dots are the
principal reservoirs used for impounding water for use during the long
Martian summer.  The dark areas shown in the drawing are Mars ancient
sea bottoms now covered with vegetation.  It will be observed that most
of the canals are double, paralleling each other at a distance of about
seventy-five miles.  Centers of population are not shown for the reason
that space is not available on so small a drawing.  The City of Urid is
situated adjacent to the reservoir in the center of drawing, just north
of the equator.




CONTENTS

Chapter I.-EROS URIDES, of the City of Urid, planet Mars, the Author,
introduces himself and his book THE PLANET MARS AND ITS INHABITANTS.

Chapter II.-He describes the Population Centers, Temperatures and
Climate.  The whole Planet is gridironed with Canals.  (See Diagram.)

Chapter III.-He gives a full description of the marvelous Martian Canal
System.

Chapter IV.-Planetary Economy.  No Worries, and the Wants of all are
supplied by the Commonwealth.

Chapter V.-Property and Property Rights.  God, the Creator of it, is
considered the Owner of all Property.  Material things to the Martians
are but Expedients.  The Millions of Martians live as one great family,
though divided into families.  And it is this solidarity and filial
consideration towards each other that made the stupendous Canal and
other Works possible.

