
SEX AND COMMON-SENSE

BY

A. MAUDE ROYDEN
ASSISTANT PREACHER AT THE CITY TEMPLE, LONDON
1918-1920





To MY FRIENDS A.J.S. AND W.H.S.




PREFACE TO AMERICAN EDITION


THE NOBILITY OF THE SEX PROBLEM

Of all the problems which the alert and curious mind of modern man is
considering, none occupies him more than that of the relations of the
sexes. This is natural. It touches us all and we have made rather a mess
of it! We want to know why, and we want to do better. We resent being the
sport of circumstance and perhaps we are beginning to understand that this
instinct of sex which has been so great a cause of suffering and shame and
has been treated as a subject fit only for furtive whispers or silly jokes,
is in fact one of the greatest powers in human nature, and that its misuse
is indeed "the expense of spirit in a waste of shame."

It is not the abnormal or the bizarre that interests most of us to-day. It
is not into the by-ways of vice that we seek to penetrate. It is the normal
exercise of a normal instinct by normal people that interests us: and it is
of this that I have tried to write and speak. The curiosities of depravity
are for the physician and the psychologist to discuss and cure. Ordinary
men and women want first to know how to live ordinary human lives on
a higher level and after a nobler pattern than before. They want, I
think,--and I want,--to grow up, but to grow rightly, beautifully,
humanely.

And I believe the first essential is to realize that the sex-problem, as it
is called, is the problem of something noble, not something base. It is
not a "disagreeable duty" to know our own natures and understand our own
instincts: it is a joy. The sex-instinct is not "the Fall of Man"; neither
is it an instance of divine wisdom on which moralists could, if they had
only been consulted in time, greatly have improved. It is a thing noble in
essence. It is the development of the higher, not the lower, creation. It
is the asexual which is the lower, and the sexually differentiated which is
the higher organism.

In the humbler ranks of being there is no sex, and in a sense no death. The
organism is immortal because--strange paradox--it is not yet alive enough
to die. But as we pass from the lower to the higher, we pass from the less
individual to the more individual; from asexual to sexual. And with this
change comes that great rhythm by which life and death succeed each other,
and death is the _cost_ of life, and to bring life into the world means
sacrifice; and--as we rise higher still--to sustain life means prolonged
and altruistic love. This is the history of sex and of procreation, a
history associated with the rising of humanity in the scale of being, a
history not so much of his physical as of his spiritual growth.

By what an irony have we come to associate the instinct of sex with all
that is bestial and shameful!

It has happened because the corruption of the best is the worst. I always
want to remind people of this truism when they have _first_ come into
contact with sex in some horrible and shameful way. That is one of the
greatest misfortunes that can happen to any of us, and unfortunately it
happens to many. Boys and girls are allowed to grow up in ignorance. The
girls perhaps know nothing till they have to know all. The boys learn
from grimy sources. I was speaking on this subject at one of our great
universities the other day, and afterwards many of the men came and talked
to me privately. With hardly a single exception they said to me--"Our
parents told us nothing. We have never heard sex spoken of except in a
dirty way."

It is difficult for us, in such a case, to realize that sex is not a
dirty thing. It _can_ only be realized, I think, by remembering that
the corruption of the best is the worst, and that we can measure by the
hideousness of debased and depraved sexuality, the greatness and the wonder
of sex love.

This is to me the great teaching of Christ about sex. Other great
religious teachers--some of them very great indeed--have thought and taught
contemptuously of our animal nature. "He spake of the temple of His
body." That is sublime! That is the whole secret. And that is why vice is
horrible: because it is the desecration, not of a hovel or a shop, of a
marketplace or a place of business: but of a temple.

Christ, I am told, told us nothing about sex. He did not need to tell us
anything but "Your body is the Temple of the Holy Spirit."

It is my belief that in appealing to an American public I shall be
appealing to those who are ready to face the subject of the relations
of the sexes with perfect frankness and with courage. America is still a
country of experiments--a country adventurous enough to make experiments,
and to risk making mistakes. That is the only spirit in which it is
possible to make anything at all; and though the mistakes we may make in a
matter which so deeply and tragically affects human life must be serious,
and we must with corresponding seriousness weigh every word we say, and
take the trouble to think harder and more honestly than we have perhaps
ever thought before; yet I believe that we must above all have courage.
Human nature is sound and men and women do, on the whole, want to do what
is right. The great impulse of sex is part of our very being, and it is not
base. Passion is essentially noble and those who are incapable of it are
the weaker, not the stronger. If then we have light to direct our course,
we shall learn to direct it wisely, for indeed this is our desire.

Such is my creed. My prayer is for "more light." And my desire to take my
part in spreading it.

A. MAUDE ROYDEN.

April, 1922.




PREFACE TO THIRD ENGLISH EDITION

In the first editions of this book a certain passage on our Lord's humanity
(see p. 40) has, I find, been misunderstood by some. They have supposed
it to imply a suggestion that our Lord was not only "tempted in all things
like as we are"--which I firmly believe--but that He fell--which is to
me unthinkable. I hope I have made this perfectly clear in the present
edition.

Beyond this there are few alterations except the correction of some very
abominable errors of style. The book still bears the impress of the speaker
rather than the writer, and as such I must leave it.

With regard to the chapter called "Common-Sense and Divorce Law Reform,"
which now has been added to this edition, I wish to express my indebtedness
to Dr. Jane Walker and the group of "inquirers" over which she presided,
for the memorandum on Divorce which they drew up and published in the
_Challenge_, of July, 1918. I am not in complete agreement with their views
on all points, but readers of their memorandum will easily see whence I
derived my view as a whole.

A.M.R.

_January_, 1922.




FOREWORD

Chapters I. to VII. of this book were originally given in the form of
addresses, in the Kensington Town Hall, on successive Sunday evenings in
1921. They were taken down _verbatim_, but have been revised and even to
some extent rewritten. I do not like reports in print of things spoken, for
speaking and writing are two different arts, and what is right when it is
spoken is almost inevitably wrong when it is written. (I refer, of course,
to style, not matter.) If I had had time, I should have re-shaped what I
have said, though it would have been the manner only and not the substance
that would have been changed. This has been impossible, and I can therefore
only explain that the defective form and the occasional repetition which
the reader cannot fail to mark were forced upon me by the fact that I was
speaking--not writing--and that I felt bound to make each address, as far
as possible, complete and comprehensible in itself.

Chapters VIII., IX., and X. were added later to meet various difficulties,
questions, or criticisms evoked by the addresses which form the earlier
part of the book.

I desire to record my gratitude to Mr. and Mrs. Douglas Sladen, but for
whose active help and encouragement I should hardly have proceeded with the
book: to Miss Irene Taylor, who, out of personal friendship for me, took
down, Sunday after Sunday, all that I said, with an accuracy which, with a
considerable experience of reporters, I have only once known equalled
and never surpassed: and to my congregation, whose questions and speeches
during the discussion that followed each address greatly helped my work.

A. MAUDE ROYDEN.

_September_, 1921.




CONTENTS

I.--THE OLD PROBLEM INTENSIFIED BY THE DISPROPORTION OF THE SEXES

II.--A SOLUTION OF THE PROBLEM OF THE UNMARRIED

III.--CONSIDERATION OF OTHER SOLUTIONS OF THE PROBLEM OF THE DISPROPORTION
      OF THE SEXES

IV.--THE TRUE BASIS OF MORALITY

V.--THE MORAL STANDARD OF THE FUTURE: WHAT SHOULD IT BE?

VI.--A PLEA FOR LIGHT

VII.--FRIENDSHIP

VIII.--MISUNDERSTANDINGS

IX.--FURTHER MISUNDERSTANDINGS: THE NEED FOR SEX CHIVALRY

X.--"THE SIN OF THE BRIDEGROOM"

XI.--COMMON-SENSE AND DIVORCE LAW REFORM



I


THE OLD PROBLEM INTENSIFIED BY THE DISPROPORTION OF THE SEXES


     "There has arisen in society, a figure which is certainly the
     most mournful, and in some respects the most awful, upon which
     the eye of the moralist can dwell. That unhappy being whose
     very name is a shame to speak; who counterfeits with a cold
     heart the transports of affection, and submits herself as the
     passive instrument of lust; who is scorned and insulted as the
     vilest of her sex, and doomed for the most part to disease and
     abject wretchedness and an early death, appears in every eye as
     the perpetual symbol of the degradation and sinfulness of man.
     Herself the supreme type of vice, she is ultimately the most
     efficient guardian of virtue. But for her the unchallenged
     purity of countless happy homes would be polluted, and not a
     few who, in the pride of their untempted chastity, think of her
     with an indignant shudder, would have known the agony of
     remorse and despair. She remains while creeds and civilisations
     rise and fall, the eternal priestess of humanity, blasted for
     the sins of the people."

     Lecky's _History of European Morals_, Chap. V.


One of the many problems which have been intensified by the war is the
problem of the relations of the sexes. Difficult as it has always been,
the difficulty inevitably becomes greater when there is a grave
disproportion--an excess in numbers of one sex over the other. And in this
country, whereas there was a disproportion of something like a million more
women than men before the war broke out, there is now a disproportion of
about one and three-quarter millions.

This accidental and (I believe) temporary difficulty--a difficulty not
"natural" and necessary to human life, but artificial and peculiar to
certain conditions which may be altered--does not, of course, create the
problem we have to deal with: but it forces that problem on our attention
by sheer force of suffering inflicted on so large a scale. It compels us
to ask ourselves on what we base, and at what we value the moral standard
which, if it is to be preserved, must mean a tremendous sacrifice on the
part of so large a number of women as is involved in their acceptance of
life-long celibacy.

There is no subject on which it is more difficult to find a common
ground than this. To some people it seems to be immoral even to ask the
question--on what are your moral standards based? To others what we call
our "moral standards" are so obviously absurd and "unnatural" that the
question has for them no meaning. And between these extremes there are so
many varieties of opinion that one can take nothing as generally accepted
by men and women.

I want, therefore, to leave aside the ordinary conventions--not because
they are necessarily bad, but because they are not to my purpose, which
is to discover whether there is a real morality which we can justify
to ourselves without appeal to any authority however great, or to any
tradition however highly esteemed: a morality which is based on the real
needs, the real aspirations of humanity itself.

And I begin by calling your attention to the morality of Jesus of Nazareth,
not because He is divine, but because He was a great master of the human
heart, and more than others "knew what was in man."

You will notice at once the height of His morality--the depth of His mercy.
He demands such purity of spirit, such loyalty of heart, that the most
loyal of His disciples shrank appalled: "Whosoever shall look upon a woman
to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart."
... "Whosoever shall put away his wife and marry another, committeth
adultery against her." From such a standard Christ's disciples shrank--"If
the case of the man be so with his wife, it is not good to marry." And
one evangelist almost certainly inserted in this absolute prohibition the
exception--"Saving for the cause of fornication"--feeling that the Master
_could_ not have meant anything else. But, in fact, there is little doubt
that Jesus did both say and mean that marriage demanded lifelong fidelity
on either side; just as He really taught that a lustful thought was
adultery in the sight of God.

But if Christendom has been staggered at the austerity of Christ's morality
not less has it been shocked at the quality of His mercy. His gentleness to
the sensual sinner has been compared, with amazement, to the sternness of
His attitude to the sins of the spirit. Not the profligate or the harlot
but the Pharisee and the scribe were those who provoked His sternest
rebukes. And perhaps the most characteristic of all His dealings with such
matters was that incident of the woman taken in adultery, when He at once
reaffirmed the need of absolute chastity for men--demand undreamed of by
the woman's accusers--and put aside the right to condemn which in all that
assembly He alone could claim--"Neither do I condemn thee; go, and sin no
more."

Having then in mind this most lofty and compassionate of moralists, let us
turn to the problem of to-day. Here are nearly 2,000,000 women who, if the
austere demands of faithful monogamy are to be obeyed, will never know
the satisfaction of a certain physical need. Now it is the desire of every
normal human being to satisfy all his instincts. And this is as true of
women as of men. What I have to say applies indeed to many men to-day, for
many men are unable to marry because they have been so broken by war--or
otherwise--so shattered or maimed or impoverished that they do not feel
justified in marrying. But I want to emphasize with all my power that the
hardness of enforced celibacy presses as cruelly on women as on men. Women,
difficult as some people find it to believe, are human beings; and because
women are so, they want work, and interest, and love--both given and
received--and children, and, in short, the satisfaction of every _human_
need. The idea that existence is enough for them--that they need not work,
and do not suffer if their sex instincts are repressed or starved--is a
convenient but most cruel illusion. People often tell me, and nearly always
unconsciously _assume_, that women have no sex hunger--no sex needs at all
until they marry, and that even then their need is not at all so imperious
as men's, or so hard to repress. Such people are nearly always either men,
or women who have married young and happily and borne many children, and
had a very full and interesting outside life as well! Such women will
assure me with the utmost complacency that the sex-instincts of a woman are
very easily controllable, and that it is preposterous to speak as if their
repression really cost very much. I think with bitterness of that age-long
repression, of its unmeasured cost; of the gibe contained in the phrase
"old maid," with all its implication of a narrowed life, a prudish mind,
an acrid tongue, an embittered disposition. I think of the imbecilities in
which the repressed instinct has sought its pitiful baffled release, of
the adulation lavished on a parrot, a cat, a lap-dog; or of the emotional
"religion," the parson-worship, on which every fool is clever enough
to sharpen his wit. And all these cramped and stultified lives have not
availed to make the world understand that women have had to pay for their
celibacy!

  "The toad beneath the harrow knows
    Exactly where each tooth-point goes.
  The butterfly beside the road
    Preaches contentment to that toad."

Modern psychology is lifting the veil to-day from the suffering which
repression causes. It is a pity that its most brilliant exponents should
ascribe to a single instinct--however potent--_all_ the ills that afflict
mankind, for such one-sidedness defeats its own object; but, at least, the
modern psychologist is trying to show us "exactly where each tooth-point
goes" in the repression of the sex-instinct among women as among men. Nor
does the fact that the _tabu_ of society has actually in many cases enabled
a woman to inhibit the development of her own nature, obviate the fact that
she does so at great cost, even when she least understands what she does.

I affirm this, and with insistence, that the normal--the average--woman
sacrifices a great deal if she accepts life-long celibacy. She sacrifices
quite as much as a man. In those cases--too frequent even now--where she
is not educated or expected to earn her own living or to have a career, I
maintain that she loses more than a man who is expected to work. I do not
say, and I do not believe, that passion in a woman is the same as in a man,
or that they suffer in precisely the same way. I believe indeed that if men
and women understood each other a little better they would hurt each other
a good deal less. But I am persuaded that we shall not even begin to reach
a wise morality so long as we persist in basing our demands on the imbecile
assumption that women suffer nothing or little by the unsatisfaction of the
sex side of their nature.

I emphasize this point here, because it is involved in the present state
of affairs. I have reminded you that there are nearly 2,000,000 women
whose lives are to be considered. If the number were quite small, it might
comfortably be assumed that the women who remained unmarried were those
who, in any case, had no vocation for marriage. For it is, of course, true
that there are such women, as there are such men. The normal man and woman
desire marriage and parenthood, and are fitted for it; but there are always
exceptions who either do not desire it, or, desiring it, feel bound to
put it aside at the call of some other vocation, which they feel to
be supremely theirs, and which is not compatible with marriage. They
sacrifice; but they do so joyfully, not for repression, but for a different
life, another vocation. And where the number of the unmarried is small,
it may without essential injustice be supposed that these are the natural
celibates.

But you cannot suppose that of 2,000,000! Among the number how many are
young widows, girls engaged to marry men now dead, and how many whose
_natural_ vocation was marriage, motherhood, home-making, and all that is
meant by such things as these? If this be the normal vocation of the normal
woman how many of these have been deprived of all that seemed to them to
make life worth living? Is it astonishing if they rebel? If they determine
to snatch at anything that yet lies in their grasp? If they affirm "the
right to motherhood" when they want children, or the satisfaction of the
sex-instinct when that need becomes imperious?

If we are to say to such women--"The normal life is denied to you, not
by your fault, or because you do not need it, but because we have
unfortunately been obliged to sacrifice in war the men who should have been
your mates: and we now invite you in the interests of morality to accept as
your lot perpetual virginity"--it is not difficult to imagine their reply:
"What is this morality in whose interests you ask so huge a sacrifice? Is
it worth such a price? Is the whole community willing to pay it, or is it
exacted from us alone? And on what, in the end, is it based?"

The answer to this question is often given to the young, even before the
question arises; and it is given in the lives of men and women. The lives
of those who are nobly celibate, or nobly married, are in themselves so
moving a plea, that few who have been closely in contact with them are left
untouched. It is the ideal realized that is the best defence of the ideal.
But let us admit that, too often, the actual marriage is a very pitiful
comment on our morality, and celibacy either a mere pretence or a very
mean and pinched reality. What answer then shall we give to the rising
generation which questions us--"On what do you base your moral standards?"

I do not doubt that I am voicing the experience of many if I say that when
I first began to ask such questions I met first of all with extreme horror
at such a question being put at all; and that, when I persisted, I found
that it was almost entirely by women that the cost was to be borne. Women
were to conform strictly to the moral standard (whose basis I was not
questioning), but men need not and, generally speaking, did not. I reasoned
that if men need not be chaste there must exist at least a certain number
of women who _could_ not be so, and that this reduced "morality" to a
farce. I soon found that it was not a farce but a tragedy. These women were
admittedly necessary but outcast. They were the safeguards of the rest. I
wish that men would try for a moment to put themselves in the place of a
young girl who learns for the first time that prostitution is the safeguard
of the virtuous! I think that they would never again wonder at the
rejection of such "moral standards" by the rising generation of women. You
would only wonder why women had tolerated such a combination of folly
and cruelty so long. You would not ask them to accept or to suffer for a
"standard" like that.

Again, this morality for which (it is affirmed) society is prepared to pay
so horrible a price--what is it? A physical condition! A state of body,
which any man can destroy! an "honour" which lies at the mercy of a
ruffian! A woman raped is a woman "dishonoured." Are her "morals" then at
the mercy of another person? Is "morality" not a state of mind or of will,
a spiritual passion for purity, but a material, physical thing which is
only hers as long as no one snatches it from her? How senseless! How false!

When you ask a woman to-day to make the great sacrifice "in the interests
of morality," you must offer her a morality that _is_ moral--a morality
whose justice and humanity move her to a response; not a morality which
offends every instinct of justice and reality the moment the person to whom
it is offered understands what it means. For what is asked to-day is too
often that women should sacrifice themselves for the convenience of other
people--of a hypocritical society which preaches a morality as senseless as
it is base.

When older people tell me that the young seem to have "no morals at all,"
I ask myself whether the repudiation of much that has been called morality
was not, after all, a necessity, if we are to advance at all. When I
reflect on, for example, Lecky's "History of European Morals," and
remember that it was not a profligate or a hedonist, but an honourable and
respectable member of a civilized society, who proclaimed the prostitute
the high priestess of humanity--the protectress of the purity of a thousand
homes[A]--I am prepared to say that to have "no morals at all" is better
than to accept such infamy and _call_ it "morals"; as it is better to be an
agnostic or an atheist than to worship a devil--to have no standard than to
say: "Evil be thou my good."

[Footnote A: Lecky's "History of European Morals." Chap. V.]

And I believe that the tendency to reject all moral standards is largely
due to the refusal of an older generation to examine and to justify its own
standard. To refuse to discuss or defend it--to affirm that it is beyond
debate and not to be questioned without depravity is merely to produce the
impression that it is beyond defence and impossible to justify. It is not
surprising that people begin to say: "Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow
we die. Let us experience all we desire. Let us act like the normal healthy
creatures that we are. Let us ignore the flimsy barriers a corrupt and
imbecile moral code would erect between us and what we desire."

That is the point of view of many men and women to-day. That is what the
absence of a just and reasoned moral code has led to. And I am prepared,
in spite of all protests, to affirm that it is not a step backward, but
forward; that promiscuity is not as vile as prostitution--a prostitution
which has been accepted, which has been _defended_ by Christian people! It
is less horrible for a human being to have the morals of an animal than the
morals of a devil. We have to begin by rejecting the morality of fiends,
and we begin, even if the immediate effect is more terrifying to the
moralist than the old hidden-up devilry that lent itself to an easier
disguise.

So I believe. And so the present chaos, though it has its elements of
anxiety and its obvious dangers, leaves me unafraid. I am utterly persuaded
that we shall win through to solid ground.

I believe that the long groping of humanity after a sex-relationship which
shall be stable, equal, passionate, disciplined, pure, is the groping of a
right instinct, the hunger of a real need; and that we must--we shall--find
its answer. With many failures, with many reactions, it can, I think, be
seen, as history unrolls its record and civilizations rise and fall,
that the movement of humanity has been towards a more stable, a more
responsible, a more disciplined, but not less passionate form of
relationship between men and women. Let us not forget that great and
pregnant fact when we reject the immoral arguments, the cruelties and
injustices, with which society has sought either to justify its ideals or
to conceal its horrible failures. For if we can thus distinguish, and go
forward, this generation will not have suffered in vain. It will, on the
contrary, make of its suffering the spur which shall force us all onward
and upward. It will by its courage and its honesty give to the world a
truer and a nobler moral standard than the world has ever accepted yet.



