
CASTLE RACKRENT


by Maria Edgeworth


With an Introduction by
Anne Thackeray Ritchie


LONDON
MACMILLAN AND CO.
AND NEW YORK
1895




    [Note: The body of this novel contains a lot of footnotes and many
    references to the Glossary at the end. The references to the
    Glossary have been numbered in square brackets. They are linked to
    the Glossary at the end of the eBook. The footnotes (which are
    sometimes quite long) have been numbered in curly brackets. They
    are linked to the note at the end of the paragraph.

    Italics have been replaced by capitals.]




INTRODUCTION


I

The story of the Edgeworth Family, if it were properly told, should be
as long as the ARABIAN NIGHTS themselves; the thousand and one cheerful
intelligent members of the circle, the amusing friends and relations,
the charming surroundings, the cheerful hospitable home, all go to make
up an almost unique history of a county family of great parts and no
little character. The Edgeworths were people of good means and position,
and their rental, we are told, amounted to nearly £3000 a year. At one
time there was some talk of a peerage for Mr. Edgeworth, but he was
considered too independent for a peerage.

The family tradition seems to have been unconventional and spirited
always. There are records still extant in the present Mr. Edgeworth’s
possession,--papers of most wonderful vitality for parchment,--where
you may read passionate remonstrances and adjurations from
great-grandfathers to great-great-grandfathers, and where
great-great-grandmothers rush into the discussion with vehement spelling
and remonstrance, and make matters no better by their interference. I
never read more passionately eloquent letters and appeals. There
are also records of a pleasanter nature; merrymakings, and festive
preparations, and 12s. 6d. for a pair of silk stockings for Miss
Margaret Edgeworth to dance in, carefully entered into the family
budget. All the people whose portraits are hanging up, beruffled,
dignified, calm, and periwigged, on the old walls of Edgeworthstown
certainly had extraordinarily strong impressions, and gave eloquent
expression to them. I don’t think people could feel quite so strongly
now about their own affairs as they did then; there are so many printed
emotions, so many public events, that private details cannot seem quite
as important. Edgeworths of those days were farther away from the world
than they are now, dwelling in the plains of Longford, which as yet
were not crossed by iron rails. The family seems to have made little
of distances, and to have ridden and posted to and fro from Dublin to
Edgeworthstown in storm and sunshine.


II

When Messrs. Macmillan asked me to write a preface to this new edition
of Miss Edgeworth’s stories I thought I should like to see the place
where she had lived so long and where she had written so much, and so it
happened that being in Ireland early this year, my daughter and I found
ourselves driving up to Broadstone Station one morning in time for the
early train to Edgeworthstown. As we got out of our cab we asked the
driver what the fare should be. ‘Sure the fare is half a crown,’ said
he, ‘and if you wish to give me more, I could keep it for myself!’

The train was starting and we bought our papers to beguile the road.
‘Will you have a Home Rule paper or one of them others?’ said the
newsboy, with such a droll emphasis that we couldn’t help laughing.
‘Give me one of each,’ said I; then he laughed, as no English newsboy
would have done. . . . We went along in the car with a sad couple of
people out of a hospital, compatriots of our own, who had been settled
ten years in Ireland, and were longing to be away. The poor things
were past consolation, dull, despairing, ingrained English, sick and
suffering and yearning for Brixton, just as other aliens long for their
native hills and moors. We travelled along together all that spring
morning by the blossoming hedges, and triumphal arches of flowering May;
the hills were very far away, but the lovely lights and scents were all
about and made our journey charming. Maynooth was a fragrant vision as
we flew past, of vast gardens wall-enclosed, of stately buildings.
The whole line of railway was sweet with the May flowers, and with the
pungent and refreshing scent of the turf-bogs. The air was so clear and
so limpid that we could see for miles, and short-sighted eyes needed no
glasses to admire with. Here and there a turf cabin, now and then a lake
placidly reflecting the sky. The country seemed given over to silence,
the light sped unheeded across the delicate browns and greens of the
bog-fields; or lay on the sweet wonderful green of the meadows. One
dazzling field we saw full of dancing circles of little fairy pigs
with curly tails. Everything was homelike but NOT England, there was
something of France, something of Italy in the sky; in the fanciful
tints upon the land and sea, in the vastness of the picture, in the
happy sadness and calm content which is so difficult to describe or to
account for. Finally we reached our journey’s end. It gave one a real
emotion to see EDGEWORTHSTOWN written up on the board before us, and
to realise that we were following in the steps of those giants who had
passed before us. The master of Edgeworthstown kindly met us and drove
us to his home through the outlying village, shaded with its sycamores,
underneath which pretty cows were browsing the grass. We passed
the Roman Catholic Church, the great iron crucifix standing in the
churchyard. Then the horses turned in at the gate of the park, and there
rose the old home, so exactly like what one expected it, that I felt as
if I had been there before in some other phase of existence.

It is certainly a tradition in the family to welcome travellers! I
thought of the various memoirs I had read, of the travellers arriving
from the North and the South and the West; of Scott and Lockhart, of
Pictet, of the Ticknors, of the many visitants who had come up in turn;
whether it is the year 14, or the year 94, the hospitable doors open
kindly to admit them. There were the French windows reaching to the
ground, through which Maria used to pass on her way to gather her roses;
there was the porch where Walter Scott had stood; there grew the quaint
old-fashioned bushes with the great pink peonies in flower, by those
railings which still divide the park from the meadows beyond; there
spread the branches of the century-old trees. Only last winter they told
us the storms came and swept away a grove of Beeches that were known in
all the country round, but how much of shade, of flower, still remain!
The noble Hawthorn of stately growth, the pine-trees (there should be
NAMES for trees, as there are for rocks or ancient strongholds). Mr.
Edgeworth showed us the oak from Jerusalem, the grove of cypress and
sycamore where the beautiful depths of ground ivy are floating upon the
DEBRIS, and soften the gnarled roots, while they flood the rising banks
with green.

Mr. and Mrs. Edgeworth brought us into the house. The ways go upstairs
and downstairs, by winding passages and side gates; a pretty domed
staircase starts from the central hall, where stands that old clock-case
which Maria wound up when she was over eighty years old. To the right
and to the left along the passages were rooms opening from one into
another. I could imagine Sir Walter’s kind eyes looking upon the scene,
and Wordsworth coming down the stairs, and their friendly entertainer
making all happy, and all welcome in turn; and their hostess, the
widowed Mrs. Edgeworth, responding and sympathising with each. We saw
the corner by the fire where Maria wrote; we saw her table with
its pretty curves standing in its place in the deep casements. Miss
Edgeworth’s own room is a tiny little room above looking out on the back
garden. This little closet opens from a larger one, and then by a narrow
flight of stairs leads to a suite of ground-floor chambers, following
one from another, lined with bookcases and looking on the gardens. What
a strange fellow-feeling with the past it gave one to stand staring at
the old books, with their paper backs and old-fashioned covers, at the
gray boards, which were the liveries of literature in those early
days; at the first editions, with their inscriptions in the author’s
handwriting, or in Maria’s pretty caligraphy. There was the PIRATE in
its original volumes, and Mackintosh’s MEMOIRS, and Mrs. Barbauld’s
ESSAYS, and Descartes’s ESSAYS, that Arthur Hallam liked to read;
Hallam’s CONSTITUTIONAL HISTORY, and Rogers’s POEMS, were there
all inscribed and dedicated. Not less interesting were the piles of
Magazines that had been sent from America. I never knew before how many
Magazines existed even those early days; we took some down at hazard and
read names, dates, and initials. . . . Storied urn and monumental bust
do not bring back the past as do the books which belong to it. Storied
urns are in churches and stone niches, far removed from the lives of
which they speak; books seem a part of our daily life, and are like the
sound of a voice just outside the door. Here they were, as they had
been read by her, stored away by her hands, and still safely preserved,
bringing back the past with, as it were, a cheerful encouraging greeting
to the present. Other relics there are of course, but, as I say, none
which touch one so vividly. There is her silver ink-stand, the little
table her father left her on which she wrote (it had belonged to his
mother before him). There is also a curious trophy--a table which was
sent to her from Edinburgh, ornamented by promiscuous views of Italy,
curiously inappropriate to her genius; but not so the inscription, which
is quoted from Sir Walter Scott’s Preface to his Collected Edition, and
which may as well be quoted here: ‘WITHOUT BEING SO PRESUMPTUOUS AS TO
HOPE TO EMULATE THE RICH HUMOUR, THE PATHETIC TENDERNESS, AND ADMIRABLE
TRUTH WHICH PERVADE THE WORKS OF MY ACCOMPLISHED FRIEND,’ Sir Walter
wrote, I FELT THAT SOMETHING MIGHT BE ATTEMPTED FOR MY OWN COUNTRY OF
THE SAME KIND AS THAT WHICH MISS EDGEWORTH SO FORTUNATELY ACHIEVED FOR
IRELAND.’

In the MEMOIRS of Miss Edgeworth there is a pretty account of her sudden
burst of feeling when this passage so unexpected, and so deeply felt by
her, was read out by one of her sisters, at a time when Maria lay weak
and recovering from illness in Edgeworthstown.

Our host took us that day, among other pleasant things, for a marvellous
and delightful flight on a jaunting car, to see something of the
country. We sped through storms and sunshine, by open moors and fields,
and then by villages and little churches, by farms where the pigs were
standing at the doors to be fed, by pretty trim cottages. The lights
came and went; as the mist lifted we could see the exquisite colours,
the green, the dazzling sweet lights on the meadows, playing upon the
meadow-sweet and elder bushes; at last we came to the lovely glades of
Carriglass. It seemed to me that we had reached an enchanted forest amid
this green sweet tangle of ivy, of flowering summer trees, of immemorial
oaks and sycamores.

A squirrel was darting up the branches of a beautiful spreading
beech-tree, a whole army of rabbits were flashing with silver tails into
the brushwood; swallows, blackbirds, peacock-butterflies, dragonflies
on the wing, a mighty sylvan life was roaming in this lovely orderly
wilderness.

The great Irish kitchen garden, belonging to the house, with its seven
miles of wall, was also not unlike a part of a fairy tale. Its owner,
Mr. Lefroy, told me that Miss Edgeworth had been constantly there. She
was a great friend of Judge Lefroy. As a boy he remembered her driving
up to the house and running up through the great drawing-room doors to
greet the Judge.

Miss Edgeworth certainly lived in a fair surrounding, and, with Sophia
Western, must have gone along the way of life heralded by sweetest
things, by the song of birds, by the gold radiance of the buttercups, by
the varied shadows of those beautiful trees under which the cows gently
tread the grass. English does not seem exactly the language in which to
write of Ireland, with its sylvan wonders of natural beauty. Madame de
Sevigne’s descriptions of her woods came to my mind. It is not a place
which delights one by its actual sensual beauty, as Italy does; it is
not as in England, where a thousand associations link one to every
scene and aspect--Ireland seems to me to contain some unique and most
impersonal charm, which is quite unwritable.

All that evening we sat talking with our hosts round the fire (for it
was cold enough for a fire), and I remembered that in Miss Edgeworth’s
MEMOIRS it was described how the snow lay upon the ground and upon
the land, when the family came home in June to take possession of
Edgeworthstown.

As I put out my candle in the spacious guest-chamber I wondered which of
its past inhabitants I should wish to see standing in the middle of the
room. I must confess that the thought of the beautiful Honora filled
me with alarm, and if Miss Seward had walked in in her pearls and satin
robe I should have fled for my life. As I lay there experimentalising
upon my own emotions I found that after all, natural simple people do
not frighten one whether dead or alive. The thought of them is ever
welcome; it is the artificial people who are sometimes one thing,
sometimes another, and who form themselves on the weaknesses and fancies
of those among whom they live, who are really terrifying.

The shadow of the bird’s wing flitted across the window of my bedroom,
and the sun was shining next morning when I awoke. I could see the cows,
foot deep in the grass under the hawthorns. After breakfast we went out
into the grounds and through an arched doorway into the kitchen garden.
It might have been some corner of Italy or the South of France; the
square tower of the granary rose high against the blue, the gray walls
were hung with messy fruit trees, pigeons were darting and flapping
their wings, gardeners were at work, the very vegetables were growing
luxuriant and romantic and edged by thick borders of violet pansy;
crossing the courtyard, we came into the village street, also orderly
and white-washed. The soft limpid air made all things into pictures,
into Turners, into Titians. A Murillo-like boy, with dark eyes, was
leaning against a wall, with his shadow, watching us go by; strange
old women, with draperies round their heads, were coming out of their
houses. We passed the Post-Office, the village shops, with their names,
the Monaghans and Gerahtys, such as we find again in Miss Edgeworth’s
novels. We heard the local politics discussed over the counter with a
certain aptness and directness which struck me very much. We passed the
boarding-house, which was not without its history--a long low building
erected by Mr. and Miss Edgeworth for a school, where the Sandfords
and Mertons of those days were to be brought up together: a sort of
foreshadowing of the High Schools of the present. Mr. Edgeworth was,
as we know, the very spirit of progress, though his experiment did not
answer at the time. At the end of the village street, where two roads
divide, we noticed a gap in the decent roadway--a pile of ruins in a
garden. A tumble-down cottage, and beyond the cottage, a falling shed,
on the thatched roof of which a hen was clucking and scraping. These
cottages Mr. Edgeworth had, after long difficulty, bought up and
condemned as unfit for human habitation. The plans had been considered,
the orders given to build new cottages in their place, which were to
be let to the old tenants at the old rent, but the last remaining
inhabitant absolutely refused to leave; we saw an old woman in a hood
slowly crossing the road, and carrying a pail for water; no threats or
inducements would move her, not even the sight of a neat little house,
white-washed and painted, and all ready for her to step into. Her
present rent was 10d. a week, Mr. Edgeworth told me, and she had been
letting the tumble-down shed to a large family for 1s. 4d. This sub-let
was forcibly put an end to, but the landlady still stops there, and
there she will stay until the roof tumbles down upon her head. The old
creature passed on through the sunshine, a decrepit, picturesque figure
carrying her pail to the stream, defying all the laws of progress and
political economy and civilisation in her feebleness and determination.

Most of the women came to their doors to see us go by. They all looked
as old as the hills--some dropt curtseys, others threw up their arms in
benediction. From a cottage farther up the road issued a strange, shy
old creature, looking like a bundle of hay, walking on bare legs. She
came up with a pinch of snuff, and a shake of the hand; she was of the
family of the man who had once saved Edgeworthstown from being destroyed
by the rebels. ‘Sure it was not her father,’ said old Peggy,’ it was her
grandfather did it!’ So she explained, but it was hard to believe that
such an old, old creature had ever had a grandfather in the memory of
man.

The glebe lands lie beyond the village. They reach as far as the church
on its high plateau, from which you can see the Wicklow Hills on a fine
day, and the lovely shifting of the lights of the landscape. The remains
of the great pew of the Edgeworth family, with its carved canopy of
wood, is still a feature in the bare church from which so much has been
swept away. The names of the fathers are written on the chancel walls,
and a few medallions of daughters and sisters also. In the churchyard,
among green elder bushes and tall upspringing grasses, is the square
monument erected to Mr. Edgeworth and his family; and as we stood there
the quiet place was crossed and recrossed by swallows with their beating
crescent wings.


III

Whatever one may think of Mr. Edgeworth’s literary manipulations and of
his influence upon his daughter’s writings, one cannot but respect the
sincere and cordial understanding which bound these two people together,
and realise the added interest in life, in its machinery and evolutions,
which Maria owed to her father’s active intelligence. Her own gift, I
think, must have been one for perceiving through the minds of others,
and for realising the value of what they in turn reflected; one is
struck again and again by the odd mixture of intuition, and of absolute
matter of fact which one finds in her writings.

It is difficult to realise, when one reads the memoirs of human beings
who loved and hated, and laughed and scolded, and wanted things and did
without them, very much as we do ourselves, that though they thought as
we do and felt as we do (only, as I have said, with greater vehemence),
they didn’t LOOK like us at all; and Mr. Edgeworth, the father of
Maria Edgeworth, the ‘gay gallant,’ the impetuous, ingenious, energetic
gentleman, sat writing with powdered hair and a queue, with tights and
buckles, bolt upright in a stiff chair, while his family, also bequeued
and becurled and bekerchiefed, were gathered round him in a group,
composedly attentive to his explanations, as he points to the roll
upon the table, or reads from his many MSS. and notebooks, for their
edification.

To have four wives and twenty-two children, to have invented so many
machines, engines, and curricles, steeples and telegraph posts, is more
than commonly falls to the lot of one ordinary man, but such we know was
Mr. Edgeworth’s history told by his own lips.

I received by chance an old newspaper the other day, dated the 23rd July
1779. It is called the LONDON PACKET, and its news, told with long s’s
and pretty curly italics, thrills one even now as one looks over the
four short pages. The leading article is entitled ‘Striking Instance
of the PERFIDY of France.’ It is true the grievance goes back to Louis
XIV., but the leader is written with plenty of spirit and present
indignation. Then comes news from America and the lists of New
Councillors elected:

‘Artemus Ward, Francis Dana, Oliver Prescott, Samuel Baker, while a very
suitable sermon on the occasion is preached by the Rev. Mr. Stillman
of Boston.’ How familiar the names all sound! Then the thanks of the
Members of Congress are given to ‘General Lee, Colonel Moultrie, and the
officers and soldiers under their command who on the 28th of June last
Repulsed with so much Valour the attack that was made that day on the
State of South Carolina by the fleet and army of his Britannic Majesty.’

There is an irresistible spirit of old-world pigtail decorum and dash
about it all. We read of our ‘grand fleet’ waiting at Corunna for the
Spanish; of 80,000 men on the coast of Brittany supposed to be ready for
an invasion of England; of the Prince of Conde playing at cards, with
Northumberland House itself for stakes (Northumberland House which he is
INTENDING to take). We read the list of Lottery Prizes, of the £1000 and
£500 tickets; of the pressing want of seamen for His Majesty’s Navy,
and how the gentlemen of Ireland are subscribers to a bounty fund. Then
comes the narrative of James Caton of Bristol, who writes to complain
that while transacting his business on the Bristol Exchange he is
violently seized by a pressgang, with oaths and imprecations. Mr. Farr,
attempting to speak to him, is told by the Lieutenant that if he does
not keep off he will be shot with a pistol. Mr. Caton is violently
carried off, locked up in a horrible stinking room, prevented from
seeing his friends; after a day or two he is forced on board a tender,
where Mr. Tripp, a midshipman, behaves with humanity, but the Captain
and Lieutenant outvie each other in brutality; Captain Hamilton behaving
as an ‘enraged partisan.’ Poor Mr. Caton is released at last by the
exertions of Mr. Edmund Burke, of Mr. Farr, and another devoted friend,
who travel post-haste to London to obtain a Habeas Corpus, so that he
is able to write indignantly and safe from his own home to the LONDON
PACKET to describe his providential escape. The little sheet gives one
a vivid impression of that daily life in 1779, when Miss Edgeworth
must have been a little girl of twelve years old, at school at Mrs.
Lataffiere’s, and learning to write in her beautiful handwriting. It
was a time of great events. The world is fighting, armies marching and
counter-marching, and countries rapidly changing hands. Miss Seward is
inditing her elegant descriptions for the use of her admiring circle.
But already the circle is dwindling! Mr. Day has parted from Sabrina.
The well-known episodes of Lichfield gaieties and love-makings are over.
Poor Major Andre has been exiled from England and rejected by Honora.
The beautiful Honora, whose “blending charms of mind and person”
 are celebrated by one adoring lover after another, has married Mr.
Edgeworth. She has known happiness, and the devoted affection of an
adoring husband, and the admiring love of her little step-daughter, all
this had been hers; and now all this is coming to an end, and the poor
lady lying on her death-bed imploring her husband to marry her sister
Elizabeth. Accordingly Mr. Edgeworth married Elizabeth Sneyd in 1780,
which was also the year of poor Andre’s death.

There is a little oval picture at the National Gallery in Dublin, the
photograph of a sketch at Edgeworthstown House, which gives one a very
good impression of the family as it must have appeared in the reigns of
King George and the third Mrs. Edgeworth. The father in his powder and
frills sits at the table with intelligent, well-informed finger showing
some place upon a map. He is an agreeable-looking youngish man; Mrs.
Edgeworth, his third wife, is looking over his shoulder; she has marked
features, beautiful eyes, she holds a child upon her knee, and one can
see the likeness in her to her step-daughter Honora, who stands just
behind her and leans against the chair. A large globe appropriately
stands in the background. The grown-up ladies alternate with small
children. Miss Edgeworth herself, sitting opposite to her father, is
the most prominent figure in the group. She wears a broad leghorn hat,
a frizzed coiffure, and folded kerchief; she has a sprightly, somewhat
French appearance, with a marked nose of the RETROUSSE order. I had
so often heard that she was plain that to see this fashionable and
agreeable figure was a pleasant surprise.

Miss Edgeworth seems to be about four-and-twenty in the sketch; she
was born in 1767; she must have been eleven in 1778, when Mr. Edgeworth
finally came over to Ireland to settle on his own estate, and among
his own people. He had been obliged some years before to leave
Edgeworthstown on account of Mrs. Honora Edgeworth’s health; he now
returned in patriarchal fashion with Mrs. Elizabeth Edgeworth, his third
wife, with his children by his first, second, and third marriages,
and with two sisters-in-law who had made their home in his family. For
thirty-five years he continued to live on in the pretty old home which
he now adapted to his large family, and which, notwithstanding Miss
Edgeworth’s objections, would have seemed so well fitted for its various
requirements. The daughter’s description of his life there, of his
work among his tenants, of his paternal and spirited rule, is vivid and
interesting. When the present owner of Edgeworthstown talked to us of
his grandfather, one felt that, with all his eccentricities, he must
have been a man of a far-seeing mind and observation. Mr. Erroles
Edgeworth said that he was himself still reaping the benefit of his
grandfather’s admirable organisation and arrangements on the estate,
and that when people all around met with endless difficulties and
complications, he had scarcely known any. Would that there had been more
Mr. Edgeworths in Ireland!

Whatever business he had to do, his daughter tells us, was done in the
midst of his family. Maria copied his letters of business and helped
him to receive his rents. ‘On most Irish estates,’ says Miss Edgeworth,
‘there is, or there was, a personage commonly called a driver,--a person
who drives and impounds cattle for rent and arrears.’ The drivers are,
alas! from time to time too necessary in collecting Irish rents. Mr.
Edgeworth desired that none of his tenants should pay rent to any
one but himself; thus taking away subordinate interference, he became
individually acquainted with his tenantry. He also made himself
acquainted with the different value of land on his estate. In every
case where the tenant had improved the land his claim to preference over
every new proposer was admitted. The mere plea, ‘I have been on
your Honour’s estate so many years,’ was disregarded. ‘Nor was it
advantageous that each son,’ says Miss Edgeworth, ‘of the original
tenant should live on his subdivided little potato garden without
further exertion of mind or body.’ Further on she continues: ‘Not being
in want of ready money, my father was not obliged to let his land to the
highest bidder. He could afford to have good tenants.’ In the old leases
claims of duty-fowl, of duty-work, of man or beast had been inserted.
Mr. Edgeworth was one of the first to abolish them. The only clause he
continued in every lease was the alienation fine, which was to protect
the landlord and to prevent a set of middlemen from taking land at a
reasonable rent, and letting it immediately at the highest possible
price. His indulgence as to the time he allowed for the payment of
rent was unusually great, but beyond the half year the tenants knew his
strictness so well, that they rarely ventured to go into arrears, and
never did so with impunity. ‘To his character as a good landlord,’
she continues, ‘was added that he was a real gentleman; this phrase
comprises a good deal in the opinion of the lower Irish.’ There is one
very curious paragraph in which Miss Edgeworth describes how her father
knew how to make use of the tenants’ prejudices, putting forward his
wishes rather than his convictions. ‘It would be impossible for me,’
says his daughter, ‘without ostentation to give any of the proofs I
might record of my father’s liberality. Long after they were forgotten
by himself, they were remembered by the warm-hearted people among whom
he lived.’

Mr. Edgeworth was one of those people born to get their own way. Every
one seems to have felt the influence of his strong character. It was not
only with his family and his friends that he held his own--the tenants
and the poor people rallied to his command. To be sure, it sounds like
some old Irish legend to be told that Mr. Edgeworth had so loud a voice
that it could be heard a mile off, and that his steward, who lived in a
lodge at that distance from the house, could hear him calling from the
drawing-room window, and would come up for orders.

In 1778, says Miss Edgeworth retrospectively, when England was
despatching her armies all over the world, she had no troops to spare
for the defence of Ireland then threatened with a French invasion; and
the principal nobility and gentry embodied themselves volunteers for the
defence of the country. The Duke of Leinster and Lord Charlemont were
at the head of the ‘corps which in perfect order and good discipline
rendered their country respectable.’ The friends of Ireland, profiting
by England’s growing consideration for the sister country, now obtained
for her great benefits for which they had long been striving, and
Mr. Grattan moved an address to the throne asserting the legislative
independence of Ireland. The address passed the House, and, as his
daughter tells us, Mr. Edgeworth immediately published a pamphlet.
Miss Edgeworth continues as follows, describing his excellent course
of action: ‘My father honestly and unostentatiously used his utmost
endeavours to obliterate all that could tend to perpetuate ill-will in
the country. Among the lower classes in his neighbourhood he endeavoured
to discourage that spirit of recrimination and retaliation which the
lower Irish are too prone to cherish. They are such acute observers that
there is no deceiving them as to the state of the real feeling of their
superiors. They know the signs of what passes within with more certainty
than any physiognomist, and it was soon seen by all those who had
any connection with him that my father was sincere in his disdain of
vengeance.’ Further on, describing his political feelings, she says that
on the subject of the Union in parliamentary phrase he had not then been
able to make up his mind. She describes with some pride his first speech
in the Irish House at two o’clock in the morning, when the wearied
members were scarcely awake to hear it, and when some of the
outstretched members were aroused by their neighbours to listen to
him! ‘When people perceived that it was not a set speech,’ says Miss
Edgeworth, ‘they became interested.’ He stated his doubts just as they
had occurred as he threw them by turn into each scale. After giving many
reasons in favour of what appeared to be the advantages of the Union,
he unexpectedly gave his vote against it, because he said he had been
convinced by what he had heard one night, that the Union was decidedly
against the wishes of the majority of men of sense and property in
the nation. He added (and surely Mr. Edgeworth’s opinion should go for
something still) that if he should be convinced that the opinions of the
country changed, his vote would be in its favour.

His biographer tells us that Mr. Edgeworth was much complimented on his
speech by BOTH sides, by those for whom he voted, and also by those who
found that the best arguments on the other side of the question had
been undoubtedly made by him. It is a somewhat complicated statement
and state of feeling to follow; to the faithful daughter nothing is
impossible where her father is concerned. This vote, I believe, cost Mr.
Edgeworth his peerage. ‘When it was known that he had voted against the
Union he became suddenly the idol of those who would previously have
stoned him,’ says his devoted biographer. It must not, however, be
forgotten that Mr. Edgeworth had refused an offer of £3000 for his seat
for two or three weeks, during that momentous period when every vote was
of importance. Mr. Pitt, they say, spent over £2,000,000 in carrying the
measure which he deemed so necessary.


IV

As a rule people’s books appeal first to one’s imagination, and then
after a time, if the books are good books and alive, not stuffed
dummies and reproductions, one begins to divine the writers themselves,
hidden away in their pages, and wrapped up in their hot-press sheets of
paper; and so it happened by chance that a printed letter once written
by Maria Edgeworth to Mrs. Barbauld set the present reader wondering
about these two familiar names, and trying to realise the human beings
which they each represented. Since those days Miss Edgeworth has become
a personage more vivid and interesting than any of her characters, more
familiar even than ‘Simple Susan’ or ‘Rosamond of the Purple Jar.’ She
has seemed little by little to grow into a friend, as the writer has
learnt to know her more and more intimately, has visited the home of
that home-loving woman, has held in her hands the delightful Family
Memoirs,{1}  has seen the horizons, so to speak, of Maria Edgeworth’s
long life. Several histories of Miss Edgeworth have been lately
published in England. Miss Zimmern and Miss Oliver in America have each
written, and the present writer has written, and various memoirs and
letters have appeared in different magazines and papers with allusions
and descriptions all more or less interesting. One can but admire the
spirit which animated that whole existence; the cheerful, kindly,
multiplied interest Maria Edgeworth took in the world outside, as well
as in the wellbeing of all those around her. Generations, changes, new
families, new experiences, none of these overwhelmed her. She seemed to
move in a crowd, a cheerful, orderly crowd, keeping in tune and heart
with its thousand claims; with strength and calmness of mind to bear
multiplied sorrows and a variety of care with courage, and an
ever-reviving gift of spirited interest. Her history is almost unique
in its curious relationships; its changes of step-mothers, its warm
family ties, its grasp of certain facts which belong to all time rather
than to the hour itself. Miss Edgeworth lived for over eighty years,
busy, beneficent, modest, and intelligent to the last. When she died
she was mourned as unmarried women of eighty are not often mourned.

    {1} Now published and edited by Mr. Hare (Nov. 1894).

The present owner of Edgeworthstown told us that he could just remember
her, lying dead upon her bed, and her face upon the pillow, and the
sorrowful tears of the household; and how he and the other little
children were carried off by a weeping aunt into the woods, to comfort
and distract them on the funeral day. He also told us of an incident
prior to this event which should not be overlooked. How he himself,
being caught red-handed, at the age of four or thereabouts, with his
hands in a box of sugar-plums, had immediately confessed the awful fact
that he had been about to eat them, and he was brought then and there
before his Aunt Maria for sentence. She at once decided that he had
behaved Nobly in speaking the truth, and that he must be rewarded
in kind for his praiseworthy conduct, and be allowed to keep the
sugar-plums!

This little story after half a century certainly gives one pleasure
still to recall, and proves, I think, that cakes may be enjoyed long
after they have been eaten, and also that there is a great deal to be
said for justice with lollipops in the scale. But what would Rosamond’s
parents have thought of such a decision? One shudders to think of their
disapproval, or of that of dear impossible Mr. Thomas Day, with his
trials and experiments of melted sealing-wax upon little girls’ bare
arms, and his glasses of tar-water so inflexibly administered. Miss
Edgeworth, who suffered from her eyes, recalls how Mr. Day used to bring
the dose, the horrible tar-water, every morning with a ‘Drink this,
Miss Maria!’ and how she dared not resist, though she thought she saw
something of kindness and pity beneath all his apparent severity.

Severity was the order of those times. The reign of sugar-plums had
scarcely begun. It was not, as now, only ignorance and fanaticism that
encouraged the giving of pain, it was the universal custom. People
were still hanged for stealing, women were still burnt--so we have
been assured--in St. Stephen’s Green; though, it is true, they were
considerately strangled first. Children were bullied and tortured with
the kindest intentions; even Maria Edgeworth at her fashionable school
was stretched in a sort of machine to make her grow; Mr. Day, as we
know, to please the lady of his affections, passed eight hours a day
in the stocks in order to turn out his knock-knees. One feels that a
generation of ladies and gentlemen who submitted to such inflictions
surely belonged to a race of heroes and heroines, and that, if the times
were difficult and trying, the people also were stronger to endure them,
and must have been much better fitted with nerves than we are.

Miss Edgeworth’s life has been so often told that I will not attempt to
recapitulate the story at any length. She well deserved her reputation.
Her thoughts were good, her English was good, her stories had the charm
of sincerity, and her audience of children was a genuine audience, less
likely to be carried away by fashion than more advanced critics might
be. There is a curious matter-of-fact element in all she wrote, combined
with extraordinary quickness and cleverness; and it must be remembered,
in trying to measure her place in literature, that in her day the whole
great school of English philosophical romance was in its cradle; George
Eliot was not in existence; my father was born in the year in which THE
ABSENTEE was published. Sir Walter Scott has told us that it was Miss
Edgeworth’s writing which first suggested to him the idea of writing
about Scotland and its national life. Tourgenieff in the same way says
that it was after reading her books on Ireland that he began to write
of his own country and of Russian peasants as he did. Miss Edgeworth was
the creator of her own special world of fiction, though the active Mr.
Edgeworth crossed the t’s and dotted the i’s, interpolated, expurgated,
to his own and Maria’s satisfaction. She was essentially a modest woman;
she gratefully accepted his criticism and emendations. Mr. Clark Russell
quotes Sydney Smith, who declared that Mr. Edgeworth must have written
or burst. ‘A discharge of ink was an evacuation absolutely necessary
to avoid fatal and plethoric congestion.’ The only wonder is that,
considering all they went through, his daughter’s stories survived to
tell their tale, and to tell it so well, with directness and conviction,
that best of salt in any literary work. A letter Maria wrote to her
cousin will be remembered. ‘I beg, dear Sophy,’ she says, ‘that you will
not call my stories by the sublime name of my works; I shall else be
ashamed when the little mouse comes forth.’

Maria’s correspondence is delightful, and conveys us right away into
that bygone age. The figures rapidly move across her scene, talking and
unconsciously describing themselves as they go; you see them all through
the eyes of the observant little lady. She did not go very deep; she
seems to me to have made kindly acquaintance with some, to have admired
others with artless enthusiasm. I don’t think she troubled herself much
about complication of feeling; she liked people to make repartees, or
to invent machines, to pay their bills, and to do their duty in a
commonplace and cheerfully stoical fashion. But then Maria Edgeworth
certainly did not belong to our modern schools, sipping the emetic
goblet to give flavour to daily events, nor to that still more alarming
and spreading clique of DEGENERES who insist upon administering such
doses to others to relieve the tedium of the road of life.

Perhaps we in our time scarcely do justice to Miss Edgeworth’s
extraordinary cleverness and brightness of apprehension. There is more
fun than humour in her work, and those were the days of good rollicking
jokes and laughter. Details change so quickly that it is almost
impossible to grasp entirely the aims and intentions of a whole set of
people just a little different from ourselves in every single thing; who
held their heads differently, who pointed their toes differently, who
addressed each other in a language just a little unlike our own. The
very meanings of the words shift from one generation to another, and
we are perhaps more really in harmony with our great-great-grandfathers
than with the more immediate generations.

Her society was charming, so every one agrees; and her acquaintance with
all the most remarkable men of her time must not be forgotten, nor the
genuine regard with which she inspired all who came across her path.

‘In external appearance she is quite the fairy of our nursery tale, the
WHIPPETY STOURIE, if you remember such a sprite, who came flying through
the window to work all sorts of marvels,’ writes Sir Walter. ‘I will
never believe but what she has a wand in her pocket, and pulls it out
to conjure a little before she begins those very striking pictures of
manners.’

Among others Sir William Hamilton has left a pleasing description of
Miss Edgeworth. ‘If you would study and admire her as she deserves,
you must see her at home,’ says he, ‘and hear her talk. She knows an
infinite number of anecdotes about interesting places and persons, which
she tells extremely well, and never except when they arise naturally
out of the subject. . . . To crown her merits, she seemed to take a
prodigious fancy to me, and promised to be at home, and made me promise
to be at Edgeworthstown for a fortnight some time next vacation.’ We owe
to him also an amusing sketch of some other collateral members of the
family; the fine animated old lady, who immediately gets him to explain
the reason why a concave mirror inverts while a convex mirror leaves
them erect; the young ladies, one of whom was particularly anxious to
persuade him that the roundness of the planets was produced by friction,
perhaps by their being shaken together like marbles in a bag.

There is also an interesting letter from Sir W. Hamilton at
Edgeworthstown on 23rd September 1829. Wordsworth is also staying there.
‘After some persuasion Francis and I succeed in engaging Mr. Wordsworth
in many very interesting conversations. Miss Edgeworth has had for some
time a very serious illness, but she was able to join us for dinner
the day that I arrived, and she exhibited in her conversations with Mr.
Wordsworth a good deal of her usual brilliancy; she also engaged
Mr. Marshall in some long conversations upon Ireland, and even Mr.
Marshall’s son, whose talent for silence seems to be so very profound,
was thawed a little on Monday evening, and discussed after tea the
formation of the solar system. Miss Edgeworth tells me that she is at
last employed in writing for the public after a long interval, but does
not expect to have her work soon ready for publication.’{2}

   {2} There is a curious criticism of Miss Edgeworth by Robert Hall,
   the great preacher, which should not be passed over. ‘As to her
   style,’ he says, ‘she is simple and elegant, content to convey her
   thoughts in their most plain and natural form, that is indeed the
   perfection of style. . . . In point of tendency,’ he continues, ‘I
   should class her books among the most irreligious I ever read. . . .
   She does not attack religion nor inveigh against it, but makes it
   appear unnecessary by exhibiting perfect virtue without it. . . . No
   works ever produced so bad an effect on my own mind as hers.’

Besides Wordsworth and Sir William Hamilton and Mr. Marshall, we
presently come to Sir John Herschell. ‘I saw your admirable friend Miss
Edgeworth lately in town,’ he writes to Hamilton; ‘she is a most warm
admirer of yours, and praise such as hers is what any man might be proud
of.’ Later on Miss Edgeworth, corresponding with Sir W. Hamilton, tells
him she is ill and forbidden to write, or even to think. This is what
she thinks of THINKING: ‘I am glad to see that the severe sciences do
not destroy the energy and grace of the imagination, but only chasten it
and impart their philosophical influence.’


V

Certain events are remembered and mourned for generations, so there are
others, happy and interesting in themselves, which must continue to give
satisfaction long after they are over, and long after those concerned in
them have passed away. And certainly among things pleasant to remember
is the story of Sir Walter Scott’s visit to Ireland in July 1825, when
he received so warm a greeting from the country and spent those happy
hours with Miss Edgeworth at Edgeworthstown. Fortunately for us,
Lockhart was one of the party. Anne Scott, and Walter the soldier, and
Jane Scott the bride, were also travelling in Sir Walter’s train. The
reception which Ireland gave Sir Walter was a warm-hearted ovation. ‘It
would be endless to enumerate the distinguished persons who, morning
after morning, crowded to his levee in St. Stephen’s Green,’ says
Lockhart, and he quotes an old saying of Sir Robert Peel’s, ‘that Sir
Walter’s reception in the High Street of Edinburgh in 1822 was the first
thing that gave him (Peel) a notion of the electric shock of a nation’s
gratitude.’ ‘I doubt if even that scene surpassed what I myself
witnessed,’ continues the biographer, ‘when Sir Walter returned down
Dame Street after inspecting the Castle of Dublin.’

From ovations to friendship it was Sir Walter’s inclination to turn. On
the 1st August he came to Edgeworthstown, accompanied by his family. ‘We
remained there for several days, making excursions to Loch Oel, etc. Mr.
Lovell Edgeworth had his classical mansion filled every evening with
a succession of distinguished friends. Here, above all, we had
the opportunity of seeing in what universal respect and comfort a
gentleman’s family may live in that country, provided only they live
there habitually and do their duty. . . . Here we found neither mud
hovels nor naked peasantry, but snug cottages and smiling faces all
about. . . . Here too we pleased ourselves with recognising some of the
sweetest features in Goldsmith’s picture of “Sweet Auburn! loveliest
village of the plain.”’ Oliver Goldsmith received his education at this
very school of Edgeworthstown, and Pallas More, the little hamlet where
the author of THE VICAR OF WAKEFIELD first saw the light, is still, as
it was then, the property of the Edgeworths.

So Scott came to visit his little friend, and the giant was cheered
and made welcome by her charming hospitality. It was a last gleam of
sunshine in that noble life. We instinctively feel how happy they all
were in each other’s good company. We can almost overhear some of their
talk, as they walk together under the shade of the trees of the park.
One can imagine him laughing in his delightful hearty way, half joking,
half caressing. Lockhart had used some phrase (it is Lockhart who tells
us the story) which conveyed the impression that he suspects poets and
novelists of looking at life and at the world chiefly as materials for
art. ‘A soft and pensive shade came over Scott’s face. “I fear you have
some very young ideas in your head,” he says. “God help us, what a poor
world this would be if that were the true doctrine! I have read books
enough, and observed and conversed with enough eminent minds in my time,
but I assure you I have heard higher sentiments from the lips of poor
uneducated men and women, exerting the spirit of severe yet gentle
heroism, or speaking their simple thoughts, than I ever met with out
of the pages of the Bible. We shall never learn to feel and respect our
real calling unless we have taught ourselves to consider everything as
moonshine compared with the education of the heart,”’ said the great
teacher. ‘Maria did not listen to this without some water in
her eyes,--her tears are always ready when a generous string is
touched,--but she brushed them gaily aside, and said, “You see how it
is: Dean Swift said he had written his books in order that people should
learn to treat him like a great lord; Sir Walter writes his in order
that he might be able to treat his people as a great lord ought to do.”’

Years and years afterwards Edward Fitzgerald stayed at Edgeworthstown,
and he also carries us there in one of his letters. He had been at
college with Mr. Frank Edgeworth, who had succeeded to the estate, and
had now in 1828 come to stay with him. The host had been called away,
but the guest describes his many hostesses: ‘Edgeworth’s mother, aged
seventy-four; his sister, the great Maria, aged seventy-two; and another
cousin or something. All these people were pleasant and kind, the house
pleasant, the grounds ditto, a good library, so here I am quite at home,
but surely must go to England soon.’ One can imagine Fitzgerald sitting
in the library with his back to the window and writing his letters
and reading his thirty-two sets of novels, while the rain is steadily
pouring outside, and the Great Authoress (so he writes her down) as busy
as a bee sitting by chattering and making a catalogue of her books. ‘We
talk about Walter Scott, whom she adores, and are merry all day long,’
he says. ‘When I began this letter I thought I had something to say, but
I believe the truth was I had nothing to do.’

Two years later Mr. Fitzgerald is again there and writing to Frederick
Tennyson: ‘I set sail from Dublin to-morrow night, bearing the heartfelt
regrets of all the people of Ireland with me.’ Then comes a flash of his
kind searching lantern: ‘I had a pleasant week with Edgeworth. He farms
and is a justice, and goes to sleep on the sofa of evenings. At odd
moments he looks into Spinoza and Petrarch. People respect him very much
in these parts.’ Edward Fitzgerald seems to have had a great regard for
his host; the more he knows him the more he cares for him; he describes
him ‘firing away about the odes of Pindar.’ They fired noble broadsides
those men of the early Victorian times, and when we listen we still seem
to hear their echoes rolling into the far distance. Mr. Fitzgerald
ends his letter with a foreboding too soon to be realised: ‘Old Miss
Edgeworth is wearing away. She has a capital bright soul, which even now
shines quite youthfully through her faded carcase.’ It was in May 1849
that Maria Edgeworth went to her rest. She died almost suddenly, with no
long suffering, in the arms of her faithful friend and step-mother.





NOTES ON ‘CASTLE RACKRENT’

In 1799, When Maria was in London, she and her father went to call upon
Mr. Johnson, the bookseller, who was then imprisoned in the King’s
Bench for a publication which was considered to be treasonable, and they
probably then and there arranged with him for the publication of CASTLE
RACKRENT, for in January 1800, writing to her cousin, Miss Ruxton, Maria
says, ‘Will you tell me what means you have of getting parcels from
London to Arundel, because I wish to send my aunt a few popular tales.
. . . We have begged Johnson to send CASTLE RACKRENT, and hope it has
reached you. DO NOT MENTION THAT IT IS OURS.’

The second edition of CASTLE RACKRENT came out with Miss Edgeworth’s
name to it in 1811. ‘Its success was so triumphant,’ Mrs. Edgeworth
writes, ‘that some one--I heard his name at the time, but do not now
remember it--not only asserted that he was the author, but actually took
the trouble to copy out several chapters with corrections and erasions
as if it was his original manuscript.’

It was when Miss Edgeworth first came to Ireland,--so she tells one of
her correspondents,--that she met the original Thady of CASTLE RACKRENT.
His character struck her very much, and the story came into her mind.
She purposely added to the agent’s age so as to give time for the events
to happen.

Honest Thady tells the story; you can almost hear his voice, and see him
as he stands: ‘I wear a long greatcoat winter and summer, which is very
handy, as I never put my arms into the sleeves; they are as good as new,
though come Holantide next I’ve had it these seven years: it holds on by
a single button round my neck, cloak fashion. To look at me, you would
hardly think “Poor Thady” was the father of Attorney Quirk; he is a high
gentleman, and never minds what poor Thady says, and having better than
fifteen hundred a year landed estate, looks down upon honest Thady; but
I wash my hands of his doings, and as I have lived, so will I die, true
and loyal to the family. The family of Rackrents is, I am proud to say,
one of the most ancient in the kingdom.’ And then he gives the history
of the Rackrents, beginning with Sir Patrick, who could sit out the best
man in Ireland, let alone the three kingdoms itself, and who fitted
up the chicken-house to accommodate his friends when they honoured him
unexpectedly with their company. There was ‘such a fine whillaluh at Sir
Patrick’s funeral, you might have heard it to the farthest end of the
county, and happy the man who could get but a sight of the hearse.’ Then
came Sir Murtagh, who used to boast that he had a law-suit for every
