CHAPTER VIII

A BLINDING FLASH


Stumbling on through the dark woods, led by his captors, Tom tried to
pierce the gloom and identify the persons who had firm grips on either
side of him. But it was useless. A little light sifted down from the
starlit sky above, but it was not sufficient. The young inventor was
beginning to think, after all, that he had fallen into the hands of the
Happy Harry gang, and he knew that if this was so he need expect no
mercy.

But two things were against this belief. One was that the principal
members of the gang were still in jail, or at least they were supposed
to be, and another was that there were too many of the captors. Happy
Harry's crowd never numbered so many.

"Maybe they're highwaymen," thought our hero, as he was dragged along
"But that can't be," he reasoned further. "If they wanted to rob me
they'd have done it back there in the road, and not brought me off here
in the woods. Besides, I haven't anything for them to steal."

Suddenly Tom stumbled over a projecting root, and nearly fell, dragging
along with him the person who had hold of his left arm.

"Look out there! What's the matter with you?" exclaimed one of the
throng quickly, and at the sound of the voice Tom started.

"Andy Foger!" cried the young inventor, as he recovered himself, for he
had recognized the voice of the red-haired bully.  "What do you mean by
holding me up in this way?" he demanded.

"Quiet!" urged a voice in his ear, and the tones were unfamiliar.
"Mention no names!"

"I'm on to your game!" retorted Tom. "I know you're here, Andy, and Sam
and Pete; and Jack Reynolds and Sid Holton," and he named two rather
loose-charactered lads, who were often in the company of Andy and his
cronies. "You'd better quit this nonsense," Tom went on. "I'll cause
the arrest of all of you if you make trouble for me. I know who you are
now!"

"You think you do," answered the voice in his ear, and the young
inventor concluded that it must be some lad whom he did not know. "Nor
is this nonsense," the other went on. "You are about to receive the
punishment due you."

Our hero did not answer, but he was doing some hard thinking.  He
wondered why Andy and his crowd had captured him.

Suddenly the blackness of the woods was illuminated by the fitful gleam
of a distant fire. Tom could see more plainly now, and he managed to
count about ten dusky figures hurrying along, four being close to him,
to prevent his escape, and the others running on ahead. The light
became stronger, and, a moment later the prisoner and his captors
emerged into a little clearing, where a fire was burning. Two figures,
masked with black cloth, as were all in the crowd, stood about the
blaze, putting on sticks of wood.

"Did you get him?" asked one of these figures eagerly.

"Yes, they got me, Sam Snedecker," answered Tom quickly, recognizing
Sam's tones. "And they'll wish they hadn't before I'm done with them."

"Quiet!" ordered an unknown voice. "Members of the Deep Forest Throng,
the prisoner is here!" the lad went on.

"'Tis well, bind the captive to the sacrificial tree," was the response
from some one in the crowd.

Tom laughed. He was at ease now, for he recognized that those who had
taken him prisoner were all lads of Andy's character.  Most of them
were Shopton youths, but some, evidently, were strangers in town. Tom
felt he had little to fear.

"Bring him over here," ordered one, and Tom cried out:

"You wouldn't be giving those orders, Andy Foger, if my arms weren't
tied. And if you'll untie me, I'll fight any two of you at once,"
offered the young inventor fiercely, for he hated the humiliation to
which he was being subjected.

"Don't do it! Don't untie him!" begged some one.

"No danger, they won't. They're afraid to, Pete Bailey," replied Tom
quickly, for he had recognized the voice of the other one of Andy's
particular cronies.

"Aw, he knows who we are," whispered Sam, but not so low but that our
hero heard him.

"No matter," was Andy's retort. "Let's go ahead with it. Tie him to
that tree."

It was useless for Tom to struggle. He was bound too tightly by the
rope, and the crowd was too many for him. In a few minutes he was
securely fastened to a tree, not far from the camp-fire, which was
replenished from time to time.

"Now for the judgment!" called one of the masked lads, in what he meant
to be a sepulchral tone. "What is the charge against the prisoner?
Brother Number One of the Deep Forest Throng, what is your accusation?"

"He's a regular snob, that's what's the trouble,"  answered Andy
Foger,  though whether he was "Brother Number One," did not appear.
"He's too fresh and--and--"

"I'll make you wish you felt fresh when I get hold of you, Andy,"
murmured Tom.

"Quiet!" cried a tall lad. "What's the next charge?"

"He keeps an old colored man on guard at his place," was the answer,
and Tom had no difficulty in recognizing the voice of Sid Holton. "The
coon throws whitewash all over us. I got some of it."

"You wouldn't have, if you'd minded your own business," retorted Tom.
"It served you right!"

"What is the verdict on the prisoner?" asked one who seemed to be the
leader.

"I say let's tar and feather him!" cried Andy suddenly.  "There's a
barrel of tar back in the woods here, and we can get some feathers from
a chicken coop. That would make him so he wouldn't be so uppish, I
guess!"

"That's right! Tar and feathers!" exclaimed several.

Our hero's heart sank. He was not afraid, but he did not relish the
indignity that was proposed. He resolved to fight to the last ounce of
his strength against the masked lads.

"Can we get a kettle to heat the tar in?" asked some one.

"We'll find one," answered Sam Snedecker. "Come on, let's do it. You'll
look pretty, Tom Swift, when we're through with you," he exulted.

Tom did not answer, but there was fierce anger in his heart.  The tar
and feather proposal seemed to meet with general favor.

"Members of the Deep Forest Throng, we will hold a consultation,"
proposed the leader, in his assumed deep voice.  "Come over here, to
one side. Brother Number Six, guard the prisoner well."

"There ain't no need to," answered a lad who had been instructed to
mount guard over Tom. "He's tied so tight he can't move. I want to hear
what you say."

"Very well then," assented the leader,  "But look to his bonds."

The lad made a hasty examination of the ropes binding the young
inventor to the tree, and Tom was glad that the examination was a hasty
one. For he feared the guard might discover that one hand had been
worked nearly free. The young inventor had done this while he leered at
his captors.

Tom was not going to submit tamely to the nonsense, and from the moment
he had been tied, he had been trying to get loose. He had nearly
succeeded in freeing one hand when the crowd of masked boys moved off
to one side, where they presently began to talk in excited whispers.

"I wonder how they came to catch me," thought the prisoner, as he
worked feverishly to further loosen the ropes. "This looks as if it was
a put-up job, with the masks, and everything."  Later he learned that
the idea was the outcome of a proposal of one of the new arrivals in
town. He had organized the "Deep Forest Throng," as a sort of secret
society, and Andy and his cronies had been induced to join. It was
Andy's proposal to capture Tom, though, and, having seen him depart for
Mansburg on his motor-cycle, and knowing that he would return along a
road that ran near the woods where the Throng met, suggested that they
take Tom captive. The idea was enthusiastically received, and Andy and
his cronies thought they saw a chance to be revenged.

Tom, while he picked at the ropes, listened to what the boys were
saying. He heard frequent mention of tar and feathers, and began to
believe, that unless he could get free, while they were off there
consulting, he might be forced to submit to the humiliating ordeal.

He managed to get one hand comparatively free, so that he could move it
about, but then he struck several hard knots, and could make no further
progress. The conference seemed on the point of breaking up.

"One of you go for a big kettle to boil the tar in," ordered the
leader, "and the rest of you dig up some feathers."

"I must get loose!" thought Tom desperately. "If they try to tar and
feather me it will be a risky business. I've got to get loose! They may
burn me severely!"

But, though he tried with all his strength, the ropes would not loosen
another bit. He had one hand free, and that was all. The crowd was
moving back toward him.

"My knife!" thought the captive quickly. "If I can reach that in my
pocket I can cut the ropes! Once I get loose I'll fight the whole
crowd!"

He managed to get his free hand into his pocket. His fingers touched
something. It was not his knife, and, for a moment he felt a pang of
disappointment. Then, as he realized what it was that he had grasped, a
new idea came to him.

"This will be better than the knife!" he thought exultantly.  The crowd
of lads was now surrounding him, some distance from the fire, which
burned in front of the captive.

"Sentence has been passed upon you," remarked the leader.  "Prepare to
meet thy doom! Get the materials, brothers!"

"One moment!" called Tom, for he wanted the crowd all present to
witness what he was about to do. "I'll give you one chance to let me go
peaceably. If you don't--"

"Well, what will you do?" demanded Andy sneeringly, as he pulled his
mask further over his face. "I guess you won't do anything, Tom Swift."

"I'll give you one chance to let me go, and I'll agree to say nothing
about this joke," went on Tom. "If you don't I'll blow this place up!"

For a moment there was a silence.

"Ha! Ha! Ho! Ho!" laughed Sam Snedecker. "Listen to him! He'll blow the
place up! I'd like to see you do it! You can't get loose in the first
place, and you haven't anything to blow it up with in the second. I'd
like to see you do it; hey, fellers?"

"Sure," came the answering chorus.

"Would you?" asked Tom quickly. "Then watch. Stand back if you don't
want to get hurt, and remember that I gave you a chance to let me go!"

Tom made a rapid motion with the hand he had gotten loose. He threw
something toward the blazing fire, which was now burning well.
Something white sailed through the air, and fell amid the hot embers.

There was a moment's pause, and then a blinding flash of blue fire
lighted up the woods, and a dull rumble, as when gun-powder is lighted
in the open followed. A great cloud of white smoke arose, as the vivid
blue glare died away, and it seemed as if a great wind swept over the
place. Several of the masked lads were knocked down by the explosion,
and when the rumble died away, and deep blackness succeeded the intense
blue light, there came cries of pain and terror. The fire had been
scattered, and extinguished by the explosion which Tom, though still
bound to the tree had caused to happen in the midst of the Deep Forest
Throng. Then, as the smoke rolled away, Andy Foger cried:

"Come on, fellows! Something's happened. I guess a volcano blew up!"




