CHAPTER XXI

OFF TO THE BIG RACE


From their task of handing out money to eager depositors, the wearied
tellers looked up as Tom and Mr. Damon entered with the big valise
crammed full of money. It was opened, and the bundles of bills turned
out on a table.

"Perhaps you'd better make an announcement to the crowd, Mr.
Pendergast," suggested Mr. Swift. "Tell them we now have cash enough to
meet all demands, and that the bank will be kept open until every one
is paid."

"I will," agreed the aged president. His announcement was received with
cheers, and had exactly the effect the inventor hoped it would.

Many, learning that the bank was safe, and that they could have their
money whenever they wanted it, concluded not to withdraw it, thus
saving the interest. Scores in the waiting crowd turned out of line and
went home. Their example was contagious, and, though many still
remained to get their deposits, the run was broken. Only part of the
sixty thousand dollars Tom and Mr. Damon had brought through after a
race with time, was needed. But had it not been for the moral effect of
the cash arriving as it did, the bank would have failed.

"You have a great car, Tom Swift," complimented Mr. Pendergast, when
the excitement had somewhat cooled down, and the story of the hold-up
had been told.

"I think so myself," agreed the young inventor modestly. "I must get
ready for the races now."

"And as for those farmers, I think I'll send them a reward," went on
the president. "They deserve something for the trouble they had with
the load of hay. I certainly shall send them a reward," which he did,
and a substantial one, too.

Of course the hold-up was at once reported to the police after the run
had quieted down, but Chief Simonson surprised Tom by saying that he
had expected it.

"The gang that held you up," said the police officer, "was one that
escaped from a jail, about twenty miles away. I got a tip after you
left, that they were going to rob you, for, in some way, they learned
about the money you and Mr. Damon were to bring from the bank. The
unfortunate part of it was that the tip I got was to the effect that
the hold-up would take place just outside of Clayton. I telephoned to
the police there, just after you left, and they said they'd send out a
posse. But the gang changed their plans; and held you up near here,
where I wasn't expecting it. But I'll get 'em yet."

Chief Simonson did not arrest the gang, but some other police officers
did, and they were taken back to jail. They were not prosecuted for the
attempted robbery of Tom, as it was considered difficult to fix the
guilt on them, but they received such a long additional sentence for
breaking jail, that it will be many years before they are released.

When Tom reached home that night he found some mail from the officials
of the Touring Club of America. It was to the effect that arrangements
for the big contest had been completed, and that contesting cars must
be on the ground by September first.

"That gives me two weeks yet," thought our hero.

He read further of the regulations covering the race. Each car must
proceed from the home town or city of the owner, and go to the track
under its own power. This was a new regulation, it was stated, and was
adopted to better develop the industry of building electric autos. Two
passengers, or one in addition to the driver, must be carried, it was
stated, and this one would also be expected to be in the car during the
entire race.

Regarding the race proper it was stated that at first it had been
decided to make it a twenty-four hour endurance contest, but that for
certain reasons this was changed, as it was found that few storage
batteries could go this length of time without a number of rechargings.
Therefore the race was to be one for distance--five hundred miles, on
the new Long Island track, and the car first covering that distance
would win. Cars were allowed to change their batteries as often as they
needed to, but all time lost would count against them. There were other
rules and regulations of minor importance.

"Well," remarked Tom, as he read through the circulars, "I must get my
car in shape. It will be quite a trip to Long Island, and I think my
best plan will be to go direct to the cottage we had when we were
building the submarine, and from there proceed to the track. That will
comply with the rules, I think. But who will I get to go with me? I
suppose Mr. Damon or Mr. Sharp will be willing. I'll ask them."

He broached the matter to his two friends that night, and they both
agreed to go to Long Island in the car, though only Mr. Sharp would
accompany Tom in the race. The next two weeks were busy ones for Tom.
He worked night and day over his car, getting it in shape for the big
event.

The young inventor made some changes in his battery, and also adopted a
new gear, which would give greater speed. He also completed the
exterior of the auto, giving it several coats of purple paint and
varnish, so that when it was finished, though it was different in shape
from most autos, it was as fine an appearing car as one could wish. He
arranged to carry two extra wheels, with tires inflated, and, under the
rear seats, or tonneau, as he called it, Tom fitted up a complete
tire-repairing outfit. Mr. Sharp agreed to ride there, and in case
there was need to use more than two spare wheels during the race, the
rubber shoes or inner tubes could be mended while the car was swinging
around the track.

Mr. Damon would ride in front with Tom on the cross-country trip, and
occasionally relieve him at steering, or would help to manage the
electrical connections. Spare fuses, extra parts, wires and different
things he thought he might need, the young inventor stored in his car.
He also found means to install a small additional storage battery, to
give added power in case of emergency.

Tom learned from the racing officials that if he made a trip from
Shopton to the cottage on the coast, near the city of Atlantis, and
later traveled from there to the track, it would fulfill the conditions
of the contest.

Finally all was in readiness, and one morning, having spent the better
part of the night going over his machine, to see that he had forgotten
nothing, Tom invited Mr. Damon and Mr. Sharp to enter, and prepare for
the trip to Long Island.

"Well, Tom, I certainly hope you win that race," remarked Mrs. Baggert,
as she stood in the doorway, waving a farewell.

"If I do I'll buy you a pair of diamond earrings to match the diamond
ring I gave you from the money I got from the wreck," promised the lad
with a laugh.

"An' ef yo' sees dat Andy Foger," added Eradicate Sampson, while he
rubbed the long ears of Boomerang, his mule, "ef yo' sees him, jest run
ober him once or twice fer mah sake, Mistah Swift."

"I'll do it for my own, too," agreed Tom.

The youth shook hands with his father, who wished him good luck, and
then, after a final look at his car, he climbed to his seat, and turned
on the power. There was a low hum from the motor and the electric
started off. Would it return a winner or loser of the big race?




