CHAPTER XXV

WINNING THE PRIZE


After making two circuits of the track at moderate speed, Tom turned on
more power, deciding to see how the machine would behave on the turns,
going at a fast speed. As it happened he forged ahead just as the big
red car was coming up behind him.  The driver of it took this for a
challenge and threw his controller handle forward.

"Come on!" he cried to our hero, when even with him.

Tom did not want to decline the invitation, and the impromptu race was
under way. Soon the green car came rushing up, and for two miles the
three kept almost in line. It was evident that neither the green nor
the red car drivers wanted to "open out," until they saw Tom do so.

He was willing to oblige them, and suddenly increased his speed. They
did the same, and went ahead of him. Then Tom turned on a little more
juice and got the lead, but the two men were right after him, and they
see-sawed like this for two more miles.  Then, with a cry the man in
the red car, with a sudden burst of speed, left Tom and the green car
behind. The green car was soon up to its rival, but Tom decided he
would not spurt.

The lad and his friends spent the early part of the night in making a
final inspection of the machinery, finding it in good order. Then, with
his head filled with visions of the race on the morrow Tom went to bed.
He had made inquiries, by telephone, of the friends of Miss Nestor, and
learned that she had not arrived.  Tom felt a distinct sense of
disappointment.

The day of the race could not have been better. It was ideal weather,
and conditions at the track were just right. Tom was up early, and went
over every inch of his car with a nervous dread that he might find
something the matter.

The final details of the race were completed, and the entrants given
their numbers and places. Tom drew a good position, not the best, but
he had no reason to complain. Half an hour before the start he again
telephoned to see if Miss Nestor had arrived, but she had not, and it
was with rather gloomy thoughts that the lad entered his car, in which
Mr. Sharp had already taken his place.  Mr. Damon went to the
grandstand to watch the race.

"I wanted Mary to see me win," thought our hero, for he had grimly set
his mind on coming in ahead.

There was a great crowd in the grandstand and scattered about the big
track, which took in a large extent of territory. In spite of its
size--five  miles  around--it  seemed  solidly packed for the entire
length with autos, containing gay parties who had come to see the
electric contest. There was a band playing gay airs, as Tom guided his
machine through the entrance gate, and onto the track.

The judges made their final inspection. There were twenty cars entered,
but it was obvious that some of them would not last long, as their
battery capacity was not large enough. Their owners might have relied
on recharging, but how they could do this under the usual slow system,
and hope to win, Tom could not see. He hoped to run the entire distance
on the single charge, but, if by some accident part of his current
should leak away, his battery could be charged in a short time, by
means of his new system, to run for a considerable distance, or he
could install a new one already charged, for he had two sets on hand.
Tom glanced over the cars of his competitors. They were to be sent away
in batches, the affair being a handicap one, with time allowance for
the smaller powered cars. Tom noted that his car and the red and the
green ones were in the same bunch. Tom's car was purple.

"Are you all ready?" asked the starter of the first group of races.

"Ready," was the low-voiced response.

"Crack!" went the pistol, and there followed the hum of the motors as
the current set the mechanism to work. Forward went the cars, amid the
crash of the band and the cheers of the crowd. The big race was under
way.

"Do you feel nervous, Tom?" asked Mr. Sharp.

"Not a bit," replied the lad.

Around and around the track flew the speedy electrics. It was evident
that the holding of a meet solely for cars of this character had
brought out many new ideas that would be to the benefit of the
industry. Some cars were "freaks" and others, like Tom's, showed a
distinct advance over previous styles of construction.

A five-hundred mile race around a track is rather a monotonous affair,
except for what happens, and things very soon began to happen at this
race.

As Tom had expected, several of the machines were forced to withdraw.
Tire troubles beset some, and others found that they were hopelessly
out of it because of low power, or lack of battery capacity.

Tom determined not to let the red or the green car gain any advantage
over him, and so he watched those two vehicles narrowly. On the other
hand, the red and the green electrics were evidently afraid of one
another and of Tom.

They all three kept pretty much together for the first thirty miles. By
this time the race had settled down into a steady grind. There was some
excitement when the steering gear of one car broke, and it crashed into
the fence, injuring the driver, but the race went on.

The young inventor was holding his own with his two chief rivals, and
was feeling rather proud of his car, when there came from it a report
like a pistol shot.

"Blow out!" yelled Tom desperately, steering to one of the several
repair stations on the inner side of the track. "Be ready with the
extra wheel, Mr. Sharp!"

"Right you are!" cried the balloonist. The car was scarcely stopped
when he had leaped out, and had the lifting jack under the left rear
wheel, where the tire had gone to the bad. He and Tom labored like
Trojans to take off the wheel, and put on the other. They lost five
minutes, and when they got under way again the red and the green cars
were three quarters of a lap ahead.

"You've got to catch them!" declared Sharp firmly.

But the red and the green car drivers saw their advantage, and were
determined to hold it. Tom could not catch them without going his
limit, and he did not want to do this just yet.  However, he had his
opportunity when about two hundred miles had been covered. Both the red
and the green cars had tire troubles, but the red one was delayed
scarcely two minutes as there was a corps of mechanics on hand to take
off the defective wheel and put on another. Still Tom regained his lost
ground, and once more the race between those three cars was even.

In the rear of Tom's car Mr. Sharp was mending the blown-out tire,
though there was still one spare wheel on reserve. Tom, in front,
peered eagerly at the track. Nearly side by side raced the red and the
green cars, the latter somewhat to the rear.

It was at the three hundred and fiftieth mile that Tom had another
blow-out. This time it took a little longer to change the wheel, and
the red and green cars gained a full lap on him. The track was now so
dusty that it was difficult to see the contesting cars. Many had
dropped out, and more were on the verge of giving up.

With the odds against him, Tom started in to regain the lost ground.
Narrowly he watched his electric power. Slowly he saw it dropping.
Would he have enough left to finish out the race? He feared not. The
hours were passing. Still there was a hundred miles yet to go twenty
circuits of the track. Some of the spectators were getting weary and
leaving. The band played spasmodically.

Suddenly Tom saw the red car shoot to one side of the track, toward a
charging station; The green car followed.

"That's our cue!" cried the young inventor "We need a little more
'juice' and now is the time to get it."

The lad ran to the shed where his charging wires were, and they were
connected in a trice. He allowed twenty-five minutes for the charging,
as he knew with his improved battery he could get enough current in
that time to finish the contest. Before the red and green car drivers
had finished installing new batteries, for they could not recharge as
quickly as could our hero, Tom was on the track again. But, in a little
while, his two rivals were after him.

It was now a spectacular race. Around and around swept the three big
cars. All the others were practically out of it. The crowd became
lively airs. Mile after mile was reeled off. The day was passing. Tired
and covered with dust from the track, Tom still sat at the steering
wheel.

"Two laps more!" cried Mr. Sharp, as the starter's pistol gave this
warning. "Can you get away from 'em, Tom?"

The red and the green cars were following closely. The young inventor
looked back and nodded. He turned on more power, almost to the
limit--that he was saving for the final spurt. But after him still came
the two big cars. Suddenly the red car shot ahead, just as the last lap
was beginning. The green tried to follow, but there was a flash of
fire, a loud report, and Tom knew a fuse had blown out. There was no
time for his rival to put in a new one. The race was now between Tom
and the red car. Could the lad catch and pass it?

They were now only a mile from the finish. The red car was three
lengths ahead. With a quick motion Tom turned on the last bit of power.
There seemed to come a roar from his motor and his car shot ahead. It
was on even terms with the red car when what Tom had been fearing for
the last five minutes happened: his fuse blew out.

"Too bad! It's all up with us!" cried Mr. Sharp.

"No!" cried Tom in a ringing voice. "I've got an emergency fuse ready!"
He snapped a switch in place, putting into commission another fuse. The
motor that had lost speed began to pick it up again. Tom had pulled
back the controller handle, but he now shoved it forward again, notch
by notch, until it was at the limit. He had fallen back from the red
car, and the occupants of that, with a yell of triumph, prepared to
cross the line a winner.

But, like a race horse that nerves himself for the last desperate
spurt, Tom's machine fairly leaped ahead. With his hands gripping the
rim of the steering wheel, until it seemed that the bones of his
fingers would protrude, Tom sent his car straight for the finishing
tape. There was a yell from the spectators. Men were standing up,
waving their hats and shouting.  Women were fairly screaming. Mr. Damon
was blessing everything within sight. Mr. Sharp, in his excitement, was
pushing on the back of the front seats as if to shove the car ahead.

Then, as the pistol announced the close of the race, Tom's car, with
what seemed a mighty leap, like a hunter clearing a ditch, forged
ahead, and crossed the line a length in advance of the red car. Tom
Swift had Won.

Amid the cheers of the crowd the lad slowed up, and, at the direction
of the judges, wheeled back to the stand, to receive the prize. A
certified check for three thousand dollars was handed him, and he
received the congratulations of the racing officials. The driver of the
red car also generously praised him.

"You won fair and square," he said, shaking hands with Tom.

The young inventor and his friends drove their car to their shed. As
Tom was descending, weary and begrimed with dust he heard a voice
asking:

"Mayn't I congratulate you also?"

He wheeled around, to confront Mary Nestor, immaculate in a summer gown.

"Why--why," he stammered. "I--I thought you didn't come."

"Oh, yes I did," she answered, laughing. "I wouldn't have missed it for
anything. I arrived late, but I saw the whole race.  Wasn't it
glorious. I'm so glad you won!"  Tom was too, now, but he shrank back
when Miss Nestor held out both daintily gloved hands to him. His hands
were covered with oil and dirt.

"As if I cared for my gloves!" she cried, and she took possession of
his hands, a proceeding to which Tom was nothing loath. "Are you going
to race any more?" she asked, as he walked along by her side, away from
the gathering crowd.

"I don't know," he replied. "My car is speedier than I thought it was.
Perhaps I may enter it in other contests."

But what Tom Swift did later on will be told in another volume, to be
called, "Tom Swift and His Wireless Message; or, The Castaways of
Earthquake Island"--a strange tale of ship-wreck and mystery.

The run back home was made without incident, save for a broken chain,
easily repaired, the day following the race, and Tom later received a
number of invitations to give exhibitions of speed.  Several automobile
manufacturers wanted to secure the rights to his machine, but he said
he desired to consider the matter before acting. He did not forget his
promise to Mrs. Baggert, regarding the diamond earrings, and bought her
the finest pair he could find.

"Come on, Mr. Sharp," proposed Tom, a week or so after the big race,
"let's go for a spin in the airship. I want to see how it feels to be
among the clouds once more," and they were soon soaring aloft.

The new bank, started by Mr. Foger, did not flourish long. It closed
its doors in less than six months, but the old institution was stronger
than ever. Mr. Berg disappeared, and Tom never learned whether the
agent really was the man he had chased, and whose watch charm he tore
loose, though he always had his suspicions. Nor did it ever develop who
crossed the electric wires, so that Tom was so nearly fatally shocked.
Andy Foger disliked our hero more than ever, and on several occasions
caused him not a little trouble, but Tom was able to look after himself.




THE END





This Isn't All!

Would you like to know what became of the good friends you have made in
this book?

Would you like to read other stories continuing their adventures and
experiences, or other books quite as entertaining by the same author?

On the reverse side of the wrapper which comes with this book, you will
find a wonderful list of stories which you can buy at the same store
where you got this book.

Don't throw away the Wrapper

Use it as a handy catalog of the books you want some day to have.  But
in case you do mislay it, write to the Publishers for a complete
catalog.



THE TOM SWIFT SERIES

By VICTOR APPLETON

Uniform Style of Binding. Individual Colored Wrappers, Every Volume
Complete in Itself.

Every boy possesses some form of inventive genius. Tom Swift is a
bright, ingenious boy and his inventions and adventures make the most
interesting kind of reading.

  TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR CYCLE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTORBOAT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIRSHIP
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS SUBMARINE BOAT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RUNABOUT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WIRELESS MESSAGE
  TOM SWIFT AMONG THE DIAMOND MAKERS
  TOM SWIFT IN THE CAVES OF ICE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS SKY RACER
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RIFLE
  TOM SWIFT IN THE CITY OF GOLD
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR GLIDER
  TOM SWIFT IN CAPTIVITY
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WIZARD CAMERA
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GREAT SEARCHLIGHT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GIANT CANNON
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS PHOTO TELEPHONE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AERIAL WARSHIP
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS BIG TUNNEL
  TOM SWIFT IN THE LAND OF WONDER
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WAR TANK
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR SCOUT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS UNDERSEA SEARCH
  TOM SWIFT AMONG THE FIRE FIGHTERS
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS FLYING BOAT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GREAT OIL GUSHER
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS CHEST OF SECRETS
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIRLINE EXPRESS



THE DON STURDY SERIES

By VICTOR APPLETON

  Individual Colored Wrappers and Text Illustrations by
  WALTER S. ROGERS
  Every Volume Complete in Itself.

In the company with his uncles, one a mighty hunter and the other a
noted scientist, Don Sturdy travels far and wide, gaining much useful
knowledge and meeting many thrilling adventures.

DON STURDY ON THE DESERT OF MYSTERY;
  An engrossing tale of the Sahara Desert, of encounters with
  wild animals and crafty Arabs.

DON STURDY WITH THE BIG SNAKE HUNTERS;
  Don's uncle, the hunter, took an order for some of the biggest
  snakes to be found in South America--to be delivered alive!

DON STURDY IN THE TOMBS OF GOLD;
  A fascinating tale of exploration and adventure in the Valley
  of Kings in Egypt.

DON STURDY ACROSS THE NORTH POLE;
  A great polar blizzard nearly wrecks the airship of the
  explorers.

DON STURDY IN THE LAND OF VOLCANOES;
  An absorbing tale of adventure among the volcanos of Alaska.

DON STURDY IN THE PORT OF LOST SHIPS;
  This story is just full of exciting and fearful experiences on
  the sea.

DON STURDY AMONG THE GORILLAS;
  A thrilling story of adventure in darkest Africa. Don is
  carried over a mighty waterfall into the heart of gorilla land.



THE TOM SWIFT SERIES

TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR-CYCLE
  Or Fun and Adventure on the Road

TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR-BOAT
  Or the Rivals of Lake Carlopa

TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIRSHIP
  Or the Stirring Cruise of the Red Cloud

TOM SWIFT AND HIS SUBMARINE BOAT
  Or Under the Ocean for Sunken Treasure

TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RUNABOUT
  Or the Speediest Car on the Road











