CHAPTER I


A GREAT joy has come to me; one of those unexpected gifts which life
loves to bestow after we have learnt to loose our grip of her.  I am back
in my own place very near my road—the white gate lies within my distant
vision; near the lean grey Downs which keep watch and ward between the
country and the sea; very near, nay, in the lap of Mother Earth, for as I
write I am lying on a green carpet, powdered yellow and white with the
sun’s own flowers; overhead a great sycamore where the bees toil and
sing; and sighing shimmering poplars golden grey against the blue.  The
day of Persephone has dawned for me, and I, set free like Demeter’s
child, gladden my eyes with this foretaste of coming radiance, and rest
my tired sense with the scent and sound of home.  Away down the meadow I
hear the early scythe song, and the warm air is fragrant with the fallen
grass.  It has its own message for me as I lie here, I who have obtained
yet one more mercy, and the burden of it is life, not death.

I remember when, taking a grace from my road, I helped to mow Farmer
Marler’s ten-acre field, rich in ripe upstanding grass.  The mechanism of
the ancient reaper had given way under the strain of the home meadows,
and if this crop was to be saved it must be by hand.  I have kept the
record of those days of joyous labour under a June sky.  Men were hard to
get in our village; old Dodden, who was over seventy, volunteered his
services—he had done yeoman work with the scythe in his youth—and two of
the farm hands with their master completed our strength.

We took our places under a five o’clock morning sky, and the larks cried
down to us as we stood knee-deep in the fragrant dew-steeped grass, each
man with his gleaming scythe poised ready for its sweeping swing.  Old
Dodden led by right of age and ripe experience; bent like a sickle, brown
and dry as a nut, his face a tracery of innumerable wrinkles, he has
never ailed a day, and the cunning of his craft was still with him.  At
first we worked stiffly, unreadily, but soon the monotonous motion
possessed us with its insistent rhythm, and the grass bowed to each
sibilant swish and fell in sweet-smelling swathes at our feet.  Now and
then a startled rabbit scurried through the miniature forest to vanish
with white flick of tail in the tangled hedge; here and there a mother
lark was discovered sitting motionless, immovable upon her little brood;
but save for these infrequent incidents we paced steadily on with no
speech save the cry of the hone on the steel and the swish of the falling
swathes.  The sun rose high in the heaven and burnt on bent neck and bare
and aching arms, the blood beat and drummed in my veins with the unwonted
posture and exercise; I worked as a man who sees and hears in a mist.
Once, as I paused to whet my scythe, my eye caught the line of the
untroubled hills strong and still in the broad sunshine; then to work
again in the labouring, fertile valley.

Rest time came, and wiping the sweat from brow and blade we sought the
welcome shadow of the hedge and the cool sweet oatmeal water with which
the wise reaper quenches his thirst.  Farmer Marler hastened off to see
with master-eye that all went well elsewhere; the farm men slept
tranquilly, stretched at full length, clasped hands for pillow; and old
Dodden, sitting with crooked fingers interlaced to check their trembling
betrayal of old age, told how in his youth he had “swep” a four-acre
field single-handed in three days—an almost impossible feat—and of the
first reaping machine in these parts, and how it brought, to his
thinking, the ruin of agricultural morals with it.  “’Tis again nature,”
he said, “the Lard gave us the land an’ the seed, but ’Ee said that a man
should sweat.  Where’s the sweat drivin’ round wi’ two horses cuttin’ the
straw down an’ gatherin’ it again, wi’ scarce a hand’s turn i’ the day’s
work?”

Old Dodden’s high-pitched quavering voice rose and fell, mournful as he
surveyed the present, vehement as he recorded the heroic past.  He spoke
of the rural exodus and shook his head mournfully.  “We old ’uns were
content wi’ earth and the open sky like our feythers before us, but wi’
the children ’tis first machines to save doin’ a hand’s turn o’ honest
work, an’ then land an’ sky ain’t big enough seemin’ly, nor grand enough;
it must be town an’ a paved street, an’ they sweat their lives out atwixt
four walls an’ call it seein’ life—’tis death an’ worse comes to the most
of ’em.  Ay, ’tis better to stay by the land, as the Lard said, till time
comes to lie under it.”  I looked away across the field where the hot air
throbbed and quivered, and the fallen grass, robbed already of its
freshness, lay prone at the feet of its upstanding fellows.  It is quite
useless to argue with old Dodden; he only shakes his head and says
firmly, “An old man, seventy-five come Martinmass knows more o’ life than
a young chap, stands ter reason”; besides, his epitome of the town life
he knows nothing of was a just one as far as it went; and his own son is
the sweeper of a Holborn crossing, and many other things that he should
not be; but that is the parson’s secret and mine.

We took rank again and swept steadily on through the hot still hours into
the evening shadows, until the sinking sun set a _Gloria_ to the psalm of
another working day.  Only a third of the field lay mown, for we were not
skilled labourers to cut our acre a day; I saw it again that night under
the moonlight and the starlight, wrapped in a shroud of summer’s mist.

The women joined us on the third day to begin haymaking, and the air was
fragrant of tossed and sun-dried grass.  One of them walked apart from
the rest, without interest or freedom of movement; her face, sealed and
impassive, was aged beyond the vigour of her years.  I knew the woman by
sight, and her history by hearsay.  We have a code of morals here—not
indeed peculiar to this place or people—that a wedding is ‘respectable’
if it precedes child-birth by a bare month, tolerable, and to be
recognised, should it succeed the same by less than a year (provided the
pair are not living in the same village); but the child that has never
been ‘fathered’ and the wife without a ring are ‘anathema,’ and such in
one was Elizabeth Banks.  She went away a maid and came back a year ago
with a child and without a name.  Her mother was dead, her father and the
village would have none of her: the homing instinct is very strong, or
she would scarcely have returned, knowing the traditions of the place.
Old Dodden, seeing her, grumbled to me in the rest-time.—“Can’t think
what the farmer wants wi’ Lizzie Banks in ’is field.”  “She must live,” I
said, “and by all showing her life is a hard one.”  “She ’ad the makin’
of ’er bed,” he went on, obstinately.  “What for do she bring her
disgrace home, wi’ a fatherless brat for all folks to see?  We don’t want
them sort in our village.  The Lord’s hand is heavy, an’ a brat’s a curse
that cannot be hid.”

When tea-time came I crossed the field to look for a missing hone, and
saw Elizabeth Banks far from the other women, busied with a bundle under
the hedge.  I passed close on my search, and lo! the bundle was a little
boy.  He lay smiling and stretching, fighting the air with his small pink
fists, while the wind played with his curls.  “A curse that cannot be
hid,” old Dodden had said.  The mother knelt a moment, devouring him with
her eyes, then snatched him to her with aching greed and covered him with
kisses.  I saw the poor, plain face illumined, transfigured, alive with a
mother’s love, and remembered how the word came once to a Hebrew
prophet:—

    Say unto your brethren Ammi, and to your sisters Ruhamah.

The evening sky was clouding fast, the sound of rain was in the air;
Farmer Marler shook his head as he looked at the grass lying in ordered
rows.  I was the last to leave, and as I lingered at the gate drinking in
the scent of the field and the cool of the coming rain, the first drops
fell on my upturned face and kissed the poor dry swathes at my feet, and
I was glad.

David, child of the fields and the sheepfolds, his kingship laid aside,
sees through the parted curtain of the years the advent of his greater
Son, and cries in his psalm of the hilltops, his last prophetic prayer:—

    He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass.

Even so He came, and shall still come.  Three days ago the field, in its
pageant of fresh beauty, with shimmering blades and tossing banners,
greeted sun and shower alike with joy for the furtherance of its life and
purpose; now, laid low, it hears the young grass whisper the splendour of
its coming green; and the poor swathes are glad at the telling, but full
of grief for their own apparent failure.  Then in great pity comes the
rain, the rain of summer, gentle, refreshing, penetrating, and the
swathes are comforted, for they know that standing to greet or prostrate
to suffer, the consolations of the former and the latter rain are still
their own, with tender touch and cool caress.  Then, once more parched by
the sun, they are borne away to the new service their apparent failure
has fitted them for; and perhaps as they wait in the dark for the unknown
that is still to come they hear sometimes the call of the distant rain,
and at the sound the dry sap stirs afresh—they are not forgotten and can
wait.

“_Say unto your sisters Ruhamah_,” cries the prophet.

“_He shall come down like rain on the mown grass_,” sang the poet of the
sheepfolds.

“_My ways are not your ways_, _saith the Lord_.”

                                * * * * *

I remember how I went home along the damp sweet-scented lanes through the
grey mist of the rain, thinking of the mown field and Elizabeth Banks and
many, many more; and that night, when the sky had cleared and the
nightingale sang, I looked out at the moon riding at anchor, a silver
boat in a still blue sea ablaze with the headlights of the stars, and the
saying of the herdsman of Tekoa came to me—as it has come oftentimes
since:—

    Seek Him that maketh the seven stars and Orion, and turneth the
    shadow of death into the morning, and maketh the day dark with night;
    that calleth for the waters of the sea and poureth them out upon the
    face of earth; the Lord is His name.



