CHAPTER III


YESTERDAY was a day of encounters.

First, early in the morning, a young girl came down the road on a
bicycle.  Her dressguard was loose, and she stopped to ask for a piece of
string.  When I had tied it for her she looked at me, at my worn dusty
clothes and burnt face; and then she took a Niphetos rose from her belt
and laid it shyly in my dirty disfigured palm.  I bared my head, and
stood hat in hand looking after her as she rode away up the hill.  Then I
took my treasure and put it in a nest of cool dewy grass under the hedge.
_Ecce ancilla Domini_.

My next visitor was a fellow-worker on his way to a job at the
cross-roads.  He stood gazing meditatively at my heap of stones.

“Ow long ’ave yer bin at this job that y’ere in such a hurry?”

I stayed my hammer to answer—“Four months.”

“Seen better days?”

“Never,” I said emphatically, and punctuated the remark with a stone
split neatly in four.

The man surveyed me in silence for a moment; then he said slowly, “Mean
ter say yer like crackin’ these blamed stones to fill ’oles some other
fool’s made?”

I nodded.

“Well, that beats everything.  Now, I ’_ave_ seen better days; worked in
a big brewery over near Maidstone—a town that, and something doing; and
now, ’ere I am, ’ammering me ’eart out on these blasted stones for a bit
o’ bread and a pipe o’ baccy once a week—it ain’t good enough.”  He
pulled a blackened clay from his pocket and began slowly filling it with
rank tobacco; then he lit it carefully behind his battered hat, put the
spent match back in his pocket, rose to his feet, hitched his braces,
and, with a silent nod to me, went on to his job.

Why do we give these tired children, whose minds move slowly, whose eyes
are holden that they cannot read the Book, whose hearts are full of sore
resentment against they know not what, such work as this to do—hammering
their hearts out for a bit of bread?  All the pathos of unreasoning
labour rings in these few words.  We fit the collar on unwilling necks;
and when their service is over we bid them go out free; but we break the
good Mosaic law and send them away empty.  What wonder there is so little
willing service, so few ears ready to be thrust through against the
master’s door.

The swift stride of civilisation is leaving behind individual effort, and
turning man into the Dæmon of a machine.  To and fro in front of the long
loom, lifting a lever at either end, paces he who once with painstaking
intelligence drove the shuttle.  _Then_ he tasted the joy of completed
work, that which his eye had looked upon, and his hands had handled; now
his work is as little finished as the web of Penelope.  Once the reaper
grasped the golden corn stems, and with dexterous sweep of sickle set
free the treasure of the earth.  Once the creatures of the field were
known to him, and his eye caught the flare of scarlet and blue as the
frail poppies and sturdy corn-cockles laid down their beauty at his feet;
now he sits serene on Juggernaut’s car, its guiding Dæmon, and the field
is silent to him.

As with the web and the grain so with the wood and stone in the
treasure-house of our needs.  The ground was accursed _for our sake_ that
in the sweat of our brow we might eat bread.  Now the many live in the
brain-sweat of the few; and it must be so, for as little as great King
Cnut could stay the sea until it had reached the appointed place, so
little can we raise a barrier to the wave of progress, and say, “Thus far
and no further shalt thou come.”

What then?  This at least; if we live in an age of mechanism let us see
to it that we are a race of intelligent mechanics; and if man is to be
the Dæmon of a machine let him know the setting of the knives, the rise
of the piston, the part that each wheel and rod plays in the economy of
the whole, the part that he himself plays, co-operating with it.  Then,
when he has lived and served intelligently, let us give him of our flocks
and of our floor that he may learn to rest in the lengthening shadows
until he is called to his work above.

So I sat, hammering out my thoughts, and with them the conviction that
stonebreaking should be allotted to minor poets or vagrant children of
nature like myself, never to such tired folk as my poor mate at the
cross-roads and his fellows.

At noon, when I stopped for my meal, the sun was baking the hard white
road in a pitiless glare.  Several waggons and carts passed, the horses
sweating and straining, with drooping, fly-tormented ears.  The men for
the most part nodded slumberously on the shaft, seeking the little
shelter the cart afforded; but one shuffled in the white dust, with an
occasional chirrup and friendly pressure on the tired horse’s neck.

Then an old woman and a small child appeared in sight, both with enormous
sun-bonnets and carrying baskets.  As they came up with me the woman
stopped and swept her face with her hand, while the child, depositing the
basket in the dust with great care, wiped her little sticky fingers on
her pinafore.  Then the shady hedge beckoned them and they came and sat
down near me.  The woman looked about seventy, tall, angular, dauntless,
good for another ten years of hard work.  The little maid—her only
grandchild, she told me—was just four, her father away soldiering, and
the mother died in childbed, so for four years the child had known no
other guardian or playmate than the old woman.  She was not the least
shy, but had the strange self-possession which comes from associating
with one who has travelled far on life’s journey.

“I couldn’t leave her alone in the house,” said her grandmother, “and she
wouldn’t leave the kitten for fear it should be lonesome”—with a
humorous, tender glance at the child—“but it’s a long tramp in the heat
for the little one, and we’ve another mile to go.”

“Will you let her bide here till you come back?” I said.  “She’ll be all
right by me.”

The old lady hesitated.

“Will ’ee stay by him, dearie?” she said.

The small child nodded, drew from her miniature pocket a piece of
sweetstuff, extracted from the basket a small black cat, and settled in
for the afternoon.  Her grandmother rose, took her basket, and, with a
nod and “Thank ’ee kindly, mister,” went off down the road.

I went back to my work a little depressed—why had I not white hair?—for a
few minutes had shown me that I was not old enough for the child despite
my forty years.  She was quite happy with the little black cat, which lay
in the small lap blinking its yellow eyes at the sun; and presently an
old man came by, lame and bent, with gnarled twisted hands, leaning
heavily on his stick.

He greeted me in a high, piping voice, limped across to the child, and
sat down.  “Your little maid, mister?” he said.

I explained.

“Ah,” he said, “I’ve left a little darlin’ like this at ’ome.  It’s ’ard
on us old folks when we’re one too many; but the little mouths must be
filled, and my son, ’e said ’e didn’t see they could keep me on the
arf-crown, with another child on the way; so I’m tramping to N—, to the
House; but it’s a ’ard pinch, leavin’ the little ones.”

I looked at him—a typical countryman, with white hair, mild blue eyes,
and a rosy, childish, unwrinkled face.

“I’m eighty-four,” he went on, “and terrible bad with the rheumatics and
my chest.  Maybe it’ll not be long before the Lord remembers me.”

The child crept close and put a sticky little hand confidingly into the
tired old palm.  The two looked strangely alike, for the world seems much
the same to those who leave it behind as to those who have but taken the
first step on its circular pathway.

“’Ook at my kitty,” she said, pointing to the small creature in her lap.
Then, as the old man touched it with trembling fingers she went on—“’Oo
isn’t my grandad; he’s away in the sky, but I’ll kiss ’oo.”

I worked on, hearing at intervals the old piping voice and the
child-treble, much of a note; and thinking of the blessings vouchsafed to
the simple old age which crowns a harmless working-life spent in the
fields.  The two under the hedge had everything in common and were
boundlessly content together, the sting of the knowledge of good and evil
past for the one, and for the other still to come; while I stood on the
battlefield of the world, the flesh, and the devil, though, thank God,
with my face to the foe.

The old man sat resting: I had promised him a lift with my friend the
driver of the flour-cart, and he was almost due when the child’s
grandmother came down the road.

When she saw my other visitor she stood amazed.

“What, Richard Hunton, that worked with my old man years ago up at
Ditton, whatever are you doin’ all these miles from your own place?”

“Is it Eliza Jakes?”

He looked at her dazed, doubtful.

“An’ who else should it be?  Where’s your memory gone, Richard Hunton,
and you not such a great age either?  Where are you stayin’?”

Shame overcame him; his lips trembled, his mild blue eyes filled with
tears.  I told the tale as I had heard it, and Mrs Jakes’s indignation
was good to see.

“Not keep you on ’alf a crown!  Send you to the House!  May the Lord
forgive them!  You wouldn’t eat no more than a fair-sized cat, and not
long for this world either, that’s plain to see.  No, Richard Hunton, you
don’t go to the House while I’m above ground; it’d make my good man turn
to think of it.  You’ll come ’ome with me and the little ’un there.  I’ve
my washin’, and a bit put by for a rainy day, and a bed to spare, and the
Lord and the parson will see I don’t come to want.”

She stopped breathless, her defensive motherhood in arms.

The old man said quaveringly, in the pathetic, grudging phrase of the
poor, which veils their gratitude while it testifies their independence,
“Maybe I might as well.”  He rose with difficulty, picked up his bundle
and stick, the small child replaced the kitten in its basket, and thrust
her hand in her new friend’s.

“Then ’oo _is_ grandad tum back,” she said.

Mrs Jakes had been fumbling in her pocket, and extracted a penny, which
she pressed on me.

“It’s little enough, mister,” she said.

Then, as I tried to return it: “Nay, I’ve enough, and yours is poor paid
work.”

I hope I shall always be able to keep that penny; and as I watched the
three going down the dusty white road, with the child in the middle, I
thanked God for the Brotherhood of the Poor.



