CHAPTER II


ON Sundays my feet take ever the same way.  First my temple service, and
then five miles tramp over the tender, dewy fields, with their ineffable
earthy smell, until I reach the little church at the foot of the
grey-green down.  Here, every Sunday, a young priest from a neighbouring
village says Mass for the tiny hamlet, where all are very old or very
young—for the heyday of life has no part under the long shadow of the
hills, but is away at sea or in service.  There is a beautiful seemliness
in the extreme youth of the priest who serves these aged children of God.
He bends to communicate them with the reverent tenderness of a son, and
reads with the careful intonation of far-seeing love.  To the old people
he is the son of their old age, God-sent to guide their tottering
footsteps along the highway of foolish wayfarers; and he, with his youth
and strength, wishes no better task.  Service ended, we greet each other
friendly—for men should not be strange in the acre of God; and I pass
through the little hamlet and out and up on the grey down beyond.  Here,
at the last gate, I pause for breakfast; and then up and on with
quickening pulse, and evergreen memory of the weary war-worn Greeks who
broke rank to greet the great blue Mother-way that led to home.  I stand
on the summit hatless, the wind in my hair, the smack of salt on my
cheek, all round me rolling stretches of cloud-shadowed down, no sound
but the shrill mourn of the peewit and the gathering of the sea.

The hours pass, the shadows lengthen, the sheep-bells clang; and I lie in
my niche under the stunted hawthorn watching the to and fro of the sea,
and Æolus shepherding his white sheep across the blue.  I love the sea
with its impenetrable fathoms, its wash and undertow, and rasp of shingle
sucked anew.  I love it for its secret dead in the Caverns of Peace, of
which account must be given when the books are opened and earth and
heaven have fled away.  Yet in my love there is a paradox, for as I watch
the restless, ineffective waves I think of the measureless, reflective
depths of the still and silent Sea of Glass, of the dead, small and
great, rich or poor, with the works which follow them, and of the Voice
as the voice of many waters, when the multitude of one mind rends heaven
with alleluia: and I lie so still that I almost feel the kiss of White
Peace on my mouth.  Later still, when the flare of the sinking sun has
died away and the stars rise out of a veil of purple cloud, I take my way
home, down the slopes, through the hamlet, and across miles of sleeping
fields; over which night has thrown her shifting web of mist—home to the
little attic, the deep, cool well, the kindly wrinkled face with its
listening eyes—peace in my heart and thankfulness for the rhythm of the
road.

Monday brings the joy of work, second only to the Sabbath of rest, and I
settle to my heap by the white gate.  Soon I hear the distant stamp of
horsehoofs, heralding the grind and roll of the wheels which reaches me
later—a heavy flour-waggon with a team of four great gentle horses, gay
with brass trappings and scarlet ear-caps.  On the top of the craftily
piled sacks lies the white-clad waggoner, a pink in his mouth which he
mumbles meditatively, and the reins looped over the inactive whip—why
should he drive a willing team that knows the journey and responds as
strenuously to a cheery chirrup as to the well-directed lash?  We greet
and pass the time of day, and as he mounts the rise he calls back a
warning of coming rain.  I am already white with dust as he with flour,
sacramental dust, the outward and visible sign of the stir and beat of
the heart of labouring life.

Next to pass down the road is an anxious ruffled hen, her speckled breast
astir with maternal troubles.  She walks delicately, lifting her feet
high and glancing furtively from side to side with comb low dressed.  The
sight of man, the heartless egg-collector, from whose haunts she has
fled, wrings from her a startled cluck, and she makes for the white gate,
climbs through, and disappears.  I know her feelings too well to intrude.
Many times already has she hidden herself, amassed four or five precious
treasures, brooding over them with anxious hope; and then, after a brief
desertion to seek the necessary food, she has returned to find her
efforts at concealment vain, her treasures gone.  At last, with the
courage of despair she has resolved to brave the terrors of the unknown
and seek a haunt beyond the tyranny of man.  I will watch over her from
afar, and when her mother-hope is fulfilled I will marshal her and her
brood back to the farm where she belongs; for what end I care not to
think, it is of the mystery which lies at the heart of things; and we are
all God’s beasts, says St Augustine.

Here is my stone-song, a paraphrase of the Treasure Motif.

   [Picture: Music score: F# dotted crotchet, F# quaver, F# quaver, F#
 dotted crotchet, D crotchet, E crotchet.  This bar is then repeated once
                                  more]

What a wonderful work Wagner has done for humanity in translating the
toil of life into the readable script of music!  For those who seek the
tale of other worlds his magic is silent; but earth-travail under his
wand becomes instinct with rhythmic song to an accompaniment of the
elements, and the blare and crash of the bottomless pit itself.  The
Pilgrim’s March is the sad sound of footsore men; the San Graal the
tremulous yearning of servitude for richer, deeper bondage.  The yellow,
thirsty flames lick up the willing sacrifice, the water wails the secret
of the river and the sea; the birds and beasts, the shepherd with his
pipe, the underground life in rocks and caverns, all cry their message to
this nineteenth-century toiling, labouring world—and to me as I mend my
road.

Two tramps come and fling themselves by me as I eat my noonday meal.  The
one, red-eyed, furtive, lies on his side with restless, clutching hands
that tear and twist and torture the living grass, while his lips mutter
incoherently.  The other sits stooped, bare-footed, legs wide apart, his
face grey, almost as grey as his stubbly beard; and it is not long since
Death looked him in the eyes.  He tells me querulously of a two hundred
miles tramp since early spring, of search for work, casual jobs with more
kicks than halfpence, and a brief but blissful sojourn in a hospital bed,
from which he was dismissed with sentence passed upon him.  For himself,
he is determined to die on the road under a hedge, where a man can see
and breathe.  His anxiety is all for his fellow; _he_ has said he will
“do for a man”; he wants to “swing,” to get out of his “dog’s life.”  I
watch him as he lies, this Ishmael and would-be Lamech.  Ignorance,
hunger, terror, the exhaustion of past generations, have done their work.
The man is mad, and would kill his fellowman.

Presently we part, and the two go, dogged and footsore, down the road
which is to lead them into the great silence.



