CHAPTER III


ONCE again I have paid a rare visit to my tree to find many things
changed since my last sojourn there.  The bees are silent, for the
honey-laden flowers of the sycamore are gone and in their place hang
dainty two-fold keys.  The poplar has lost its metallic shimmer, the
chestnut its tall white candles; and the sound of the wind in the
fully-leaved branches is like the sighing of the sea.  The martins’ nests
are finished, and one is occupied by a shrill-voiced brood; but for the
most part the birds’ parental cares are over, and the nestlings in bold
flight no longer flutter on inefficient wings across the lawn with
clamorous, open bill.  The robins show promise of their ruddy vests, the
slim young thrush is diligently practising maturer notes, and soon Maid
June will have fled.

It is such a wonderful world that I cannot find it in my heart to sigh
for fresh beauty amid these glories of the Lord on which I look, seeing
men as trees walking, in my material impotence which awaits the final
anointing.  The marigolds with their orange suns, the lilies’ white
flame, the corncockle’s blue crown of many flowers, the honeysuckle’s
horn of fragrance—I can paraphrase them, name, class, dissect them; and
then, save for the purposes of human intercourse, I stand where I stood
before, my world bounded by my capacity, the secret of colour and
fragrance still kept.  It is difficult to believe that the second lesson
will not be the sequence of the first, and death prove a “feast of
opening eyes” to all these wonders, instead of the heavy-lidded slumber
to which we so often liken it.  “Earth to earth?”  Yes, “dust thou art,
and unto dust thou shalt return,” but what of the rest?  What of the
folded grave clothes, and the Forty Days?  If the next state be, as it
well might, space of four dimensions, and the first veil which will lift
for me be the material one, then the “other” world which is hidden from
our grosser material organism will lie open, and declare still further to
my widening eyes and unstopped ears the glory and purpose of the manifold
garment of God.  Knowledge will give place to understanding in that
second chamber of the House of Wisdom and Love.  Revelation is always
measured by capacity: “Open thy mouth wide,” and it shall be filled with
a satisfaction that in itself is desire.

There is a child here, a happy quiet little creature holding gently to
its two months of life.  Sometimes they lay it beside me, I the more
helpless of the two—perhaps the more ignorant—and equally dependent for
the supply of my smallest need.  I feel indecently large as I survey its
minute perfections and the tiny balled fist lying in my great palm.  The
little creature fixes me with the wise wide stare of a soul in advance of
its medium of expression; and I, gazing back at the mystery in those
eyes, feel the thrill of contact between my worn and sustained self and
the innocence of a little white child.  It is wonderful to watch a
woman’s rapturous familiarity with these newcomers.  A man’s love has far
more awe in it, and the passionate animal instinct of defence is wanting
in him.  “A woman shall be saved through the child-bearing,” said St
Paul; not necessarily her own, but by participation in the great act of
motherhood which is the crown and glory of her sex.  She is the “prisoner
of love,” caught in a net of her own weaving; held fast by little hands
which rule by impotence, pursued by feet the swifter for their faltering.

It seems incredible that this is what a woman will barter for the right
to “live her own life”—surely the most empty of desires.  Man—_vir_,
woman—_femina_, go to make up _the_ man—_homo_.  There can be no
comparison, no rivalry between them; they are the complement of each
other, and a little child shall lead them.  It is easy to understand that
desire to shelter under the dear mantle of motherhood which has led to
one of the abuses of modern Romanism.  I met an old peasant couple at
Bornhofen who had tramped many weary miles to the famous shrine of Our
Lady to plead for their only son.  They had a few pence saved for a
candle, and afterwards when they told me their tale the old woman heaved
a sigh of relief, “Es wird bald gut gehen: Die da, Sie versteht,” and I
saw her later paying a farewell visit to the great understanding Mother
whom she could trust.  Superstitious misapprehension if you will, but
also the recognition of a divine principle.

It was Behmen, I believe, who cried with the breath of inspiration, “Only
when I know God shall I know myself”; and so man remains the last of all
the riddles, to be solved it may be only in Heaven’s perfection and the
light of the Beatific Vision.  “Know thyself” is a vain legend, the more
so when emphasised by a skull; and so I company with a friend and a
stranger, and looking across at the white gate I wonder concerning the
quiet pastures and still waters that lie beyond, even as Brother Ambrose
wondered long years ago in the monastery by the forest.

    The Brother Ambrose was ever a saintly man approved of God and
    beloved by the Brethren.  To him one night, as he lay abed in the
    dormitory, came the word of the Lord, saying, “Come, and I will show
    thee the Bride, the Lamb’s wife.”  And Brother Ambrose arose and was
    carried to a great and high mountain, even as in the Vision of
    Blessed John.  ’Twas a still night of many stars, and Brother
    Ambrose, looking up, saw a radiant path in the heavens; and lo! the
    stars gathered themselves together on either side until they stood as
    walls of light, and the four winds lapped him about as in a mantle
    and bore him towards the wondrous gleaming roadway.  Then between the
    stars came the Holy City with roof and pinnacle aflame, and walls
    aglow with such colours as no earthly limner dreams of, and much
    gold.  Brother Ambrose beheld the Gates of Pearl, and by every gate
    an angel with wings of snow and fire, and a face no man dare look on
    because of its exceeding radiance.

    Then as Brother Ambrose stretched out his arms because of his great
    longing, a little grey cloud came out of the north and hung between
    the walls of light, so that he no longer beheld the Vision, but only
    heard a sound as of a great multitude crying ‘Alleluia’; and suddenly
    the winds came about him again, and lo! he found himself in his bed
    in the dormitory, and it was midnight, for the bell was ringing to
    Matins; and he rose and went down with the rest.  But when the
    Brethren left the choir Brother Ambrose stayed fast in his place,
    hearing and seeing nothing because of the Vision of God; and at Lauds
    they found him and told the Prior.

    He questioned Brother Ambrose of the matter, and when he heard the
    Vision bade him limn the Holy City even as he had seen it; and the
    Precentor gave him uterine vellum and much fine gold and what colours
    he asked for the work.  Then Brother Ambrose limned a wondrous fair
    city of gold with turrets and spires; and he inlaid blue for the
    sapphire, and green for the emerald, and vermilion where the city
    seemed aflame with the glory of God; but the angels he could not
    limn, nor could he set the rest of the colours as he saw them, nor
    the wall of stars on either hand; and Brother Ambrose fell sick
    because of the exceeding great longing he had to limn the Holy City,
    and was very sad; but the Prior bade him thank God, and remember the
    infirmity of the flesh, which, like the little grey cloud, veiled
    Jerusalem to his sight.

As I write the monastery bell hard by rings out across the lark’s song.
They still have time for visions behind those guarding walls, but for
most of us it is not so.  We let slip the ideal for what we call the
real, and the golden dreams vanish while we clutch at phantoms: we speed
along life’s pathway, counting to the full the sixty minutes of every
hour, yet the race is not to the swift nor the battle to the strong.
Lying here in this quiet backwater it is hard to believe that the world
without is turbulent with storm and stress and the ebb and flow of
uncertain tides.  The little yellow cat rolling on its back among the
daisies, the staid tortoise making a stately meal off the buttercups near
me, these are great events in this haven of peace.  And yet, looking back
to the working days, I know how much goodness and loving kindness there
is under the froth and foam.  If we do not know ourselves we most
certainly do not know our brethren: that revelation awaits us, it may be,
first in Heaven.  To have faith is to create; to have hope is to call
down blessing; to have love is to work miracles.  Above all let us see
visions, visions of colour and light, of green fields and broad rivers,
of palaces laid with fair colours, and gardens where a place is found for
rosemary and rue.

It is our prerogative to be dreamers, but there will always be men ready
to offer us death for our dreams.  And if it must be so let us choose
death; it is gain, not loss, and the gloomy portal when we reach it is
but a white gate, the white gate maybe we have known all our lives barred
by the tendrils of the woodbine.



