CHAPTER IV


YESTERDAY a funeral passed, from the work-house at N—, a quaint sepulture
without solemnities.  The rough, ungarnished coffin of stained deal lay
bare and unsightly on the floor of an old market-cart; a woman sat
beside, steadying it with her feet.  The husband drove; and the most
depressed of the three was the horse, a broken-kneed, flea-bitten grey.
It was pathetic, this bringing home in death of the old father whom,
while he lived, they had been too poor to house; it was at no small
sacrifice that they had spared him that terror of old age, a pauper’s
grave, and brought him to lie by his wife in our quiet churchyard.  They
felt no emotion, this husband and wife, only a dull sense of filial duty
done, respectability preserved; and above and through all, the bitter but
necessary counting the cost of this last bed.

It is strange how pagan many of us are in our beliefs.  True, the funeral
libations have made way for the comfortable bake-meats; still, to the
large majority Death is Pluto, king of the dark Unknown whence no
traveller returns, rather than Azrael, brother and friend, lord of this
mansion of life.  Strange how men shun him as he waits in the shadow,
watching our puny straining after immortality, sending his comrade sleep
to prepare us for himself.  When the hour strikes he comes—very gently,
very tenderly, if we will but have it so—folds the tired hands together,
takes the way-worn feet in his broad strong palm; and lifting us in his
wonderful arms he bears us swiftly down the valley and across the waters
of Remembrance.

Very pleasant art thou, O Brother Death, thy love is wonderful, passing
the love of women.

                                * * * * *

To-day I have lived in a whirl of dust.  To-morrow is the great annual
Cattle Fair at E—, and through the long hot hours the beasts from all the
district round have streamed in broken procession along my road, to
change hands or to die.  Surely the lordship over creation implies wise
and gentle rule for intelligent use, not the pursuit of a mere immediate
end, without any thought of community in the great sacrament of life.

For the most part mystery has ceased for this working Western world, and
with it reverence.  Coventry Patmore says: “God clothes Himself actually
and literally with His whole creation.  Herbs take up and assimilate
minerals, beasts assimilate herbs, and God, in the Incarnation and its
proper Sacrament, assimilates us, who, says St Augustine, ‘are God’s
beasts.’”  It is man in his blind self-seeking who separates woof from
weft in the living garment of God, and loses the more as he neglects the
outward and visible signs of a world-wide grace.

In olden days the herd led his flock, going first in the post of danger
to defend the creatures he had weaned from their natural habits for his
various uses.  Now that good relationship has ceased for us to exist, man
drives the beasts before him, means to his end, but with no harmony
between end and means.  All day long the droves of sheep pass me on their
lame and patient way, no longer freely and instinctively following a
protector and forerunner, but _driven_, impelled by force and resistless
will—the same will which once went before without force.  They are all
trimmed as much as possible to one pattern, and all make the same sad
plaint.  It is a day on which to thank God for the unknown tongue.  The
drover and his lad in dusty blue coats plod along stolidly, deaf and
blind to all but the way before them; no longer wielding the crook,
instrument of deliverance, or at most of gentle compulsion, but armed
with a heavy stick and mechanically dealing blows on the short thick
fleeces; without evil intent because without thought—it is the ritual of
the trade.

Of all the poor dumb pilgrims of the road the bullocks are the most
terrible to see.  They are not patient, but go most unwillingly with
lowered head and furtive sideways motion, in their eyes a horror of great
fear.  The sleek cattle, knee deep in pasture, massed at the gate, and
stared mild-eyed and with inquiring bellow at the retreating drove; but
these passed without answer on to the Unknown, and for them it spelt
death.

Behind a squadron of sleek, well-fed cart-horses, formed in fours, with
straw braid in mane and tail, came the ponies, for the most part a merry
company.  Long strings of rusty, shaggy two-year-olds, unbroken, unkempt,
the short Down grass still sweet on their tongues; full of fun, frolic,
and wickedness, biting and pulling, casting longing eyes at the
hedgerows.  The boys appear to recognise them as kindred spirits, and are
curiously forbearing and patient.  Soon both ponies and boys vanish in a
white whirl, and a long line of carts, which had evidently waited for the
dust to subside, comes slowly up the incline.  For the most part they
carry the pigs and fowls, carriage folk of the road.  The latter are hot,
crowded, and dusty under the open netting; the former for the most part
cheerfully remonstrative.

I drew a breath of relief as the noise of wheels died away and my road
sank into silence.  The hedgerows are no longer green but white and
choked with dust, a sight to move good sister Rain to welcome tears.  The
birds seem to have fled before the noisy confusion.  I wonder whether my
snake has seen and smiled at the clumsy ruling of the lord he so little
heeds?  I turned aside through the gate to plunge face and hands into the
cool of the sheltered grass that side the hedge, and then rested my eyes
on the stretch of green I had lacked all day.  The rabbits had apparently
played and browsed unmindful of the stir, and were still flirting their
white tails along the hedgerows; a lark rose, another and another, and I
went back to my road.  Peace still reigned, for the shadows were
lengthening, and there would be little more traffic for the fair.  I
turned to my work, grateful for the stillness, and saw on the white
stretch of road a lone old man and a pig.  Surely I knew that tall figure
in the quaint grey smock, surely I knew the face, furrowed like nature’s
face in springtime, and crowned by a round, soft hat?  And the pig, the
black pig walking decorously free?  Ay, I knew them.

In the early spring I took a whole holiday and a long tramp; and towards
afternoon, tired and thirsty, sought water at a little lonely cottage
whose windows peered and blinked under overhanging brows of thatch.  I
had, not the water I asked for, but milk and a bowl of sweet porridge for
which I paid only thanks; and stayed for a chat with my kindly hosts.
They were a quaint old couple of the kind rarely met with nowadays.  They
enjoyed a little pension from the Squire and a garden in which vegetables
and flowers lived side by side in friendliest fashion.  Bees worked and
sang over the thyme and marjoram, blooming early in a sunny nook; and in
a homely sty lived a solemn black pig, a pig with a history.

It was no common utilitarian pig, but the honoured guest of the old
couple, and it knew it.  A year before, their youngest and only surviving
child, then a man of five-and-twenty, had brought his mother the result
of his savings in the shape of a fine young pig: a week later he lay dead
of the typhoid that scourged Maidstone.  Hence the pig was sacred, cared
for and loved by this Darby and Joan.

“Ee be mos’ like a child to me and the mother, an’ mos’ as sensible as a
Christian, ee be,” the old man had said; and I could hardly credit my
eyes when I saw the tall bent figure side by side with the black pig,
coming along my road on such a day.

I hailed the old man, and both turned aside; but he gazed at me without
remembrance.

I spoke of the pig and its history.  He nodded wearily.  “Ay, ay, lad,
you’ve got it; ’tis poor Dick’s pig right enow.”

“But you’re never going to take it to E—?”

“Ay, but I be, and comin’ back alone, if the Lord be marciful.  The
missus has been terrible bad this two mouths and more; Squire’s in
foreign parts; and food-stuffs such as the old woman wants is hard buying
for poor folks.  The stocking’s empty, now ’tis the pig must go, and I
believe he’d be glad for to do the missus a turn; she were terrible good
to him, were the missus, and fond, too.  I dursn’t tell her he was to go;
she’d sooner starve than lose poor Dick’s pig.  Well, we’d best be
movin’; ’tis a fairish step.”

The pig followed comprehending and docile, and as the quaint couple
passed from sight I thought I heard Brother Death stir in the shadow.  He
is a strong angel and of great pity.



