CHAPTER V


THERE is always a little fire of wood on the open hearth in the kitchen
when I get home at night; the old lady says it is “company” for her, and
sits in the lonely twilight, her knotted hands lying quiet on her lap,
her listening eyes fixed on the burning sticks.

I wonder sometimes whether she hears music in the leap and lick of the
fiery tongues, music such as he of Bayreuth draws from the violins till
the hot energy of the fire spirit is on us, embodied in sound.

Surely she hears some voice, that lonely old woman on whom is set the
seal of great silence?

It is a great truth tenderly said that God builds the nest for the blind
bird; and may it not be that He opens closed eyes and unstops deaf ears
to sights and sounds from which others by these very senses are debarred?

Here the best of us see through a mist of tears men as trees walking; it
is only in the land which is very far off and yet very near that we shall
have fulness of sight and see the King in His beauty; and I cannot think
that any listening ears listen in vain.

The coppice at our back is full of birds, for it is far from the road and
they nest there undisturbed year after year.  Through the still night I
heard the nightingales calling, calling, until I could bear it no longer
and went softly out into the luminous dark.

The little wood was manifold with sound, I heard my little brothers who
move by night rustling in grass and tree.  A hedgehog crossed my path
with a dull squeak, the bats shrilled high to the stars, a white owl
swept past me crying his hunting note, a beetle boomed suddenly in my
face; and above and through it all the nightingales sang—and sang!

The night wind bent the listening trees, and the stars yearned earthward
to hear the song of deathless love.  Louder and louder the wonderful
notes rose and fell in a passion of melody; and then sank to rest on that
low thrilling call which it is said Death once heard, and stayed his
hand.

They will scarcely sing again this year, these nightingales, for they are
late on the wing as it is.  It seems as if on such nights they sang as
the swan sings, knowing it to be the last time—with the lavish note of
one who bids an eternal farewell.

At last there was silence.  Sitting under the big beech tree, the giant
of the coppice, I rested my tired self in the lap of mother earth,
breathed of her breath and listened to her voice in the quickening
silence until my flesh came again as the flesh of a little child, for it
is true recreation to sit at the footstool of God wrapped in a fold of
His living robe, the while night smoothes our tired face with her healing
hands.

The grey dawn awoke and stole with trailing robes across earth’s floor.
At her footsteps the birds roused from sleep and cried a greeting; the
sky flushed and paled conscious of coming splendour; and overhead a file
of swans passed with broad strong flight to the reeded waters of the
sequestered pool.

Another hour of silence while the light throbbed and flamed in the east;
then the larks rose harmonious from a neighbouring field, the rabbits
scurried with ears alert to their morning meal, the day had begun.

I passed through the coppice and out into the fields beyond.  The dew lay
heavy on leaf and blade and gossamer, a cool fresh wind swept clear over
dale and down from the sea, and the clover field rippled like a silvery
lake in the breeze.

There is something inexpressibly beautiful in the unused day, something
beautiful in the fact that it is still untouched, unsoiled; and town and
country share alike in this loveliness.  At half-past three on a June
morning even London has not assumed her responsibilities, but smiles and
glows lighthearted and smokeless under the caresses of the morning sun.

Five o’clock.  The bell rings out crisp and clear from the monastery
where the Bedesmen of St Hugh watch and pray for the souls on this
labouring forgetful earth.  Every hour the note of comfort and warning
cries across the land, tells the Sanctus, the Angelus, and the Hours of
the Passion, and calls to remembrance and prayer.

When the wind is north, the sound carries as far as my road, and
companies me through the day; and if to His dumb children God in His
mercy reckons work as prayer, most certainly those who have forged
through the ages an unbroken chain of supplication and thanksgiving will
be counted among the stalwart labourers of the house of the Lord.

Sun and bell together are my only clock: it is time for my water drawing;
and gathering a pile of mushrooms, children of the night, I hasten home.

The cottage is dear to me in its quaint untidiness and want of rectitude,
dear because we are to be its last denizens, last of the long line of
toilers who have sweated and sown that others might reap, and have passed
away leaving no trace.

I once saw a tall cross in a seaboard churchyard, inscribed, “To the
memory of the unknown dead who have perished in these waters.”  There
might be one in every village sleeping-place to the unhonoured many who
made fruitful the land with sweat and tears.  It is a consolation to
think that when we look back on this stretch of life’s road from beyond
the first milestone, which, it is instructive to remember, is always a
grave, we may hope to see the work of this world with open eyes, and to
judge of it with a due sense of proportion.

A bee with laden honey-bag hummed and buzzed in the hedge as I got ready
for work, importuning the flowers for that which he could not carry, and
finally giving up the attempt in despair fell asleep on a buttercup, the
best place for his weary little velvet body.  In five minutes—they may
have been five hours to him—he awoke a new bee, sensible and
clear-sighted, and flew blithely away to the hive with his sufficiency—an
example this weary world would be wise to follow.

My road has been lonely to-day.  A parson came by in the afternoon, a
stranger in the neighbourhood, for he asked his way.  He talked awhile,
and with kindly rebuke said it was sad to see a man of my education
brought so low, which shows how the outside appearance may mislead the
prejudiced observer.  “Was it misfortune?”  “Nay, the best of good luck,”
I answered, gaily.

The good man with beautiful readiness sat down on a heap of stones and
bade me say on.  “Read me a sermon in stone,” he said, simply; and I
stayed my hand to read.

He listened with courteous intelligence.

“You hold a roadmender has a vocation?” he asked.

“As the monk or the artist, for, like both, he is universal.  The world
is his home; he serves all men alike, ay, and for him the beasts have
equal honour with the men.  His soul is ‘bound up in the bundle of life’
with all other souls, he sees his father, his mother, his brethren in the
children of the road.  For him there is nothing unclean, nothing common;
the very stones cry out that they serve.”

Parson nodded his head.

“It is all true,” he said; “beautifully true.  But need such a view of
life necessitate the work of roadmending?  Surely all men should be
roadmenders.”

O wise parson, so to read the lesson of the road!

“It is true,” I answered; “but some of us find our salvation in the
actual work, and earn our bread better in this than in any other way.  No
man is dependent on our earning, all men on our work.  We are ‘rich
beyond the dreams of avarice’ because we have all that we need, and yet
we taste the life and poverty of the very poor.  We are, if you will,
uncloistered monks, preaching friars who speak not with the tongue,
disciples who hear the wise words of a silent master.”

“Robert Louis Stevenson was a roadmender,” said the wise parson.

“Ay, and with more than his pen,” I answered.  “I wonder was he ever so
truly great, so entirely the man we know and love, as when he inspired
the chiefs to make a highway in the wilderness.  Surely no more fitting
monument could exist to his memory than the Road of Gratitude, cut, laid,
and kept by the pure-blooded tribe kings of Samoa.”

Parson nodded.

“He knew that the people who make no roads are ruled out from intelligent
participation in the world’s brotherhood.”  He filled his pipe, thinking
the while, then he held out his pouch to me.

“Try some of this baccy,” he said; “Sherwood of Magdalen sent it me from
some outlandish place.”

I accepted gratefully.  It was such tobacco as falls to the lot of few
roadmenders.

He rose to go.

“I wish I could come and break stones,” he said, a little wistfully.

“Nay,” said I, “few men have such weary roadmending as yours, and perhaps
you need my road less than most men, and less than most parsons.”

We shook hands, and he went down the road and out of my life.

He little guessed that I knew Sherwood, ay, and knew him too, for had not
Sherwood told me of the man he delighted to honour.

Ah, well!  I am no Browning Junior, and Sherwood’s name is not Sherwood.



