CHAPTER VI


“ANYTUS and Meletus can kill me, but they cannot hurt me,” said Socrates;
and Governor Sancho, with all the itch of newly-acquired authority, could
not make the young weaver of steel-heads for lances sleep in prison.  In
the Vision of Er the souls passed straight forward under the throne of
necessity, and out into the plains of forgetfulness, where they must
severally drink of the river of unmindfulness whose waters cannot be held
in any vessel.  The throne, the plain, and the river are still here, but
in the distance rise the great lone heavenward hills, and the wise among
us no longer ask of the gods Lethe, but rather remembrance.  Necessity
can set me helpless on my back, but she cannot keep me there; nor can
four walls limit my vision.  I pass out from under her throne into the
garden of God a free man, to my ultimate beatitude or my exceeding shame.
All day long this world lies open to me; ay, and other worlds also, if I
will but have it so; and when night comes I pass into the kingdom and
power of the dark.

I lie through the long hours and watch my bridge, which is set with
lights across the gloom; watch the traffic which is for me but so many
passing lamps telling their tale by varying height and brightness.  I
hear under my window the sprint of over-tired horses, the rattle of
uncertain wheels as the street-sellers hasten south; the jangle of cab
bells as the theatre-goers take their homeward way; the gruff altercation
of weary men, the unmelodious song and clamorous laugh of women whose
merriment is wearier still.  Then comes a time of stillness when the
light in the sky waxes and wanes, when the cloud-drifts obscure the
stars, and I gaze out into blackness set with watching eyes.  No sound
comes from without but the voice of the night-wind and the cry of the
hour.  The clock on the mantelpiece ticks imperatively, for a check has
fallen on the familiarity which breeds a disregard of common things, and
a reason has to be sought for each sound which claims a hearing.  The
pause is wonderful while it lasts, but it is not for long.  The working
world awakes, the poorer brethren take up the burden of service; the dawn
lights the sky; remembrance cries an end to forgetting.

Sometimes in the country on a night in early summer you may shut the
cottage door to step out into an immense darkness which palls heaven and
earth.  Going forward into the embrace of the great gloom, you are as a
babe swaddled by the hands of night into helpless quiescence.  Your feet
tread an unseen path, your hands grasp at a void, or shrink from the
contact they cannot realise; your eyes are holden; your voice would die
in your throat did you seek to rend the veil of that impenetrable
silence.

Shut in by the intangible dark, we are brought up against those worlds
within worlds blotted out by our concrete daily life.  The working of the
great microcosm at which we peer dimly through the little window of
science; the wonderful, breathing earth; the pulsing, throbbing sap; the
growing fragrance shut in the calyx of to-morrow’s flower; the heart-beat
of a sleeping world that we dream that we know; and around, above, and
interpenetrating all, the world of dreams, of angels and of spirits.

It was this world which Jacob saw on the first night of his exile, and
again when he wrestled in Peniel until the break of day.  It was this
world which Elisha saw with open eyes; which Job knew when darkness fell
on him; which Ezekiel gazed into from his place among the captives; which
Daniel beheld as he stood alone by the great river, the river Hiddekel.

For the moment we have left behind the realm of question and explanation,
of power over matter and the exercise of bodily faculties; and passed
into darkness alight with visions we cannot see, into silence alive with
voices we cannot hear.  Like helpless men we set our all on the one thing
left us, and lift up our hearts, knowing that we are but a mere speck
among a myriad worlds, yet greater than the sum of them; having our roots
in the dark places of the earth, but our branches in the sweet airs of
heaven.

It is the material counterpart of the ‘Night of the Soul.’  We have left
our house and set forth in the darkness which paralyses those faculties
that make us men in the world of men.  But surely the great mystics, with
all their insight and heavenly love, fell short when they sought freedom
in complete separateness from creation instead of in perfect unity with
it.  The Greeks knew better when they flung Ariadne’s crown among the
stars, and wrote Demeter’s grief on a barren earth, and Persephone’s joy
in the fruitful field.  For the earth is gathered up in man; he is the
whole which is greater than the sum of its parts.  Standing in the image
of God, and clothed in the garment of God, he lifts up priestly hands and
presents the sacrifice of redeemed earth before the throne of the
All-Father.  “Dust and ashes and a house of devils,” he cries; and there
comes back for answer, “_Rex concupiscet decorem tuam_.”

The Angel of Death has broad wings of silence and mystery with which he
shadows the valley where we need fear no evil, and where the voice which
speaks to us is as the “voice of doves, tabering upon their breasts.”  It
is a place of healing and preparation, of peace and refreshing after the
sharply-defined outlines of a garish day.  Walking there we learn to use
those natural faculties of the soul which are hampered by the familiarity
of bodily progress, to apprehend the truths which we have intellectually
accepted.  It is the place of secrets where the humility which embraces
all attainable knowledge cries “I know not”; and while we proclaim from
the house-tops that which we have learnt, the manner of our learning lies
hid for each one of us in the sanctuary of our souls.

The Egyptians, in their ancient wisdom, act in the desert a great
androsphinx, image of mystery and silence, staring from under level brows
across the arid sands of the sea-way.  The Greeks borrowed and debased
the image, turning the inscrutable into a semi-woman who asked a foolish
riddle, and hurled herself down in petulant pride when Œdipus answered
aright.  So we, marring the office of silence, question its mystery;
thwart ourselves with riddles of our own suggesting; and turn away,
leaving our offering but half consumed on the altar of the unknown god.
It was not the theft of fire that brought the vengeance of heaven upon
Prometheus, but the mocking sacrifice.  Orpheus lost Eurydice because he
must see her face before the appointed time.  Persephone ate of the
pomegranate and hungered in gloom for the day of light which should have
been endless.

The universe is full of miracle and mystery; the darkness and silence are
set for a sign we dare not despise.  The pall of night lifts, leaving us
engulphed in the light of immensity under a tossing heaven of stars.  The
dawn breaks, but it does not surprise us, for we have watched from the
valley and seen the pale twilight.  Through the wondrous Sabbath of
faithful souls, the long day of rosemary and rue, the light brightens in
the East; and we pass on towards it with quiet feet and opening eyes,
bearing with us all of the redeemed earth that we have made our own,
until we are fulfilled in the sunrise of the great Easter Day, and the
peoples come from north and south and east and west to the City which
lieth foursquare—the Beatific Vision of God.

    Vere Ierusalem est illa civitas
    Cuius pax iugis et summa iucunditas;
    Ubi non prævenit rem desiderium,
    Nec desiderio minus est præmium.




AT THE WHITE GATE


