CHAPTER VI


AWHILE ago I took a holiday; mouched, played truant from my road.  Jem
the waggoner hailed me as he passed—he was going to the mill—would I ride
with him and come back atop of the full sacks?

I hid my hammer in the hedge, climbed into the great waggon white and
fragrant with the clean sweet meal, and flung myself down on the empty
flour bags.  The looped-back tarpaulin framed the long vista of my road
with the downs beyond; and I lay in the cool dark, caressed by the fresh
breeze in its thoroughfare, soothed by the strong monotonous tramp of the
great grey team and the music of the jangling harness.

Jem walked at the leaders’ heads; it is his rule when the waggon is
empty, a rule no “company” will make him break.  At first I regretted it,
but soon discovered I learnt to know him better so, as he plodded along,
his thickset figure slightly bent, his hands in his pockets, his whip
under one arm, whistling hymn tunes in a low minor, while the great
horses answered to his voice without touch of lash or guiding rein.

I lay as in a blissful dream and watched my road unfold.  The sun set the
pine-boles aflare where the hedge is sparse, and stretched the long
shadows of the besom poplars in slanting bars across the white highway;
the roadside gardens smiled friendly with their trim-cut laurels and rows
of stately sunflowers—a seemly proximity this, Daphne and Clytie, sisters
in experience, wrapped in the warm caress of the god whose wooing they
need no longer fear.  Here and there we passed little groups of women and
children off to work in the early cornfields, and Jem paused in his fond
repetition of “The Lord my pasture shall prepare” to give them good-day.

It is like Life, this travelling backwards—that which has been, alone
visible—like Life, which is after all, retrospective with a steady moving
on into the Unknown, Unseen, until Faith is lost in Sight and experience
is no longer the touchstone of humanity.  The face of the son of Adam is
set on the road his brothers have travelled, marking their landmarks,
tracing their journeyings; but with the eyes of a child of God he looks
forward, straining to catch a glimpse of the jewelled walls of his future
home, the city “Eternal in the Heavens.”

Presently we left my road for the deep shade of a narrow country way
where the great oaks and beeches meet overhead and no hedge-clipper sets
his hand to stay nature’s profusion; and so by pleasant lanes scarce the
waggon’s width across, now shady, now sunny, here bordered by thickset
coverts, there giving on fruitful fields, we came at length to the mill.

I left Jem to his business with the miller and wandered down the flowery
meadow to listen to the merry clack of the stream and the voice of the
waters on the weir.  The great wheel was at rest, as I love best to see
it in the later afternoon; the splash and churn of the water belong
rather to the morning hours.  It is the chief mistake we make in
portioning out our day that we banish rest to the night-time, which is
for sleep and recreating, instead of setting apart the later afternoon
and quiet twilight hours for the stretching of weary limbs and repose of
tired mind after a day’s toil that should begin and end at five.

The little stone bridge over the mill-stream is almost on a level with
the clear running water, and I lay there and gazed at the huge wheel
which, under multitudinous forms and uses, is one of the world’s wonders,
because one of the few things we imitative children have not learnt from
nature.  Is it perchance a memory out of that past when Adam walked
clear-eyed in Paradise and talked with the Lord in the cool of the day?
Did he see then the flaming wheels instinct with service, wondrous
messengers of the Most High vouchsafed in vision to the later prophets?

Maybe he did, and going forth from before the avenging sword of his own
forging to the bitterness of an accursed earth, took with him this bright
memory of perfect, ceaseless service, and so fashioned our labouring
wheel—pathetic link with the time of his innocency.  It is one of many
unanswered questions, good to ask because it has no answer, only the
suggestion of a train of thought: perhaps we are never so receptive as
when with folded hands we say simply, “This is a great mystery.”  I
watched and wondered until Jem called, and I had to leave the rippling
weir and the water’s side, and the wheel with its untold secret.

The miller’s wife gave me tea and a crust of home-made bread, and the
miller’s little maid sat on my knee while I told the sad tale of a little
pink cloud separated from its parents and teazed and hunted by
mischievous little airs.  To-morrow, if I mistake not, her garden will be
wet with its tears, and, let us hope, point a moral; for the tale had its
origin in a frenzied chicken driven from the side of an anxious mother,
and pursued by a sturdy, relentless figure in a white sun-bonnet.

The little maid trotted off, greatly sobered, to look somewhat
prematurely for the cloud’s tears; and I climbed to my place at the top
of the piled-up sacks, and thence watched twilight pass to starlight
through my narrow peep, and, so watching, slept until Jem’s voice hailed
me from Dreamland, and I went, only half awake, across the dark fields
home.

Autumn is here and it is already late.  He has painted the hedges russet
and gold, scarlet and black, and a tangle of grey; now he has damp brown
leaves in his hair and frost in his finger-tips.

It is a season of contrasts; at first all is stir and bustle, the
ingathering of man and beast; barn and rickyard stand filled with golden
treasure; at the farm the sound of threshing; in wood and copse the
squirrels busied ’twixt tree and storehouse, while the ripe nuts fall
with thud of thunder rain.  When the harvesting is over, the fruit
gathered, the last rick thatched, there comes a pause.  Earth strips off
her bright colours and shows a bare and furrowed face; the dead leaves
fall gently and sadly through the calm, sweet air; grey mists drape the
fields and hedges.  The migratory birds have left, save a few late
swallows; and as I sit at work in the soft, still rain, I can hear the
blackbird’s melancholy trill and the thin pipe of the redbreast’s winter
song—the air is full of the sound of farewell.

Forethought and preparation for the Future which shall be; farewell,
because of the Future which may never be—for us; “Man, thou hast goods
laid up for many years, and it is well; but, remember, this night _thy_
soul may be required”; is the unvoiced lesson of autumn.  There is
growing up among us a great fear; it stares at us white, wide-eyed, from
the faces of men and women alike—the fear of pain, mental and bodily
pain.  For the last twenty years we have waged war with suffering—a noble
war when fought in the interest of the many, but fraught with great
danger to each individual man.  It is the fear which should not be,
rather than the ‘hope which is in us,’ that leads men in these days to
drape Death in a flowery mantle, to lay stress on the shortness of
parting, the speedy reunion, to postpone their good-byes until the last
moment, or avoid saying them altogether; and this fear is a poor, ignoble
thing, unworthy of those who are as gods, knowing good and evil.  We are
still paying the price of that knowledge; suffering in both kinds is a
substantial part of it, and brings its own healing.  Let us pay like men,
our face to the open heaven, neither whimpering like children in the
dark, nor lulled to unnecessary oblivion by some lethal drug; for it is
manly, not morbid, to dare to taste the pungent savour of pain, the
lingering sadness of farewell which emphasises the aftermath of life; it
should have its place in all our preparation as a part of our inheritance
we dare not be without.

There is an old couple in our village who are past work.  The married
daughter has made shift to take her mother and the parish half-crown, but
there is neither room nor food for the father, and he must go to N—.  If
husband and wife went together, they would be separated at the workhouse
door.  The parting had to come; it came yesterday.  I saw them stumbling
lamely down the road on their last journey together, walking side by side
without touch or speech, seeing and heeding nothing but a blank future.
As they passed me the old man said gruffly, “’Tis far eno’; better be
gettin’ back”; but the woman shook her head, and they breasted the hill
together.  At the top they paused, shook hands, and separated; one went
on, the other turned back; and as the old woman limped blindly by I
turned away, for there are sights a man dare not look upon.  She passed;
and I heard a child’s shrill voice say, “I come to look for you, gran”;
and I thanked God that there need be no utter loneliness in the world
while it holds a little child.

Now it is my turn, and I must leave the wayside to serve in the
sheepfolds during the winter months.  It is scarcely a farewell, for my
road is ubiquitous, eternal; there are green ways in Paradise and golden
streets in the beautiful City of God.  Nevertheless, my heart is heavy;
for, viewed by the light of the waning year, roadmending seems a great
and wonderful work which I have poorly conceived of and meanly performed:
yet I have learnt to understand dimly the truths of three great
paradoxes—the blessing of a curse, the voice of silence, the
companionship of solitude—and so take my leave of this stretch of road,
and of you who have fared along the white highway through the medium of a
printed page.

Farewell!  It is a roadmender’s word; I cry you Godspeed to the next
milestone—and beyond.




OUT OF THE SHADOW


