CHAPTER II


THIS garden is an epitome of peace; sun and wind, rain, flowers, and
birds gather me into the blessedness of their active harmony.  The world
holds no wish for me, now that I have come home to die with my own
people, for verify I think that the sap of grass and trees must run in my
veins, so steady is their pull upon my heart-strings.  London claimed all
my philosophy, but the country gives all, and asks of me only the warm
receptivity of a child in its mother’s arms.

When I lie in my cool light room on the garden level, I look across the
bright grass—_il verde smalto_—to a great red rose bush in lavish
disarray against the dark cypress.  Near by, amid a tangle of many-hued
corn-flowers I see the promise of coming lilies, the sudden crimson of a
solitary pæony; and in lowlier state against the poor parched earth glow
the golden cups of the eschseholtzias.  Beyond the low hedge lies pasture
bright with buttercups, where the cattle feed.  Farther off, where the
scythe has been busy, are sheep, clean and shorn, with merry, well-grown
lambs; and in the farthest field I can see the great horses moving in
slow steady pace as the farmer turns his furrow.

The birds are noisy comrades and old friends, from the lark which chants
the dew-steeped morning, to the nightingale that breaks the silence of
the most wonderful nights.  I hear the wisdom of the rooks in the great
elms; the lifting lilt of the linnet, and the robin’s quaint little
summer song.  The starlings chatter ceaselessly, their queer strident
voices harsh against the melodious gossip of the other birds; the martins
shrill softly as they swoop to and fro busied with their nesting under
the caves; thrush and blackbird vie in friendly rivalry like the
Meister-singer of old; sometimes I hear the drawling cry of a peacock
strayed from the great house, or the laugh of the woodpecker; and at
night the hunting note of the owl reaches me as he sweeps by in search of
prey.

To-day I am out again; and the great sycamore showers honey and flowers
on me as I lie beneath it.  Sometimes a bee falls like an over-ripe
fruit, and waits awhile to clean his pollen-coated legs ere he flies home
to discharge his burden.  He is too busy to be friendly, but his great
velvety cousin is much more sociable, and stays for a gentle rub between
his noisy shimmering wings, and a nap in the hollow of my hand, for he is
an idle friendly soul with plenty of time at his own disposal and no
responsibilities.  Looking across I can watch the martins at work; they
have a starling and a sparrow for near neighbours in the wooden gutter.
One nest is already complete all but the coping, the other two are
a-building: I wonder whether I or they will be first to go south through
the mist.

This great tree is a world in itself, and the denizens appear full of
curiosity as to the Gulliver who has taken up his abode beneath it.  Pale
green caterpillars and spiders of all sizes come spinning down to visit
me, and have to be persuaded with infinite difficulty to ascend their
threads again.  There are flies with beautiful iridescent wings, beetles
of all shapes, some of them like tiny jewels in the sunlight.  Their
nomenclature is a sealed book to me; of their life and habits I know
nothing; yet this is but a little corner of the cosmos I am leaving, and
I feel not so much desire for the beauty to come, as a great longing to
open my eyes a little wider during the time which remains to me in this
beautiful world of God’s making, where each moment tells its own tale of
active, progressive life in which there is no undoing.  Nature knows
naught of the web of Penelope, that acme of anxious pathetic waiting, but
goes steadily on in ever widening circle towards the fulfilment of the
mystery of God.

There are, I take it, two master-keys to the secrets of the universe,
viewed _sub specie æternitatis_, the Incarnation of God, and the
Personality of Man; with these it is true for us as for the pantheistic
little man of contemptible speech, that “all things are ours,” yea, even
unto the third heaven.

I have lost my voracious appetite for books; their language is less plain
than scent and song and the wind in the trees; and for me the clue to the
next world lies in the wisdom of earth rather than in the learning of
men.  “_Libera me ab fuscina Hophni_,” prayed the good Bishop fearful of
religious greed.  I know too much, not too little; it is realisation that
I lack, wherefore I desire these last days to confirm in myself the
sustaining goodness of God, the love which is our continuing city, the
New Jerusalem whose length, breadth, and height are all one.  It is a
time of exceeding peace.  There is a place waiting for me under the firs
in the quiet churchyard; thanks to my poverty I have no worldly anxieties
or personal dispositions; and I am rich in friends, many of them unknown
to me, who lavishly supply my needs and make it ideal to live on the
charity of one’s fellow-men.  I am most gladly in debt to all the world;
and to Earth, my mother, for her great beauty.

I can never remember the time when I did not love her, this mother of
mine with her wonderful garments and ordered loveliness, her tender care
and patient bearing of man’s burden.  In the earliest days of my lonely
childhood I used to lie chin on hand amid the milkmaids, red sorrel, and
heavy spear-grass listening to her many voices, and above all to the
voice of the little brook which ran through the meadows where I used to
play: I think it has run through my whole life also, to lose itself at
last, not in the great sea but in the river that maketh glad the City of
God.  Valley and plain, mountain and fruitful field; the lark’s song and
the speedwell in the grass; surely a man need not sigh for greater
loveliness until he has read something more of this living letter, and
knelt before that earth of which he is the only confusion.

It is a grave matter that the word religion holds such away among us,
making the very gap seem to yawn again which the Incarnation once and for
ever filled full.  We have banished the protecting gods that ruled in
river and mountain, tree and grove; we have gainsayed for the most part
folk-lore and myth, superstition and fairy-tale, evil only in their
abuse.  We have done away with mystery, or named it deceit.  All this we
have done in an enlightened age, but despite this policy of destruction
we have left ourselves a belief, the grandest and most simple the world
has ever known, which sanctifies the water that is shed by every passing
cloud; and gathers up in its great central act vineyard and cornfield,
proclaiming them to be that Life of the world without which a man is dead
while he liveth.  Further, it is a belief whose foundations are the most
heavenly mystery of the Trinity, but whose centre is a little Child: it
sets a price upon the head of the sparrow, and reckons the riches of this
world at their true value; it points to a way of holiness where the fool
shall not err, and the sage may find the realisation of his far-seeking;
and yet, despite its inclusiveness, it is a belief which cannot save the
birds from destruction, the silent mountains from advertisement, or the
stream from pollution, in an avowedly Christian land.  John Ruskin
scolded and fought and did yeoman service, somewhat hindered by his
over-good conceit of himself; but it is not the worship of beauty we need
so much as the beauty of holiness.  Little by little the barrier grows
and ‘religion’ becomes a _rule_ of life, not life itself, although the
Bride stands ready to interpret, likened in her loveliness to the chief
treasures of her handmaid-Earth.  There is more truth in the believing
cry, “Come from thy white cliffs, O Pan!” than in the religion that
measures a man’s life by the letter of the Ten Commandments, and erects
itself as judge and ruler over him, instead of throwing open the gate of
the garden where God walks with man from morning until morning.

As I write the sun is setting; in the pale radiance of the sky above his
glory there dawns the evening star; and earth like a tired child turns
her face to the bosom of the night.



