The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Roadmender, by Michael Fairless


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Roadmender


Author: Michael Fairless



Release Date: February 5, 2013  [eBook #705]
[This file was first posted on November 6, 1996]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROADMENDER***


Transcribed from the 1911 Duckworth and Co. edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                              The Roadmender


                                    By

                             Michael Fairless

                                Author of
                   “The Gathering of Brother Hilarius”

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

                                * * * * *

                                  London

                             Duckworth & Co.

                         3 Henrietta Street, W.C.
                                   1911

                                * * * * *

This series of papers appeared in _The Pilot_ and is now republished by
permission of the Editor.

                                * * * * *

                               A. M. D. G.

                                * * * * *

                                    TO
                                MY MOTHER:
                         AND TO EARTH, MY MOTHER,
                               WHOM I LOVE.




CONTENTS

                             PAGE
THE ROADMENDER                  1
OUT OF THE SHADOW              61
AT THE WHITE GATE             119

The Roadmender


CHAPTER I


I HAVE attained my ideal: I am a roadmender, some say stonebreaker.  Both
titles are correct, but the one is more pregnant than the other.  All day
I sit by the roadside on a stretch of grass under a high hedge of
saplings and a tangle of traveller’s joy, woodbine, sweetbrier, and late
roses.  Opposite me is a white gate, seldom used, if one may judge from
the trail of honeysuckle growing tranquilly along it: I know now that
whenever and wherever I die my soul will pass out through this white
gate; and then, thank God, I shall not have need to undo that trail.

In our youth we discussed our ideals freely: I wonder how many beside
myself have attained, or would understand my attaining.  After all, what
do we ask of life, here or indeed hereafter, but leave to serve, to live,
to commune with our fellowmen and with ourselves; and from the lap of
earth to look up into the face of God?  All these gifts are mine as I sit
by the winding white road and serve the footsteps of my fellows.  There
is no room in my life for avarice or anxiety; I who serve at the altar
live of the altar: I lack nothing but have nothing over; and when the
winter of life comes I shall join the company of weary old men who sit on
the sunny side of the workhouse wall and wait for the tender mercies of
God.

Just now it is the summer of things; there is life and music
everywhere—in the stones themselves, and I live to-day beating out the
rhythmical hammer-song of The Ring.  There is real physical joy in the
rise and swing of the arm, in the jar of a fair stroke, the split and
scatter of the quartz: I am learning to be ambidextrous, for why should
Esau sell his birthright when there is enough for both?  Then the
rest-hour comes, bringing the luxurious ache of tired but not weary
limbs; and I lie outstretched and renew my strength, sometimes with my
face deep-nestled in the cool green grass, sometimes on my back looking
up into the blue sky which no wise man would wish to fathom.

The birds have no fear of me; am I not also of the brown brethren in my
sober fustian livery?  They share my meals—at least the little dun-coated
Franciscans do; the blackbirds and thrushes care not a whit for such
simple food as crumbs, but with legs well apart and claws tense with
purchase they disinter poor brother worm, having first mocked him with
sound of rain.  The robin that lives by the gate regards my heap of
stones as subject to his special inspection.  He sits atop and practises
the trill of his summer song until it shrills above and through the
metallic clang of my strokes; and when I pause he cocks his tail, with a
humorous twinkle of his round eye which means—“What! shirking, big
brother?”—and I fall, ashamed, to my mending of roads.

The other day, as I lay with my face in the grass, I heard a gentle
rustle, and raised my head to find a hedge-snake watching me fearless,
unwinking.  I stretched out my hand, picked it up unresisting, and put it
in my coat like the husbandman of old.  Was he so ill-rewarded, I wonder,
with the kiss that reveals secrets?  My snake slept in peace while I
hammered away with an odd quickening of heart as I thought how to me, as
to Melampus, had come the messenger—had come, but to ears deafened by
centuries of misrule, blindness, and oppression; so that, with all my
longing, I am shut out of the wondrous world where walked Melampus and
the Saint.  To me there is no suggestion of evil in the little silent
creatures, harmless, or deadly only with the Death which is Life.  The
beasts who turn upon us, as a rule maul and tear unreflectingly; with the
snake there is the swift, silent strike, the tiny, tiny wound, then sleep
and a forgetting.

My brown friend, with its message unspoken, slid away into the grass at
sundown to tell its tale in unstopped ears; and I, my task done, went
home across the fields to the solitary cottage where I lodge.  It is old
and decrepit—two rooms, with a quasi-attic over them reached by a ladder
from the kitchen and reached only by me.  It is furnished with the
luxuries of life, a truckle bed, table, chair, and huge earthenware pan
which I fill from the ice-cold well at the back of the cottage.  Morning
and night I serve with the Gibeonites, their curse my blessing, as no
doubt it was theirs when their hearts were purged by service.  Morning
and night I send down the moss-grown bucket with its urgent message from
a dry and dusty world; the chain tightens through my hand as the liquid
treasure responds to the messenger, and then with creak and jangle—the
welcome of labouring earth—the bucket slowly nears the top and disperses
the treasure in the waiting vessels.  The Gibeonites were servants in the
house of God, ministers of the sacrament of service even as the High
Priest himself; and I, sharing their high office of servitude, thank God
that the ground was accursed for my sake, for surely that curse was the
womb of all unborn blessing.

The old widow with whom I lodge has been deaf for the last twenty years.
She speaks in the strained high voice which protests against her own
infirmity, and her eyes have the pathetic look of those who search in
silence.  For many years she lived alone with her son, who laboured on
the farm two miles away.  He met his death rescuing a carthorse from its
burning stable; and the farmer gave the cottage rent free and a weekly
half-crown for life to the poor old woman whose dearest terror was the
workhouse.  With my shilling a week rent, and sharing of supplies, we
live in the lines of comfort.  Of death she has no fears, for in the long
chest in the kitchen lie a web of coarse white linen, two pennies covered
with the same to keep down tired eyelids, decent white stockings, and a
white cotton sun-bonnet—a decorous death-suit truly—and enough money in
the little bag for self-respecting burial.  The farmer buried his servant
handsomely—good man, he knew the love of reticent grief for a ‘kind’
burial—and one day Harry’s mother is to lie beside him in the little
churchyard which has been a cornfield, and may some day be one again.



