CHAPTER XI

CRITICISM


Those people who think that it is more godlike to seem to turn water
into wine than to seem to turn wine into water surprise me. I cannot
imagine an intolerable critic. It seems to me that, if A resents B's
criticism in trying to put his (A's) discovery in the right or wrong
place, A acts as if he thought he had some private property in truth.
The White Queen seems to have shared the popular misconception as to the
nature of criticism.[39]

FOOTNOTES:

[39] See Appendix J.




CHAPTER XII

HISTORICAL CRITICISM


From a problem in Diophantus's _Arithmetic_ about the price of some wine
it would seem that the wine was of poor quality, and Paul Tannery has
suggested that the prices mentioned for such a wine are higher than were
usual until after the end of the second century. He therefore rejected
the view which was formerly held that Diophantus lived in that
century.[40]

The same method applied to a problem given by the ancient Hindu
algebraist Brahmagupta, who lived in the seventh century after Christ,
might result in placing Brahmagupta in prehistoric times. This is the
problem:[41] "Two apes lived at the top of a cliff of height _h_, whose
base was distant _mh_ from a neighbouring village. One descended the
cliff and walked to the village, the other flew up a height _x_ and then
flew in a straight line to the village. The distance traversed by each
was the same. Find _x_."

FOOTNOTES:

[40] W. W. Rouse Ball, _A Short Account of the History of Mathematics_,
4th edition, London, 1908, p. 109.

[41] _Ibid._, pp. 148-9.




CHAPTER XIII

IS THE MIND IN THE HEAD?


The contrary opinion has been maintained by idealists and a certain
election agent with whom I once had to deal and who remarked that
something slipped his mind and then went out of his head altogether. At
some period, then, a remembrance was in his head and out of his mind;
his mind was not, then, wholly within his head. Also, one is sometimes
assured that with certain people "out of sight is out of mind." What is
in their minds is therefore in sight, and cannot therefore be inside
their heads.




CHAPTER XIV

THE PRAGMATIST THEORY OF TRUTH


The pragmatist theory that "truth" is a belief which works well
sometimes conflicts with common-sense and not with logic. It is commonly
supposed that it is always better to be sometimes right than to be never
right. But this is by no means true. For example, consider the case of a
watch which has stopped; it is exactly right twice every day. A watch,
on the other hand, which is always five minutes slow is never exactly
right. And yet there can be no question but that a belief in the
accuracy of the watch which was never right would, on the whole, produce
better results than such a belief in the one which had altogether
stopped. The pragmatist would, then, conclude that the watch which was
always inaccurate gave truer results than the one which was sometimes
accurate. In this conclusion the pragmatist would seem to be correct,
and this is an instance of how the false premisses of pragmatism may
give rise to true conclusions.

From the text written above the church clock in a certain English
village, "Be ye ready, for ye know not the time," it would be concluded
that the clock never stopped for a period as long as twelve hours. For
the text is rather a vague symbolical expression of a propositional
function which is asserted to be true at all instants. The proposition
that a presumably not illiterate and credulous observer of the clock at
any definite instant does not know the time implies, then, that the
clock is always wrong. Now, if the clock stopped for twelve hours, it
would be absolutely right at least once. It must be right twice if it
were right at the first instant it stopped or the last instant at which
it went;[42] but the second possibility is excluded by hypothesis, and
the occurrence of the first possibility--or of the analogous possibility
of the stopped clock being right three times in twenty-four hours--does
not affect the present question. Hence the clock can never stop for
twelve hours.

The pragmatist's criterion of truth appears to be far more difficult to
apply than the Bellman's,[43] that what he said three times is true, and
to give results just as insecure.

FOOTNOTES:

[42] Both cases cannot occur; the question is similar to that arising in
the discussion of the mortality of Socrates (see Chapter XXII).

[43] See Appendix K.




