CHAPTER XX

DIGNITY


We have seen, at the end of the preceding chapter, that logical
implication is often an enemy of dignity. The subject of dignity is not
usually considered in treatises on logic, but, as we have remarked, many
mathematicians implicitly or explicitly seem to fear either that the
dignity of mathematics will be impaired if she follows out conclusions
logically, or that only an act of faith can save us from the belief
that, if we followed out conclusions logically, we should find out
something alarming about the past, present, or future of mathematics.

Thus it seems necessary to inquire rather more closely into the nature
of dignity, with a view to the discovery of whether it is, as is
commonly supposed, a merit in life and logic.

The chief use of dignity is to veil ignorance. Thus, it is well known
that the most dignified people, as a rule, are schoolmasters, and
schoolmasters are usually so occupied with teaching that they have no
time to learn anything. And because dignity is used to hide ignorance,
it is plain that impudence is not always the opposite of dignity, but
that dignity is sometimes impudence. Dignity is said to inspire respect;
and this may be in part why respect for others is an error of judgment
and self-respect is ridiculous.

Self-respect is, of course, self-esteem. William James has remarked that
self-esteem depends, not simply upon our success, but upon the ratio of
our success to our pretensions, and can therefore be increased by
diminishing our pretensions. Thus if a man is successful, but only then,
can he be both ambitious and dignified. James also implies that
happiness increases with self-esteem. Likeness of thought with one's
friends, then, does not make one happy, for otherwise a man who esteemed
himself little would be indeed happy. Also if a man is unhappy he could
not, from our premisses, by the principles of the syllogism and of
contraposition, be dignified--a conclusion which should be fatal to many
novelists' heroes.

A reflection on pessimism to which this discussion gives rise is the
following: It would appear that a man's self-esteem would be increased
by a conviction of the unworthiness of his neighbours. A man, therefore,
who thinks that the world and all its inhabitants, except himself, are
very bad, should be extremely happy. In fact, the effects would hardly
be distinguishable from those of optimism. And optimism, as everybody
knows, is a state of mind induced by stupidity.




CHAPTER XXI

THE SYNTHETIC NATURE OF DEDUCTION


Doubt has often been expressed as to whether a syllogism can add to
our knowledge in any way. John Stuart Mill and Henri Poincare, in
particular, held the opinion that the conclusion of a syllogism is an
"analytic" judgment in the sense of Kant, and therefore could be
obtained by the mere dissection of the premisses. Any one, then, who
maintains that mathematics is founded solely on logical principles would
appear to maintain that mathematics, in the last instance, reduces to a
huge tautology.

Mill, in Chapter III of Book II of his _System of Logic_, said that "it
must be granted that in every syllogism, considered as an argument to
prove the conclusion, there is a _petitio principii_. When we say

  All men are mortal,
  Socrates is a man,

therefore

  Socrates is mortal,

it is unanswerably urged by the adversaries of the syllogistic theory,
that the proposition, Socrates is mortal, is presupposed in the more
general assumption, All men are mortal; that we cannot be assured of the
mortality of all men unless we are already certain of the mortality of
every individual man; that if it be still doubtful whether Socrates, or
any other individual we choose to name, be mortal or not, the same
degree of uncertainty must hang over the assertion, All men are mortal;
that the general principle, instead of being given as evidence of the
particular case, cannot itself be taken for true without exception until
every shadow of doubt which could affect any case comprised with it is
dispelled by evidence _aliunde_; and then what remains for the syllogism
to prove? That, in short, no reasoning from general to particular can,
as such, prove anything, since from a general principle we cannot infer
any particulars but those which the principle itself assumes as known.
This doctrine appears to me irrefragable...."

But it is not difficult to see that in certain cases at least deduction
gives us _new_ knowledge.[56] If we already know that two and two always
make four, and that Asquith and Lloyd George are two and so are the
German Emperor and the Crown Prince, we can deduce that Asquith and
Lloyd George and the German Emperor and the Crown Prince are four. This
is new knowledge, not contained in our premisses, because the general
proposition, "two and two are four," never told us there were such
people as Asquith and Lloyd George and the German Emperor and the Crown
Prince, and the particular premisses did not tell us that there were
four of them, whereas the particular proposition deduced does tell us
both these things. But the newness of the knowledge is much less certain
if we take the stock instance of deduction that is always given in books
on logic, namely "All men are mortal; Socrates is a man, therefore
Socrates is mortal." In this case what we really know beyond reasonable
doubt is that certain men, A, B, C, were mortal, since, in fact, they
have died. If Socrates is one of these men, it is foolish to go the
roundabout way through "all men are mortal" to arrive at the conclusion
that _probably_ Socrates is mortal. If Socrates is not one of the men on
whom our induction is based, we shall still do better to argue straight
from our A, B, C, to Socrates, than to go round by the general
proposition, "all men are mortal." For the probability that Socrates is
mortal is greater, on our data, than the probability that all men are
mortal. This is obvious, because if all men are mortal, so is Socrates;
but if Socrates is mortal, it does not follow that all men are mortal.
Hence we shall reach the conclusion that Socrates is mortal, with a
greater approach to certainty if we make our argument purely inductive
than if we go by way of "all men are mortal" and then use deduction.

Many years ago there appeared, principally owing to the initiative of
Dr. F. C. S. Schiller of Oxford, a comic number of _Mind_. The idea was
extraordinarily good, not so the execution. A German friend of Dr.
Schiller was puzzled by the appearance of the advertisements, which were
doubtfully humorous. However, by a syllogistic process, he acquired
information which was new and useful to him, and thus incidentally
refuted Mill. Presumably he started from the title of the magazine
(_Mind!_), for a mark of exclamation seems nearly always in German to be
a sign of an intended joke (including of course the mark after the
politeness expressed in the first sentence of a private letter or a
public address). There would be, then, the following syllogism:

  This is a book of would-be jokes (i.e. everything in this book is a
          would-be joke);
  This advertisement is in this book;
  Therefore, this advertisement is a would-be joke.

Thus the syllogism may be almost as powerful an agent in the detection
of humour as M. Bergson's criterion, to be described in a future
chapter.[57]

FOOTNOTES:

[56] [The following passage is almost word for word the same as a
passage on pp. 123-5 of Mr. Russell's _Problems of Philosophy_, first
published in 1912, a year after Mr. R*ss*ll's death. It is easy hastily
to conclude that Mr. Russell was indebted to Mr. R*ss*ll to a greater
degree than is usually supposed. But an examination of the internal
evidence leads us to another conclusion. The two texts, it will be
found, differ only in the names of the German Emperor, the Crown Prince
and the other personages being replaced, in the book of 1912, by those
of Messrs. Brown, Jones, Smith, and Robinson. Now, Mr. Russell, in a new
edition of his _Problems_ issued near the beginning of the European war
and before the Russian revolution, substituted "the Emperor of Russia"
for "the Emperor of China" of the first edition. Hence it seems quite
likely that Mr. Russell, who has always shown a tendency to substitute
existents for nonentities, wrote Mr. R*ss*ll's notes.--<sc>Ed.</sc>]

[57] [See Chapter XLII.--ED.]




