CHAPTER 42


    Then Job answered the Lord, and said,
    I know that thou canst do everything,
    And that no thought can be withholden from thee.
    Who is he that hideth counsel without knowledge?
    Therefore have I uttered that I understood not;
    Things too wonderful for me, which I knew not.
    Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak:
    I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me.
    I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear:
    But now mine eye seeth thee.
    Wherefore I abhor myself, and repent
    In dust and ashes.

And it was so, that after the Lord had spoken these words unto Job, the
Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath is kindled against thee,
and against thy two friends: for ye have not spoken of me the thing
that is right, as my servant Job hath. Therefore take unto you now
seven bullocks and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer up
for yourselves a burnt offering; and my servant Job shall pray for you:
for him will I accept: lest I deal with you after your folly, in that
ye have not spoken of me the thing which is right, like my servant Job.

So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar the
Naamathite went, and did according as the Lord commanded them: the Lord
also accepted Job. And the Lord turned the captivity of Job, when he
prayed for his friends: also the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had
before. Then came there unto him all his brethren, and all his sisters,
and all they that had been of his acquaintance before, and did eat
bread with him in his house: and they bemoaned him, and comforted him
over all the evil that the Lord had brought upon him: every man also
gave him a piece of money, and every one an ear-ring of gold. So the
Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning: for he had
fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand camels, and a thousand yoke
of oxen, and a thousand she asses. He had also seven sons and three
daughters.
    And he called the name of the first, Jemima; and
    the name of the second, Kezia; and the name of the
      third, Keren-happuch. And in all the land were no
        women found so fair as the daughters of Job:
          and their father gave them inheritance
            among their brethren. After this lived
              Job an hundred and forty years,
               and saw his sons, and his sons’
                sons, even four generations.
                  So Job died, being old
                    and full of days.




CECIL PALMER & HAYWARD


Contemporary Russian Composers

By M. MONTAGU-NATHAN

(Author of A History of Russian Music, Glinka, Moussorgsky,
Rimsky-Korsakof, The Piano Music of Skryabin, etc.)

With many portraits of famous Russian Musicians

  Demy 8vo      ⁷⁄₆ net      Cloth

In this volume M. Montagu-Nathan introduces to the public a number
of Russian composers, who may be said collectively to constitute
the contemporary Russian School of Musical Composition, and who are
maintaining for Russia its supremacy among the musical nations.

Of such composers as SKRYABIN, GLAZOUNOF, STRAVINSKY, REBIKOF, MEDTNER
and RAKHMANINOF, the author provides a biographical account, and a
detailed consideration of their creative work; their aims and ideals
are discussed, and their music subjected to a critical review.

There are some chapters devoted to those younger men whose music has
already attracted considerable attention in Russia, and whose names are
likely ere long to become familiar to the musical world.

An introductory section of the book is devoted to a survey of the
earlier period of musical activity in Russia, in which the founders
of the Nationalist movement are dealt with and their artistic labours
outlined.


THE PATH OF THE MODERN RUSSIAN STAGE, and other Essays

  By ALEXANDER BAKSHY      With 12 Illustrations

  Demy 8vo      ⁷⁄₆ net      Cloth

The modern revival in the art of the theatre has been particularly
marked in Russia where it has revolutionized many established
traditions, and has opened up new paths of development. The remarkable
progress of the Russian dramatic theatre is of special interest to the
student, since in no other country the new movement has been fruitful
of so many original ideas, or has had them realized in such striking
forms. In the present volume the guiding principles of the Russian
stage, such as “faithfulness to life” of the Moscow Art Theatre, the
various forms of “conventionalism” applied at the Theatre of Vera
Kommissarzhevsky, and the theories of “theatricality” lately propounded
by Meyerhold and Evreinov, are subjected to a close analysis. The
book also includes separate essays on the forms of the theatre, as
determined by the relationship between the audience and the stage, and
on the art aspects of the kinematograph.


THE GIRL AND THE FAUN

By EDEN PHILLPOTTS

With four Illustrations in colour, and Title Page and Border designed
by MR. FRANK BRANGWYN, A.R.A.

  Crown 4to      6/- net      Cloth

EDEN PHILLPOTTS has been called “the painter’s novelist,” and in this
work he combines his peculiar power of bringing colour and form to
the sense of his readers, with a story cast in classic mould, full
of explicit humour and implicit meaning. In his quest for beauty he
has never been more successful, while the co-operation of England’s
greatest painter, Frank Brangwyn, A.R.A., who contributes four full
page drawings in colour and title page border in black and white, will
place this work among the most notable productions of the War.


DELIGHT AND OTHER POEMS

By EDEN PHILLPOTTS

With twelve Illustrations in Black and White, by ALMA ELLIOTT

  Crown 8vo      ³⁄₆ net      Illustrated Wrapper

As a laughter maker Eden Phillpotts has “done his bit” during these
dark years, and all men are agreed that the relief of light literature
and humorous verse are very considerable in these days. They rest and
distract the mind, and remind us of Nietzsche’s aphorism that, “art is
with us that we may not perish of too much truth.”

A feature of the work is twelve illustrations by Miss Alma Elliott,
which will attract the attention of all lovers of art by their
wonderful craftsmanship and imagination, and every effort has been made
by the Publishers to make this volume one of the best gift books of the
season.


AN INTRODUCTION TO RUSSIAN MUSIC

By M. MONTAGU-NATHAN

Author of A History of Russian Music, Glinka, Moussorgsky,
Rimsky-Korsakof, Contemporary Russian Composers

  Crown 8vo      ⅙ net      Boards

AN INTRODUCTION TO RUSSIAN MUSIC is a small volume designed to afford
a concise account of the foundation and development of Russian musical
art. It consists of a series of chapters devoted to the most famous
Russian composers. Prefacing these is an Introduction to the subject;
following them comes a sketch of what the author has styled The New Age
in Russian Music; in this section will be found the names of such as
Stravinsky, Skryabin and Rebikof.


THE SILVER CHAIN

A Satire on Convention

By SIR WILLIAM BLAKE RICHMOND, K.C.B., R.A., etc.

  Illustrated Wrapper      500 pages
  Crown 8vo      6/- net      Cloth

SIR WILLIAM RICHMOND’S eminence in the world of Art and Letters will
command for his long novel “The Silver Chain” a wide circle of readers.
It is a work of great artistic achievement and of scholarship and
culture. Philosophy, psychology, a delightful sense of humour, subtle
analysis of the moods and motives of men and women, and a true and
artistic presentation of nature are the rich elements that make every
page of this book of absorbing interest.


A BOOK OF LAUGHTER

By EDWIN PUGH

Author of “Punch and Judy,” “Harry the Cockney,” etc.

Specially designed Illustrated Wrapper by F. GARDNER

  Crown 8vo      6/- net      Cloth

“When you want to laugh--mind you do.”--_Eden Phillpotts._

“Laughter is day and sobriety is night.”--_H. W. Beecher._

“Laugh when you can, it is a cheap medicine. Merriment is a philosophy,
not well understood. It is the sunny side of existence.”--_Lord Byron._

“A Book of Laughter” is a book to read for oneself, a book to keep
handy on one’s library shelves, and an ideal gift book from friend to
friend. A sense of humour is the most precious quality of man, and
laughter its most glorious attribute. The exposition of the philosophy
of laughter needs a born humorist, and that Mr. Edwin Pugh most
certainly is. “A Book of Laughter” is a subtle analysis of our various
ideas of humour, and illustrated throughout with numerous stories and
anecdotes, mostly original. There can be no question that Mr. Pugh’s
new work will prove to be the most humorous book of the year.


A YEAR IN THE GARDEN

A book about Gardens in Prose and Verse

Edited by NORAH ELIZABETH MUSTARD

With Illustrations in Colour by ELLEN WARRINGTON

  Crown 8vo      5/- net      Cloth

    “Oh, Happy Garden, whose seclusion deep
    Hath been so friendly to industrious hours.”

    --_Wordsworth._

An anthology from the works of great authors giving expression to their
appreciation and love for the gardens which in so many cases helped
to inspire their work. The passages are so arranged in the form of
a journal giving an extract in prose or verse for every day in the
year. A feature of the work is delightful illustrations in colour by
Miss Ellen Warrington, whose garden pictures have attained a wide and
well-merited reputation. The book is a welcome addition to the library
of the Garden, and will prove a most appropriate gift to Garden Lovers.


[Illustration]

  PRINTED BY
  THE MORLAND PRESS LTD
  LONDON
  S W

       *       *       *       *       *



Transcriber’s note




Minor punctuation errors have been changed without notice. Hyphenation
was standardized. Spelling has been retained as originally published.

Changes that have been made:

  Page  32: “And thou sowest up mine”        “And thou sewest up mine”
  Page  62: “out from the inhabitants”       “out from the inhabitant”
  Page 104: “of Neitzsche’s aphorism”        “of Nietzsche’s aphorism”
  Page 105: ““A book of Laughter" is”        ““A Book of Laughter" is”



