CHAPTER 2


Again there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves
before the Lord, and Satan came also among them to present himself
before the Lord. And the Lord said unto Satan, From whence comest
thou? And Satan answered the Lord, and said, From going to and fro in
the earth, and from walking up and down in it. And the Lord said unto
Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like
him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God,
and escheweth evil? and still he holdeth fast his integrity, although
thou movedest me against him to destroy him without cause. And Satan
answered the Lord, and said, Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath
will he give for his life. But put forth thine hand now, and touch
his bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face. And the
Lord said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thine hand; but save his life.
So went Satan forth from the presence of the Lord, and smote Job with
sore boils from the sole of his foot unto his crown. And he took him
a potsherd to scrape himself withal; and he sat down among the ashes.
Then said his wife unto him, Dost thou still retain thine integrity?
curse God, and die. But he said unto her, Thou speakest as one of the
foolish women speaketh. What? shall we receive good at the hand of God,
and shall we not receive evil? In all this did not Job sin with his
lips.

Now when Job’s three friends heard of all this evil that was come upon
him, they came every one from his own place; Eliphaz the Temanite, and
Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite: for they had made an
appointment together to come to mourn with him and to comfort him. And
when they lifted up their eyes afar off, and knew him not, they lifted
up their voice, and wept; and they rent every one his mantle, and
sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven. So they sat down with
him upon the ground seven days and seven nights, and none spake a word
unto him: for they saw that his grief was very great.




CHAPTER 3


After this opened Job his mouth, and cursed his day. And Job spake, and
said,

    Let the day perish wherein I was born,
    And the night in which it was said, There is a man child conceived.
    Let that day be darkness;
    Let not God regard it from above,
    Neither let the light shine upon it.
    Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it;
    Let a cloud dwell upon it;
    Let the blackness of the day terrify it.
    As for that night, let darkness seize upon it;
    Let it not be joined unto the days of the year,
    Let it not come into the number of the months.
    Lo, let that night be solitary,
    Let no joyful voice come therein.
    Let them curse it that curse the day,
    Who are ready to raise up their mourning.
    Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark;
    Let it look for light, but have none;
    Neither let it see the dawning of the day:
    Because it shut not up the doors of my mother’s womb,
    Nor hid sorrow from mine eyes.
    Why died I not from the womb?
    Why did I not give up the ghost when I came out of the belly?
    Why did the knees prevent me?
    Or why the breast that I should suck?
    For now should I have lain still and been quiet,
    I should have slept: then had I been at rest,
    With kings and counsellors of the earth,
    Which built desolate places for themselves;
    Or with princes that had gold,
    Who filled their houses with silver:
    Or as an hidden untimely birth I had not been;
    As infants which never saw light.
    There the wicked cease from troubling;
    And there the weary be at rest.
    There the prisoners rest together;
    They hear not the voice of the oppressor.
    The small and great are there;
    And the servant is free from his master.
    Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery,
    And life unto the bitter in soul;
    Which long for death, but it cometh not;
    And dig for it more than for hid treasures;
    Which rejoice exceedingly,
    And are glad, when they can find the grave?
    Why is light given to a man whose way is hid,
    And whom God hath hedged in?
    For my sighing cometh before I eat,
    And my roarings are poured out like the waters.
    For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me,
    And that which I was afraid of is come unto me.
    I was not in safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet;
    Yet trouble came.




