CHAPTER 28


    Surely there is a vein for the silver,
    And a place for gold where they fine it.
    Iron is taken out of the earth,
    And brass is molten out of the stone.
    He setteth an end to darkness,
    And searcheth out all perfection:
    The stones of darkness, and the shadow of death.
    The flood breaketh out from the inhabitant;
    Even the waters forgotten of the foot:
    They are dried up, they are gone away from men.
    As for the earth, out of it cometh bread:
    And under it is turned up as it were fire.
    The stones of it are the place of sapphires:
    And it hath dust of gold.
    There is a path which no fowl knoweth,
    And which the vulture’s eye hath not seen:
    The lion’s whelps have not trodden it,
    Nor the fierce lion passed by it.
    He putteth forth his hand upon the rock;
    He overturneth the mountains by the roots.
    He cutteth out rivers among the rocks;
    And his eye seeth every precious thing.
    He bindeth the floods from overflowing;
    And the thing that is hid bringeth he forth to light.
    But where shall wisdom be found?
    And where is the place of understanding?
    Man knoweth not the price thereof;
    Neither is it found in the land of the living.
    The depth saith, It is not with me:
    And the sea saith, It is not with me.
    It cannot be gotten for gold,
    Neither shall silver be weighed for the price thereof.
    It cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir,
    With the precious onyx, or the sapphire.
    The gold and the crystal cannot equal it:
    And the exchange of it shall not be for jewels of fine gold.
    No mention shall be made of coral, or of pearls:
    For the price of wisdom is above rubies.
    The topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it,
    Neither shall it be valued with pure gold.
    Whence then cometh wisdom?
    And where is the place of understanding?
    Seeing it is hid from the eyes of all living,
    And kept close from the fowls of the air.
    Destruction and death say,
    We have heard the fame thereof with our ears.
    God understandeth the way thereof,
    And he knoweth the place thereof.
    For he looketh to the ends of the earth,
    And seeth under the whole heaven;
    To make the weight for the winds;
    And he weigheth the waters by measure.
    When he made a decree for the rain,
    And a way for the lightning of the thunder:
    Then did he see it, and declare it;
    He prepared it, yea, and searched it out.
    And unto man he said,
    Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom;
    And to depart from evil is understanding.




CHAPTER 29


    Moreover Job continued his parable, and said,
    Oh that I were as in months past,
    As in the days when God preserved me;
    When his candle shined upon my head,
    And when by his light I walked through darkness;
    As I was in the days of my youth,
    When the secret of God was upon my tabernacle;
    When the Almighty was yet with me,
    When my children were about me;
    When I washed my steps with butter,
    And the rock poured me out rivers of oil.
    When I went out to the gate through the city,
    When I prepared my seat in the street:
    The young men saw me, and hid themselves:
    And the aged arose, and stood up.
    The princes refrained talking,
    And laid their hand on their mouth.
    The nobles held their peace,
    And their tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth.
    When the ear heard me, then it blessed me;
    And when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me:
    Because I delivered the poor that cried,
    And the fatherless, and him that had none to help him.
    The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me:
    And I caused the widow’s heart to sing for joy.
    I put on righteousness and it clothed me:
    My judgment was as a robe and a diadem.
    I was eyes to the blind,
    And feet was I to the lame.
    I was a father to the poor:
    And the cause which I knew not I searched out.
    And I brake the jaws of the wicked,
    And plucked the spoil out of his teeth.
    Then I said, I shall die in my nest,
    And I shall multiply my days as the sand.
    My root was spread out by the waters,
    And the dew lay all night upon my branch.
    My glory was fresh in me,
    And my bow was renewed in my hand.
    Unto me men gave ear, and waited,
    And kept silence at my counsel.
    After my words they spake not again;
    And my speech dropped upon them.
    And they waited for me as for the rain;
    And they opened their mouth wide as for the latter rain.
    If I laughed on them, they believed it not;
    And the light of my countenance they cast not down.
    I chose out their way, and sat chief,
    And dwelt as a king in the army,
    As one that comforteth the mourners.




