CHAPTER 6


    But Job answered and said,
    O that my grief were throughly weighed,
    And my calamity laid in the balances together!
    For now it would be heavier than the sand of the sea:
    Therefore my words are swallowed up.
    For the arrows of the Almighty are within me,
    The poison whereof drinketh up my spirit:
    The terrors of God do set themselves in array against me.
    Doth the wild ass bray when he hath grass?
    Or loweth the ox over his fodder?
    Can that which is unsavoury be eaten without salt?
    Or is there any taste in the white of an egg?
    The things that my soul refused to touch
    Are as my sorrowful meat.
    O that I might have my request;
    And that God would grant me the thing that I long for!
    Even that it would please God to destroy me;
    Then he would let loose his hand, and cut me off!
    Then should I yet have comfort;
    Yea, I would harden myself in sorrow: let him not spare;
    For I have not concealed the words of the Holy One.
    What is my strength, that I should hope?
    And what is mine end, that I should prolong my life?
    Is my strength the strength of stones?
    Or is my flesh of brass?
    Is not my help in me?
    And is wisdom driven quite from me?
    To him that is afflicted pity should be shewed from his friend;
    But he forsaketh the fear of the Almighty.
    My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook,
    And as the stream of brooks they pass away;
    Which are blackish by reason of the ice,
    And wherein the snow is hid:
    What time they wax warm, they vanish:
    When it is hot, they are consumed out of their place.
    The paths of their way are turned aside;
    They go to nothing, and perish.
    The troops of Tema looked,
    The companies of Sheba waited for them.
    They were confounded because they had hoped;
    They came thither, and were ashamed.
    For now ye are nothing;
    Ye see my casting down, and are afraid.
    Did I say, Bring unto me?
    Or, Give a reward for me of your substance?
    Or, Deliver me from the enemy’s hand?
    Or, Redeem me from the hand of the mighty?
    Teach me, and I will hold my tongue:
    And cause me to understand wherein I have erred.
    How forcible are right words!
    But what doth your arguing reprove?
    Do ye imagine to reprove words,
    And the speeches of one that is desperate, which are as wind?
    Yea, ye overwhelm the fatherless,
    And ye dig a pit for your friend.
    Now therefore be content, look upon me;
    For it is evident unto you if I lie.
    Return, I pray you, let it not be iniquity;
    Yea, return again, my righteousness is in it.
    Is there iniquity in my tongue?
    Cannot my taste discern perverse things?

[Illustration: And it was so, when the days of their feasting were
gone about, that Job rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt
offerings.]




CHAPTER 7


    Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth?
    Are not his days also like the days of an hireling?
    As a servant earnestly desireth the shadow,
    And as an hireling looketh for the reward of his work:
    So am I made to possess months of vanity,
    And wearisome nights are appointed to me.
    When I lie down, I say,
    When shall I arise, and the night be gone?
    And I am full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day.
    My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust;
    My skin is broken, and become loathsome.
    My days are swifter than a weaver’s shuttle,
    And are spent without hope.
    O remember that my life is wind:
    Mine eyes shall no more see good.
    The eye of him that hath seen me shall see me no more:
    Thine eyes are upon me, and I am not.
    As the cloud is consumed and vanisheth away:
    So he that goeth down to the grave shall come up no more.
    He shall return no more to his house,
    Neither shall his place know him any more.
    Therefore I will not refrain my mouth;
    I will speak in the anguish of my spirit;
    I will complain in the bitterness of my soul.
    Am I a sea, or a whale,
    That thou settest a watch over me?
    When I say, My bed shall comfort me,
    My couch shall ease my complaint;
    Then thou scarest me with dreams,
    And terrifiest me through visions:
    So that my soul chooseth strangling,
    And death rather than my life.
    I loathe it; I would not live alway:
    Let me alone; for my days are vanity.
    What is man, that thou shouldest magnify him?
    And that thou shouldest set thine heart upon him?
    And that thou shouldest visit him every morning,
    And try him every moment?
    How long wilt thou not depart from me,
    Nor let me alone till I swallow down my spittle?
    I have sinned; what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men?
    Why hast thou set me as a mark against thee,
    So that I am a burden to myself?
    And why dost thou not pardon my transgression, and
    take away mine iniquity?
    For now shall I sleep in the dust;
    And thou shalt seek me in the morning, but I shall not be.




