CHAPTER 10


    My soul is weary of my life;
    I will leave my complaint upon myself;
    I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.
    I will say unto God, Do not condemn me;
    Show me wherefore thou contendest with me.
    Is it good unto thee that thou shouldest oppress,
    That thou shouldest despise the work of thine hands,
    And shine upon the counsel of the wicked?
    Hast thou eyes of flesh?
    Or seest thou as man seeth?
    Are thy days as the days of man?
    Are thy years as man’s days,
    That thou inquirest after mine iniquity,
    And searchest after my sin?
    Thou knowest that I am not wicked;
    And there is none that can deliver out of thine hand.
    Thine hands have made me and fashioned me
    Together round about; yet thou dost destroy me.
    Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast made me as the clay;
    And wilt thou bring me into dust again?
    Has thou not poured me out as milk,
    And curdled me like cheese?
    Thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh,
    And hast fenced me with bones and sinews.
    Thou hast granted me life and favour,
    And thy visitation hath preserved my spirit.
    And these things hast thou hid in thine heart:
    I know that this is with thee.
    If I sin, then thou markest me,
    And thou wilt not acquit me from mine iniquity.
    If I be wicked, woe unto me;
    And if I be righteous, yet will I not lift up my head.
    I am full of confusion; therefore see thou mine affliction;
    For it increaseth. Thou huntest me as a fierce lion:
    And again thou showest thyself marvellous upon me.
    Thou renewest thy witnesses against me,
    And increasest thine indignation upon me;
    Changes and war are against me.
    Wherefore then hast thou brought me forth out of the womb?
    Oh that I had given up the ghost, and no eye had seen me!
    I should have been as though I had not been;
    I should have been carried from the womb to the grave.
    Are not my days few? cease then,
    And let me alone, that I may take comfort a little,
    Before I go whence I shall not return,
    Even to the land of darkness and the shadow of death;
    A land of darkness, as darkness itself;
    And of the shadow of death, without any order,
    And where the light is as darkness.




CHAPTER 11


    Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said,
    Should not the multitude of words be answered?
    And should a man full of talk be justified?
    Should thy lies make men hold their peace?
    And when thou mockest, shall no man make thee ashamed?
    For thou hast said, My doctrine is pure,
    And I am clean in thine eyes.
    But oh that God would speak,
    And open his lips against thee;
    And that he would shew thee the secrets of wisdom,
    That they are double to that which is!
    Know therefore that God exacteth of thee less than thine iniquity
      deserveth.
    Canst thou by searching find out God?
    Canst thou find out the Almighty unto perfection?
    It is as high as heaven; what canst thou do?
    Deeper than hell; what canst thou know?
    The measure thereof is longer than the earth,
    And broader than the sea.
    If he cut off, and shut up,
    Or gather together, then who can hinder him?
    For he knoweth vain men:
    He seeth wickedness also; will he not then consider it?
    For vain man would be wise,
    Though man be born like a wild ass’s colt.
    If thou prepare thine heart,
    And stretch out thine hands toward him;
    If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away,
    And let not wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles.
    For then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot;
    Yea, thou shalt be stedfast, and shalt not fear:
    Because thou shalt forget thy misery,
    And remember it as waters that pass away:
    And thine age shall be clearer than the noonday.
    Thou shalt shine forth, thou shalt be as the morning.
    And thou shalt be secure, because there is hope;
    Yea, thou shalt dig about thee, and thou shalt take thy rest in
      safety.
    Also thou shalt lie down, and none shall make thee afraid;
    Yea, many shall make suit unto thee.
    But the eyes of the wicked shall fail,
    And they shall not escape,
    And their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost.




