CHAPTER 12


    And Job answered and said,
    No doubt but ye are the people,
    And wisdom shall die with you.
    But I have understanding as well as you;
    I am not inferior to you:
    Yea, who knoweth not such things as these?
    I am as one mocked of his neighbour,
    Who calleth upon God, and he answereth him:
    The just upright man is laughed to scorn.
    He that is ready to slip with his feet
    Is as a lamp despised in the thought of him that is at ease.
    The tabernacles of robbers prosper,
    And they that provoke God are secure;
    Into whose hand God bringeth abundantly.
    But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee;
    And the fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee:
    Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee:
    And the fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee.
    Who knoweth not in all these
    That the hand of the Lord hath wrought this?
    In whose hand is the soul of every living thing,
    And the breath of all mankind.
    Doth not the ear try words?
    And the mouth taste his meat?
    With the ancient is wisdom;
    And in length of days understanding.
    With him is wisdom and strength,
    He hath counsel and understanding.
    Behold, he breaketh down and it cannot be built again:
    He shutteth up a man, and there can be no opening.
    Behold, he withholdeth the waters, and they dry up:
    Also he sendeth them out, and they overturn the earth.
    With him is strength and wisdom:
    The deceived and the deceiver are his.
    He leadeth counsellers away spoiled,
    And maketh the judges fools.
    He looseth the bond of kings,
    And girdeth their loins with a girdle.
    He leadeth princes away spoiled,
    And overthroweth the mighty.
    He removeth away the speech of the trusty,
    And taketh away the understanding of the aged.
    He poureth contempt upon princes,
    And weakeneth the strength of the mighty.
    He discovereth deep things out of darkness,
    And bringeth out to light the shadow of death.
    He increaseth the nations, and destroyeth them:
    He enlargeth the nations, and straiteneth them again.
    He taketh away the heart of the chief of the people of the earth,
    And causeth them to wander in a wilderness where there is no way.
    They grope in the dark without light,
    And he maketh them to stagger like a drunken man.




CHAPTER 13


    Lo, mine eye hath seen all this,
    Mine ear hath heard and understood it.
    What ye know, the same do I know also:
    I am not inferior unto you.
    Surely I would speak to the Almighty,
    And I desire to reason with God.
    But ye are forgers of lies,
    Ye are all physicians of no value.
    O that ye would altogether hold your peace!
    And it should be your wisdom.
    Hear now my reasoning,
    And hearken to the pleadings of my lips.
    Will ye speak wickedly for God?
    And talk deceitfully for him?
    Will ye accept his person?
    Will ye contend for God?
    Is it good that he should search you out?
    Or as one man mocketh another, do ye so mock him?
    He will surely reprove you,
    If ye do secretly accept persons.
    Shall not his excellency make you afraid?
    And his dread fall upon you?
    Your remembrances are like unto ashes,
    Your bodies to bodies of clay.
    Hold your peace, let me alone, that I may speak,
    And let come on me what will.
    Wherefore do I take my flesh in my teeth,
    And put my life in mine hand?
    Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him:
    But I will maintain mine own ways before him.
    He also shall be my salvation:
    For an hypocrite shall not come before him.
    Hear diligently my speech,
    And my declaration with your ears.
    Behold now, I have ordered my cause;
    I know that I shall be justified.
    Who is he that will plead with me?
    For now, if I hold my tongue, I shall give up the ghost.
    Only do not two things unto me:
    Then will I not hide myself from thee.
    Withdraw thine hand far from me:
    And let not thy dread make me afraid.
    Then call thou, and I will answer:
    Or let me speak, and answer thou me.
    How many are mine iniquities and sins?
    Make me to know my transgression and my sin.
    Wherefore hidest thou thy face,
    And boldest me for thine enemy?
    Wilt thou break a leaf driven to and fro?
    And wilt thou pursue the dry stubble?
    For thou writest bitter things against me,
    And makest me to possess the iniquities of my youth.
    Thou puttest my feet also in the stocks, and lookest narrowly unto
      all my paths;
    Thou settest a print upon the heels of my feet.
    And he, as a rotten thing, consumeth,
    As a garment that is moth eaten.

[Illustration: Then said his wife unto him, “Dost thou still retain
thine integrity? Curse God, and die.”]




