CHAPTER 36


    Elihu also proceeded, and said,
    Suffer me a little, and I will shew thee
    That I have yet to speak on God’s behalf.
    I will fetch my knowledge from afar,
    And will ascribe righteousness to my Maker.
    For truly my words shall not be false:
    He that is perfect in knowledge is with thee.
    Behold, God is mighty, and despiseth not any.
    He is mighty in strength and wisdom.
    He preserveth not the life of the wicked:
    But giveth right to the poor.
    He withdraweth not his eyes from the righteous:
    But with kings are they on the throne;
    Yea, he doth establish them for ever, and they are exalted.
    And if they be bound in fetters,
    And be holden in cords of affliction;
    Then he showeth them their work,
    And their transgressions that they have exceeded.
    He openeth also their ear to discipline,
    And commandeth that they return from iniquity.
    If they obey and serve him,
    They shall spend their days in prosperity,
    And their years in pleasures.
    But if they obey not, they shall perish by the sword,
    And they shall die without knowledge.
    But the hypocrites in heart heap up wrath:
    They cry not when he bindeth them.
    They die in youth,
    And their life is among the unclean.
    He delivereth the poor in his affliction,
    And openeth their ears in oppression.
    Even so would he have removed thee out of the strait
    Into a broad place, where there is no straitness;
    And that which should be set on thy table should be full of fatness.
    But thou hast fulfilled the judgment of the wicked:
    Judgment and justice take hold on thee.
    Because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his
      stroke:
    Then a great ransom cannot deliver thee.
    Will he esteem thy riches? no, not gold.
    Nor all the forces of strength.
    Desire not the night,
    When people are cut off in their place.
    Take heed, regard not iniquity:
    For this hast thou chosen rather than affliction.
    Behold, God exalteth by his power:
    Who teacheth like him?
    Who hath enjoined him his way?
    Or who can say, Thou hast wrought iniquity?
    Remember that thou magnify his work,
    Which men behold.
    Every man may see it;
    Man may behold it afar off.
    Behold, God is great, and we know him not,
    Neither can the number of his years be searched out.
    For he maketh small the drops of water:
    They pour down rain according to the vapour thereof:
    Which the clouds do drop
    And distil upon man abundantly.
    Also can any understand the spreadings of the clouds,
    Or the noise of his tabernacle?
    Behold, he spreadeth his light upon it,
    And covereth the bottom of the sea.
    For by them judgeth he the people;
    He giveth meat in abundance.
    With clouds he covereth the light;
    And commandeth it not to shine by the cloud that cometh betwixt.
    The noise thereof sheweth concerning it,
    The cattle also concerning the vapour.




CHAPTER 37


    At this also my heart trembleth,
    And is moved out of his place.
    Hear attentively the noise of his voice,
    And the sound that goeth out of his mouth.
    He directeth it under the whole heaven,
    And his lightning unto the ends of the earth.
    After it a voice roareth:
    He thundereth with the voice of his excellency;
    And he will not stay them when his voice is heard.
    God thundereth marvellously with his voice;
    Great things doeth he, which we cannot comprehend.
    For he saith to the snow, Be thou on the earth;
    Likewise to the small rain,
    And to the great rain of his strength.
    He sealeth up the hand of every man;
    That all men may know his work.
    Then the beasts go into dens,
    And remain in their places.
    Out of the south cometh the whirlwind:
    And cold out of the north.
    By the breath of God frost is given:
    And the breadth of the waters is straitened.
    Also by watering he wearieth the thick cloud:
    He scattereth his bright cloud:
    And it is turned round about by his counsels:
    That they may do whatsoever he commandeth them
    Upon the face of the world in the earth.
    He causeth it to come, whether for correction,
    Or for his land, or for mercy.
    Hearken unto this, O Job:
    Stand still, and consider the wondrous works of God.
    Dost thou know when God disposed them,
    And caused the light of his clouds to shine?
    Dost thou know the balancings of the clouds,
    The wondrous works of him which is perfect in knowledge?
    How thy garments are warm,
    When he quieteth the earth by the south wind?
    Hast thou with him spread out the sky,
    Which is strong, and as a molten looking glass?
    Teach us what we shall say unto him;
    For we cannot order our speech by reason of darkness.
    Shall it be told him that I speak?
    If a man speak, surely he shall be swallowed up.
    And now men see not the bright light which is in the clouds:
    But the wind passeth, and cleanseth them.
    Fair weather cometh out of the north:
    With God is terrible majesty.
    Touching the Almighty we cannot find him out: he is excellent in
      power,
    And in judgment, and in plenty of justice: he will not afflict.
    Men do therefore fear him:
    He respecteth not any that are wise of heart.




