CHAPTER V

CONCLUSION


Now that we have examined in some detail the most important phases of
the Greek view of life, it may be as well to endeavour briefly to
recapitulate and bring to a point the various considerations that have
been advanced.

But, first, one preliminary remark must be made. Throughout the
preceding pages we have made no attempt to distinguish the Greek "view"
from the Greek "ideal"; we have interpreted their customs and
institutions, political, social, or religious, by the conceptions and
ideals of philosophers and poets, and have thus, it may be objected,
made the mistake of identifying the blind work of popular instinct with
the theories and aspirations of conscious thought.

Such a procedure, no doubt, would be illegitimate if it were supposed to
imply that Greek institutions were the result of a deliberate intention
consciously adopted and approved by the average man. Like other social
products they grew and were not made; and it was only the few who
realised fully all that they implied. But on the other hand it is a
distinguishing characteristic of the Greek age that the ideal formulated
by thought was the direct outcome of the facts. That absolute separation
of what ought to be from what is which continues to haunt and vitiate
modern life had not yet been made in ancient Greece. Plato, idealist
though he be, is yet rooted in the facts of his age; his perfect
republic he bases on the institutions of Sparta and Crete; his perfect
man he shapes on the lines of the Greek citizen. That dislocation of the
spirit which opposed the body to the soul, heaven to earth, the church
to the state, the man of the world to the priest, was altogether alien
to the consciousness of the Greeks. To them the world of fact was also
the world of the ideal; the conceptions which inspired their highest
aims were already embodied in their institutions and reflected in their
life; and the realisation of what ought to be involved not the
destruction of what was, but merely its perfecting on its own lines.

While then, on the one hand, it would be ridiculous so to idealise the
civilisation of the Greeks as to imply that they had eliminated discord
and confusion, yet, on the other, it is legitimate to say that they had
built on the plan of the ideal, and that their life both in public and
private was, by the very law of its existence, an effort to realise
explicitly that type of Good which was already implicitly embodied in
its structure.

The ideal, in a word, in ancient Greece, was organically related to the
real; and that is why it is possible to identify the Greek view with the
Greek ideal.

Bearing this in mind we may now proceed to recapitulate our conclusions
as to what that view was. And, first, let us take the side of
speculation. Here we are concerned not with the formal systems of Greek
thought, but with that half-unconscious working of imagination as much
as of mind whose expression was their popular religion. Of this
religion, as we saw, the essential feature was that belief in
anthropomorphic gods, by virtue of which a reconciliation was effected
between man and the powers whether of nature or of his own soul. Behind
phenomena, physical or psychic, beings were conceived of like nature
with man, beings, therefore, whose actions he could interpret and whose
motives he could comprehend. For his imagination, if not for his
intellect, a harmony was thus induced between himself and the world that
was not he. A harmony! and in this word we have the key to the dominant
idea of the Greek civilisation.

For, turning now to the practical side, we find the same impulse to
reconcile divergent elements. That antithesis of soul and body which was
emphasised in the mediaeval view of life and dominates still our current
ethical conceptions, does not appear in the normal consciousness of the
Greeks. Their ideal for the individual life included the perfection of
the body; beauty no less than goodness was the object of their quest,
and they believed that the one implied the other. But since the
perfection of the body required the co-operation of external aids, they
made these also essential to their ideal. Not merely virtue of the soul,
not merely health and beauty of the body, but noble birth, sufficient
wealth and a good name among men, were included in their conception of
the desirable life. Harmony, in a word, was the end they pursued,
harmony of the soul with the body and of the body with its environment;
and it is this that distinguishes their ethical ideal from that which in
later times has insisted on the fundamental antagonism of the inner to
the outer life, and made the perfection of the spirit depend on the
mortification of the flesh.

The same ideal of harmony dominates the Greek view of the relation of
the individual to the state. This relation, it is true, is often
described as one in which the parts were subordinated to the whole; but
more accurately it may be said that they were conceived as finding in
the whole their realisation. The perfect individual was the individual
in the state; the faculties essential to his excellence had there only
their opportunity of development; the qualities defined as virtues had
there only their significance; and it was only in so far as he was a
citizen that a man was properly a man at all. Thus that opposition
between the individual and the state which perplexes our own society had
hardly begun to define itself in Greece. If on the one hand the state
made larger claims on the liberty of the individual, on the other, the
liberty of the individual consisted in a response to the claims. So that
in this department also harmony was maintained by the Greeks between
elements which have developed in modern times their latent antagonism.

Thus, both in speculation and in practice, in his relation to nature and
in his relation to the state, both internally, between the divergent
elements of which his own being was composed, and externally between
himself and the world that was not he, it was the aim, conscious or
unconscious, and, in part at least, the achievement of the Greeks, to
create and maintain an essential harmony. The antitheses of which we in
our own time are so painfully and increasingly aware, between Man as a
moral being and Nature as an indifferent law, between the flesh and the
spirit, between the individual and the state, do not appear as factors
in that dominant consciousness of the Greeks under whose influence their
religion, their institutions and their customary ideals had been formed.
And so regarded, in general, under what may fairly be called its most
essential aspect, the Greek civilisation is rightly described as that of
harmony.

But, on the other hand, and this is the point to which we must now turn
our attention, this harmony which was the dominant feature in the
consciousness of the Greeks and the distinguishing characteristic of
their epoch in the history of the world, was nevertheless, after all,
but a transitory and imperfect attempt to reconcile elements whose
antagonism was too strong for the solution thus proposed. The factors of
disruption were present from the beginning in the Greek ideal; and it
was as much by the development of its own internal contradictions as by
the invasion of forces from without that that fabric of magical beauty
was destined to fall. These contradictions have already been indicated
at various points in the text, and it only remains to bring them
together in a concluding summary.

On the side of speculation, the religion of the Greeks was open, as we
saw, to a double criticism. On the one hand, the ethical conceptions
embodied in those legends of the gods which were the product of an
earlier and more barbarous age, had become to the contemporaries of
Plato revolting or ridiculous. On the other hand, to metaphysical
speculation, not only was the existence of the gods unproved, but their
mutually conflicting activities, their passions and their caprice, were
incompatible with that conception of universal law which the developing
reason evolved as the form of truth. The reconciliation of man with
nature which had been effected by the medium of anthropomorphic gods was
a harmony only to the imagination, not to the mind. Under the action of
the intellect the unstable combination was dissolved and the elements
that had been thus imperfectly joined fell back into their original
opposition. The religion of the Greeks was destroyed by the internal
evolution of their own consciousness.

And in the sphere of practice we are met with a similar dissolution. The
Greek conception of excellence included, as we saw, not only bodily
health and strength, but such a share at least of external goods as
would give a man scope for his own self-perfection. And since these
conditions were not attainable by all, the sacrifice of the majority to
the minority was frankly accepted and the pursuit of the ideal confined
to a privileged class.

Such a conception, however, was involved in internal contradictions. For
in the first place, even for the privileged few, an excellence which
depended on external aids was, at the best, uncertain and problematical.
Misfortune and disease were possibilities that could not be ignored; old
age and death were imperative certainties; and no care, no art, no
organisation of society, could obviate the inherent incompatibility of
individual perfection with the course of nature. Harmony between the
individual and his environment was perhaps more nearly achieved by and
for the aristocracy of ancient Greece than by any society of any other
age. But such a harmony, even at the best, is fleeting and precarious;
and no perfection of life delivers from death.

And, in the second place, to secure even this imperfect realisation, it
was necessary to restrict the universal application of the ideal.
Excellence, in Greece, was made the end for some, not for all. But this
limitation was felt, in the development of consciousness, to be self-
contradictory; and the next great system of ethics that succeeded to
that of Aristotle, postulated an end of action that should be at once
independent of the aids of fortune and open alike to all classes of
mankind. The ethics of a privileged class were thus expanded into the
ethics of humanity; but this expansion was fatal to its essence, which
had depended on the very limitations by which it was destroyed.

With the Greek civilisation beauty perished from the world. Never again
has it been possible for man to believe that harmony is in fact the
truth of all existence. The intellect and the moral sense have developed
imperative claims which can be satisfied by no experience known to man.
And as a consequence of this the goal of desire which the Greeks could
place in the present, has been transferred, for us, to a future
infinitely remote, which nevertheless is conceived as attainable.
Dissatisfaction with the world in which we live and determination to
realise one that shall be better, are the prevailing characteristics of
the modern spirit. The development is one into whose meaning and end
this is not the place to enter. It is enough that we feel it to be
inevitable; that the harmony of the Greeks contained in itself the
factors of its own destruction; and that in spite of the fascination
which constantly fixes our gaze on that fairest and happiest halting-
place in the secular march of man, it was not there, any more than here,
that he was destined to find the repose of that ultimate reconciliation
which was but imperfectly anticipated by the Greeks.







