CHAPTER II

THE GREEK VIEW OF THE STATE


Section 1. The Greek State a "City."

The present kingdom of Greece is among the smallest of European states;
but to the Greeks it would have appeared too large to be a state at all.
Within that little peninsular whose whole population and wealth are so
insignificant according to modern ideas, were comprised in classical
times not one but many flourishing polities. And the conception of an
amalgamation of these under a single government was so foreign to the
Greek idea, that even to Aristotle, the clearest and most comprehensive
thinker of his age, it did not present itself even as a dream. To him,
as to every ancient Greek, the state meant the City--meant, that is to
say, an area about the size of an English county, with a population,
perhaps, of some hundred thousand, self-governing and independent of any
larger political whole.

If we can imagine the various County Councils of England emancipated
from the control of Parliament and set free to make their own laws,
manage their own finance and justice, raise troops and form with one
another alliances, offensive and defensive, we may form thus some
general idea of the political institutions of the Greeks and some
measure of their difference from our own.

Nor must it be supposed that the size of the Greek state was a mere
accident in its constitution, that it might have been indefinitely
enlarged and yet regained its essential character. On the contrary, the
limitation of size belonged to its very notion. The greatest state, says
Aristotle, is not the one whose population is most numerous; on the
contrary, after a certain limit of increase has been passed, the state
ceases to be a state at all. "Ten men are too few for a city; a hundred
thousand are too many." Not only London, it seems, but every one of our
larger towns, would have been too big for the Greek idea of a state; and
as for the British empire, the very conception of it would have been
impossible to the Greeks.

Clearly, their view on this point is fundamentally different from our
own. Their civilisation was one of "city-states", not of kingdoms and
empires; and their whole political outlook was necessarily determined by
this condition. Generalising from their own experience, they had formed
for themselves a conception of the state not the less interesting to us
that it is unfamiliar; and this conception it will be the business of
the present chapter to illustrate and explain.


Section 2. The Relation of the State to the Citizen.

First, let us consider the relation of the state to the citizens--that
is to say, to that portion of the community, usually a minority, which
was possessed of full political rights. It is here that we have the key
to that limitation of size which we have seen to be essential to the
idea of the city-state. For, in the Greek view, to be a citizen of a
state did not merely imply the payment of taxes, and the possession of a
vote; it implied a direct and active co-operation in all the functions
of civil and military life. A citizen was normally a soldier, a judge,
and a member of the governing assembly; and all his public duties he
performed not by deputy, but in person. He must be able frequently to
attend the centre of government; hence the limitation of territory. He
must be able to speak and vote in person in the assembly; hence the
limitation of numbers. The idea of representative government never
occurred to the Greeks; but if it had occurred to them, and if they had
adopted it, it would have involved a revolution in their whole
conception of the citizen. Of that conception, direct personal service
was the cardinal point--service in the field as well as in the council;
and to substitute for personal service the mere right to a vote would
have been to destroy the form of the Greek state. Such being the idea
the Greeks had formed, based on their own experience, of the relation of
the citizen to the state, it follows that to them a society so complex
as our own would hardly have answered to the definition of a state at
all. Rather they would have regarded it as a mere congeries of
unsatisfactory human beings, held together, partly by political, partly
by economic compulsion, but lacking that conscious identity of interest
with the community to which they belong which alone constitutes the
citizen. A man whose main pre-occupation should be with his trade or his
profession, and who should only become aware of his corporate relations
when called upon for his rates and taxes--a man, that is to say, in the
position of an ordinary Englishman--would not have seemed to the Greeks
to be a full and proper member of a state. For the state, to them, was
more than a machinery, it was a spiritual bond; and "public life", as we
call it, was not a thing to be taken up and laid aside at pleasure, but
a necessary and essential phase of the existence of a complete man.

This relation of the citizen to the state, as it was conceived by the
Greeks, is sometimes described as though it involved the sacrifice of
the individual to the whole. And in a certain sense, perhaps, this is
true. Aristotle, for instance, declares that no one must suppose he
belongs to himself, but rather that all alike belong to the state; and
Plato, in the construction of his ideal republic, is thinking much less
of the happiness of the individual citizens, than of the symmetry and
beauty of the whole as it might appear to a disinterested observer from
without. Certainly it would have been tedious and irksome to any but his
own ideal philosopher to live under the rule of that perfect polity.
Individual enterprise, bent, and choice is rigorously excluded. Nothing
escapes the net of legislation, from the production of children to the
fashion of houses, clothes, and food. It is absurd, says the ruthless
logic of this mathematician among the poets, for one who would regulate
public life to leave private relations uncontrolled; if there is to be
order at all, it must extend through and through; no moment, no detail
must be withdrawn from the grasp of law. And though in this, Plato, no
doubt, goes far beyond the common sense of the Greeks, yet he is not
building altogether in the air. The republic which he desiderates was
realised, as we shall see, partially at least, in Sparta. So that his
insistence on the all-pervading domination of the state, exaggerated
though it be, is exaggerated on the actual lines of Greek practice, and
may be taken as indicative of a real distinction and even antithesis
between their point of view and that which prevails at present in most
modern states.

But on the other hand such a phrase as the "sacrifice of the individual
to the whole", to this extent at least is misleading, that it
presupposes an opposition between the end of the individual and that of
the State, such as was entirely foreign to the Greek conception. The
best individual, in their view, was also the best citizen; the two
ideals not only were not incompatible, they were almost
indistinguishable. When Aristotle defines a state as "an association of
similar persons for the attainment of the best life possible", he
implies not only that society is the means whereby the individual
attains his ideal, but also that that ideal includes the functions of
public life. The state in his view is not merely the convenient
machinery that raises a man above his animal wants and sets him free to
follow his own devices; it is itself his end, or at least a part of it.
And from this it follows that the regulations of the state were not
regarded by the Greeks--as they are apt to be by modern men--as so many
vexatious, if necessary, restraints on individual liberty; but rather as
the expression of the best and highest nature of the citizen, as the
formula of the conduct which the good man would naturally prescribe to
himself. So that, to get a clear conception of what was at least the
Greek ideal, however imperfectly it may have been attained in practice,
we ought to regard the individual not as sacrificed to, but rather as
realising himself in the whole. We shall thus come nearer to what seems
to have been the point of view not only of Aristotle and of Plato, but
also of the average Greek man.


Section 3. The Greek View of Law.

For nothing is more remarkable in the political theory of the Greeks
than the respect they habitually express for law. Early legislators were
believed to have been specially inspired by the divine power--Lycurgus,
for instance, by Apollo, and Minos by Zeus; and Plato regards it as a
fundamental condition of the well-being of any state that this view
should prevail among its citizens. Nor was this conception of the divine
origin of law confined to legend and to philosophy; we find it expressed
in the following passage of Demosthenes, addressed to a jury of average
Athenians, and representing at any rate the conventional and orthodox,
if not the critical view of the Greek public:

"The whole life of men, O Athenians, whether they inhabit a great city
or a small one, is governed by nature and by laws. Of these, nature is a
thing irregular, unequal, and peculiar to the individual possessor; laws
are regular, common, and the same for all. Nature, if it be depraved,
has often vicious desires; therefore you will find people of that sort
falling into error. Laws desire what is just and honourable and useful;
they seek for this, and, when it is found, it is set forth as a general
ordinance, the same and alike for all; and that is law, which all men
ought to obey for many reasons, and especially because every law is an
invention and gift of the Gods, a resolution of wise men, a corrective
of errors intentional and unintentional, a compact of the whole state,
according to which all who belong to the state ought to live."
[Footnote: Demosth. in Aristogeit. Section 17.--Translation by C. R.
Kennedy.]

In this opposition of Law, as the universal principle, to Nature, as
individual caprice, is implied a tacit identification of Law and
Justice. The identification, of course, is never complete in any state,
and frequently enough is not even approximate. No people were more
conscious of this than the Greeks, none, as we shall see later, pushed
it more vigorously home. But still, the positive conception which lay at
the root of their society was that which finds expression in the passage
we have quoted, and which is stated still more explicitly in the
"Memorabilia" of Xenophon, where that admirable example of the good and
efficient citizen represents his hero Socrates as maintaining, without
hesitation or reserve, that "that which is in accordance with law is
just." The implication, of course, is not that laws cannot be improved,
that they do at any point adequately correspond to justice; but that
justice has an objective and binding validity, and that Law is a serious
and on the whole a successful attempt to embody it in practice. This was
the conviction predominant in the best period of Greece; the conviction
under which her institutions were formed and flourished, and whose
overthrow by the philosophy of a critical age was coincident with, if it
was not the cause of, her decline.


Section 4. Artisans and Slaves.

We have now arrived at a general idea of the nature of the Greek state,
and of its relations to the individual citizen. But there were also
members of the state who were not citizens at all; there was the class
of labourers and traders, who, in some states at least, had no political
rights; and the class of slaves who had nowhere any rights at all. For
in the Greek conception the citizen was an aristocrat. His excellence
was thought to consist in public activity; and to the performance of
public duties he ought therefore to be able to devote the greater part
of his time and energy. But the existence of such a privileged class
involved the existence of a class of producers to support them; and the
producers, by the nature of their calling, be they slave or free, were
excluded from the life of the perfect citizen. They had not the
necessary leisure to devote to public business; neither had they the
opportunity to acquire the mental and physical qualities which would
enable them to transact it worthily. They were therefore regarded by the
Greeks as an inferior class; in some states, in Sparta, for example, and
in Thebes, they were excluded from political rights; and even in Athens,
the most democratic of all the Greek communities, though they were
admitted to the citizenship and enjoyed considerable political
influence, they never appear to have lost the stigma of social
inferiority. And the distinction which was thus more or less definitely
drawn in practice between the citizens proper and the productive class,
was even more emphatically affirmed in theory. Aristotle, the most
balanced of all the Greek thinkers and the best exponent of the normal
trend of their ideas, excludes the class of artisans from the
citizenship of his ideal state on the ground that they are debarred by
their occupation from the characteristic excellence of man. And Plato,
though here as elsewhere he pushes the normal view to excess, yet, in
his insistence on the gulf that separates the citizen from the mechanic
and the trader, is in sympathy with the general current of Greek ideas.
His ideal state is one which depends mainly on agriculture; in which
commerce and exchange are reduced to the smallest possible dimensions;
in which every citizen is a landowner, forbidden to engage in trade; and
in which the productive class is excluded from all political rights. The
obverse then, of the Greek citizen, who realised in the state his
highest life, was an inferior class of producers who realised only the
means of subsistence. But within this class again was a distinction yet
more fundamental--the distinction between free men and slaves. In the
majority of the Greek states the slaves were the greater part of the
population; in Athens, to take an extreme case, at the close of the
fourth century, they are estimated at 400,000, to 100,000 citizens. They
were employed not only in domestic service, but on the fields, in
factories and in mines, and performed, in short, a considerable part of
the productive labour in the state. A whole large section, then, of the
producers in ancient Greece had no social or political rights at all.
They existed simply to maintain the aristocracy of citizens, for whom
and in whom the state had its being. Nor was this state of things in the
least repugnant to the average Greek mind. Nothing is more curious to
the modern man than the temper in which Aristotle approaches this theme.
Without surprise or indignation, but in the tone of an impartial,
scientific inquirer, he asks himself the question whether slavery is
natural, and answers it in the affirmative. For, he argues, though in
any particular case, owing to the uncertain chances of fortune and war,
the wrong person may happen to be enslaved, yet, broadly speaking, the
general truth remains, that there are some men so inferior  to others
that they ought to be despotically governed, by the same right and for
the same good end that the body ought to be governed by the soul. Such
men, he maintains, are slaves by nature; and it is as much to their
interest to be ruled as it is to their masters' interest to rule them.
To this class belong, for example, all who are naturally incapable of
any but physical activity. These should be regarded as detachable limbs,
so to speak, of the man who owns them, instruments of his will, like
hands and feet; or, to use Aristotle's own phrase, "the slave is a tool
with life in it, and the tool a lifeless slave."

The relation between master and slave thus frankly conceived by the
Greeks, did not necessarily imply, though it was quite compatible with,
brutality of treatment. The slave might be badly treated, no doubt, and
very frequently was, for his master had almost absolute control over
him, life and limb; but, as we should expect, it was clearly recognised
by the best Greeks that the treatment should be genial and humane.
"There is a certain mutual profit and kindness," says Aristotle,
"between master and slave, in all cases where the relation is natural,
not merely imposed from without by convention or force." [Footnote:
Arist. Pol. I. 7. 1255 b 12] And Plato insists on the duty of neither
insulting nor outraging a slave, but treating him rather with even
greater fairness than if he were in a position of equality.

Still, there can be no doubt that the Greek conception of slavery is one
of the points in which their view of life runs most counter to our own.
Centuries of Christianity have engendered in us the conviction, or
rather, the instinct, that men are equal at least to this extent, that
no one has a right explicitly to make of another a mere passive
instrument of his will--that every man, in short, must be regarded as an
end in himself. Yet even here the divergence between the Greek and the
modern view is less extreme than it appears at first sight. For the
modern man, in spite of his perfectly genuine belief in equality (in the
sense in which we have just defined the word), does nevertheless, when
he is confronted with racial differences, recognise degrees of
inferiority so extreme, that he is practically driven into the
Aristotelian position that some men are naturally slaves. The American,
for example, will hardly deny that such is his attitude towards the
negro. The negro, in theory, is the equal, politically and socially, of
the white man; in practice, he is excluded from the vote, from the
professions, from the amenities of social intercourse, and even, as we
have recently learnt, from the most elementary forms of justice. The
general and a priori doctrine of equality is shattering itself against
the actual facts; and the old Greek conception, "the slave by nature",
may be detected behind the mask of the Christian ideal. And while thus,
even in spite of itself, the modern view is approximating to that of the
Greeks, on the other hand the Greek view by its own evolution was
already beginning to anticipate our own. Even Aristotle, in formulating
his own conception of slavery, finds it necessary to observe that though
it be true that some men are naturally slaves, yet in practice, under
conditions which give the victory to force, it may happen that the
"natural" slave becomes the master, and the "natural" master is degraded
to a slave. This is already a serious modification of his doctrine. And
other writers, pushing the contention further, deny altogether the
theory of natural slavery. "No man," says the poet Philemon, "was ever
born a slave by nature. Fortune only has put men in that position." And
Euripides, the most modern of the Greeks, writes in the same strain:
"One thing only disgraces a slave, and that is the name. In all other
respects a slave, if he be good, is no worse than a freeman." [Footnote:
Euripides, Ion. 854]

It seems then that the distinction between the Greek and the modern
point of view is not so profound or so final as it appears at first
sight. Still, the distinction, broadly speaking, is there. The Greeks,
on the whole, were quite content to sacrifice the majority to the
minority. Their position, as we said at the outset, was fundamentally
aristocratic; they exaggerated rather than minimised the distinctions
between men--between the Greek and the barbarian, the freeman and the
slave, the gentleman and the artisan--regarding them as natural and
fundamental, not as the casual product of circumstances. The "equality"
which they sought in a well-ordered state was proportional not
arithmetical--the attribution to each of his peculiar right, not of
equal rights to all. Some were born to rule, others to serve; some to be
ends, others to be means; and the problem to be solved was not how to
obliterate these varieties of tone, but how to compose them into an
ordered harmony.

In a modern state, on the other hand, though class distinctions are
clearly enough marked, yet the point of view from which they are
regarded is fundamentally different. They are attributed rather to
accidents of fortune than to varieties of nature. The artisan, for
example, ranks no doubt lower than the professional man; but no one
maintains that he is a different kind of being, incapable by nature, as
Aristotle asserts, of the characteristic excellence of man. The
distinction admitted is rather one of wealth than of natural calling,
and may be obliterated by ability and good luck. Neither in theory nor
in practice does the modern state recognise any such gulf as that which,
in ancient Greece, separated the freeman from the slave, or the citizen
from the non-citizen.


Section 5. The Greek State Primarily Military, not Industrial.

The source of this divergence of view must be sought in the whole
circumstances and character of the Greek states. Founded in the
beginning by conquest, many of them still retained, in their internal
structure, the marks of their violent origin. The citizens, for example,
of Sparta and of Crete, were practically military garrisons, settled in
the midst of a hostile population. These were extreme cases; and
elsewhere, no doubt, the distinction between the conquerors and the
conquered had disappeared. Still, it had sufficed to mould the
conception and ideal of the citizen as a member of a privileged and
superior class, whose whole energies were devoted to maintaining, by
council and war, not only the prosperity, but the very existence of the
state. The original citizen, moreover, would be an owner of land, which
would be tilled for him by a subject class. Productive labour would be
stamped, from the outset, with the stigma of inferiority; commerce would
grow up, if at all, outside the limits of the landed aristocracy, and
would have a struggle to win for itself any degree of social and
political recognition. Such were the conditions that produced the Greek
conception of the citizen. In some states, such as Sparta, they
continued practically unchanged throughout the best period of Greek
history; in others, such as Athens, they were modified by the growth of
a commercial population, and where that was the case the conception of
the citizen was modified too, and the whole polity assumed a democratic
character. Yet never, as we have seen, even in the most democratic
states, was the modern conception of equality admitted. For, in the
first place, the institution of slavery persisted, to stamp the mass of
producers as an inferior caste; and in the second place, trade, even in
the states where it was most developed, hardly attained a preponderating
influence. The ancient state was and remained primarily military. The
great industrial questions which agitate modern states either did not
exist at all in Greece, or assumed so simple a form that they did not
rise to the surface of political life. [Footnote: There was, of course,
the general opposition between rich and poor (see below). But not those
infinitely complex relations which are the problems of modern
statesmanship.] How curious it is, for example, from the modern point of
view, to find Plato, a citizen of the most important trading centre of
Greece, dismissing in the following brief sentence the whole commercial
legislation of his ideal state:

"As to those common business transactions between private individuals in
the market, including, if you please, the contracts of artisans, libels,
assaults, law-proceedings, and the impanelling of juries, or again
questions relating to tariffs, and the collection of such customs as may
be necessary in the market or in the harbours, and generally all
regulations of the market, the police, the custom-house, and the like;
shall we condescend to legislate at all on such matters?

"No, it is not worth while to give directions on these points to good
and cultivated men: for in most cases they will have little difficulty
in discovering all the legislation required." [Footnote: Plato, Rep. IV.
425.--Translated by Davies and Vaughan.]

In fact, throughout his treatise it is the non-commercial or military
class with which Plato is almost exclusively concerned; and in taking
that line he is so far at least in touch with reality that that class
was the one which did in fact predominate in the Greek state; and that
even where, as in Athens, the productive class became an important
factor in political life, it was never able altogether to overthrow the
aristocratic conception of the citizen.

And with that conception, we must add, was bound up the whole Greek view
of individual excellence. The inferiority of the artisan and the trader,
historically established in the manner we have indicated, was further
emphasised by the fact that they were excluded by their calling from the
cultivation of the higher personal qualities--from the training of the
body by gymnastics and of the mind by philosophy; from habitual
conversance with public affairs; from that perfect balance, in a word,
of the physical, intellectual, and moral powers, which was only to be
attained by a process of self-culture, incompatible with the pursuance
of a trade for bread. Such, at any rate, was the opinion of the Greeks.
We shall have occasion to return to it later. Meantime, let us sum up
the course of our investigation up to the present point.

We have seen that the state, in the Greek view, must be so limited, both
in territory and population, that all its citizens might be able to
participate in person in its government and defence; that it was based
on fundamental class distinctions separating sharply the citizen from
the non-citizen, and the slave from the free; that its end and purpose
was that all-absorbing corporate activity in which the citizen found the
highest expression of himself; and that to that end the inferior classes
were regarded as mere means--a point of view which finds its completest
expression in the institution of slavery.


Section 6. Forms of Government in the Greek State.

While, however, this was the general idea of the Greek state, it would
be a mistake to suppose that it was everywhere embodied in a single
permanent form of polity. On the contrary, the majority of the states in
Greece were in a constant state of flux; revolution succeeded revolution
with startling rapidity; and in place of a single fixed type what we
really get is a constant transition from one variety to another. The
general account we have given ought therefore to be regarded only as a
kind of limiting formula, embracing within its range a number of
polities distinct and even opposed in character. Of these polities
Aristotle, whose work is based on an examination of all the existing
states of Greece, recognises three main varieties: government by the
one, government by the few, and government by the many; and each of
these is subdivided into two forms, one good, where the government has
regard to the well-being of the whole, the other bad, where it has
regard only to the well-being of those who govern. The result is six
forms, of which three are good, monarchy, aristocracy, and what he calls
a "polity" par excellence; three bad, tyranny, oligarchy, and democracy.
Of all these forms we have examples in Greek history, and indeed can
roughly trace a tendency of the state to evolve through the series of
them. But by far the most important, in the historical period, are the
two forms known as Oligarchy and Democracy; and the reason of their
importance is that they corresponded roughly to government by the rich
and government by the poor. "Rich and poor," says Aristotle, "are the
really antagonistic members of a state. The result is that the character
of all existing polities is determined by the predominance of one or
other of these classes, and it is the common opinion that there are two
polities and two only, viz., Democracy and Oligarchy." [Footnote: Arist.
Pol. VI. (IV) 1291 b8.--Translation by Welldon.] In other words, the
social distinction between rich and poor was exaggerated in Greece into
political antagonism. In every state there was an oligarchic and a
democratic faction; and so fierce was the opposition between them, that
we may almost say that every Greek city was in a chronic state of civil
war, having become, as Plato puts it, not one city but two, "one
comprising the rich and the other the poor, who reside together on the
same ground, and are always plotting against one another." [Footnote:
Plat. Rep. viii. 551--Translation by Davies and Vaughan]


Section 7. Faction and Anarchy.

This internal schism which ran through almost every state, came to a
head in the great Peloponnesian war which divided Greece at the close of
the fifth century, and in which Athens and Sparta, the two chief
combatants, represented respectively the democratic and the oligarchic
principles. Each appealed to the kindred faction in the states that were
opposed to them; and every city was divided against itself, the party
that was "out" for the moment plotting with the foreign foe to overthrow
the party that was "in." Thus the general Greek conception of the
ordered state was so far from being realised in practice that probably
at no time in the history of the civilised world has anarchy more
complete and cynical prevailed.

To appreciate the gulf that existed between the ideal and the fact, we
have only to contrast such a scheme as that set forth in the "Republic"
of Plato with the following description by Thucydides of the state of
Greece during the Peloponnesian war:

"Not long afterwards the whole Hellenic world was in commotion; in every
city the chiefs of the democracy and of the oligarchy were struggling,
the one to bring in the Athenians, the other the Lacedaemonians. Now in
time of peace, men would have had no excuse for introducing either, and
no desire to do so; but when they were at war and both sides could
easily obtain allies to the hurt of their enemies and the advantage of
themselves, the dissatisfied party were only too ready to invoke foreign
aid. And revolution brought upon the cities of Hellas many terrible
calamities, such as have been and always will be while human nature
remains the same, but which are more or less aggravated and differ in
character with every new combination of circumstances. In peace and
prosperity both states and individuals are actuated by higher motives,
because they do not fall under the dominion of imperious necessities;
but war which takes away the comfortable provision of daily life is a
hard master, and tends to assimilate men's characters to their
conditions.

"When troubles had once begun in the cities, those who followed carried
the revolutionary spirit further and further, and determined to outdo
the report of all who had preceded them by the ingenuity of their
enterprises and the atrocity of their revenges. The meaning of words had
no longer the same relation to things, but was changed by them as they
thought proper. Reckless daring was held to be loyal courage; prudent
delay was the excuse of a coward; moderation was the disguise of unmanly
weakness; to know everything was to do nothing. Frantic energy was the
true quality of a man. A conspirator who wanted to be safe was a
recreant in disguise. The lover of violence was always trusted, and his
opponent suspected. He who succeeded in a plot was deemed knowing, but a
still greater master in craft was he who detected one. On the other
hand, he who plotted from the first to have nothing to do with plots was
a breaker-up of parties and a poltroon who was afraid of the enemy. In a
word, he who could outstrip another in a bad action was applauded, and
so was he who encouraged to evil one who had no idea of it. The tie of
party was stronger than the tie of blood, because a partisan was more
ready to dare without asking why (for party associations are not based
upon any established law, nor do they seek the public good; they are
formed in defiance of the laws and from self-interest). The seal of good
faith was not divine law, but fellowship in crime. If an enemy when he
was in the ascendant offered fair words, the opposite party received
them, not in a generous spirit, but by a jealous watchfulness of his
actions. Revenge was dearer than self-preservation. Any agreements sworn
to by either party, when they could do nothing else, were binding as
long as both were powerless. But he who on a favourable opportunity
first took courage and struck at his enemy when he saw him off his
guard, had greater pleasure in a perfidious than he would have had in an
open act of revenge; he congratulated himself that he had taken the
safer course, and also that he had overreached his enemy and gained the
prize of superior ability. In general the dishonest more easily gain
credit for cleverness than the simple for goodness; men take a pride in
the one, but are ashamed of the other.

"The cause of all these evils was the love of power originating in
avarice and ambition, and the party-spirit which is engendered by them
when men are fairly embarked in a contest. For the leaders on either
side used specious names, the one party professing to uphold the
constitutional equality of the many, the other the wisdom of an
aristocracy, while they made the public interests, to which in name they
were devoted, in reality their prize. Striving in every way to overcome
each other, they committed the most monstrous crimes; yet even these
were surpassed by the magnitude of their revenges which they pursued to
the very utmost, neither party observing any definite limits either of
justice or public expediency, but both alike making the caprice of the
moment their law. Either by the help of an unrighteous sentence, or
grasping power with the strong hand, they were eager to satiate the
impatience of party spirit. Neither faction cared for religion; but any
fair pretence which succeeded in effecting some odious purpose was
greatly lauded. And the citizens who were of neither party fell a prey
to both; either they were disliked because they held aloof, or men were
jealous of their surviving.

"Thus revolution gave birth to every form of wickedness in Hellas. The
simplicity which is so large an element in a noble nature was laughed to
scorn and disappeared. An attitude of perfidious antagonism everywhere
prevailed; for there was no word binding enough, nor oath terrible
enough to reconcile enemies. Each man was strong only in the conviction
that nothing was secure; he must look to his own safety, and could not
afford to trust others. Inferior intellects generally succeeded best.
For aware of their own deficiencies, and fearing the capacities of their
opponents, for whom they were no match in powers of speech, and whose
subtle wits were likely to anticipate them in contriving evil, they
struck boldly and at once. But the cleverer sort, presuming in their
arrogance that they would be aware in time, and disdaining to act when
they could think, were taken off their guard and easily destroyed."
[Footnote: Thuc. iii. 82.--Translated by Jowett.]

The general indictment thus drawn up by Thucydides is amply illustrated
by the events of war which he describes. On one occasion, for example,
the Athenians were blockading Mitylene; the government, an oligarchy,
was driven to arm the people for the defence; the people, having
obtained arms, immediately demanded political rights, under threat of
surrendering the city to the foreign foe; and the government, rather
than concede their claims, surrendered it themselves. Again, Megara, we
learn, was twice betrayed, once by the democrats to the Athenians, and
again by the oligarchs to the Lacedaemonians. At Leontini the Syracusans
were called in to drive out the popular party. And at Corcyra the
people, having got the better of their aristocratic opponents, proceeded
to a general massacre which extended over seven days, with every variety
of moral and physical atrocity.

Such is the view of the political condition of Greece given to us by a
contemporary observer towards the close of the fifth century, and it is
a curious comment on the Greek idea of the state. That idea, as we saw,
was an ordered inequality, political as well as social; and in certain
states, and notably in Sparta, it was successfully embodied in a stable
form. But in the majority of the Greek states it never attained to more
than a fluctuating and temporary realisation. The inherent contradiction
was too extreme for the attempted reconciliation; the inequalities
refused to blend in a harmony of divergent tones but asserted themselves
in the dissonance of civil war.


Section 8. Property and the Communistic Ideal.

And, as we have seen, this internal schism of the Greek state was as
much social as political. The "many" and the "few" were identified
respectively with the poor and the rich; and the struggle was thus at
bottom as much economic as political. Government by an oligarchy was
understood to mean the exploitation of the masses by the classes. "An
oligarchy," says a democrat, as reported by Thucydides, "while giving
the people the full share of danger, not merely takes too much of the
good things, but absolutely monopolises them." [Footnote: Thuc. vi. 39.--
Translated by Jowett.] And, similarly, the advent of democracy was held
to imply the spoliation of the classes in the interest of the masses,
either by excessive taxation, by an abuse of the judicial power to fine,
or by any other of the semi-legal devices of oppression which the
majority in power have always at their command. This substantial
identity of rich and poor, respectively, with oligarch and democrat may
be further illustrated by the following passage from Aristotle:

"In consequence of the political disturbances and contentions between
the commons on the one hand and the rich on the other, whichever party
happens to get the better of its opponents, instead of establishing a
polity of a broad and equal kind, assumes political supremacy as a prize
of the victory, and sets up either a Democracy or an Oligarchy."
[Footnote: Arist. Pol. VI. (IV) 1296 a 27.--Translation by Welldon.]

We see then that it was the underlying question of property that infused
so strong a rancour into the party struggles of Greece. From the very
earliest period, in fact, we find it to have been the case that
political revolution was prompted by economic causes. Debt was the main
factor of the crisis which led to the legislation of Solon; and a re-
division of the land was one of the measures attributed to Lycurgus.
[Footnote: I have not thought it necessary for my purpose, here or
elsewhere, to discuss the authenticity of the statements made by Greek
authors about Lycurgus.] As population increased, and, in the maritime
states, commerce and trade developed, the problem of poverty became
increasingly acute; and though it was partially met by the emigration of
the surplus population to colonies, yet in the fifth and fourth
centuries we find it prominent and pressing both in practical politics
and in speculation. Nothing can illustrate better how familiar the topic
was, and to what free theorising it had led, than the passages in which
it is treated in the comedies of Aristophanes. Here for example, is an
extract from the "Ecclesiazusae" which it may be worth while to insert
as a contribution to an argument that belongs to every age.

PRAXAGORA. I tell you that we are all to share alike and have everything
in common, instead of one being rich and another poor, and one having
hundreds of acres and another not enough to make him a grave, and one a
houseful of servants and another not even a paltry foot-boy. I am going
to introduce communism and universal equality.

BLEPSYRUS. How communism?

PRAX. That's just what I was going to tell you. First of all,
everybody's money and land and anything else he may possess will be made
common property. Then we shall maintain you all out of the common stock,
with due regard to economy and thrift.

BLEPS. But how about those who have no land, but only money that they
can hide?

PRAX. It will all go to the public purse. To keep anything back will be
perjury.

BLEPS. Perjury! Well, if you come to that, it was by perjury it was all
acquired.

PRAX. And then, money won't be the least use to any one.

BLEPS. Why not?

PRAX. Because nobody will be poor. Everybody will have everything he
wants, bread, salt-fish, barley-cake, clothes, wine, garlands,
chickpeas. So what will be the good of keeping anything back? Answer
that if you can!

BLEPS. Isn't it just the people who have all these things that are the
greatest thieves?

PRAX. No doubt, under the old laws. But now, when everything will be in
common what will be the good of keeping anything back?

BLEPS. Who will do the field work?

PRAX. The slaves; all you will have to do is to dress and go out to
dinner in the evening.

BLEPS. But what about the clothes? How are they to be provided?

PRAX. What you have now will do to begin with, and afterwards we shall
make them for you ourselves.

BLEPS. Just one thing more! Supposing a man were to lose his suit in the
courts, where are the damages to come from? It would not be fair to take
the public funds.

PRAX. But there won't be any lawsuits at all!

BLEPS. That will mean ruin to a good many people!

BYSTANDER. Just my idea!

PRAX. Why should there be any?

BLEPS. Why! for reasons enough, heaven knows! For instance, a man might
repudiate his debts.

PRAX. In that case, where did the man who lent the money get it from?
Clearly, since everything is in common, he must have stolen it!

BLEPS. So he must! An excellent idea! But now tell me this. When fellows
come to blows over their cups, where are the damages to come from?

PRAX. From the rations! A man won't be in such a hurry to make a row
when his belly has to pay for it.

BLEPS. One thing more! Will there be no more thieves?

PRAX. Why should any one steal what is his own?

BLEPS. And won't one be robbed of one's cloak at night?

PRAX. Not if you sleep at home!

BLEPS. Nor yet, if one sleeps out, as one used to do?

PRAX. No, for there will be enough and to spare for all. And even if a
thief does try to strip a man, he will give up his cloak of his own
accord. What would be the good of fighting? He has only to go and get
another, and a better, from the public stores.

BLEPS. And will there be no more gambling?

PRAX. What will there be to play for?

BLEPS. And how about house accommodation?

PRAX. That will be the same for all. I tell you I am going to turn the
whole city into one huge house, and break down all the partitions, so
that every one may have free access to every one else. [Footnote:
Aristoph. Eccles. 590.]

The "social problem," then, had clearly arisen in ancient Greece, though
no doubt in an infinitely simpler form than that in which it is
presented to ourselves; and it might perhaps have been expected that the
Greeks, with their notion of the supremacy of the state, would have
adopted some drastic public measure to meet it. And, in fact, in the
earlier period of their history, as has been indicated above, we do find
sweeping revolutions effected in the distribution of property. In
Athens, Solon abolished debt, either in whole or part, by reducing the
rate of interest and depreciating the currency; and in Sparta Lycurgus
is said to have resumed the whole of the land for the state, and
redivided it equally among the citizens. We have also traces of laws
existing in other states to regulate in the interests of equality the
possession and transfer of land. But it does not appear that any attempt
was made in any state permanently to control by public authority the
production and distribution of wealth. Meantime, however, the problem of
social inequality was exercising the minds of political theorists; and
we have notice of various schemes for an ideal polity framed upon
communistic principles. Of these the most important, and the only one
preserved to us, is the celebrated "Republic" of Plato; and never, it
may be safely asserted, was a plan of society framed so consistent,
harmonious and beautiful in itself, or so indifferent to the actual
capacities of mankind. Following out what we have already indicated as
the natural drift of Greek ideas, the philosopher separates off on the
one hand the productive class, who are to have no political rights; and
on the other the class of soldiers and governors. It is the latter alone
with whom he seriously concerns himself; and the scheme he draws up for
them is uncompromisingly communistic. After being purged, by an
elaborate education, of all the egoistic passions, they are to live
together, having all things in common, devoted heart and soul to the
public good, and guiltless even of a desire for any private possession
or advantage of their own. "In the first place, no one," says Plato,
"should possess any private property, if it can possibly be avoided;
secondly, no one should have a dwelling or store house into which all
who please may not enter; whatever necessaries are required by temperate
and courageous men, who are trained to war, they should receive by
regular appointment from their fellow-citizens, as wages for their
services, and the amount should be such as to leave neither a surplus on
the year's consumption nor a deficit; and they should attend common
messes and live together as men do in a camp: as for gold and silver, we
must tell them that they are in perpetual possession of a divine species
of the precious metals placed in their souls by the gods themselves, and
therefore have no need of the earthly one; that in fact it would be
profanation to pollute their spiritual riches by mixing them with the
possession of mortal gold, because the world's coinage has been the
cause of countless impieties, whereas theirs is undefiled: therefore to
them, as distinguished from the rest of the people, it is forbidden to
handle or touch gold and silver, or enter under the same roof with them,
or to wear them in their dresses, or to drink out of the precious
metals. If they follow these rules, they will be safe themselves and the
saviours of the city: but whenever they come to possess lands, and
houses, and money of their own, they will be householders and
cultivators instead of guardians, and will become hostile masters of
their fellow-citizens rather than their allies; and so they will spend
their whole lives, hating and hated, plotting and plotted against,
standing in more frequent and intense alarm of their enemies at home
than of their enemies abroad; by which time they and the rest of the
city will be running on the very brink of ruin." [Footnote: Plato, Rep.
III. 416.--Translation by Davies and Vaughan.]

The passage is interesting, if only as an illustration of the way in
which Plato had been impressed by the evil results of the institution of
private property. But as a contribution to political theory it was open
to severe attack from the representatives of experience and common
sense. Of these, the chief was Aristotle, whose criticism has been
preserved to us, and who, while admitting that Plato's scheme has a
plausible appearance of philanthropy, maintains that it is inapplicable
to the facts of human nature. To this conclusion, indeed, even Plato
himself was driven in the end; for in his later work, the "Laws,"
although he still asserts that community of goods would be the ideal
institution, he reluctantly abandons it as a basis for a possible state.
On the other hand, he endeavours by the most stringent regulations, to
prevent the growth of inequalities of wealth. He distributes the land in
equal lots among his citizens, prohibiting either purchase or sub-
division; limits the possession of money to the amount required for
daily exchange; and forbids lending on interest. The object of a
legislator, he declares, is to make not a great but a happy city. But
only the good are happy, and goodness and wealth are incompatible. The
legislator, therefore, will not allow his citizens to be wealthy, any
more than he will allow them to be poor. He will seek to establish by
law the happy mean; and to this end, if he despair of the possibility of
a thorough-going communism, will legislate at least as indicated above.
The uncompromising idealism of Plato's scheme, with its assumption of
the indefinite plasticity of human nature, is of course peculiar to
himself, not typical of Greek ideas. But it is noticeable that
Aristotle, who is a far better representative of the average Greek mind,
exhibits the same mistrust of the accumulation of private property. In
the beginning of his "Politics" he distinguishes two kinds of money-
making, one natural, that which is pursued for the sake of a livelihood,
the other unnatural, that which is pursued for the sake of accumulation.
"The motive of this latter," he says, "is a desire for life instead of
for good life"; and its most hateful method is that of usury, the
unnatural breeding of money out of money. And though he rejects as
impracticable the compulsory communism of Plato's "Republic", yet he
urges as the ideal solution that property, while owned by individuals,
should be held as in trust for the common good; and puts before the
legislator the problem: "so to dispose the higher natures that they are
unwilling, and the lower that they are unable to aggrandise themselves."
[Footnote: Aristotle, Pol. ii. 7. 1267 b 6.--Translation by Welldon.]

Such views as these, it may be noted, interesting though they be, as
illustrating how keenly the thinkers of ancient Greece had realised the
drawbacks of private property, have but the slightest bearing on the
conditions of our own time. The complexity and extent of modern industry
have given rise to quite new problems, and quite new schemes for their
solution; and especially have forced into prominence the point of view
of the producers themselves. To Greek thinkers it was natural to
approach the question of property from the side of the governing class
or of the state as a whole. The communism of Plato, for example, applied
only to the "guardians" and soldiers, and not to the productive class on
whom they depended; and so completely was he pre-occupied with the
former to the exclusion of the latter, that he dismisses in a single
sentence, as unworthy the legislator's detailed attention, the whole
apparatus of labour and exchange. To regard the "working-class" as the
most important section of the community, to substitute for the moral or
political the economic standpoint, and to conceive society merely as a
machine for the production and distribution of wealth, would have been
impossible to an ancient Greek. Partly by the simplicity of the economic
side of the society with which he was acquainted, partly by the habit of
regarding the labouring class as a mere means to the maintenance of the
rest, he was led, even when he had to deal with the problem of poverty
and wealth, to regard it rather from the point of view of the stability
and efficiency of the state, than from that of the welfare of the
producers themselves. The modern attitude is radically different; a
revolution has been effected both in the conditions of industry and in
the way in which they are regarded; and the practice and the speculation
of the Greek city-states have for us an interest which, great as it is,
is philosophic rather than practical.


Section 9. Sparta.

The preceding attempt at a general sketch of the nature of the Greek
state is inevitably loose and misleading to this extent, that it
endeavours to comprehend in a single view polities of the most varied
and discrepant character. To remedy, so far as may be, this defect, to
give an impression, more definite and more complete, of the variety and
scope of the political experience of the Greeks, let us examine a little
more in detail the character of the two states which were at once the
most prominent and the most opposed in their achievement and their aim--
the state of Sparta on the one hand, and that of Athens on the other. It
was these two cities that divided the hegemony of Greece; they represent
the extremes of the two forms--oligarchy and democracy--under which, as
we saw, the Greek polities fall; and from a sufficient acquaintance with
them we may gather a fairly complete idea of the whole range of Greek
political life.

In Sparta we see one extreme of the political development of Greece, and
the one which approaches nearest, perhaps, to the characteristic Greek
type. Of that type, it is true, it was an exaggeration, and was
recognised as such by the best thinkers of Greece; but just for that
reason it is the more interesting and instructive as an exhibition of a
distinctive aspect of Greek civilisation.

The Spartan state was composed of a small body of citizens--the
Spartiatae or Spartans proper-encamped in the midst of a hostile
population to whom they allowed no political rights and by whose labour
they were supplied with the necessaries of life. The distinction between
the citizen class on the one hand and the productive class on the other
was thus as clearly and sharply drawn as possible. It was even
exaggerated; for the citizens were a band of conquerors, the productive
class a subject race, perpetually on the verge of insurrection and only
kept in restraint by such measures as secret assassination. The result
was to draw together the small band of Spartiatae into a discipline so
rigorous and close that under it everything was sacrificed to the
necessity of self-preservation; and the bare maintenance of the state
became the end for which every individual was born, and lived, and died.
This discipline, according to tradition, had been devised by a single
legislator, Lycurgus, and it was maintained intact for several
centuries. Its main features may be summarised as follows.

The production and rearing of children, to begin at the beginning,
instead of being left to the caprice of individuals, was controlled and
regulated by the state. The women, in the first place, were trained by
physical exercise for the healthy performance of the duties of
motherhood; they were taught to run and wrestle naked, like the youths,
to dance and sing in public, and to associate freely with men. Marriage
was permitted only in the prime of life; and a free intercourse, outside
its limits, between healthy men and women, was encouraged and approved
by public opinion. Men who did not marry were subject to social and
civic disabilities. The children, as soon as they were born, were
submitted to the inspection of the elders of their tribe; if strong and
well-formed, they were reared; if not, they were allowed to die.

A healthy stock having been thus provided as a basis, every attention
was devoted to its appropriate training. The infants were encouraged
from the beginning in the free use of their limbs, unhampered by
swaddling-clothes, and were accustomed to endure without fear darkness
and solitude, and to cure themselves of peevishness and crying. At the
age of seven the boys were taken away from the charge of their parents,
and put under the superintendence of a public official. Their education,
on the intellectual side, was slight enough, comprising only such
rudiments as reading and writing; but on the moral side it was stringent
and severe. Gathered into groups under the direction of elder youths--
"monitors" we might call them--they were trained to a discipline of iron
endurance. One garment served them for the whole year; they went without
shoes, and slept on beds of rushes plucked with their own hands. Their
food was simple, and often enough they had to go without it. Every
moment of the day they were under inspection and supervision, for it was
the privilege and the duty of every citizen to admonish and punish not
only his own but other people's children. At supper they waited at table
on their elders, answered their questions and endured their jests. In
the streets they were taught to walk in silence, their hands folded in
their cloaks, their eyes cast down, their heads never turning to right
or left. Their gymnastic and military training was incessant; wherever
they met, we are told, they began to box; under the condition, however,
that they were bound to separate at the command of any bystander. To
accustom them early to the hardships of a campaign, they were taught to
steal their food from the mess-tables of their elders; if they were
detected they were beaten for their clumsiness, and went without their
dinner. Nothing was omitted, on the moral or physical side, to make them
efficient members of a military state. Nor was the discipline relaxed
when they reached years of maturity. For, in fact, the whole city was a
camp. Family life was obliterated by public activity. The men dined
together in messes, rich and poor alike, sharing the same coarse and
simple food. Servants, dogs, and horses, were regarded as common
property. Luxury was strictly forbidden. The only currency in
circulation was of iron, so cumbrous that it was impossible to
accumulate or conceal it. The houses were as simple as possible, the
roofs shaped only with the axe, and the doors with the saw; the
furniture and fittings corresponded, plain but perfectly made. The
nature of the currency practically prohibited commerce, and no citizen
was allowed to be engaged in any mechanical trade. Agriculture was the
main industry, and every Spartan had, or was supposed to have, a landed
estate, cultivated by serfs who paid him a yearly rent. In complete
accordance with the Greek ideal, it was a society of soldier-citizens,
supported by an inferior productive class. In illustration of this point
the following curious anecdote may be quoted from Plutarch. During one
of the wars in which Sparta and her allies were engaged, the allies
complained that they, who were the majority of the army, had been forced
into a quarrel which concerned nobody but the Spartans. Whereupon
Agesilaus, the Spartan king, "devised this expedient to show the allies
were not the greater number. He gave orders that all the allies, of
whatever country, should sit down promiscuously on one side, and all the
Lacedaemonians on the other: which being done, he commanded a herald to
proclaim, that all the potters of both divisions should stand out; then
all the blacksmiths; then all the masons; next the carpenters; and so he
went through all the handicrafts. By this time almost all the allies
were risen, but of the Lacedaemonians not a man, they being by law
forbidden to learn any mechanical business; and now Agesilaus laughed
and said, "You see, my friends, how many more soldiers we send out than
you do." [Footnote: Plut. Agesilaus.--Translation by Clough.]

And certainly, so far as its immediate ends were concerned, this society
of soldier-citizens was singularly successful. The courage and
efficiency of Spartan troops were notorious, and were maintained indeed
not only by the training we have described, but by social penalties
attached to cowardice. A man who had disgraced himself in battle was a
pariah in his native land. No one would eat with him, no one would
wrestle with him; in the dance he must take the lowest place; he must
give the wall at meetings in the street, and resign his seat even to
younger men; he must dress and bear himself humbly, under penalty of
blows, and suffer the reproaches of women and of boys. Death plainly
would be preferable to such a life; and we are not surprised to hear
that the discipline and valour of Spartan troops was celebrated far and
wide. Here is a description of them, given by one of themselves to the
Persian king when he was projecting the invasion of Greece:

"Brave are all the Greeks who dwell in any Dorian land; but what I am
about to say does not concern all, but only the Lacedaemonians. First,
then, come what may, they will never accept thy terms, which would
reduce Greece to slavery; and further, they are sure to join battle with
thee, though all the rest of Greece should submit to thy will. As for
their numbers, do not ask how many they are, that their resistance
should be a possible thing; for if a thousand of them should take the
field, they will meet thee in battle, and so will any number, be it less
than this, or be it more.

"When they fight singly, they are as good men as any in the world, and
when they fight in a body, they are the bravest of all. For though they
be freemen, they are not in all respects free; Law is the master whom
they own; and this master they fear more than thy subjects fear thee.
Whatever he commands they do; and his commandment is always the same: it
forbids them to flee in battle, whatever the number of their foes, and
requires them to stand firm, and either to conquer or die." [Footnote:
Herodotus vii. 102, 4.--Translation by Rawlinson.]

The practical illustration of this speech is the battle of Thermopylae,
where 300 Spartans kept at bay the whole Persian host, till they were
betrayed from the rear and killed fighting to a man.

The Spartan state, then, justified itself according to its own ideal;
but how limited that ideal was will be clear from our sketch. The
individual, if it cannot be said that he was sacrificed to the state--
for he recognised the life of the state as his own--was at any rate
starved upon one side of his nature as much as he was hypertrophied upon
the other. Courage, obedience, and endurance were developed in excess;
but the free play of passion and thought, the graces and arts of life,
all that springs from the spontaneity of nature, were crushed out of
existence under this stern and rigid rule. "None of them," says
Plutarch, an enthusiastic admirer of the Spartan polity "none of them
was left alone to live as he chose; but passing their time in the city
as though it were a camp, their manner of life and their avocations
ordered with a view to the public good, they regarded themselves as
belonging, not to themselves, but to their country." [Footnote: Plut.
Lycurgus, ch. 24.] And Plato, whose ideal republic was based so largely
upon the Spartan model, has marked nevertheless as the essential defect
of their polity its insistence on military virtue to the exclusion of
everything else, and its excessive accentuation of the corporate aspect
of life. "Your military way of life," he says, "is modelled after the
camp, and is not like that of dwellers in cities; and you have your
young men herding and feeding together like young colts. No one takes
his own individual colt and drags him away from his fellows against his
will, raging and foaming, and gives him a groom for him alone, and
trains and rubs him down privately, and gives him the qualities in
education which will make him not only a good soldier, but also a
governor of a state and of cities. Such a one would be a greater warrior
than he of whom Tyrtaeus sings; and he would honour courage everywhere,
but always as the fourth, and not as the first part of virtue, either in
individuals or states." [Footnote: Plato Laws, II. 666 e.--Translation
by Jowett].

The Spartan state, in fact, by virtue of that excellence which was also
its defect--the specialising of the individual on the side of discipline
and rule--carried within it the seeds of its own destruction. The
tendencies which Lycurgus had endeavoured to repress by external
regulation reasserted themselves in his despite. He had intended once
for all both to limit and to equalise private property; but already as
early as the fifth century Spartans had accumulated gold which they
deposited in temples in foreign states; the land fell, by inheritance
and gift, into the hands of a small minority; the number of the citizens
was reduced, not only by war, but by the disfranchisement attending
inability to contribute to the common mess-tables; till at last we find
no more than 700 Spartan families, and of these no more than 100
possessing estates in land.

And this decline from within was hastened by external events. The
constitution devised for a small state encamped amidst a hostile
population, broke down under the weight of imperial power. The conquest
of Athens by Sparta was the signal of her own collapse. The power and
wealth she had won at a stroke alienated her sons from her discipline.
Generals and statesmen who had governed like kings the wealthy cities of
the east were unable to adapt themselves again to the stern and narrow
rules of Lycurgus. They rushed into freedom and enjoyment, into the
unfettered use of their powers, with an energy proportional to the
previous restraint. The features of the human face broke through the
fair but lifeless mask of ancient law; and the Spartan, ceasing to be a
Spartan, both rose and fell to the level of a man.


Section 10. Athens.

In the institutions of Sparta we see, carried to its furthest point, one
side of the complex Greek nature--their capacity for discipline and law.
Athens, the home of a different stock, gives us the other extreme--their
capacity for rich and spontaneous individual development. To pass from
Sparta to Athens, is to pass from a barracks to a playing-field. All the
beauty, all the grace, all the joy of Greece; all that chains the desire
of mankind, with a yearning that is never stilled, to that one golden
moment in the past, whose fair and balanced interplay of perfect flesh
and soul no later gains of thought can compensate, centres about that
bright and stately city of romance, the home of Pericles and all the
arts, whence from generation to generation has streamed upon ages less
illustrious an influence at once the sanest and the most inspired of all
that have shaped the secular history of the world. Girt by mountain and
sea, by haunted fountain and sacred grove, shaped and adorned by the
master hands of Pheidias and Polygnotus and filled with the breath of
passion and song by Euripides and Plato, Athens, famed alike for the
legended deeds of heroes and gods and for the feats of her human sons in
council, art, and war, is a name, to those who have felt her spell, more
familiar and more dear than any of the few that mark with gold the
sombre scroll of history. And still across the years we feel the throb
of the glorious verse that broke in praise of his native land from the
lips of Euripides:


     "Happy of yore were the children of race divine
     Happy the sons of old Erechtheus' line
           Who in their holy state
           With hands inviolate
     Gather the flower of wisdom far-renowned,
     Lightly lifting their feet in the lucid air
     Where the sacred nine, the Pierid Muses, bare
           Harmonia golden-crowned.

     There in the wave from fair Kephisus flowing
     Kupris sweetens the winds and sets them blowing
           Over the delicate land;
           And ever with joyous hand
     Braiding her fragrant hair with the blossom of roses,
     She sendeth the Love that dwelleth in Wisdom's place
     That every virtue may quicken and every grace
           In the hearts where she reposes."
          [Footnote: Eurip. Medea, 825.]

And this, the Athens of poetry and art, is but another aspect of the
Athens of political history. The same individuality, the same free and
passionate energy that worked in the hearts of her sculptors and her
poets, moulded also and inspired her city life. In contradistinction to
the stern and rigid discipline of Sparta, the Athenian citizen displayed
the resource, the versatility and the zeal that only freedom and self-
reliance can teach. The contrast is patent at every stage of the history
of the two states, and has been acutely set forth by Thucydides in the
speech which he puts into the mouths of the Corinthian allies of Sparta:

"You have never considered," they say to the Lacedaemonians, "what
manner of men are these Athenians with whom you will have to fight, and
how utterly unlike yourselves. They are revolutionary, equally quick in
the conception and in the execution of every new plan; while you are
conservative--careful only to keep what you have, originating nothing,
and not acting even when action is most necessary. They are bold beyond
their strength; they run risks which prudence would condemn; and in the
midst of misfortunes they are full of hope. Whereas it is your nature,
though strong, to act feebly; when your plans are most prudent, to
distrust them; and when calamities come upon you, to think that you will
never be delivered from them. They are impetuous, and you are dilatory;
they are always abroad, and you are always at home. For they hope to
gain something by leaving their homes; but you are afraid that any new
enterprise may imperil what you have already. When conquerors, they
pursue their victory to the utmost; when defeated, they fall back the
least. Their bodies they devote to their country as though they belonged
to other men; their true self is their mind, which is most truly their
own when employed in her service. When they do not carry out an
intention which they have formed, they seem to have sustained a personal
bereavement; when an enterprise succeeds, they have gained a mere
instalment of what is to come; but if they fail, they at once conceive
new hopes and so fill up the void.

"With them alone to hope is to have, for they lose not a moment in the
execution of an idea. This is the lifelong task, full of danger and
toil, which they are always imposing upon themselves. None enjoy their
good things less, because they are always seeking for more. To do their
duty is their only holiday, and they deem the quiet of inaction to be as
disagreeable as the most tiresome business. If a man should say of them,
in a word, that they were born neither to have peace themselves nor to
allow peace to other men, he would simply speak the truth." [Footnote:
Thuc. i. 70.--Translated by Jowett.]

The qualities here set forth by Thucydides as characteristic of the
Athenians, were partly the cause and partly the effect of their
political constitution. The history of Athens, indeed, is the very
antithesis to that of Sparta. In place of a type fixed at a stroke and
enduring for centuries, she presents a series of transitions through the
whole range of polities, to end at last in a democracy so extreme that
it refuses to be included within the limits of the general formula of
the Greek state.

Seldom, indeed, has "equality" been pushed to so extreme a point as it
was, politically at least, in ancient Athens. The class of slaves, it is
true, existed there as in every other state; but among the free
citizens, who included persons of every rank, no political distinction
at all was drawn. All of them, from the lowest to the highest, had the
right to speak and vote in the great assembly of the people which was
the ultimate authority; all were eligible to every administrative post;
all sat in turn as jurors in the law-courts. The disabilities of poverty
were minimised by payment for attendance in the assembly and the courts.
And, what is more extraordinary, even distinctions of ability were
levelled by the practice of filling all offices, except the highest, by
lot.

Had the citizens been a class apart, as was the case in Sparta, had they
been subjected from the cradle to a similar discipline and training,
forbidden to engage in any trade or business, and consecrated to the
service of the state, there would have been nothing surprising in this
uncompromising assertion of equality. But in Athens the citizenship was
extended to every rank and calling; the poor man jostled the rich, the
shopman the aristocrat, in the Assembly; cobblers, carpenters, smiths,
farmers, merchants, and retail traders met together with the ancient
landed gentry, to debate and conclude on national affairs; and it was
from such varied elements as these that the lot impartially chose the
officials of the law, the revenue, the police, the highways, the
markets, and the ports, as well as the jurors at whose mercy stood
reputation, fortune, and life. The consequence was that in Athens, at
least in the later period of her history, the middle and lower classes
tended to monopolise political power. Of the popular leaders, Cleon, the
most notorious, was a tanner; another was a baker, another a cattle-
dealer. Influence belonged to those who had the gift of leading the
mass; and in that competition the man of tongue, of energy, and of
resource, was more than a match for the aristocrat of birth and
intellect.

The constitution of Athens, then, was one of political equality imposed
upon social inequality. To illustrate the point we may quote a passage
from Aristophanes which shows at once the influence exercised by the
trading class and the disgust with which that influence was regarded by
the aristocracy whom the poet represents. The passage is taken from the
"Knights," a comedy written to discredit Cleon, and turning upon the
expulsion of the notorious tanner from the good graces of Demos, by the
superior impudence and address of a sausage-seller. Demosthenes, a
general of the aristocratic party, is communicating to the latter the
destiny that awaits him.

     DEMOSTHENES (_to the_ SAUSAGE-SELLER _gravely_).
   Set these poor wares aside; and now--bow down
   To the ground; and adore the powers of earth and heaven.

     S.-S. Heigh-day! Why, what do you mean?

     DEM. O happy man!
   Unconscious of your glorious destiny,
   Now mean and unregarded; but to-morrow,
   The mightiest of the mighty, Lord of Athens.

     S.-S. Come, master, what's the use of making game?
   Why can't ye let me wash my guts and tripe,
   And sell my sausages in peace and quiet?

     DEM. O simple mortal, cast those thoughts aside!
   Bid guts and tripe farewell! Look here! Behold!
         (_pointing to the audience_)
   The mighty assembled multitude before ye!

     S.-S. (_with a grumble of indifference_).
   I see 'em.

     DEM. You shall be their lord and master,
   The sovereign and the ruler of them all,
   Of the assemblies and tribunals, fleets and armies;
   You shall trample down the Senate under foot,
   Confound and crush the generals and commanders,
   Arrest, imprison, and confine in irons,
   And feast and fornicate in the Council House.

     S.-S. Are there any means of making a great man
   Of a sausage-selling fellow such as I?

     DEM. The very means you have, must make ye so,
   Low breeding, vulgar birth, and impudence,
   These, these must make ye, what you're meant to be.

     S.-S. I can't imagine that I'm good for much.

     DEM. Alas! But why do ye say so? What's the meaning
   Of these misgivings? I discern within ye
   A promise and an inward consciousness
   Of greatness. Tell me truly: are ye allied
   To the families of gentry?

     S.-S. Naugh, not I;
   I'm come from a common ordinary kindred,
   Of the lower order.

     DEM. What a happiness!
   What a footing will it give ye! What a groundwork
   For confidence and favour at your outset!

     S.-S. But bless ye! only consider my education!
   I can but barely read.... in a kind of way.

     DEM. That makes against ye!--the only thing against ye--
   The being able to read, in any way:
   For now no lead nor influence is allowed
   To liberal arts or learned education,
   But to the brutal, base, and underbred.
   Embrace then and hold fast the promises
   Which the oracles of the gods announce to you.
          [Footnote: Aristoph. Knights. 155.--Translation by Frere.]

We have here an illustration, one among many that might be given, of the
political equality that prevailed in Athens. It shows us how completely
that distinction between the military or governing, and the productive
class, which belonged to the normal Greek conception of the state, had
been broken down, on the side at least of privilege and right, though
not on that of social estimation, in this most democratic of the ancient
states. Politically, the Athenian trader and the Athenian artisan was
the equal of the aristocrat of purest blood; and so far the government
of Athens was a genuine democracy.

But so far only. For in Athens, as in every Greek state, the greater
part of the population was unfree; and the government which was a
democracy from the point of view of the freeman, was an oligarchy from
the point of view of the slave. For the slaves, by the nature of their
position, had no political rights; and they were more than half of the
population. It is noticeable, however, that the freedom and
individuality which was characteristic of the Athenian citizen, appears
to have reacted favourably on the position of the slaves. Not only had
they, to a certain extent, the protection of the law against the worst
excesses of their masters, but they were allowed a license of bearing
and costume which would not have been tolerated in any other state. A
contemporary writer notes that in dress and general appearance Athenian
slaves were not to be distinguished from citizens; that they were
permitted perfect freedom of speech; and that it was open to them to
acquire a fortune and to live in ease and luxury. In Sparta, he says,
the slave stands in fear of the freeman, but in Athens this is not the
case; and certainly the bearing of the slaves introduced into the
Athenian comedy does not indicate any undue subservience. Slavery at the
best is an undemocratic institution; but in Athens it appears to have
been made as democratic as its nature would admit.

We find then, in the Athenian state, the conception of equality pushed
to the farthest extreme at all compatible with Greek ideas; pushed, we
may fairly say, at last to an undue excess; for the great days of Athens
were those when she was still under the influence of her aristocracy,
and when the popular zeal evoked by her free institutions was directed
by members of the leisured and cultivated class. The most glorious age
of Athenian history closes with the death of Pericles; and Pericles was
a man of noble family, freely chosen, year after year, by virtue of his
personal qualities, to exercise over this democratic nation a
dictatorship of character and brain. It is into his mouth that
Thucydides has put that great panegyric of Athens, which sets forth to
all time the type of an ideal state and the record of what was at least
partially achieved in the greatest of the Greek cities:

"Our form of government does not enter into rivalry with the
institutions of others. We do not copy our neighbours, but are an
example to them. It is true that we are called a democracy, for the
administration is in the hands of the many and not of the few. But while
the law secures equal justice to all alike in their private disputes,
the claim of excellence is also recognised; and when a citizen is in any
way distinguished, he is preferred to the public service, not as a
matter of privilege, but as the reward of merit. Neither is poverty a
bar, but a man may benefit his country whatever be the obscurity of his
condition. There is no exclusiveness in our public life, and in our
private intercourse we are not suspicious of one another, nor angry with
our neighbour if he does what he likes; we do not put on sour looks at
him, which, though harmless, are not pleasant. While we are thus
unconstrained in our private intercourse, a spirit of reverence pervades
our public acts; we are prevented from doing wrong by respect for
authority and for the laws, having an especial regard for those which
are ordained for the protection of the injured, as well as for those
unwritten laws which bring upon the transgressor of them the reprobation
of the general sentiment.

"And we have not forgotten to provide for our weary spirits many
relaxations from toil; we have regular games and sacrifices throughout
the year; at home the style of our life is refined; and the delight
which we daily feel in all these things helps to banish melancholy.
Because of the greatness of our city the fruits of the whole earth flow
in upon us, so that we enjoy the goods of other countries as freely as
of our own.

"Then again, our military training is in many respects superior to that
of our adversaries. Our city is thrown open to the world, and we never
expel a foreigner or prevent him from seeing or learning anything of
which the secret if revealed to an enemy might profit him. We rely not
upon management and trickery, but upon our own hearts and hands. And in
the matter of education, whereas they from early youth are always
undergoing laborious exercises which are to make them brave, we live at
ease, and yet are ready to face the perils which they face.

"If then we prefer to meet danger with a light heart but without
laborious training, and with a courage which is gained by habit and not
enforced by law, are we not greatly the gainers? Since we do not
anticipate the pain, although when the hour comes, we can be as brave as
those who never allow themselves to rest; and thus too our city is
equally admirable in peace and in war. For we are lovers of the
beautiful, yet simple in our tastes, and we cultivate the mind without
loss of manliness.

"Wealth we employ, not for talk and ostentation, but when there is a real
use for it. To avow poverty with us is no disgrace; the true disgrace is
in doing nothing to avoid it. An Athenian citizen does not neglect the
state because he takes care of his own household; and even those of us
who are engaged in business have a very fair idea of politics. We alone
regard a man who takes no interest in public affairs, not as a harmless,
but as a useless character; and if few of us are originators, we are all
sound judges of a policy. The great impediment to action is, in our
opinion, not discussion but the want of that knowledge which is gained
by discussion preparatory to action. For we have a peculiar power of
thinking before we act, and of acting too, whereas other men are
courageous from ignorance but hesitate upon reflection. And they are
surely to be esteemed the bravest spirits who have the clearest sense
both of the pains and pleasures of life, but do not on that account
shrink from danger.

"To sum up, I say that Athens is the school of Hellas, and that the
individual Athenian in his own person seems to have the power of
adapting himself to the most varied forms of action with the utmost
versatility and grace. This is no passing and idle word, but truth and
fact; and the assertion is verified by the position to which these
qualities have raised the state. For in the hour of trial Athens alone
among her contemporaries is superior to the report of her. No enemy who
comes against her is indignant at the reverses which he sustains at the
hands of such a city; no subject complains that his masters are unworthy
of him. And we shall assuredly not be without witnesses; there are
mighty monuments of our power which will make us the wonder of this and
of succeeding ages: we shall not need the praises of Homer or of any
other panegyrist, whose poetry may please for the moment, although his
representation of the facts will not bear the light of day. For we have
compelled every land, every sea, to open a path for our valour, and have
everywhere planted eternal memorials of our friendship and of our
enmity." [Footnote: Thuc. ii. 37.--Translated by Jowett.]

An impression so superb as this it is almost a pity to mar with the
inevitable complement of disaster and decay. But our account of the
Athenian polity would be misleading and incomplete if we did not
indicate how the idea of equality, on which it turned, defeated itself,
as did, in Sparta, the complementary idea of order, by the excesses of
its own development. Already before the close of the fifth century, and
with reiterated emphasis in the earlier decades of the fourth, we hear
from poets and orators praise of a glorious past that is dead, and
denunciations of a decadent present. The ancient training in gymnastics,
we are told, the ancient and generous culture of mind and soul, is
neglected and despised by a generation of traders; reverence for age and
authority, even for law, has disappeared; and in the train of these have
gone the virtues they engendered and nurtured. Cowardice has succeeded
to courage, disorder to discipline; the place of the statesman is
usurped by the demagogue; and instead of a nation of heroes, marshalled
under the supremacy of the wise and good, modern Athens presents to view
a disordered and competitive mob, bent only on turning each to his own
personal advantage the now corrupt machinery of administration and law.

And however much exaggeration there may be in these denunciations and
regrets, we know enough of the interior working of the institutions of
Athens to see that she had to pay in licence and in fraud the bitter
price of equality and freedom. That to the influence of disinterested
statesmen succeeded, as the democracy accentuated itself, the tyranny of
unscrupulous demagogues, is evidenced by the testimony, not only of the
enemies of popular government, but by that of a democrat so convinced as
Demosthenes. "Since these orators have appeared," he says, "who ask,
What is your pleasure? what shall I move? how can I oblige you? the
public welfare is complimented away for a moment's popularity, and these
are the results; the orators thrive, you are disgraced.... Anciently the
people, having the courage to be soldiers, controlled the statesmen, and
disposed of all emoluments; any of the rest were happy to receive from
the people his share of honour, office, or advantage. Now, contrariwise,
the statesmen dispose of emoluments; through them everything is done;
you, the people, enervated, stripped of treasure and allies, are become
as underlings and hangers-on, happy if these persons dole you out show-
money or send you paltry beeves; and, the unmanliest part of all, you
are grateful for receiving your own." [Footnote: Dem. 01. iii.--
Translation by Kennedy.]

And this indictment is amply confirmed from other sources. We know that
the populace was demoralised by payments from the public purse; that the
fee for attendance in the Assembly attracted thither, as ready
instruments in the hands of ambitious men, the poorest and most degraded
of the citizens; that the fees of jurors were the chief means of
subsistence for an indigent class, who had thus a direct interest in the
multiplication of suits; and that the city was infested by a race of
"sycophants", whose profession was to manufacture frivolous and
vexatious indictments. Of one of these men Demosthenes speaks as
follows:

"He cannot show any respectable or honest employment in which his life
is engaged. His mind is not occupied in promoting any political good; he
attends not to any trade, or husbandry, or other business; he is
connected with no one by ties of humanity or social union: but he walks
through the market-place like a viper or a scorpion, with his sting up-
lifted, hastening here and there, and looking out for someone whom he
may bring into a scrape, or fasten some calumny or mischief upon, and
put in alarm in order to extort money." [Footnote: Demosth. in
Aristogeit. A. 62.--Translated by C. R. Kennedy.]

From all this we may gather an idea of the way in which the Athenian
democracy by its own development destroyed itself. Beginning, on its
first emergence from an earlier aristocratic phase, with an energy that
inspired without shattering the forms of discipline and law, it
dissolved by degrees this coherent whole into an anarchy of individual
wills, drawn deeper and deeper, in pursuit of mean and egoistic ends,
into political fraud and commercial chicanery, till the tradition of the
gentleman and the soldier was choked by the dust of adventurers and
swindlers, and the people, whose fathers had fought and prevailed at
Marathon and Salamis, fell as they deserved, by treachery from within as
much as by force from without, into the grasp of the Macedonian
conqueror.


Section 11. Sceptical Criticism of the Basis of the State.

Having thus supplemented our general account of the Greek conception of
the state by a description of their two most prominent polities, it
remains for us in conclusion briefly to trace the negative criticism
under whose attack that conception threatened to dissolve.

We have quoted, in an earlier part of this chapter, a striking passage
from Demosthenes, embodying that view of the objective validity of law
under which alone political institutions can be secure. "That is law,"
said the orator, "which all men ought to obey for many reasons, and
especially because every law is an invention and gift of the gods, a
resolution of wise men, a correction of errors intentional and
unintentional, a compact of the whole state, according to which all who
belong to the state ought to live." That is the conception of law which
the citizens of any stable state must be prepared substantially to
accept, for it is the condition of that fundamental belief in
established institutions which alone can make it worth while to adapt
and to improve them. It was, accordingly, the conception tacitly, at
least, accepted in Greece, during the period of her constructive vigour.
But it is a conception constantly open to attack. For law, at any given
moment, even under the most favourable conditions, cannot do more than
approximate to its own ideal. It is, at best, but a rough attempt at
that reconciliation of conflicting interests towards which the reason of
mankind is always seeking; and even in well-ordered states there must
always be individuals and classes who resent, and rightly resent it, as
unjust. But the Greek states, as we have seen, were not well-ordered; on
the contrary, they  were always on the verge, or in the act, of civil
war; and the conception of law, as "a compact of the whole state,
according to which all who belong to the state ought to live," must have
been, at the least, severely tried, in cities permanently divided into
two factions, each intent not merely on defeating the other, but on
excluding it altogether from political rights. Such conditions, in fact,
must have irresistibly suggested the criticism, which always dogs the
idea of the state, and against which its only defence is in a perpetual
perfection of itself--the criticism that law, after all, is only the
rule of the strong, and justice the name under which they gloze their
usurpation. That is a point of view which, even apart from their
political dissensions, would hardly have escaped the subtle intellect of
the Greeks; and in fact, from the close of the fifth century onwards, we
find it constantly canvassed and discussed.

The mind of Plato, in particular, was exercised by this contention; and
it was, one may say, a main object of his teaching to rescue the idea of
justice from identification with the special interest of the strong, and
re-affirm it as the general interest of all. For this end, he takes
occasion to state, with the utmost frankness and lucidity, the view
which it is his intention to refute; and consequently it is in his works
that we find the fullest exposition of the destructive argument he seeks
to answer.

Briefly, that argument runs as follows:--It is the law of nature that
the strong shall rule; a law which every one recognises in fact, though
every one repudiates it in theory. Government therefore simply means the
rule of the strong, and exists, no matter what its form, whether
tyranny, oligarchy, or democracy, in the interests not of its subjects
but of itself. "Justice" and "Law" are the specious names it employs to
cloak its own arbitrary will; they have no objective validity, no
reference to the well-being of all; and it is only the weak and the
foolish on whom they impose. Strong and original natures sweep away this
tangle of words, assert themselves in defiance of false shame, and claim
the right divine that is theirs by nature, to rule at their will by
virtue of their strength. "Each government," says Thrasymachus in the
Republic, "has its laws framed to suit its own interests; a democracy
making democratic laws; an autocrat despotic laws, and so on. Now by
this procedure these governments have pronounced that what is for the
interest of themselves is just for their subjects; and whoever deviates
from this, is chastised by them as guilty of illegality and injustice.
Therefore, my good sir, my meaning is, that in all cities the same
thing, namely, the interest of the established government is just. And
superior strength, I presume, is to be found on the side of government.
So that the conclusion of right reasoning is, that the same thing,
namely, the interest of the stronger, is everywhere just." [Footnote:
Plato, Rep. 338.--Translated by Davies and Vaughan.]

Here is an argument which strikes at the root of all subordination to
the state, setting the subject against the ruler, the minority against
the majority, with an emphasis of opposition that admits of no
conceivable reconciliation. And, as we have noticed, it was an argument
to which the actual political conditions of Greece gave a strong show of
plausibility.

How then did the constructive thinkers of Greece attempt to meet it?

The procedure adopted by Plato is curiously opposed to that which might
seem natural to a modern thinker on politics. The scepticism which was
to be met, having sprung from the extremity of class-antagonism, it
might be supposed that the cure would be sought in some sort of system
of equality. Plato's idea is precisely the contrary. The distinction
between classes he exaggerates to its highest point; only he would have
it depend on degrees, not of wealth, but of excellence. In the ideal
republic which he constructs as a type of a state where justice should
really rule, he sets an impassable gulf between the governing class and
the governed; each is specially trained and specially bred for its
appropriate function; and the harmony between them is ensured by the
recognition, on either part, that each is in occupation of the place for
which it is naturally fitted in that whole to which both alike are
subordinate. Such a state, no doubt, if ever it had been realised in
practice, would have been a complete reply to the sceptical argument;
for it would have established a "justice" which was the expression not
of the caprice of the governing class, but of the objective will of the
whole community. But in practice such a state was not realised in
Greece; and the experience of the Greek world does not lead us to
suppose that it was capable of realisation. The system of stereotyping
classes--in a word, of caste--which has played so great a part in the
history of the world, does no doubt embody a great truth, that of
natural inequality; and this truth, as we saw, was at the bottom of that
Greek conception of the state, of which the "Republic" of Plato is an
idealising caricature. But the problem is to make the inequality of
nature really correspond to the inequality imposed by institutions. This
problem Plato hoped to solve by a strict public control of the marriage
relation, so that none should be born into any class who were not
naturally fitted to be members of it; but as a matter of fact the
difficulty has never been met; and the system of caste remains open to
the reproach that its "justice" is conventional and arbitrary, not the
expression of the objective nature and will of all classes and members
of the community.

The attempt of Aristotle to construct a state that should be the
embodiment of justice is similar to Plato's so far as the relation of
classes is concerned. He, too, postulates a governing class of soldiers
and councillors, and a subject class of productive labourers. When,
however, he turns from the ideal to practical politics, and considers
merely how to avoid the worst extremes of party antagonism, his solution
is the simple and familiar one of the preponderance of the middle class.
The same view was dominant both in French and English politics from the
year 1830 onwards, and is only now being thrust aside by the democratic
ideal. In Greece it was never realised except as a passing phase in the
perpetual flux of polities. And in fine it may be said that the problem
of establishing a state which should be a concrete refutation of the
sceptical criticism that "justice" is merely another name for force, was
one that was never solved in ancient Greece. The dissolution of the idea
of the state was more a symptom than a cause of its failure in practice
to harmonise its warring elements. And Greece, divided into conflicting
polities, each of which again was divided within itself, passed on to
Macedon and thence to Rome that task of reconciling the individual and
the class with the whole, about which the political history of the world
turns.


Section 12. Summary.

We have now given some account of the general character of the Greek
state, the ideas that underlay it, and the criticism of those ideas
suggested by the course of history and formulated by speculative
thought. It remains to offer certain reflections on the political
achievement of the Greeks, and its relation to our own ideas.

The fruitful and positive aspect of the Greek state, that which fastens
upon it the eyes of later generations as upon a model, if not to be
copied, as least to be praised and admired, is that identification of
the individual citizen with the corporate life, which delivered him from
the narrow circle of personal interests into a sphere of wider views and
higher aims. The Greek citizen, as we have seen, in the best days of the
best states, in Athens for example in the age of Pericles, was at once a
soldier and a politician; body and mind alike were at his country's
service; and his whole ideal of conduct was inextricably bound up with
his intimate and personal participation in public affairs. If now with
this ideal we contrast the life of an average citizen in a modern state,
the absorption in private business and family concerns, the "greasy
domesticity" (to use a phrase of Byron's), that limits and clouds his
vision of the world, we may well feel that the Greeks had achieved
something which we have lost, and may even desire to return, so far as
we may, upon our steps, and to re-establish that interpenetration of
private and public life by which the individual citizen was at once
depressed and glorified.

It may be doubted, however, whether such a procedure would be in any way
possible or desirable. For in the first place, the existence of the
Greek citizen depended upon that of an inferior class who were regarded
not as ends in themselves, but as means to his perfection. And that is
an arrangement which runs directly counter to the modern ideal. All
modern societies aim, to this extent at least, at equality, that their
tendency, so far as it is conscious and avowed, is not to separate off a
privileged class of citizens, set free by the labour of others to live
the perfect life, but rather to distribute impartially to all the
burdens and advantages of the state, so that every one shall be at once
a labourer for himself and a citizen of the state. But this ideal is
clearly incompatible with the Greek conception of the citizen. It
implies that the greater portion of every man's life must be devoted to
some kind of mechanical labour, whose immediate connection with the
public good, though certain, is remote and obscure; and that in
consequence a deliberate and unceasing preoccupation with the end of the
state becomes as a general rule impossible.

And, in the second place, the mere complexity and size of a modern state
is against the identification of the man with the citizen. For, on the
one hand, public issues are so large and so involved that it is only a
few who can hope to have any adequate comprehension of them; and on the
other, the subdivision of functions is so minute that even when a man is
directly employed in the service of the state his activity is confined
to some highly specialised department. He must choose, for example,
whether he will be a clerk in the treasury or a soldier; but he cannot
certainly be both. In the Greek state any citizen could undertake,
simultaneously or in succession, and with complete comprehension and
mastery, every one of the comparatively few and simple public offices;
in a modern state such an arrangement has become impossible. The mere
mechanical and physical conditions of our life preclude the ideal of the
ancient citizen.

But, it may be said, the activity of the citizen of a modern state
should be and increasingly will be concerned not with the whole but with
the part. By the development of local institutions he will come, more
and more, to identify himself with the public life of his district and
his town; and will bear to that much the same relation as was borne by
the ancient Greek to his city state. Certainly so far as the limitation
of area, and the simplicity and intelligibility of issues is concerned,
such an analogy might be fairly pressed; and it is probably in
connection with such local areas that the average citizen does and
increasingly will become aware of his corporate relations. But, on the
other hand, it can hardly be maintained that public business in this
restricted sense either could or should play the part in the life of the
modern man that it played in that of the ancient Greek. For local
business after all is a matter of sewers and parks; and however great
the importance of such matters may be, and however great their claim
upon the attention of competent men, yet the kind of interest they
awaken and the kind of faculties they employ can hardly be such as to
lead to the identification of the individual ideal with that of public
activity. The life of the Greek citizen involved an exercise, the finest
and most complete, of all his powers of body, soul, and mind; the same
can hardly be said of the life of a county councillor, even of the best
and most conscientious of them. And the conclusion appears to be, that
that fusion of public and private life which was involved in the ideal
of the Greek citizen, was a passing phase in the history of the world;
that the state can never occupy again the place in relation to the
individual which it held in the cities of the ancient world; and that an
attempt to identify in a modern state the ideal of the man with that of
the citizen, would be an historical anachronism.

Nor is this a conclusion which need be regretted. For as the sphere of
the state shrinks, it is possible that that of the individual may be
enlarged. The public side of human life, it may be supposed, will become
more and more mechanical, as our understanding and control of social
forces grow. But every reduction to habit and rule of what were once
spiritual functions, implies the liberation of the higher powers for a
possible activity in other regions. And if advantage were taken of this
opportunity, the inestimable compensation for the contraction to routine
of the life of the citizen would be the expansion into new spheres of
speculation and passion of the freer and more individual life of the
man.




