CHAPTER III

THE GREEK VIEW OF THE INDIVIDUAL


Section 1. The Greek View of Manual Labour and Trade.

In our discussion of the Greek view of the State we noticed the tendency
both of the theory and the practice of the Greeks to separate the
citizens proper from the rest of the community as a distinct and
aristocratic class. And this tendency, we had occasion to observe, was
partly to be attributed to the high conception which the Greeks had
formed of the proper excellence of man, an excellence which it was the
function of the citizen to realise in his own person, at the cost, if
need be, of the other members of the State. This Greek conception of the
proper excellence of man it is now our purpose to examine more closely.
The chief point that strikes us about the Greek ideal is its
comprehensiveness. Our own word "virtue" is applied only to moral
qualities; but the Greek word which we so translate should properly be
rendered "excellence," and includes a reference to the body as well as
to the soul. A beautiful soul, housed in a beautiful body, and supplied
with all the external advantages necessary to produce and perpetuate
such a combination--that is the Greek conception of well-being; and it
is because labour with the hands or at the desk distorts or impairs the
body, and the petty cares of a calling pursued for bread pervert the
soul, that so strong a contempt was felt by the Greeks for manual labour
and trade. "The arts that are called mechanical," says Xenophon, "are
also, and naturally enough, held in bad repute in our cities. For they
spoil the bodies of workers and superintendents alike, compelling them
to live sedentary indoor lives, and in some cases even to pass their
days by the fire. And as their bodies become effeminate, so do their
souls also grow less robust. Besides this, in such trades one has no
leisure to devote to the care of one's friends or of one's city. So that
those who engage in them are thought to be bad backers of their friends
and bad defenders of their country." [Footnote: Xen. Oec. iv. 3.]

In a similar spirit Plato asserts that a life of drudgery disfigures the
body and mars and enervates the soul; [Footnote: Plato, Rep. 495.] while
Aristotle defines a mechanical trade as one which "renders the body and
soul or intellect of free persons unfit for the exercise and practice of
virtue;" [Footnote: Arist. Pol. V. 1337 b 8.--Translated by Welldon.]
and denies to the artisan not merely the proper excellence of man, but
any excellence of any kind, on the plea that his occupation and status
is unnatural, and that he misses even that reflex of human virtue which
a slave derives from his intimate connection with his master. [Footnote:
Ibid. i. 1260 a 34.]

If then the artisan was excluded from the citizenship in some of the
Greek states, and even in the most democratic of them never altogether
threw off the stigma of inferiority attaching to his trade, the reason
was that the life he was compelled to lead was incompatible with the
Greek conception of excellence. That conception we will now proceed to
examine a little more in detail.


Section 2. Appreciation of External Goods.

In the first place, the Greek ideal required for its realisation a solid
basis of external Goods. It recognised frankly the dependence of man
upon the world of sense, and the contribution to his happiness of
elements over which he had at best but a partial control. Not that it
placed his Good outside himself, in riches, power, and other such
appendages; but that it postulated certain gifts of fortune as necessary
means to his self-development. Of these the chief were, a competence, to
secure him against sordid cares, health, to ensure his physical
excellence, and children, to support and protect him in old age.
Aristotle's definition of the happy man is "one whose activity accords
with perfect virtue and who is adequately furnished with external goods,
not for a casual period of time but for a complete or perfect life-
time;" [Footnote: Arist. Ethics. I. ii. 1101 a 14.--Translated by
Welldon.] and he remarks, somewhat caustically, that those who say that
a man on the rack would be happy if only he were good, intentionally or
unintentionally are talking nonsense. That here, as elsewhere, Aristotle
represents the common Greek view we have abundant testimony from other
sources. Even Plato, in whom there runs so clear a vein of asceticism,
follows the popular judgment in reckoning high among goods, first,
health, then beauty, then skill and strength in physical exercises, and
lastly wealth, if it be not blind but illumined by the eye of reason. To
these Goods must be added, to complete the scale, success and
reputation, topics which are the constant theme of the poets' eulogy.
"Two things alone there are," says Pindar, "that cherish life's bloom to
its utmost sweetness amidst the fair flowers of wealth--to have good
success and to win therefore fair fame;" [Footnote: Pind. Isth. iv. 14.--
Translated by E. Myers.] and the passage represents his habitual
attitude. That the gifts of fortune, both personal and external, are an
essential condition of excellence, is an axiom of the point of view of
the Greeks. But on the other hand we never find them misled into the
conception that such gifts are an end in themselves, apart from the
personal qualities they are meant to support or adorn. The oriental
ideal of unlimited wealth and power, enjoyed merely for its own sake,
never appealed to their fine and lucid judgment. Nothing could better
illustrate this point than the anecdote related by Herodotus of the
interview between Solon and Croesus, King of Lydia. Croesus, proud of
his boundless wealth, asks the Greek stranger who is the happiest man on
earth? expecting to hear in reply his own name. Solon, however, answers
with the name of Tellus, the Athenian, giving his reasons in the
following speech:

"First, because his country was flourishing in his days, and he himself
had sons both beautiful and good, and he lived to see children born to
each of them, and these children all grew up; and further because, after
a life spent in what our people look upon as comfort, his end was
surpassingly glorious. In a battle between the Athenians and their
neighbours near Eleusis, he came to the assistance of his countrymen,
routed the foe, and died upon the field most gallantly. The Athenians
gave him a public funeral on the spot where he fell, and paid him the
highest honours."

Later on in the discussion Solon defines the happy man as he who "Is
whole of limb, a stranger to disease, free from misfortune, happy in his
children, and comely to look upon," and who also ends his life well.
[Footnote: Herodotus, i. 30. 32.--Translated by Rawlinson]


Section 3. Appreciation of Physical Qualities.

While, however, the gifts of a happy fortune are an essential condition
of the Greek ideal, they are not to be mistaken for the ideal itself. "A
beautiful soul in a beautiful body," to recur to our former phrase, is
the real end and aim of their endeavour. "Beautiful and good" is their
habitual way of describing what we should call a gentleman; and no
expression could better represent what they admired. With ourselves, in
spite of our addiction to athletics, the body takes a secondary place;
after a certain age, at least, there are few men who make its systematic
cultivation an important factor of their life; and in our estimate of
merit physical qualities are accorded either none or the very smallest
weight. It was otherwise with the Greeks; to them a good body was the
necessary correlative of a good soul. Balance was what they aimed at,
balance and harmony; and they could scarcely believe in the beauty of
the spirit, unless it were reflected in the beauty of the flesh. The
point is well put by Plato, the most spiritually minded of the Greeks,
and the least apt to underprize the qualities of the soul.

"Surely then," he says, "to him who has an eye to see, there can be no
fairer spectacle than that of a man who combines the possession of moral
beauty in his soul with outward beauty of form, corresponding and
harmonizing with the former, because the same great pattern enters into
both.

"There can be none so fair.

"And you will grant that what is fairest is loveliest?

"Undoubtedly it is.

"Then the truly musical person will love those who combine most
perfectly moral and physical beauty, but will not love any one in whom
there is dissonance.

"No, not if there be any defect in the soul, but if it is only a bodily
blemish, he may so bear with it as to be willing to regard it with
complacency.

"I understand that you have now, or have had, a favourite of this kind;
so I give way." [Footnote: Plato, Rep. 402.--Translated by Davies and
Vaughan.]

The reluctance of the admission that a physical defect may possibly be
overlooked is as significant as the rest of the passage. Body and soul,
it is clear, are regarded as aspects of a single whole, so that a
blemish in the one indicates and involves a blemish in the other. The
training of the body is thus, in a sense, the training of the soul, and
gymnastic and music, as Plato puts it, serve the same end, the
production of a harmonious temperament.


Section 4. Greek Athletics.

It is this conception which gives, or appears at least in the retrospect
to give, a character so gracious and fine to Greek athletics. In fact,
if we look more closely into the character of the public games in Greece
we see that they were so surrounded and transfused by an atmosphere of
imagination that their appeal must have been as much to the aesthetic as
to the physical sense. For in the first place those great gymnastic
contests in which all Hellas took part, and which gave the tone to their
whole athletic life, were primarily religious festivals. The Olympic and
Nemean Games were held in honour of Zeus, the Pythian, of Apollo, the
Isthmean, of Poseidon. In the enclosures in which they took place stood
temples of the gods; and sacrifice, prayer, and choral hymn were the
back-ground against which they were set. And since in Greece religion
implied art, in the wake of the athlete followed the sculptor and the
poet. The colossal Zeus of Pheidias, the wonder of the ancient world,
flashed from the precincts of Olympia its glory of ivory and gold;
temples and statues broke the brilliant light into colour and form; and
under that vibrating heaven of beauty, the loveliest nature crowned with
the finest art, shifted and shone what was in itself a perfect type of
both, the grace of harmonious motion in naked youths and men. For in
Greek athletics, by virtue of the practice of contending nude, the
contest itself became a work of art; and not only did sculptors draw
from it an inspiration such as has been felt by no later age, but to the
combatants themselves, and the spectators, the plastic beauty of the
human form grew to be more than its prowess or its strength, and
gymnastic became a training in aesthetics as much as, or more than, in
physical excellence.

And as with the contest, so with the reward, everything was designed to
appeal to the sensuous imagination. The prize formally adjudged was
symbolical only, a crown of olive; but the real triumph of the victor
was the ode in which his praise was sung, the procession of happy
comrades, and the evening festival, when, as Pindar has it, "the lovely
shining of the fair-faced moon beamed forth, and all the precinct
sounded with songs of festal glee," [Footnote: Pindar, Ol. xi. 90.--
Translated by Myers] or "beside Kastaly in the evening his name burnt
bright, when the glad sounds of the Graces rose." [Footnote: Pindar,
Nem. 6. 65.]

Of the Graces! for these were the powers who presided over the world of
Greek athletics. Here, for example, is the opening of one of Pindar's
odes, typical of the spirit in which he at least conceived the functions
of the chronicler of sport:

"O ye who haunt the land of goodly steeds that drinketh of Kephisos'
waters, lusty Orchomenos' Queens renowned in song, O Graces, guardians
of the Minyai's ancient race, hearken, for unto you I pray. For by your
gift come unto men all pleasant things and sweet, and the wisdom of a
man and his beauty, and the splendour of his fame. Yea, even gods
without the Graces' aid rule never at feast or dance; but these have
charge of all things done in heaven, and beside Pythian Apollo of the
golden bow they have set their thrones, and worship the eternal majesty
of the Olympian Father. O lady Aglaia, and thou Euphrosyne, lover of
song, children of the mightiest of the gods, listen and hear, and thou
Thalia delighting in sweet sounds, and look down upon this triumphal
company, moving with light step under happy fate. In Lydian mood of
melody concerning Asopichos am I come hither to sing, for that through
thee, Aglaia, in the Olympic games the Minyai's home is winner."
[Footnote: Pindar, Ol. xiv.--Translated by Myers.]

This is but a single passage among many that might be quoted to
illustrate the point we are endeavouring to bring into relief--the
conscious predominance in the Greek games of that element of poetry and
art which is either not present at all in modern sport or at best is a
happy accessory of chance. The modern man, and especially the
Englishman, addicts himself to athletics, as to other avocations, with a
certain stolidity of gaze on the immediate end which tends to confine
him to the purely physical view of his pursuit. The Greek, an artist by
nature, lifted his not less strenuous sports into an air of finer
sentiment, touched them with the poetry of legend and the grace of art
and song, and even to his most brutal contests--for brutal some of them
were--imparted so rich an atmosphere of beauty, that they could be
admitted as fit themes for dedication to the Graces by the choice and
spiritual genius of Pindar.


Section 5. Greek Ethics--Identification of the Aesthetic and Ethical
Points of View.

And as with the excellence of the body, so with that of the soul, the
conception that dominated the mind of the Greeks was primarily
aesthetic. In speaking of their religion we have already remarked that
they had no sense of sin; and we may now add that they had no sense of
duty. Moral virtue they conceived not as obedience to an external law, a
sacrifice of the natural man to a power that in a sense is alien to
himself, but rather as the tempering into due proportion of the elements
of which human nature is composed. The good man was the man who was
beautiful--beautiful in soul. "Virtue," says Plato, "will be a kind of
health and beauty and good habit of the soul; and vice will be a disease
and deformity and sickness of it." [Footnote: Plato, Rep. 444,--
Translated by Davies and Vaughan.] It follows that it is as natural to
seek virtue and to avoid vice as to seek health and to avoid disease.
There is no question of a struggle between opposite principles; the
distinction of good and evil is one of order or confusion, among
elements which in themselves are neither good nor bad.

This conception of virtue we find expressed in many forms, but always
with the same underlying idea. A favourite watch-word with the Greeks is
the "middle" or "mean", the exact point of rightness between two
extremes. "Nothing in excess," was a motto inscribed over the temple of
Delphi; and none could be more characteristic of the ideal of these
lovers of proportion. Aristotle, indeed, has made it the basis of his
whole theory of ethics. In his conception, virtue is the mean, vice the
excess lying on either side--courage, for example, the mean between
foolhardiness and cowardice, temperance, between incontinence and
insensibility, generosity, between extravagance and meanness. The
various phases of feeling and the various kinds of action he analyses
minutely on this principle, understanding always by "the mean" that
which adapts itself in the due proportion to the circumstances and
requirements of every case.

The interest of this view for us lies in its assumption that it is not
passions or desires in themselves that must be regarded as bad, but only
their disproportional or misdirected indulgence. Let us take, for
example, the case of the pleasures of sense. The puritan's rule is to
abjure them altogether; to him they are absolutely wrong in themselves,
apart from all considerations of time and place. Aristotle, on the
contrary, enjoins not renunciation but temperance; and defines the
temperate man as one who "holds a mean position in respect of pleasures.
He takes no pleasure in the things in which the licentious man takes
most pleasure; he rather dislikes them; nor does he take pleasure at all
in wrong things, nor an excessive pleasure in anything that is pleasant,
nor is he pained at the absence of such things, nor does he desire them,
except perhaps in moderation, nor does he desire them more than is
right, or at the wrong time, and so on. But he will be eager in a
moderate and right spirit for all such things as are pleasant and at the
same time conducive to health or to a sound bodily condition, and for
all other pleasures, so long as they are not prejudicial to these or
inconsistent with noble conduct or extravagant beyond his means. For
unless a person limits himself in this way, he affects such pleasures
more than is right, whereas the temperate man follows the guidance of
right reason." [Footnote: Arist. Ethics. III. 14.--1119 a 11.--Translated
by Welldon.]

As another illustration of this point of view, we may take the case of
anger. The Christian rule is never to resent an injury, but rather, in
the New Testament phrase, to "turn the other cheek." Aristotle, while
blaming the man who is unduly passionate, blames equally the man who is
insensitive; the thing to aim at is to be angry "on the proper occasions
and with the proper people in the proper manner and for the proper
length of time." And in this and all other cases the definition of what
is proper must be left to the determination of "the sensible man."

Thus, in place of a series of hard and fast rules, a rigid and
uncompromising distinction of acts and affections into good and bad, the
former to be absolutely chosen and the latter absolutely eschewed,
Aristotle presents us with the general type of a subtle and shifting
problem, the solution of which must be worked out afresh by each
individual in each particular case. Conduct to him is a free and living
creature, and not a machine controlled by fixed laws. Every life is a
work of art shaped by the man who lives it; according to the faculty of
the artist will be the quality of his work, and no general rules can
supply the place of his own direct perception at every turn. The Good is
the right proportion, the right manner and occasion; the Bad is all that
varies from this "right." But the elements of human nature in themselves
are neither good nor bad; they are merely the raw material out of which
the one or the other may be shaped.

The idea thus formulated by Aristotle is typically Greek. In another
form it is the basis of the ethical philosophy of Plato, who habitually
regards virtue as a kind of "order." "The virtue of each thing," he
says, "whether body or soul, instrument or creature, when given to them
in the best way comes to them not by chance but as the result of the
order and truth and art which are imparted to them." [Footnote: Plato,
Gorgias, 506 d.--Translated by Jowett] And the conception here
indicated, is worked out in detail in his Republic. There, after
distinguishing in the soul three principles or powers, reason, passion,
and desire, he defines justice as the maintenance among them of their
proper mutual relation, each moving in its own place and doing its
appropriate work as is, or should be, the case with the different
classes in a state.

"The just man will not permit the several principles within him to do
any work but their own, nor allow the distinct classes in his soul to
interfere with each other, but will really set his house in order; and
having gained the mastery over himself, will so regulate his own
character as to be on good terms with himself, and to set those three
principles in tune together, as if they were verily three chords of a
harmony, a higher and a lower and a middle, and whatever may lie between
these; and after he has bound all these together, and reduced the many
elements of his nature to a real unity, as a temperate and duly
harmonized man, he will then at length proceed to do whatever he may
have to do." [Footnote: Plato, Rep. IV. 443.--Translation by Davies and
Vaughan.]

Plato, it is true, in other parts of his work, approaches more closely
to the dualistic conception of an absolute opposition between good and
bad principles in man. Yet even so, he never altogether abandons that
aesthetic point of view which looks to the establishment of order among
the conflicting principles rather than to the annihilation of one by the
other in an internecine conflict. The point may be illustrated by the
following passage, where the two horses represent respectively the
elements of fleshly desire and spiritual passion, while the charioteer
stands for the controlling reason; and where, it will be noticed, the
ultimate harmony is achieved, not by the complete eradication of desire,
but by its due subordination to the higher principle. Even Plato, the
most ascetic of the Greeks, is a Greek first and an ascetic afterwards.

"Of the nature of the soul, though her true form be ever a theme of
large and more than mortal discourse, let me speak briefly, and in a
figure, and let the figure be composite--a pair of winged horses and a
charioteer. Now the winged horses and the charioteers of the gods are
all of them noble and of noble descent, but those of other races are
mixed; the human charioteer drives his in a pair; and one of them is
noble and of noble breed, and the other is ignoble and of ignoble breed;
and the driving of them of necessity gives a great deal of trouble to
him.... The right hand horse is upright and cleanly made; he has a lofty
neck and an aquiline nose; his colour is white, and his eyes dark; he is
a lover of honour and modesty and temperance, and the follower of true
glory; he needs no touch of the whip, but is guided by word and
admonition only. The other is a crooked lumbering animal, put together
anyhow; he has a short thick neck; he is flat-faced and of a dark
colour, with grey eyes and blood-red complexion; the mate of insolence
and pride, shag-eared and deaf, hardly yielding to whip and spur. Now
when the charioteer beholds the vision of love, and has his whole soul
warmed through sense, and is full of, the prickings and ticklings of
desire, the obedient steed, then as always under the government of
shame, refrains from leaping on the beloved; but the other, heedless of
the blows of the whip, plunges and runs away, giving all manner of
trouble to his companion and the charioteer, whom he forces to approach
the beloved and to remember the joys of love. They at first indignantly
oppose him and will not be urged on to do terrible and unlawful deeds;
but at last, when he persists in plaguing them, they yield and agree to
do as he bids them. And now they are at the spot and behold the flashing
beauty of the beloved; which when the charioteer sees, his memory is
carried to the true beauty whom he beholds in company with Modesty like
an image placed upon a holy pedestal He sees her, but he is afraid and
falls backwards in adoration, and by his fall is compelled to pull back
the reins with such violence as to bring both the steeds on their
haunches, the one willing and unresisting, the unruly one very
unwilling; and when they have gone back a little, the one is overcome
with shame and wonder, and his whole soul is bathed in perspiration; the
other, when the pain is over which the bridle and the fall had given
him, having with difficulty taken breath, is full of wrath and
reproaches, which he heaps upon the charioteer and his fellow-steed, for
want of courage and manhood, declaring that they have been false to
their agreement and guilty of desertion. Again they refuse, and again he
urges them on, and will scarce yield to their prayer that he would wait
until another time. When the appointed hour comes, they make as if they
had forgotten, and he reminds them, fighting and neighing and dragging
them on, until at length he on the same thoughts intent, forces them to
draw near again. And when they are near he stoops his head and puts up
his tail, and takes the bit in his teeth and pulls shamelessly. Then the
charioteer is worse off than ever; he falls back like a racer at the
barrier, and with a still more violent wrench drags the bit out of the
teeth of the wild steed and covers his abusive jaws and tongue with
blood, and forces his legs and haunches to the ground and punishes him
sorely.

"And when this has happened several times and the villain has ceased
from his wanton way, he is tamed and humbled and follows the will of the
charioteer, and when he sees the beautiful one he is ready to die of
fear. And from that time forward the soul of the lover follows the
beloved in modesty and holy fear." [Footnote: Plato, Phaedrus. 246.--
Translated by Jowett.]

Even from this passage, in spite of its dualistic hypothesis, but far
more clearly from the whole tenor of his work, we may perceive that
Plato's description of virtue as an "order" of the soul is prompted by
the same conception, characteristically Greek, as Aristotle's account of
virtue as a "mean." The view, as we said at the beginning, is properly
aesthetic rather than moral. It regards life less as a battle between
two contending principles, in which victory means the annihilation of
the one, the altogether bad, by the other, the altogether good, than as
the maintenance of a balance between elements neutral in themselves but
capable, according as their relations are rightly ordered or the
reverse, of producing either that harmony which is called virtue, or
that discord which is called vice.

Such being the conception of virtue characteristic of the Greeks, it
follows that the motive to pursue it can hardly have presented itself to
them in the form of what we call the "sense of duty." For duty
emphasises self-repression. Against the desires of man it sets a law of
prohibition, a law which is not conceived as that of his own complete
nature, asserting against a partial or disproportioned development the
balance and totality of the ideal, but rather as a rule imposed from
without by a power distinct from himself, for the mortification, not the
perfecting, of his natural impulses and aims. Duty emphasises self-
repression; the Greek view emphasised self-development. That "health and
beauty and good habit of the soul," which is Plato's ideal, is as much
its own recommendation tion to the natural man as is the health and
beauty of the body. Vice, on this view, is condemned because it is a
frustration of nature, virtue praised because it is her fulfilment; and
the motive throughout is simply that passion to realise oneself which is
commonly acknowledged as sufficient in the case of physical development,
and which appeared sufficient to the Greeks in the case of the
development of the soul.


Section 6. The Greek View of Pleasure.

From all this it follows clearly enough that the Greek ideal was far
removed from asceticism; but it might perhaps be supposed, on the other
hand, that it came dangerously near to license. Nothing, however, could
be further from the case. That there were libertines among the Greeks,
as everywhere else, goes without saying; but the conception that the
Greek rule of life was to follow impulse and abandon restraint is a
figment of would-be "Hellenists" of our own time. The word which best
sums up the ideal of the Greeks is "temperance"; "the mean," "order,"
"harmony," as we saw, are its characteristic expressions; and the self-
realisation to which they aspired was not an anarchy of passion, but an
ordered evolution of the natural faculties under the strict control of a
balanced mind. The point may be illustrated by a reference to the
treatment of pleasure in the philosophy of Plato and of Aristotle.

The practice of the libertine is to identify pleasure and good in such a
manner that he pursues at any moment any pleasure that presents itself,
eschewing comparison and reflection, with all that might tend to check
that continuous flow of vivid and fresh sensations which he postulates
as the end of life. The ideal of the Greeks, on the contrary, as
interpreted by their two greatest thinkers, while on the one hand it is
so far opposed to asceticism that it requires pleasure as an essential
complement of Good, on the other, is so far from identifying the two,
that it recognises an ordered scale of pleasures, and while rejecting
altogether those at the lower end, admits the rest, not as in themselves
constituting the Good, but rather as harmless additions or at most as
necessary accompaniments of its operation. Plato, in the Republic,
distinguishes between the necessary and unnecessary pleasures, defining
the former as those derived from the gratification of appetites "which
we cannot get rid of and whose satisfaction does us good"--such, for
example, as the appetite for wholesome food; and the latter as those
which belong to appetites "which we can put away from us by early
training; and the presence of which, besides, never does us any good,
and in some cases does positive harm,"--such, for example, as the
appetite for delicate and luxurious dishes. [Footnote: Plato, Rep. VIII.
558.--Translated by Davies and Vaughan.] The former he would admit, the
latter he excludes from his ideal of happiness. And though in a later
dialogue, the Philebus, he goes further than this, and would exclude
from the perfect life all pleasures except those which he describes as
"pure," that is those which attend upon the contemplation of form and
colour and sound, or which accompany intellectual activity; yet here, no
doubt, he is passing beyond the sphere of the practicable ideal, and his
distinct personal bias towards asceticism must be discounted if we are
to take him as representative of the Greek view. His general contention,
however, that pleasures must be ranked as higher and as lower, and that
at the best they are not to be identified with the Good, is fully
accepted by so typical a Greek as Aristotle. Aristotle, however, is
careful not to condemn any pleasure that is not definitely harmful. Even
"unnecessary" pleasures, he admits, may be desirable in themselves; even
the deliberate creation of desire with a view to the enjoyment of
satisfying it may be admissible if it is not injurious. Still, there are
kinds of pleasures which ought not to be pursued, and occasions and
methods of seeking it which are improper and perverse. Therefore the
Reason must be always at hand to check and to control; and the ultimate
test of true worth in pleasure, as in everything else, is the trained
judgment of the good and sensible man.


Section 7. Illustrations--Ischomachus; Socrates.

Such, then, was the character of the Greek conception of excellence. The
account we have given may seem somewhat abstract and ideal; but it gives
the general formula of the life which every cultivated Greek would at
any rate have wished to live. And in confirmation of this point we may
adduce the testimony of Xenophon, who has left us a description,
evidently drawn from life, of what he conceives to be the perfect type
of a "gentleman."

The interest of the account lies in the fact, that Xenophon himself was
clearly an "average" Greek, one, that is to say, of good natural parts,
of perfectly normal faculties and tastes, undisturbed by any originality
of character or mind, and representing therefore, as we may fairly
assert, the ordinary views and aims of an upright and competent man of
the world. His description of the "gentleman," therefore, may be taken
as a representative account of the recognised ideal of all that class of
Athenian citizens. And this is how the gentleman in question,
Ischomachus, describes his course of life.

"In the first place," he says, "I worship the gods. Next, I endeavour to
the best of my ability, assisted by prayer, to get health and strength
of body, reputation in the city, good will among my friends, honourable
security in battle and an honourable increase of fortune."

At this point Socrates, who is supposed to be the interlocutor,
interrupts. "Do you really covet wealth," he asks, "with all the trouble
it involves?" "Certainly I do," is the reply, "for it enables me to
honour the gods magnificently, to help my friends if they are in want,
and to contribute to the resources of my country."

Here definitely and precisely expressed is the ideal of the Athenian
gentleman--the beautiful body housing the beautiful soul, the external
aids of fortune, friends, and the like, and the realisation of the
individual self in public activity. Upon it follows an account of the
way in which Ischomachus was accustomed to pass his days. He rises
early, he tells us, to catch his friends before they go out, or walks to
the city to transact his necessary business. If he is not called into
town, he pays a visit to his farm, walking for the sake of exercise and
sending on his horse. On his arrival he gives directions about the
sowing, ploughing, or whatever it may be, and then mounting his horse
practices his military exercises. Finally he returns home on foot,
running part of the way, takes his bath, and sits down to a moderate
midday meal.

This combination of physical exercise, military training and business,
arouses the enthusiasm of Socrates. "How right you are!" he cries, "and
the consequence is that you are as healthy and strong as we see you, and
one of the best riders and the wealthiest men in the country!"

This little prosaic account of the daily life of an Athenian gentleman
is completely in harmony with all we have said about the character of
the Greek ideal; but it comprehends only a part, and that the least
spiritual, of that rich and many-sided excellence. It may be as well,
therefore, to append by way of complement the description of another
personality, exceptional indeed even among the Greeks, yet one which
only Greece could have produced--the personality of Socrates. No more
striking figure is presented to us in history, none has been more
vividly portrayed, and none, in spite of the originality of mind which
provoked the hostility of the crowd, is more thoroughly Hellenic in
every aspect, physical, intellectual, and moral.

That Socrates was ugly in countenance was a defect which a Greek could
not fail to note, and his snub nose and big belly are matters of
frequent and jocose allusion. But apart from these defects his physique,
it appears, was exceptionally good; he was sedulous in his attendance at
the gymnasia, and was noted for his powers of endurance and his courage
and skill in war. Plato records it of him that in a hard winter on
campaign, when the common soldiers were muffling themselves in
sheepskins and felt against the cold, he alone went about in his
ordinary cloak, and barefoot over the ice and snow; and he further
describes his bearing in a retreat from a lost battle, how "there you
might see him, just as he is in the streets of Athens, stalking like a
pelican and rolling his eyes, calmly contemplating enemies as well as
friends, and making very intelligible to anybody, even from a distance,
that whoever attacked him would be likely to meet with a stout
resistance." [Footnote: Plato, Symp. 221 b.--Translated by Jowett.]

To this efficiency of body corresponded, in accordance with the Greek
ideal, a perfect balance and harmony of soul. Plato, in a fine figure,
compares him to the wooden statues of Silenus, which concealed behind a
grotesque exterior beautiful golden images of the gods. Of these divine
forms none was fairer in Socrates than that typical Greek virtue,
temperance. Without a touch of asceticism, he knew how to be contented
with a little. His diet he measured strictly with a view to health.
Naturally abstemious, he could drink, when he chose, more than another
man; but no one had ever seen him drunk. His affections were strong and
deep, but never led him away to seek his own gratification at the cost
of those he loved. Without cutting himself off from any of the pleasures
of life, a social man and a frequent guest at feasts, he preserved
without an effort the supremacy of character and mind over the flesh he
neither starved nor pampered. Here is a description by Plato of his
bearing at the close of an all-night carouse, which may stand as a
concrete illustration not only of the character of Socrates, but of the
meaning of "temperance" as it was understood by the Greeks:

"Aristodemus said that Eryximachus, Phaedrus, and others went away--he
himself fell asleep, and as the nights were long took a good rest: he
was awakened towards day-break by a crowing of cocks, and when he awoke
the others were either asleep, or had gone away; there remained awake
only Socrates, Aristophanes, and Agathon, who were drinking out of a
large goblet which they passed round, and Socrates was discoursing to
them. Aristodemus did not hear the beginning of the discourse, and he
was only half awake, but the chief thing which he remembered was
Socrates compelling the other two to acknowledge that the genius of
comedy was the same as that of tragedy, and that the true artist in
tragedy was an artist in comedy also. To this they assented, being
drowsy, and not quite following the argument. And first of all
Aristophanes dropped off, then, when the day was already dawning,
Agathon. Socrates, when he had laid them to sleep, rose to depart:
Aristodemus, as his manner was, following him. At the Lyceum he took a
bath, and passed the day as usual. In the evening he retired to rest at
his own house." [Footnote: Plato, Symposion, 223.--Translated by
Jowett.]

With this quality of temperance was combined in Socrates a rare measure
of independence and moral courage. He was never an active politician;
but as every Athenian citizen was called, at some time or another, to
public office, he found himself, on a critical occasion, responsible for
putting a certain proposition to the vote in the Assembly. It was a
moment of intense excitement. A great victory had just been won; but the
generals who had achieved the success had neglected to recover the
corpses of the dead or to save the ship-wrecked. It was proposed to take
a vote of life or death on all the generals collectively. Socrates, as
it happened, was one of the committee whose duty it was to put the
question to the Assembly. But the proposition was in itself illegal, and
Socrates with some other members of the committee, refused to submit it
to the vote. Every kind of pressure was brought to bear upon the
recalcitrant officers; orators threatened, friends besought, the mob
clamoured and denounced. Finally all but Socrates gave way. He alone, an
old man, in office for the first time, had the courage to obey his
conscience and the law in face of an angry populace crying for blood.

And as he could stand against a mob, so he could stand against a despot.
At the time when Athens was ruled by the thirty tyrants he was ordered,
with four others, to arrest a man whom the authorities wished to put out
of the way. The man was guilty of no crime, and Socrates refused. "I
went quietly home," he says, "and no doubt I should have been put to
death for it, if the government had not shortly after come to an end."

These, however, were exceptional episodes in the career of a man who was
never a prominent politician. The main interest of Socrates was
intellectual and moral; an interest, however, rather practical than
speculative. For though he was charged in his indictment with preaching
atheism, he appears in fact to have concerned himself little or nothing
with either theological or physical inquiries. He was careful in his
observance of all prescribed religious rites, and probably accepted the
gods as powers of the natural world and authors of human institutions
and laws. His originality lay not in any purely speculative views, but
in the pertinacious curiosity, practical in its origin and aim, with
which he attacked and sifted the ethical conceptions of his time: "What
is justice?" "What is piety?" "What is temperance?"--these were the
kinds of questions he never tired of raising, pointing out
contradictions and inconsistencies in current ideas, and awakening
doubts which if negative in form were positive and fruitful in effect.

His method in pursuing these inquiries was that of cross-examination. In
the streets, in the market, in the gymnasia, at meetings grave and gay,
in season or out of season, he raised his points of definition. The city
was in a ferment around him. Young men and boys followed and hung on his
lips wherever he went. By the charm of his personality, his gracious
courtesy and wit, and the large and generous atmosphere of a sympathy
always at hand to temper to particular persons the rigours of a
generalising logic, he drew to himself, with a fascination not more of
the intellect than of the heart, all that was best and brightest in the
youth of Athens. His relation to his young disciples was that of a lover
and a friend; and the stimulus given by his dialectics to their keen and
eager minds was supplemented and reinforced by the appeal to their
admiration and love of his sweet and virile personality.

Only in Ancient Athens, perhaps, could such a character and such
conditions have met. The sociable out-door city life; the meeting places
in the open air, and especially the gymnasia, frequented by young and
old not more for exercise of the body than for recreation of the mind;
the nimble and versatile Athenian wits trained to preternatural
acuteness by the debates of the law courts and the Assembly; all this
was exactly the environment fitted to develop and sustain a genius at
once so subtle and so humane as that of Socrates. It is the concrete
presentation of this city-life that lends so peculiar a charm to the
dialogues of Plato. The spirit of metaphysics puts on the human form;
and Dialectic walks the streets and contends in the palaestra. It would
be impossible to convey by citation the cumulative effect of this
constant reference in Plato to a human background; but a single excerpt
may perhaps help us to realise the conditions under which Socrates lived
and worked. Here, then, is a description of the scene in one of those
gymnasia in which he was wont to hold his conversations:

"Upon entering we found that the boys had just been sacrificing; and
this part of the festival was nearly at an end. They were all in white
array, and games at dice were going on among them. Most of them were in
the outer court amusing themselves; but some were in a corner of the
Apodyterium playing at odd and even with a number of dice, which they
took out of little wicker baskets. There was also a circle of lookers-
on, one of whom was Lysis. He was standing among the other boys and
youths, having a crown upon his head, like a fair vision, and not less
worthy of praise for his goodness than for his beauty. We left them, and
went over to the opposite side of the room, where, finding a quiet
place, we sat down; and then we began to talk. This attracted Lysis, who
was constantly turning round to look at us--he was evidently wanting to
come to us. For a time he hesitated and had not the courage to come
alone; but first of all, his friend Menexenus came in out of the court
in the interval of his play, and when he saw Ctesippus and myself, came
and sat by us; and then Lysis, seeing him, followed, and sat down with
him, and the other boys joined.

"I turned to Menexenus, and said: 'Son of Demophon, which of you two
youths is the elder?'

"'That is a matter of dispute between us,' he said.

"'And which is the nobler? Is that a matter of dispute too?'

"'Yes, certainly.'

"'And another disputed point is, which is the fairer?'

"The two boys laughed.

"'I shall not ask which is the richer,' I said; 'for you two are
friends, are you not?'

"'Certainly,' they replied.

"'And friends have all things in common, so that one of you can be no
richer than the other, if you say truly that you are friends.'

"They assented. I was about to ask which was the greater of the two, and
which was the wiser of the two; but at this moment Menexenus was called
away by some one who came and said that the gymnastic-master wanted him.
I supposed that he had to offer sacrifice. So he went away and I asked
Lysis some more questions." [Footnote: Plato, Lysis 206 e.--Translated
by Jowett]

Such were the scenes in which Socrates passed his life. Of his influence
it is hardly necessary here to speak at length. In the well-known
metaphor put into his mouth by Plato, he was the "gad-fly" of the
Athenian people. To prick intellectual lethargy, to force people to
think, and especially to think about the conceptions with which they
supposed themselves to be most familiar, those which guided their
conduct in private and public affairs--justice expediency, honesty, and
the like--such was the constant object of his life. That he should have
made enemies, that he should have been misunderstood, that he should
have been accused of undermining the foundations of morality and
religion, is natural and intelligible enough; and it was on these
grounds that he was condemned to death. His conduct at his trial was of
a piece with the rest of his life. The customary arts of the pleader,
the appeal to the sympathies of the public, the introduction into court
of weeping wife and children, he rejected as unworthy of himself and of
his cause. His defence was a simple exposition of the character and the
aims of his life; so far from being a criminal he asserted that he was a
benefactor of the Athenian people; and having, after his condemnation,
to suggest the sentence he thought appropriate, he proposed that he
should be supported at the public expense as one who had deserved well
of his country. After his sentence to death, having to wait thirty days
for its execution, he showed no change from his customary cheerfulness,
passing his time in conversation with his friends. So far from
regretting his fate he rather congratulated himself that he would escape
the decadence that attends upon old age; and he had, if we may trust
Plato, a fair and confident assurance that a happy life awaited him
beyond. He died, according to the merciful law of Athens, by drinking
hemlock; "the wisest and justest and best," in Plato's judgment, "of all
the men that I have ever known."

We have dwelt thus long on the personality of Socrates, familiar though
it be, not only on account of its intrinsic interest, but also because
it is peculiarly Hellenic. That sunny and frank intelligence, bathed, as
it were, in the open air, a gracious blossom springing from the root of
physical health, that unique and perfect balance of body and soul,
passion and intellect, represent, against the brilliant setting of
Athenian life, the highest achievement of the civilisation of Greece.
The figure of Socrates, no doubt, has been idealised by Plato, but it is
none the less significant of the trend of Hellenic life. No other people
could have conceived such an ideal; no other could have gone so far
towards its realisation.


Section 8. The Greek View of Woman.

In the preceding account we have attempted to give some conception of
the Greek ideal for the individual man. It is now time to remind
ourselves that that ideal was only supposed to be proper to a small
class--the class of soldier-citizens. Artisans and slaves, as we have
seen, had no participation in it; neither, and that is our next point,
had women.

Nothing more profoundly distinguishes the Hellenic from the modern view
of life than the estimate in which women were held by the Greeks. Their
opinion on this point was partly the cause and partly the effect of that
preponderance of the idea of the State on which we have already dwelt,
and from which it followed naturally enough that marriage should be
regarded primarily as a means of producing healthy and efficient
citizens. This view is best illustrated by the institutions of such a
State as Sparta, where, as we saw, the woman was specially trained for
maternity, and connections outside the marriage tie were sanctioned by
custom and opinion, if they were such as were likely to lead to healthy
offspring. Further it may be noted that in almost every State the
exposure of deformed or sickly infants was encouraged by law, the child
being thus regarded, from the beginning, as a member of the State,
rather than as a member of the family.

The same view is reflected in the speculations of political
philosophers. Plato, indeed, in his Republic, goes so far as to
eliminate the family relation altogether. Not only is the whole
connection between men and women to be regulated by the State, in
respect both of the persons and of the limit of age within which they
may associate, but the children as soon as they are born are to be
carried off to a common nursery, there to be reared together,
undistinguished by the mothers, who will suckle indifferently any infant
that might happen to be assigned to them for the purpose. Here, as in
other instances, Plato goes far beyond the limits set by the current
sentiment of the Greeks, and in his later work is reluctantly
constrained to abandon his scheme of community of wives and children.
Yet even there he makes it compulsory on every man to marry between the
ages of thirty and thirty-five, under penalty of fine and civil
disabilities. Plato, no doubt, as we have said, exaggerates the opinions
of his time; but the view, which he pushes to its extreme, of the
subordination of the family to the State, was one, as we have already
pointed out, which did predominate in Greece. It reappears in a soberer
form in the treatise of Aristotle. He too would regulate by law both the
age at which marriages should take place and the number of children that
should be produced, and would have all deformed infants exposed. And
here, no doubt, he is speaking in conformity if not with the practice,
at least with the feeling of Greece. The modern conception that the
marriage relation is a matter of private concern, and that any
individual has a right to wed whom and when he will, and to produce
children at his own discretion, regardless of all considerations of
health and decency, was one altogether alien to the Greeks. In theory at
least, and to some extent in practice (as for example in the case of
Sparta), they recognised that the production of children was a business
of supreme import to the State, and that it was right and proper that it
should be regulated by law with a view to the advantage of the whole
community.

     *       *       *       *       *

And if now we turn from considering the family in its relation to the
State to regard it in its relation to the individual, we are struck once
more by a divergence from the modern point of view, or rather from the
view which is supposed to prevail, particularly by writers of fiction,
at any rate in modern English life. In ancient Greece, so far as our
knowledge goes, there was little or no romance connected with the
marriage tie. Marriage was a means of producing legitimate children;
that is how it is defined by Demosthenes; and we have no evidence that
it was ever regarded as anything more. In Athens we know that marriages
were commonly arranged by the father, much as they are in modern France,
on grounds of age, property, connection and the like, and without any
regard for the inclination of the parties concerned. And an interesting
passage in Xenophon indicates a point of view quite consonant with this
accepted practice. God, he says, ordained the institution of marriage;
but on what grounds? Not in the least for the sake of the personal
relation that might be established between the husband and wife, but for
ends quite external and indifferent to any affection that might exist
between them. First, for the perpetuation of the human race; secondly,
to raise up protectors for the father in his old age; thirdly, to secure
an appropriate division of labour, the man performing the outdoor work,
the woman guarding and superintending at home, and each thus fulfilling
duly the function for which they were designed by nature. This eminently
prosaic way of conceiving the marriage relation, is also, it would seem,
eminently Greek; and it leads us to consider more particularly the
opinion prevalent in Greece of the nature and duty of woman in general.

Here the first point to be noticed is the wide difference of the view
represented in the Homeric poems from that which meets us in the
historic period. Readers of the Iliad and the Odyssey will find depicted
there, amid all the barbarity of an age of rapine and war, relations
between men and women so tender, faithful and beautiful, that they may
almost stand as universal types of the ultimate human ideal. Such for
example is the relation between Odysseus and Penelope, the wife waiting
year by year for the husband whose fate is unknown, wooed in vain by
suitors who waste her substance and wear her life, nightly "watering her
bed with her tears" for twenty weary years, till at last the wanderer
returns, and "at once her knees were loosened and her heart melted
within her... and she fell a weeping and ran straight towards him, and
cast her hands about his neck, and kissed his head;" for "even as the
sight of the land is welcome to mariners, so welcome to her was the
sight of her lord, and her white arms would never quite leave hold of
his neck." [Footnote: Odyss. xxiii. 205, 231.--Translated by Butcher and
Lang.]

Such, again, is the relation between Hector and Andromache as described
in the well-known scene of the Iliad, where the wife comes out with her
babe to take leave of the husband on his way to battle. "It were better
for me," she cries, "to go down to the grave if I lose thee; for never
will any comfort be mine, when once thou, even thou, hast met thy fate,
but only sorrow..... Thou art to me father and lady mother, yea, and
brother, even as thou art my goodly husband. Come now, have pity and
abide here upon the tower, lest thou make thy child an orphan and thy
wife a widow." Hector answers with the plea of honour. He cannot draw
back, but he foresees defeat; and in his anticipation of the future
nothing is so bitter as the fate he fears for his wife. "Yet doth the
conquest of the Trojans hereafter not so much trouble me, neither
Hekabe's own, neither King Priam's, neither my brethren's, the many and
brave that shall fall in the dust before their foemen, as doth thine
anguish in the day when some mail-clad Achaian shall lead thee weeping
and rob thee of the light of freedom.... But me in death may the heaped-
up earth be covering, ere I hear thy crying and thy carrying into
captivity." [Footnote: Iliad vi. 450.--Translated by Lang, Leaf and
Myers.]

But most striking of all the portraits of women to be found in Homer,
and most typical of a frank and healthy relation between the sexes, is
the account of Nausicaa given in the Odyssey. Ulysses, shipwrecked and
naked, battered and covered with brine, surprises Nausicaa and her
maidens as they are playing at ball on the shore. The attendants run
away, but Nausicaa remains to hear what the stranger has to say. He asks
her for shelter and clothing; and she grants the request with an
exquisite courtesy and a freedom from all embarrassment which becomes
only the more marked and the more delightful when, as she sees him
emerge from the bath, clothed and beautiful, she cannot restrain the
exclamation "would that such a one might be called my husband, dwelling
here, and that it might please him here to abide." [Footnote: Od. vi.
244.--Translated by Butcher and Lang.] About the whole scene there is a
freshness and a fragrance as of early morning, and a tone so natural,
free and frank, that in the face of this rustic idyl the later centuries
sicken and faint, like candle-light in the splendour of the dawn.

If we had only Homer to give us our ideas of the Greeks, we might
conclude, from such passages as these, that they had a conception of
woman and of her relation to man, finer and nobler, in some respects,
than that of modern times. But in fact the Homeric poems represent a
civilisation which had passed away before the opening of the period with
which at present we are chiefly concerned. And in the interval, for
reasons which we need not here attempt to state, a change had taken
place in the whole way of regarding the female sex. So far, at any rate,
as our authorities enable us to judge, woman, in the historic age, was
conceived to be so inferior to man that he recognised in her no other
end than to minister to his pleasure or to become the mother of his
children. Romance and the higher companionship of intellect and spirit
do not appear (with certain notable exceptions) to have been commonly
sought or found in this relation.

Woman, in fact, was regarded as a means, not as an end; and was treated
in a manner consonant with this view. Of this estimate many
illustrations might be adduced from the writers of the fifth and fourth
centuries. Plato, for example, classes together "children, women, and
servants," [Footnote: Plato, Republic 431 c.] and states generally that
there is no branch of human industry in which the female sex is not
inferior to the male. [Footnote: Ibid. 455 c.] Similarly, Aristotle
insists again and again on the natural inferiority of woman, and
illustrates it by such quaint observations as the following: "a man
would be considered a coward who was only as brave as a brave woman, and
a woman as a chatterbox who was only as modest as a good man."
[Footnote: Arist. Pol. III. 1277 b 21.--Translated by Welldon.] But the
most striking example, perhaps, because the most unconscious, of this
habitual way of regarding women is to be found in the funeral oration
put by Thucydides into the mouth of Pericles, where the speaker, after
suggesting what consolation he can to the fathers of the slain, turns to
the women with the brief but significant exhortation: "If I am to speak
of womanly virtues to those of you who will henceforth be widows, let me
sum them up in one short admonition: To a woman not to show more
weakness than is natural to her sex is a great glory, and not to be
talked about for good or for evil among men." [Footnote: Thucydides ii.
45.--Translated by Jowett.]

The sentiments of the poets are less admissible as evidence. But some of
them are so extreme that they may be adduced as a further indication of
a point of view whose prevalence alone could render them even
dramatically plausible. Such for example is the remark which Euripides
puts into the mouth of his Medea--"women are impotent for good, but
clever contrivers of all evil" [Footnote: Euripides, Medea. 406.]; or
that of one of the characters of Menander, "a woman is necessarily an
evil, and he is a lucky man who catches her in the mildest form." While
the general Greek view of the dependence of woman on man is well
expressed in the words of Aethra, in the "Suppliants" of Euripides--"it
is proper for women who are wise to let men act for them in everything."
[Footnote: Euripides, Hik. 40.]

In accordance with this conception of the inferiority of the female sex,
and partly as a cause, partly as an effect of it, we find that the
position of the wife in ancient Greece was simply that of the domestic
drudge. To stay at home and mind the house was her recognised ideal. "A
free woman should be bounded by the street door," says one of the
characters in Menander; and another writer discriminates as follows the
functions of the two sexes:--"War, politics, and public speaking are the
sphere of man; that of woman is to keep house, to stay at home and to
receive and tend her husband." We are not surprised, therefore, to find
that the symbol of woman is the tortoise; and in the following burlesque
passage from Aristophanes we shall recognise, in spite of the touch of
caricature, the genuine features of the Greek wife. Praxagora is
recounting the merits and services of women:

"They dip their wool in hot water according to the ancient plan, all of
them without exception, and never make the slightest innovation. They
sit and cook, as of old. They carry upon their heads, as of old. They
conduct the Themophoriae, as of old. They wear out their husbands, as of
old. They buy sweets, as of old. They take their wine neat, as of old."
[Footnote: Aristophanes, Eccles. 215.]

And that this was also the kind of ideal approved by their lords and
masters, and that any attempt to pass beyond it was resented, is
amusingly illustrated in the following extract from the same poet, where
Lysistrata explains the growing indignation of the women at the bad
conduct of affairs by the men, and the way in which their attempts to
interfere were resented. The comments of the "magistrate" typify, of
course, the man's point of view.

     "Think of our old moderation and gentleness, think how we
                 bore with your pranks, and were still,
     All through the days of your former prognacity, all through
                 the war that is over and spent:
     Not that (be sure) we approved of your policy; never our
                 griefs you allowed us to vent.
     Well we perceived your mistakes and mismanagement. Often
                 at home on our housekeeping cares,
     Often we heard of some foolish proposal you made for conducting
                 the public affairs.
     Then would we question you mildly and pleasantly, inwardly
                 grieving, but outwardly gay;
     'Husband, how goes it abroad?' we would ask of him; 'what
                 have ye done in Assembly to-day?'
     'What would ye write on the side of the Treaty-stone?' Husband
                 says angrily, 'What's that to you?
     You hold your tongue!' And I held it accordingly.

                          STRATYLLIS.

             That is a thing which I never would do!

                          MAGISTRATE.

         Ma'am, if you hadn't you'd soon have repented it.

                          LYSISTRATA.

             Therefore I held it, and spake not a word.
     Soon of another tremendous absurdity, wilder and worse
                 than the former we heard.
     'Husband,' I say, with a tender solicitude, 'Why have you
                 passed such a foolish decree?'
     Viciously, moodily, glaring askance at me, 'Stick to your
                 spinning, my mistress,' says he,
     'Else you will speedily find it the worse for you! war is
                 the care and the business of men!'

                          MAGISTRATE.

           Zeus! 'twas a worthy reply, and an excellent!

                          LYSISTRATA.

           What! you unfortunate, shall we not then,
     Then, when we see you perplexed and incompetent, shall
                 we not tender advice to the state!"
          [Footnote: Aristoph. Lysistrata. 507.--Translated by B. B.
          Rogers.]

The conception thus indicated in burlesque of the proper place of woman
is expressed more seriously, from the point of view of the average man
in the "Oeconomicus" of Xenophon. Ischomachus, the hero of that work,
with whom we have already made acquaintance, gives an account of his own
wife, and of the way in which he had trained her. When he married her,
he explains, she was not yet fifteen, and had been brought up with the
utmost care "that she might see, hear, and ask as little as possible."
Her accomplishments were weaving and a sufficient acquaintance with all
that concerns the stomach; and her attitude towards her husband she
expressed in the single phrase: "Everything rests with you; my duty, my
mother said, is simply to be modest." Ischomachus proceeds to explain to
her the place he expects her to fill; she is to suckle his children, to
cook, and to superintend the house; and for this purpose God has given
her special gifts, different from but not necessarily inferior to those
of man. Husband and wife naturally supply one another's deficiencies;
and if the wife perform her function worthily she may even make herself
the ruling partner, and be sure that as she grows older she will be held
not less but more in honour, as the guardian of her children and the
stewardess of her husband's goods.--In Xenophon's view, in fact, the
inferiority of the woman almost disappears; and the sentiment
approximates closely to that of Tennyson--

                     "either sex alone
     Is half itself, and in true marriage lies
     Nor equal, nor unequal: each fulfils
     Defect in each."

Such a conception, however, of the "complementary" relation of woman to
man, does not exclude a conviction of her essential inferiority. And
this conviction, it can hardly be disputed, was a cardinal point in the
Greek view of life.


Section 9. Protests against the Common View of Woman.

Nevertheless, there are not wanting indications, both in theory and
practice, of a protest against it. In Sparta as we have already noticed,
girls, instead of being confined to the house, were brought up in the
open air among the boys, trained in gymnastics and accustomed to run and
wrestle naked. And Plato, modelling his view upon this experience, makes
no distinction of the sexes in his ideal republic. Women, he admits, are
generally inferior to men, but they have similar, if lower, capacities
and powers. There is no occupation or art for which they may not be
fitted by nature and education; and he would therefore have them take
their share in government and war, as well as in the various mechanical
trades." None of the occupations," he says, "which comprehend the
ordering of a state, belong to woman as woman, nor yet to man as man;
but natural gifts are to be found here and there, in both sexes alike;
and, so far as her nature is concerned, the woman is admissible to all
pursuits as well as the man; though in all of them the woman is weaker
than the man." [Footnote: Plato, Rep, 455 d.--Translated by Davies and
Vaughan.]

In adopting this attitude Plato stands alone not only among Greeks, but
one might almost say, among mankind, till we come to the latest views of
the nineteenth century. But there is another Greek, the poet Euripides,
who, without advancing any theory about the proper position of women,
yet displays so intimate an understanding of their difficulties, and so
warm and close a sympathy with their griefs, that some of his utterances
may stand to all time as documents of the dumb and age-long protest of
the weaker against the stronger sex. In illustration we may cite the
following lines from the "Medea," applicable, _mutatis mutandis_,
to how many generations of suffering wives?

"Of all things that have life and sense we women are most wretched. For
we are compelled to buy with gold a husband who is also--worst of all!--
the master of our person. And on his character, good or bad, our whole
fate depends. For divorce is regarded as a disgrace to a woman and she
cannot repudiate her husband. Then coming as she does into the midst of
manners and customs strange to her, she would need the gift of
divination--unless she has been taught at home--to know how best to
treat her bed-fellow. And if we manage so well that our husband remains
faithful to us, and does not break away, we may think ourselves
fortunate; if not, there is nothing for it but death. A man when he is
vexed at home can go out and find relief among his friends or
acquaintances; but we women have none to look to but him. They tell us
we live a sheltered life at home while they go to the wars; but that is
nonsense. For I would rather go into battle thrice than bear a child
once." [Footnote: Euripides, Med. 230.]

Hitherto we have been speaking mainly of the position of the wife in
Greece. It is necessary now to say a few words about that class of women
who were called in the Greek tongue Hetaerae; and who are by some
supposed to have represented, intellectually at least, a higher level of
culture than the other members of their sex. In exceptional cases, this,
no doubt, was the fact. Aspasia, for example, the mistress of Pericles,
was famous for her powers of mind. According to Plato she was an
accomplished rhetorician, and the real composer of the celebrated
funeral oration of Pericles; and Plutarch asserts that she was courted
and admired by the statesmen and philosophers of Greece. But Aspasia
cannot be taken as a type of the Hetaerae of Greece. That these women,
by the variety and freedom of their life, may and must have acquired
certain qualities of character and mind that could  hardly be developed
in the seclusion of the Greek home, may readily be admitted; we know,
for example, that they cultivated music and the power of conversation;
and were welcome guests at supper-parties. But we have no evidence that
the relations which they formed rested as a rule on any but the simplest
physical basis. The real distinction, under this head, between the Greek
point of view and our own, appears to lie rather in the frankness with
which this whole class of relations was recognised by the Greeks. There
were temples in honour of Aphrodite Pandemos, the goddess of illicit
love, and festivals celebrated in her honour; statues were erected of
famous courtesans, of Phryne for example, at Delphi, between two kings;
and philosophers and statesmen lived with their mistresses openly,
without any loss of public reputation. Every man, said the orator
Demosthenes, requires besides his wife at least two mistresses; and this
statement, made as a matter of course in open court, is perhaps the most
curious illustration we possess of the distinction between the Greek
civilisation and our own, as regards not the fact itself but the light
in which it was viewed.


Section 10. Friendship.

From what has been said about the Greek view of women, it might
naturally have been supposed that there can have been little place in
their life for all that we designate under the term "romance." Personal
affection, as we have seen, was not the basis of married life; and
relations with Hetaerae appear to have been, in this respect, no finer
or higher than similar relations in our own times. Nevertheless, it
would be a mistake to conclude, from these conditions, that the element
of romance was absent from Greek life. The fact is simply that with them
it took a different form, that of passionate friendship between men.
Such friendships, of course, occur in all nations and at all times, but
among the Greeks they were, we might say, an institution. Their ideal
was the development and education of the younger by the older man, and
in this view they were recognised and approved by custom and law as an
important factor in the state. In Sparta, for example, it was the rule
that every boy had attached to him some elder youth by whom he was
constantly attended, admonished, and trained, and who shared in public
estimation the praise and blame of his acts; so that it is even reported
that on one occasion a Spartan boy having cried out in a fight, not he
himself but his friend was fined for the lapse of self-control. The
custom of Sparta existed also in Crete. But the most remarkable instance
of the deliberate dedication of this passion to political and military
ends is that of the celebrated "Theban band," a troop consisting
exclusively of pairs of lovers, who marched and fought in battle side by
side, and by their presence and example inspired one another to a
courage so constant and high that "it is stated that they were never
beaten till the battle at Chaeronea: and when Philip, after the fight,
took a view of the slain, and came to the place where the three hundred
that fought his phalanx lay dead together, he wondered, and
understanding that it was the band of lovers, he shed tears, and said,
"Perish any man who suspects that these men either did or suffered
anything that was base." [Footnote: Plutarch, Pelopidas. ch. 18.--Ed. by
Clough.]

Greek legend and history, in fact, resounds with the praises of friends.
Achilles and Patroclus, Pylades and Orestes, Harmodius and Aristogeiton,
Solon and Peisistratus, Socrates and Alcibiades, Epaminondas and
Pelopidas,--these are names that recall at once all that is highest in
the achievement and all that is most romantic in the passion of Greece.
For it was the prerogative of this form of love, in its finer
manifestations, that it passed beyond persons to objective ends, linking
emotion to action in a life of common danger and toil. Not only, nor
primarily, the physical sense was touched, but mainly and in chief the
imagination and intellect. The affection of Achilles for Patroclus is as
intense as that of a lover for his mistress, but it has in addition a
body and depth such as only years of common labour could impart.
"Achilles wept, remembering his dear comrade, nor did sleep that
conquereth all take hold of him, but he kept turning himself to this
side and to that, yearning for Patroclus' manhood and excellent valour,
and all the toils he achieved with him and the woes he bare, cleaving
the battles of men and the grievous waves. As he thought thereon he shed
big tears, now lying on his side, now on his back, now on his face; and
then anon he would arise upon his feet and roam wildly beside the beach
of the salt sea." [Footnote: Iliad XXIV. 3.--Translated by Lang, Leaf
and Myers.] That is the ideal spirit of Greek comradeship--each
supporting the other in his best efforts and aims, mind assisting mind
and hand hand, and the end of the love residing not in an easy
satisfaction of itself but in the development and perfecting of the
souls in which it dwelt.

Of such a love we have a record in the elegies of Theognis, in which the
poet has embodied, for the benefit of Kurnus his friend, the ripe
experience of an eventful life. The poems for the most part are didactic
in character, consciously and deliberately aimed at the instruction and
guidance of the man to whom they are addressed; but every now and again
the passion breaks through which informs and inspires this virile
intercourse, and in such a passage as the following gives us the key to
this and to all the finer friendships of the Greeks:--

     "Lo, I have given thee wings wherewith to fly
          Over the boundless ocean and the earth;
     Yea, on the lips of many shalt thou lie,
          The comrade of their banquet and their mirth.
     Youths in their loveliness shall bid thee sound
          Upon the silver flute's melodious breath;
     And when thou goest darkling underground
          Down to the lamentable house of death,
     Oh yet not then from honour shalt thou cease
          But wander, an imperishable name,
     Kurnus, about the seas and shores of Greece,
          Crossing from isle to isle the barren main.
     Horses thou shalt not need, but lightly ride
          Sped by the Muses of the violet crown,
     And men to come, while earth and sun abide,
          Who cherish song shall cherish thy renown.
     Yea, I have given thee wings, and in return
          Thou givest me the scorn with which I burn."
          [Footnote: Theognis 237.]

It was his insistence on friendship as an incentive to a noble life that
was the secret of the power of Socrates. Listen, for example, to the
account which Plutarch gives of his influence upon the young Alcibiades:

"Alcibiades, listening now to language entirely free from every thought
of unmanly fondness and silly displays of affection, finding himself
with one who sought to lay open to him the deficiencies of his mind, and
repress his vain and foolish arrogance,

'Dropped like the craven cock his conquered wing.'

He esteemed these endeavours of Socrates as most truly a means which the
gods made use of for the care and preservation of youth, and began to
think meanly of himself, and to admire him; to be pleased with his
kindness, and to stand in awe of his virtue; and, unawares to himself,
there became formed in his mind that reflex image and reciprocation of
love, or Anteros, that Plato talks of..... Though Socrates had many and
powerful rivals, yet the natural good qualities of Alcibiades gave his
affection the mastery. His words overcame him so much, as to draw tears
from his eyes, and to disturb his very soul. Yet sometimes he would
abandon himself to flatterers, when they proposed to him varieties of
pleasure, and would desert Socrates; who then would pursue him, as if he
had been a fugitive slave. He despised every one else, and had no
reverence or awe for any but him." [Footnote: Plut. Alc. ch. 4.--Ed. by
Clough.] The relation thus established may be further illustrated by the
following graceful little anecdote. Socrates and Alcibiades were fellow-
soldiers at Potidaea and shared the same tent. In a stiff engagement
both behaved with gallantry. At last Alcibiades fell wounded, and
Socrates, standing over him, defended and finally saved him. For this he
might fairly have claimed the customary prize of valour; but he insisted
on resigning it to his friend, as an incentive to his "ambition for
noble deeds."

Another illustration of the power of this passion to evoke and stimulate
courage is given in the story of Cleomachus, narrated by Plutarch. In a
battle between the Chalcidians and the Eretrians, the cavalry of the
former being hard pressed, Cleomachus was called upon to make a
diversion. He turned to his friend and asked him if he intended to be a
spectator of the struggle; the youth replied in the affirmative, and
embracing his friend, with his own hands buckled on his helmet;
whereupon Cleomachus charged with impetuosity, routed the foe and died
gloriously fighting. And thenceforth, says Plutarch, the Chalcidians,
who had previously mistrusted such friendships, cultivated and honoured
them more than any other people.

So much indeed were the Greeks impressed with the manliness of this
passion, with its power to prompt to high thought and heroic action,
that some of the best of them set the love of man for man far above that
of man for woman. The one, they maintained, was primarily of the spirit,
the other primarily of the flesh; the one bent upon shaping to the type
of all manly excellence both the body and the soul of the beloved, the
other upon a passing pleasure of the senses. And they noted that among
the barbarians, who were subject to tyrants, this passion was
discouraged, along with gymnastics and philosophy, because it was felt
by their masters that it would be fatal to their power; so essentially
was it the prerogative of freedom, so incompatible with the nature and
the status of a slave.

It is in the works of Plato that this view is most completely and
exquisitely set forth. To him, love is the beginning of all wisdom; and
among all the forms of love, that one in chief, which is conceived by
one man for another, of which the main operation and end is in the
spirit, and which leads on and out from the passion for a particular
body and soul to an enthusiasm for that highest beauty, wisdom, and
excellence, of which the most perfect mortal forms are but a faint and
inadequate reflection. Such a love is the initiation into the higher
life, the spring at once of virtue, of philosophy, and of religion.
Always operative in practice in Greek life it was not invented but
interpreted by Plato. The philosopher merely gave an ideal expression to
what was stirring in the heart of every generous youth; and the passage
which we have selected for quotation may be taken as representative not
only of the personality of Plato, but of the higher aspect of a
characteristic phase of Greek civilisation.

"And now, taking my leave of you, I will rehearse a tale of love which I
heard from Diotima of Mantineia, a woman wise in this and in many other
kinds of knowledge. She was my instructress in the art of love, and I
shall repeat to you what she said to me: 'On the birthday of Aphrodite
there was a feast of the gods, at which the god Poros or Plenty, who is
the son of Metis or Discretion, was one of the guests. When the feast
was over, Penia or Poverty, as the manner is on such occasions, came
about the doors to beg. Now Plenty, who was the worse for nectar (there
was no wine in those days), went into the garden of Zeus and fell into a
heavy sleep; and Poverty considering her own straitened circumstances,
plotted to have a child by him, and accordingly she lay down at his side
and conceived Love, who partly because he is naturally a lover of the
beautiful, and because Aphrodite is herself beautiful, and also because
he was born on her birthday, is her follower and attendant. And as his
parentage is, so also are his fortunes. In the first place he is always
poor, and anything but tender and fair, as the many imagine him; and he
is rough and squalid, and has no shoes, nor a house to dwell in; on the
bare earth exposed he lies under the open heaven, in the streets, or at
the doors of houses, taking his rest; and like his mother he is always
in distress. Like his father too, whom he also partly resembles, he is
always plotting against the fair and good; he is bold, enterprising,
strong, a mighty hunter, always weaving some intrigue or other, keen in
the pursuit of wisdom, fertile in resources; a philosopher at all times,
terrible as an enchanter, sorcerer, sophist. He is by nature neither
mortal nor immortal, but alive and flourishing at one moment when he is
in plenty, and dead at another moment, and again alive by reason of his
father's nature. But that which is always flowing in is always flowing
out, and so he is never in want and never in wealth; and, further, he is
in a mean between ignorance and knowledge. The truth of the matter is
this: No god is a philosopher or seeker after wisdom, neither do the
ignorant seek after wisdom. For herein is the evil of ignorance, that he
who is neither good nor wise is nevertheless satisfied with himself: he
has no desire for that of which he feels no want.' 'But who then,
Diotima,' I said, 'are the lovers of wisdom, if they are neither the
wise nor the foolish?' 'A child may answer that question,' she replied;
'they are those who are in a mean between the two; Love is one of them.
For wisdom is a most beautiful thing, and Love is of the beautiful; and
therefore Love is also a philosopher or lover of wisdom, and being a
lover of wisdom is in a mean between the wise and the ignorant. And of
this too his birth is the cause; for his father is wealthy and wise, and
his mother poor and foolish. Such, my dear Socrates, is the nature of
the spirit Love.'

"I said: 'O thou stranger woman, thou sayest well; but, assuming Love to
be such as you say, what is the use of him to man?'

"'That, Socrates,' she replied, 'I will attempt to unfold: of his nature
and birth I have already spoken; and you acknowledge that Love is of the
beautiful. But some one will say: Of the beautiful in what, Socrates and
Diotima? or rather let me put the question more clearly, and ask: When a
man loves the beautiful, what does he desire?'

"I answered her, 'That the beautiful may be his.'

"'Still,' she said, 'the answer suggests a further question: What is
given by the possession of beauty?'

"'To what you have asked,' I said, 'I have no answer ready.'

"'Then,' she said, 'let me put the word "good" in the place of
"beautiful," and repeat the question once more: If he who loves, loves
the good, what is it then that he loves?'

"'The possession of the good,' I said.

"'And what does he gain who possesses the good?'

"'Happiness,' I replied; 'there is less difficulty in answering that
question.'

"'Yes,' she said, 'the happy are made happy by the acquisition of good
things. Nor is there any need to ask why a man desires happiness; the
answer is already final.'

"'You are right,' I said.

"'And is this wish and this desire common to all? and do all men always
desire their own good, or only some men?--what say you?'

"'All men,' I replied; 'the desire is common to all.'

"'Then,' she said, 'the simple truth is that men love the good.'

"'Yes,' I said.

"'To which must be added that they love the possession of the good?'

"'That must be added too.'

"'Then love,' she said, may be described generally as the love of the
everlasting possession of the good?'

"'That is most true.'

"'Then if this be the nature of love, can you tell me further,' she
said, 'what is the manner of the pursuit? what are they doing who show
all this eagerness and heat which is called love? and what is the object
which they have in view? Answer me.'

"'Nay, Diotima,' I replied, 'if I had known, I should not have wondered
at your wisdom, neither should I have come to learn from you about this
very matter.'

"'Well,' she said, 'I will teach you:--The object which they have in
view is birth in beauty, whether of body or soul.'

"'I do not understand you,' I said; 'the oracle requires an
explanation.'

"'I will make my meaning clearer,' she replied. 'I mean to say, that all
men are bringing to the birth in their bodies and in their souls. There
is a certain age at which human nature is desirous of procreation--
procreation which must be in beauty and not in deformity; and this
procreation is the union of man and woman, and is a divine thing: for
conception and generation are an immortal principle in the mortal
creature, and in the inharmonious they can never be. But the deformed is
always inharmonious with the divine, and the beautiful harmonious.
Beauty, then, is the destiny or goddess of parturition who presides at
birth, and therefore, when approaching beauty, the conceiving power is
propitious, and diffusive, and benign, and begets and bears fruit: at
the sight of ugliness she frowns and contracts and has a sense of pain,
and turns away, and shrivels up, and not without a pang refrains from
conception. And this is the reason why, when the hour of conception
arrives, and the teeming nature is full, there is such a flutter and
ecstasy about beauty whose approach is the alleviation of the pain of
travail. For love, Socrates, is not as you imagine, the love of the
beautiful only.'

"'What then?'

"'The love of generation and of birth in beauty.'

"'Yes,' I said.

"'Yes indeed,' she replied.

"'But why of generation?'

"'Because to the mortal creature, generation is a sort of eternity and
immortality,' she replied; 'and if, as has been already admitted, love
is of the everlasting possession of the good, all men will necessarily
desire immortality together with good: wherefore love is of
immortality.'

"I was astonished at her words and said: 'Is this really true, O thou
wise Diotima?'

"And she answered with all the authority of an accomplished sophist: 'Of
that, Socrates, you may be assured;--think only of the ambition of men,
and you will wonder at the senselessness of their ways, unless you
consider how they are stirred by the love of an immortality of fame.
They are ready to run all risks greater far than they would have run for
their children, and to spend money and undergo any sort of toil, and
even to die, for the sake of leaving behind them a name which shall be
eternal. Do you imagine that Alcestis would have died to save Admetus,
or Achilles to avenge Patroclus, or your own Codrus in order to preserve
the kingdom for his sons, if they had not imagined that the memory of
their virtues, which still survives among us, would be immortal? Nay,'
she said, 'I am persuaded that all men do all things, and the better
they are the more they do them, in hope of the glorious fame of immortal
virtue; for they desire the immortal.

"'Those who are pregnant in the body only, betake themselves to women
and beget children--this is the character of their love; their
offspring, as they hope, will preserve their memory and give them the
blessedness and immortality which they desire in the future. But souls
which are pregnant--for there certainly are men who are more creative in
their souls than in their bodies--conceive that which is proper for the
soul to conceive or contain. And what are these conceptions? wisdom and
virtue in general. And such creators are poets and all artists who are
deserving of the name inventor. But the greatest and fairest sort of
wisdom by far is that which is concerned with the ordering of states and
families, and which is called temperance and justice. And he who in
youth has the seed of these implanted in him and is himself inspired,
when he comes to maturity desires to beget and generate. He wanders
about, seeking beauty that he may beget offspring--for in deformity he
will beget nothing--and naturally embraces the beautiful rather than the
deformed body; above all when he finds a fair and noble and well-
nurtured soul, he embraces the two in one person, and to such a one he
is full of speech about virtue and the nature and pursuits of a good
man; and he tries to educate him; and at the touch of the beautiful
which is ever present to his memory, even when absent, he brings forth
that which he had conceived long before, and in company with him tends
that which he brings forth; and they are married by a far nearer tie and
have a closer friendship than those who beget mortal children, for the
children who are their common offspring are fairer and more immortal.
Who, when he thinks of Homer and Hesiod and other great poets, would not
rather have their children than ordinary ones? Who would not emulate
them in the creation of children such as theirs, which have preserved
their memory and given them everlasting glory? Or who would not have
such children as Lycurgus left behind him to be the saviours not only of
Lacedaemon, but of Hellas, as one may say? There is Solon, too, who is
the revered father of Athenian laws; and many others there are in many
other places, both among Hellenes and barbarians, who have given to the
world many noble works, and have been the parents of virtue of every
kind; and many temples have been raised in their honour for the sake of
children such as theirs; which were never raised in honour of any one,
for the sake of his mortal children.

"'These are the lesser mysteries of love, into which even you, Socrates,
may enter; to the greater and more hidden ones which are the crown of
these, and to which, if you pursue them in a right spirit, they will
lead, I know not whether you will be able to attain. But I will do my
utmost to inform you, and do you follow if you can. For he who would
proceed aright in this matter should begin in youth to visit beautiful
forms; and first, if he be guided by his instructor aright, to love one
such form only--out of that he should create fair thoughts; and soon he
will of himself perceive that the beauty of one form is akin to the
beauty of another; and then if beauty of form in general is his pursuit,
how foolish would he be not to recognise that the beauty in every form
is one and the same! And when he perceives this he will abate his
violent love of the one, which he will despise and deem a small thing,
and will become a lover of all beautiful forms. In the next stage he
will consider that the beauty of the mind is more honourable than the
outward form. So that, if a virtuous soul have but a little comeliness,
he will be content to love and tend him, and will search out and bring
to the birth thoughts which may improve the young, until he is compelled
to contemplate and see the beauty of institutions and laws, and to
understand that the beauty of them all is of one family, and that
personal beauty is a trifle; and after laws and institutions he will go
on to the sciences, that he may see their beauty, being not like a
servant in love with the beauty of one youth or man or institution,
himself a slave mean and narrow-minded, but drawing towards and
contemplating the vast sea of beauty, he will create many fair and noble
thoughts and notions in boundless love of wisdom; until on that store he
grows and waxes strong, and at last the vision is revealed to him of a
single science which is the science of beauty everywhere. To this I will
proceed; please to give me your very best attention:

"'He who has been instructed thus far in the things of love, and who has
learned to see the beautiful in due order and succession, when he comes
toward the end will suddenly perceive a nature of wondrous beauty (and
this, Socrates, is the final cause of all our former toils)--a nature
which in the first place is everlasting, not growing and decaying, or
waxing and waning; secondly, not fair in one point of view and foul in
another, or at one time or in one relation or in one place fair, at
another time or in another relation or at another place foul, as if fair
to some and foul to others, or in the likeness of a face or hands or any
other part of the bodily frame, or in any form of speech or knowledge,
or existing in any other being, as for example, in an animal, or in
heaven, or in earth, or in any other place; but beauty absolute,
separate, simple, and everlasting, which without diminution and without
increase, or any change, is imparted to the evergrowing and perishing
beauties of all other things. He who, from these ascending under the
influence of true love, begins to perceive that beauty, is not far from
the end. And the true order of going, or being led by another, to the
things of love, is to begin from the beauties of earth and mount upwards
for the sake of that other beauty, using these as steps only, and from
one going on to two, and from two to all fair forms, and from fair forms
to fair practices, and from fair practices to fair notions, until from
fair notions he arrives at the notion of absolute beauty, and at last
knows what the essence of beauty is. This, my dear Socrates,' said the
stranger of Mantineia, 'is that life above all others which man should
live, in the contemplation of beauty absolute: a beauty which if you
once beheld, you would see not to be after the measure of gold, and
garments, and fair boys and youths, whose presence now entrances you;
and you and many a one would be content to live seeing them only and
conversing with them without meat or drink, if that were possible,--you
only want to look at them and to be with them. But what if man had eyes
to see the true beauty--the divine beauty, I mean, pure and clear and
unalloyed, not clogged with the pollutions of mortality and all the
colours and vanities of human life--thither looking, and holding
converse with the true beauty simple and divine? Remember how in that
communion only, beholding beauty with the eye of the mind, he will be
enabled to bring forth, not images of beauty, but realities (for he has
hold not of an image but of a reality), and bringing forth and
nourishing true virtue to become the friend of God and be immortal, if
mortal man may. Would that be an ignoble life?'

"Such, Phaedrus--and I speak not only to you, but to all of you--were
the words of Diotima; and I am persuaded of their truth. And being
persuaded of them, I try to persuade others, that in the attainment of
this end human nature will not easily find a helper better than Love.
And therefore, also, I say that every man ought to honour him as I
myself honour him, and walk in his ways, and exhort others to do the
same, and praise the power and spirit of Love according to the measure
of my ability now and ever." [Footnote: Plato, Symp. 201.--Translated by
Jowett.]

I have thought it worth while to quote this passage, in spite of its
length, partly for the sake of its own intrinsic beauty, partly because
no account of the Greek view of life could be complete which did not
insist upon the prominence in their civilisation of the passion of
friendship, and its capacity of being turned to the noblest uses. That
there was another side to the matter goes without saying. This passion,
like any other, has its depths, as well as its heights; and the ideal of
friendship conceived by Plato was as remote, perhaps, from the
experience of the average man, as Dante's presentation of the love
between man and woman. Still, the fact remains that it was friendship of
this kind that supplied to the Greek that element of romance which plays
so large a part in modern life; and it is to this, and not to the
relations between men and women, that we must look for the highest
reaches of their emotional experience.


Section 11. Summary.

If now we turn back to take a general view of the points that have been
treated in the present chapter, we shall notice, in the first place,
that the ideal of the Greeks was the direct and natural outcome of the
conditions of their life. It was not something beyond and above the
experience of the class to which it applied, but rather, was the formula
of that experience itself: in philosophical phrase, it was immanent not
transcendent. Because there really was a class of soldier-citizens free
from the necessity of mechanical toil, possessed of competence and
leisure, and devoting these advantages willingly to the service of the
State, therefore their ideal of conduct took the form we have described.
It was the ideal of a privileged class, and postulated for its
realisation, not only a strenuous endeavour on the part of the
individual, but also certain adventitious gifts of fortune, such as
health, wealth, and family connections. These were conditions that
actually obtained among members of the class concerned; so that the
ideal in question was not a mere abstract "ought", but an expression of
what, approximately at least, was realised in fact.

But this, which was the strength of the ideal of the Greeks, was also
its limitation. Their ethical system rested not only on universal facts
of human nature, but also on a particular and transitory social
arrangement. When therefore the city State, with its sharp antithesis of
classes, began to decline, the ideal of the soldier-citizen declined
also. The conditions of its realisation no longer existed, and ethical
conceptions passed into a new phase. In the first place the ideal of
conduct was extended so as to apply to man as man, instead of to a
particular class in a particular form of State; and in the second place,
as a corollary of this, those external goods of fortune which were the
privilege of the few, could no longer be assumed as conditions of an
ideal which was supposed to apply to all. Consequently the new ideal was
conceived as wholly internal. To be virtuous was to act under the
control of the universal reason which was supposed to dwell in man as
man; and such action was independent of all the gifts of chance. It was
as open to a slave as to a freeman, to an artisan as to a soldier or a
statesman. The changes and chances of this mortal life were indifferent
to the virtuous man; on the rack as on the throne he was lord of himself
and free.

This conception of the Stoics broke down the limitation of the Greek
ideal by extending the possibility of virtue to all mankind. But at the
same time it destroyed its sanity and balance. For it was precisely
because of its limitation that the ideal of the Greeks was,
approximately at least, an account of what was, and not merely of what
ought to be. A man possessed of wealth and friends, of leisure, health,
and culture, really could and did achieve the end at which he was
aiming; but the conception of one who without any such advantages, on
the contrary with positive disadvantages, poor, sickly, and a slave
perhaps, or even in prison or on the rack, should nevertheless retain
unimpaired the dignity of manhood and the freedom of his own soul--,
such a conception if it is not chimerical, is at any rate so remote from
common experience, that it is not capable of serving as a really
practical ideal for ordinary life. But an ideal so remote that its
realisation is despaired of, is as good as none. And the conception of
the Stoics, if it was more comprehensive than that of Aristotle, was
also less practical and real.

By virtue, nevertheless, of this comprehensiveness, the Stoic ideal is
more akin to modern tendencies than that of the soldier-citizen in the
city-state. To provide for the excellence of a privileged class at the
expense of the rest of the community is becoming to us increasingly
impossible in fact and intolerable in idea. But while admitting this, we
cannot but note that the Greeks, at whatever cost, did actually achieve
a development of the individual more high and more complete than has
been even approached by any other age. Whether it will ever be possible,
under totally different conditions, to realise once more that balance of
body and soul, that sanity of ethical intuition, that frank recognition
of the whole range of our complex human nature with a view to its
harmonious organisation under the control of a lucid reason--whether it
will ever be possible again to realise this ideal, and that not only in
the members of a privileged class, but in the whole body of the State,
is a question too problematical to be raised with advantage in this
place. But it is impossible not to perceive that with the decline of the
Greek city-state something passed from the world which it can never
cease to regret, and the recovery of which, if it might be, in some more
perfect form, must be the goal of its highest practical endeavours.
Immense, no doubt, is the significance of the centuries that have
intervened, but it is a significance of preparation; and when we look
beyond the means to the wished-for end, limiting our conceptions to the
actual possibilities of life on earth, it is among the Greeks that we
seek the record of the highest achievement of the past, and the hope of
the highest possibilities of the future.




