CHAPTER IV

THE GREEK VIEW OF ART


Section 1. Greek Art an Expression of National Life.

In approaching the subject of the Art of the Greeks we come to what,
more plausibly than any other, may be regarded as the central point of
their scheme of life. We have already noticed, in dealing with other
topics, how constantly the aesthetic point of view emerges and
predominates in matters with which, in the modern way of looking at
things, it appears to have no direct and natural connection. We saw, for
example, how inseparable in their religion was the element of ritual and
ceremony from that of idea; how in their ethical conceptions the primary
notion was that of beauty; how they aimed throughout at a perfect
balance of body and soul, and more generally, in every department, at an
expression of the inner by the outer so complete and perfect that the
conception of a separation of the two became almost as impossible to
their thought as it would have been unpleasing and discordant to their
feeling. Now such a point of view is, in fact, that of art; and
philosophers of history have been amply justified in characterising the
whole Greek epoch as pre-eminently that of Beauty.

But if this be a true way of regarding the matter, we should expect to
find that art and beauty had, for the Greeks, a very wide and complex
significance. There is a view of art, and it is one that appears to be
prevalent in our own time, which sets it altogether outside the general
trend of national life and ideas; which asserts that it has no
connection with ethics, religion, politics, or any of the general
conceptions which regulate action and thought; that its end is in
itself, and is simply beauty; and that in beauty there is no distinction
of high or low, no preference of one kind above another. Art thus
conceived is, in the first place, purely subjective in character; the
artist alone is the standard, and any phase or mood of his, however
exceptional, personal and transitory, is competent to produce a work of
art as satisfying and as great as one whose inspiration was drawn from a
nation's life, reflecting its highest moments, and its most universal
aspirations and ideals; so that, for example, a butterfly drawn by Mr.
Whistler would rank as high, say, as the Parthenon. And in the second
place, in this view of art, the subject is a matter of absolute
indifference. The standards of ordinary life, ethical or other, do not
apply; there is no better or worse, but only a more or less beautiful;
and the representation of a music-hall stage or a public house bar may
be as great and perfect a work of art as the Venus of Milo or the
Madonna of Raphael.

This theory, which arises naturally and perhaps inevitably in an age
where national life has degenerated into materialism and squalor, and
the artist feels himself a stranger in a world of Philistines, we need
not here pause to examine and criticise. It has been mentioned merely to
illustrate by contrast the Greek view, which was diametrically opposed
to this, and valued art in proportion as it represented in perfect form
the highest and most comprehensive aspects of the national ideal.

To say this, is not, of course, to say that the Greek conception of art
was didactic; for the word didactic, when applied to art, has usually
the implication that the excellence of the moral is the only point to be
considered, and that if that is good the work itself must be good. This
idea does indeed occur in Greek thought--we find it, for example,
paradoxically enough, in so great an artist as Plato--but if it had been
the one which really determined their production, there would have been
no occasion to write this chapter, for there would have been no Greek
art to write about. The truer account of the impulse that urged them to
create is that given also by Plato in an earlier and more impassioned
work, in which he describes it as a "madness of those who are possessed
by the Muses; which enters into a delicate and virgin soul, and there
inspiring frenzy, awakens lyrical and all other numbers; with these
adorning the myriad actions of ancient heroes for the instruction of
posterity. But he who having no touch of the Muses' madness in his soul,
comes to the door and thinks that he will get into the temple by the
help of art--he, I say, and his poetry are not admitted; the sane man is
nowhere at all when he enters into rivalry with the madman." [Footnote:
Plato, Phaedrus, 245a.--Translated by Jowett.]

The presupposition, in fact, of all that can be said about the Greek
view of art, is that primarily and to begin with they were, by nature,
artists. Judged simply by the aesthetic standard, without any
consideration of subject matter  at all, or any reference to
intellectual or ethical ideals, they created works of art more purely
beautiful than those of any other age or people. Their mere household
crockery, their common pots and pans, are cast in shapes so exquisitely
graceful, and painted in designs so admirably drawn and composed, that
any one of them has a higher artistic value than the whole contents of
the Royal Academy; and the little clay figures they used as we do china
ornaments put to shame the most ambitious efforts of modern sculpture.
Who, for example, would not rather look at a Tanagra statuette than at
the equestrian statue of the Duke of Wellington?

The Greeks, in fact, quite apart from any theories they may have held,
were artists through and through; and that is a fact we must carry with
us through the whole of our discussion.


Section 2. Identification of the Aesthetic and Ethical Points of View.

But on the other hand, it seems to be clear from all that we can learn,
that their habitual way of regarding works of art was not to judge them
simply and exclusively by their aesthetic value. On the contrary, in
criticising two works otherwise equally beautiful, they would give a
higher place to the one or the other for its ethical or quasi-ethical
qualities. This indeed is what we should expect from the comprehensive
sense which, as we have seen, attached in their tongue to the word which
we render "beautiful." The aesthetic and ethical spheres, in fact, were
never sharply distinguished by the Greeks; and it follows that as, on
the one hand, their conception of the good was identified with that of
the beautiful, so, on the other hand, their conception of the beautiful
was identified with that of the good. Thus the most beautiful work of
art, in the Greek sense of the term, was that which made the finest and
most harmonious appeal not only to the physical but to the moral sense,
and while communicating the highest and most perfect pleasure to the eye
or the ear, had also the power to touch and inform the soul with the
grace which was her moral excellence. Of this really characteristic
Greek conception, this fusion, so instinctive as to be almost
unconscious, of the aesthetic and ethical points of view, no better
illustration could be given than the following passage from the Republic
of Plato, where the philosopher is describing the effect of beautiful
works of art, and especially of music, on the moral and intellectual
character of his imaginary citizens:

"'We would not have our guardians grow up amid images of moral
deformity, as in some noxious pasture, and there browse and feed upon
many a baneful herb and flower day by day, little by little, until they
silently gather a festering mass of corruption in their own soul. Let
our artists rather be those who are gifted to discern the true nature of
the beautiful and graceful: then will our youth dwell in a land of
health, amid fair sights and sounds, and receive the good in everything;
and beauty, the effluence of fair works, shall flow into the eye and
ear, like a healthgiving breeze from a purer region, and insensibly draw
the soul from earliest years into likeness and sympathy with the beauty
of reason.'

"'There can be no nobler training than that,' he replied.

"'And therefore,' I said, "'Glaucon, musical training is a more potent
instrument than any other, because rhythm and harmony find their way
into the inward places of the soul, on which they mightily fasten,
imparting grace, and making the soul of him who is rightly educated
graceful, or of him who is ill-educated ungraceful; and also because he
who has received this true education of the inner being will most
shrewdly perceive omissions or faults in art and nature, and with a true
taste, while he praises and rejoices over and receives into his soul the
good, and becomes noble and good, he will justly blame and hate the bad,
now in the days of his youth, even before he is able to know the reason
why: and when reason comes he will recognise and salute the friend with
whom his education has made him long familiar."[Footnote: Plato,
Republic III. 401.--Translated by Jowett.]

This fusion of the ideas of the beautiful and the good is the central
point in the Greek Theory of Art; and it enables us to understand how it
was that they conceived art to be educational. Its end, in their view,
was not only pleasure, though pleasure was essential to it; but also,
and just as much, edification. Plato, indeed, here again exaggerating
the current view, puts the edification above the pleasure. He criticises
Homer as he might criticise a moral philosopher, pointing out the
inadequacy, from an ethical point of view, of his conception of heaven
and of the gods, and dismissing as injurious and of bad example to
youthful citizens the whole tissue of passionate human feeling, the
irrepressible outbursts of anger and grief and fear, by virtue of which
alone the Iliad and the Odyssey are immortal poems instead of ethical
tracts. And finally, with a half reluctant assent to the course of his
own argument, he excludes the poets altogether from his ideal republic,
on the ground that they encourage their hearers in that indulgence of
emotion which it is the object of every virtuous man to repress. The
conclusion of Plato, by his own admission, was half paradoxical, and it
certainly never recommended itself to such a nation of artists as the
Greeks. But it illustrates, nevertheless, the general bent of their
views of art, that tendency to the identification of the beautiful and
the good, which, while it was never pushed so far as to choke art with
didactics--for Plato himself, even against his own will, is a poet--yet
served to create a standard of taste which was ethical as much as
aesthetic, and made the judgment of beauty also a judgment of moral
worth.

Quite in accordance with this view we find that the central aim of all
Greek art is the representation of human character and human ideals. The
interpretation of "nature" for its own sake (in the narrower sense in
which "nature" is opposed to man) is a modern and romantic development
that would have been unintelligible to a Greek. Not that the Greeks were
without a sense of what we call the beauties of nature, but that they
treat them habitually, not as the centre of interest, but as the
background to human activity. The most beautiful descriptions of nature
to be found in Greek poetry occur, incidentally only, in the choral odes
introduced into their dramas; and among all their pictures of which we
have any record there is not one that answers to the description of a
landscape; the subject is always mythological or historical, and the
representation of nature merely a setting for the main theme. And on the
other hand, the art for which the Greeks are most famous, and in which
they have admittedly excelled all other peoples, is that art of
sculpture whose special function it is not only to represent but to
idealise the human form, and which is peculiarly adapted to embody for
the sense not only physical but ethical types. And, more remarkable
still, as we shall have occasion to observe later, the very art which
modern men regard as the most devoid of all intellectual content, the
most incommensurable with any standard except that of pure beauty--I
refer of course to the art of music--was invested by the Greeks with a
definite moral content and worked into their general theory of art as a
direct interpretation of human life. The excellence of man, in short,
directly or indirectly, was the point about which Greek art turned; that
excellence was at once aesthetic and ethical; and the representation of
what was beautiful involved also the representation of what was good.
This point we will now proceed to illustrate more in detail in
connection with the various special branches of art.


Section 3. Sculpture and Painting.

Let us take, first, the plastic arts, sculpture and painting; and to
bring into clear relief the Greek point of view let us contrast with it
that of the modern "impressionist." To the impressionist a picture is
simply an arrangement of colour and line; the subject represented is
nothing, the treatment everything. It would be better, on the whole, not
even to know what objects are depicted; and, to judge the picture by a
comparison with the objects, or to consider what is the worth of the
objects in themselves, or what we might think of them if we came across
them in the connections of ordinary life, is simply to misconceive the
whole meaning of a picture. For the artist and for the man who
understands art, all scales and standards disappear except that of the
purely aesthetic beauty which consists in harmony of line and tone; the
most perfect human form has no more value than a splash of mud; or
rather both mud and human form disappear as irrelevant, and all that is
left for judgment is the arrangement of colour and form originally
suggested by those accidental and indifferent phenomena.

In the Greek view, on the other hand, though we certainly cannot say
that the subject was everything and the treatment nothing (for that
would be merely the annihilation of art) yet we may assert that, granted
the treatment, granted that the work was beautiful (the first and
indispensable requirement) its worth was determined by the character of
the subject. Sculpture and painting, in fact, to the Greeks, were not
merely a medium of aesthetic pleasure; they were ways of expressing and
interpreting national life. As such they were subordinated to religion.
The primary end of sculpture was to make statues of the gods and heroes;
the primary end of painting was to represent mythological scenes; and in
either case the purely aesthetic pleasure was also a means to a
religious experience.

Let us take, for example, the statue of Zeus at Olympia, the most famous
of the works of Pheidias. This colossal figure of ivory and gold was
doubtless, according to all the testimony we possess, from a merely
aesthetic point of view, among the most consummate creations of human
genius. But what was the main aim of the artist who made it? what the
main effect on the spectator? The artist had designed and the spectator
seemed to behold a concrete image of that Homeric Zeus who was the
centre of his religious consciousness--the Zeus who "nodded his dark
brow, and the ambrosial locks waved from the King's immortal head, and
he made great Olympus quake." [Footnote: Iliad i. 528.--Translated by
Lang, Leaf and Myers.] "Those who approach the temple," says Lucian, "do
not conceive that they see ivory from the Indies or gold from the mines
of Thrace; no, but the very son of Kronos and Rhea, transported by
Pheidias to earth and set to watch over the lonely plain of Pisa." "He
was," says Dion Chrysostom, "the type of that unattained ideal, Hellas
come to unity with herself; in expression at once mild and awful, as
befits the giver of life and all good gifts, the common father, saviour
and guardian of men; dignified as a king, tender as a father, awful as
giver of laws, kind as protector of suppliants and friends, simple and
great as giver of increase and wealth; revealing, in a word, in form and
countenance, the whole array of gifts and qualities proper to his
supreme divinity."

The description is characteristic of the whole aim of Greek sculpture,--
the representation not only of beauty, but of character, not only of
character but of character idealised. The statues of the various gods
derive their distinguishing individuality not merely from their
association with conventional symbols, but from a concrete reproduction,
in features, expression, drapery, pose, of the ethical and intellectual
qualities for which they stand. An Apollo differs in type from a Zeus,
an Athene from a Demeter; and in every case the artist works from an
intellectual conception, bent not simply on a graceful harmony of lines,
but on the representation of a character at once definite and ideal.

Primarily, then, Greek sculpture was an expression of the national
religion; and therefore, also, of the national life. For, as we saw, the
cult of the gods was the centre, not only of the religious but of the
political consciousness of Greece; and an art which was born and
flourished in the temple and the sacred grove, naturally became the
exponent of the ideal aspect of the state. It was thus, for example,
that the Parthenon at Athens was at once the centre of the worship of
Athene, and a symbol of the corporate life over which she presided; the
statue of the goddess having as its appropriate complement the frieze
over which the spirit of the city moved in stone. And thus, too, the
statues of the victors at the Olympian games were dedicated in the
sacred precinct, as a memorial of what was not only an athletic meeting,
but also at once a centre of Hellenic unity and the most consummate
expression of that aspect of their culture which contributed at least as
much to their aesthetic as to their physical perfection.

Sculpture, in fact, throughout, was subordinated to religion, and
through religion to national life; and it was from this that it derived
its ideal and intellectual character. And, so far as our authorities
enable us to judge, the same is true of painting. The great pictures of
which we have descriptions were painted to adorn temples and public
buildings, and represented either mythological or national themes. Such,
for example, was the great work of Polygnotus at Delphi, in which was
depicted on the one hand the sack of Troy, on the other the descent of
Odysseus into Hades; and such his representation of the battle of
Marathon, in the painted porch that led to the Acropolis of Athens. And
even the vase paintings of which we have innumerable examples, and which
are mere decorations of common domestic utensils, have often enough some
story of gods and heroes for their theme, whereby over and above their
purely aesthetic value they made their appeal to the general religious
consciousness of Greece. Painting, like sculpture, had its end, in a
sense, outside itself; and from this very fact derived its peculiar
dignity, simplicity, and power.

From this account of the plastic art of the Greeks it follows as a
simple corollary, that their aim was not merely to reproduce but to
transcend nature. For their subject was gods and heroes, and heroes and
gods were superior to men. Of this idealising tendency we have in
sculpture evidence enough in the many examples which have been preserved
to us; and with regard to painting there is curious literary testimony
to the same effect. Aristotle, for example, remarks that "even if it is
impossible that men should be such as Zeuxis painted them, yet it is
better that he should paint them so; for the example ought to excel that
for which it is an example." [Footnote: Artist, Poet, xxv.--1461. 6.
12.]

And in an imaginary conversation recorded between Socrates and
Parrhasius the artist admits without any hesitation that more pleasure
is to be derived from pictures of men who are morally good than from
those of men who are morally bad. In the Greek view, in fact, as we saw,
physical and moral excellence went together, and it was excellence they
sought to depict in their art; not merely aesthetic beauty, though that
was a necessary presupposition, but on the top of that, ideal types of
character representative of their conception of the hero and the god.
Art, in a word, was subordinate to the ethical ideal; or rather the
ethical and aesthetic ideals were not yet dissociated; and the greatest
artists the world has ever known worked deliberately under the direction
and inspiration of the ideas that controlled and determined the life of
their time.


Section 4. Music and the Dance.

Turning now from the plastic arts to that other group which the Greeks
classed together under the name of "Music"--namely music, in the
narrower sense, dancing and poetry--we find still more clearly
emphasised and more elaborately worked out the subordination of
aesthetic to ethical and religious ends. "Music," in fact, as they used
the term, was the centre of Greek education, and its moral character
thus became a matter of primary importance. By it were formed, it was
supposed, the mind and temper of the citizens, and so the whole
constitution of the state. "The introduction of a new kind of music,"
says Plato, "must be shunned as imperilling the whole state; since
styles of music are never disturbed without affecting the most important
political institutions." "The new style," he goes on, "gradually gaining
a lodgment, quietly insinuates itself into manners and customs; and from
these it issues in greater force, and makes its way into mutual
compacts: and from compacts it goes on to attack laws and constitutions,
displaying the utmost impudence, until it ends by overturning
everything, both in public and in private." [Footnote: Plato, Rep. IV.
4240.--Translated by Davies and Vaughan.] And as in his Republic he had
defined the character of the poetry that should be admitted into his
ideal state, so in the "Laws" he specially defines the character of the
melodies and dances, regarding them as the most important factor in
determining and preserving the manners and institutions of the citizens.

Nothing, at first sight, to a modern mind, could, be stranger than this
point of view. That poetry has a bearing on conduct we can indeed
understand, though we do not make poetry the centre of our system of
education; but that moral effects should be attributed to music and to
dancing and that these should be regarded as of such importance as to
influence profoundly the whole constitution of a state, will appear to
the majority of modern men an unintelligible paradox.

Yet no opinion of the Greeks is more profoundly characteristic than this
of their whole way of regarding life, and none would better repay a
careful study. That moral character should be attributed to the
influence of music is only one and perhaps the most striking
illustration of that general identification by the Greeks of the ethical
and the aesthetic standards on which we have so frequently had occasion
to insist. Virtue, in their conception, was not a hard conformity to a
law felt as alien to the natural character; it was the free expression
of a beautiful and harmonious soul. And this very metaphor "harmonious,"
which they so constantly employ, involves the idea of a close connection
between music and morals. Character, in the Greek view, is a certain
proportion of the various elements of the soul, and the right character
is the right proportion. But the relation in which these elements stand
to one another could be directly affected, it was found, by means of
music; not only could the different emotions be excited or assuaged in
various degrees, but the whole relation of the emotional to the rational
element could be regulated and controlled by the appropriate melody and
measure. That this connection between music and morals really does exist
is recognised, in a rough and general way, by most people who have any
musical sense. There are rhythms and tunes, for example, that are felt
to be vulgar and base, and others that are felt to be ennobling; some
music, Wagner's, for instance, is frequently called immoral; Gounod is
described as enervating, Beethoven as bracing, and the like; and however
absurd such comments may often appear to be in detail, underlying them
is the undoubtedly well-grounded sense that various kinds of music have
various ethical qualities. But it is just this side of music, which has
been neglected in modern times, that was the one on which the Greeks
laid most stress. Infinitely inferior to the moderns in the mechanical
resources of the art, they had made, it appears, a far finer and closer
analysis of its relation to emotional states; with the result that even
in music, which we describe as the purest of the arts, congratulating
ourselves on its absolute dissociation from all definite intellectual
conceptions,--even here the standard of the Greeks was as much ethical
as aesthetic, and the style of music was distinguished and its value
appraised, not only by the pleasure to be derived from it, but also by
the effect it tended to produce on character.

Of this position we have a clear and definite statement in Aristotle.
Virtue, he says, consists in loving and hating in the proper way, and
implies, therefore, a delight in the proper emotions; but emotions of
any kind are produced by melody and rhythm; therefore by music a man
becomes accustomed to feeling the right emotions. Music has thus the
power to form character; and the various kinds of music, based on the
various modes, may be distinguished by their effects on character--one,
for example, working in the direction of melancholy, another of
effeminacy; one encouraging abandonment, another self-control, another
enthusiasm, and so on through the series. It follows that music may be
judged not merely by the pleasure it gives, but by the character of its
moral influence; pleasure, indeed, is essential or there would be no
art; but the different kinds of pleasure given by different kinds of
music are to be distinguished not merely by quantity, but by quality.
One will produce a right pleasure of which the good man will approve,
and which will have a good effect on character; another will be in
exactly the opposite case. Or, as Plato puts it, "the excellence of
music is to be measured by pleasure. But the pleasure must not be that
of chance persons; the fairest music is that which delights the best and
best-educated, and especially that which delights the one man who is
pre-eminent in virtue and education." [Footnote: Plato Laws. II. 6586.--
Translated by Jowett.]

We see then that even pure music, to the Greeks, had a distinct and
definite ethical bearing. But this ethical influence was further
emphasised by the fact that it was not their custom to enjoy their music
pure. What they called "music," as has been already pointed out, was an
intimate union of melody, verse and dance, so that the particular
emotional meaning of the rhythm and tune employed was brought out into
perfect lucidity by the accompanying words and gestures. Thus we find,
for example, that Plato characterises a tendency in his own time to the
separation of melody and verse as a sign of a want of true artistic
taste; for, he says, it is very hard, in the absence of words, to
distinguish the exact character of the mood which the rhythm and tune is
supposed to represent. In this connection it may be interesting to refer
to the use of the "_leit-motiv_" in modern music. Here too a
particular idea, if not a particular set of words, is associated with a
particular musical phrase; the intention of the practice being clearly
the same as that which is indicated in the passage just quoted, namely
to add precision and definiteness to the vague emotional content of pure
music.

And this determining effect of words was further enhanced, in the music
of the Greeks, by the additional accompaniment of the dance. The
emotional character conveyed to the mind by the words and to the ear by
the tune, was further explained to the eye by gesture, pose, and beat of
foot; the combination of the three modes of expression forming thus in
the Greek sense a single "imitative" art. The dance as well as the
melody came thus to have a definite ethical significance; "it
imitates," says Aristotle, "character, emotion, and action." And Plato
in his ideal republic would regulate by law the dances no less than the
melodies to be employed, distinguishing them too as morally good or
morally bad, and encouraging the one while he forbids the other.

The general Greek view of music which has thus been briefly expounded,
the union of melody and rhythm with poetry and the dance in view of a
definite and consciously intended ethical character, may be illustrated
by the following passage of Plutarch, in which he describes the music in
vogue at Sparta. The whole system, it will be observed, is designed with
a view to that military courage which was the virtue most prized in the
Spartan state, and the one about which all their institutions centred.
Music at Sparta actually was, what Plato would have had it in his ideal
republic, a public and state-regulated function; and even that vigorous
race which of all the Greeks came nearest to being Philistines of
virtue, thought fit to lay a foundation purely aesthetic for their
severe and soldierly ideal.

"Their instruction in music and verse," says Plutarch, "was not less
carefully attended to than their habits of grace and good-breeding in
conversation. And their very songs had a life and spirit in them that
inflamed and possessed men's minds with an enthusiasm and ardour for
action; the style of them was plain and without affectation; the subject
always serious and moral; most usually, it was in praise of such men as
had died in defence of their country, or in derision of those that had
been cowards; the former they declared happy and glorified; the life of
the latter they described as most miserable and abject. There were also
vaunts of what they would do and boasts of what they had done, varying
with the various ages; as, for example, they had three choirs in their
solemn festivals, the first of the old men, the second of the young men,
and the last of the children; the old men began thus:

     We once were young and brave and strong;

The young men answered them, singing;

     And we're so now, come on and try:

The children came last and said:

     But we'll be strongest by and bye.

Indeed if we will take the pains to consider their compositions, and the
airs on the flute to which they marched when going to battle, we shall
find that Terpander and Pindar had reason to say that music and valour
were allied." [Footnote: Plutarch, Lycurgus, ch. 21.--Clough's ed.]

The way of regarding music which is illustrated in this passage, and in
all that is said on the subject by Greek writers, is so typical of the
whole point of view of the Greeks, that we may be pardoned for insisting
once again on the attitude of mind which it implies. Music, as we saw,
had an ethical value to the Greeks; but that is not to say that they put
the ethics first, and the music second, using the one as a mere tool of
the other. Rather an ethical state of mind was also, in their view, a
musical one. In a sense something more than metaphorical, virtue was a
harmony of the soul. The musical end was thus identical with the ethical
one. The most beautiful music was also the morally best, and _vice
versa_; virtue was not prior to beauty, nor beauty to virtue; they
were two aspects of the same reality, two ways of regarding a single
fact; and if aesthetic effects were supposed to be amenable to ethical
judgment, it was only because ethical judgments at bottom were
aesthetic. The "good" and the "beautiful" were one and the same thing;
that is the first and last word of the Greek ideal.

And while thus, on the one hand, virtue was invested with the
spontaneity and delight of art, on the other, art derived from its
association with ethics emotional precision. In modern times the end of
music is commonly conceived to be simply and without more ado the
excitement of feeling. Its value is measured by the intensity rather
than the quality of the emotion which it is capable of arousing; and the
auditor abandons himself to a casual succession of highly wrought moods
as bewildering in the actual experience as it is exhausting in the
after-effects. In Greek music, on the other hand, if we may trust our
accounts, while the intensity of the feeling excited must have been far
less than that which it is in the power of modern instrumentation to
evoke, its character was perfectly simple and definite. Melody, rhythm,
gesture and words, were all consciously adapted to the production of a
single precisely conceived emotional effect; the listener was in a
position clearly to understand and appraise the value of the mood
excited in him; instead of being exhausted and confused by a chaos of
vague and conflicting emotion he had the sense of relief which
accompanies the deliverance of a definite passion, and returned to his
ordinary business "purged", as they said, and tranquillised, by a
process which he understood, directed to an end of which he approved.


Section 5. Poetry.

If now, as we have seen, in the plastic arts, and in an art which
appears to us so pure as music, the Greeks perceived and valued, along
with the immediate pleasure of beauty, a definite ethical character and
bent, much more was this the case with poetry, whose material is
conceptions and ideas. The works of the poets, and especially of Homer,
were in fact to the Greeks all that moral treatises are to us; or
rather, instead of learning their lessons in abstract terms, they learnt
them out of the concrete representation of life. Poetry was the basis of
their education, the guide and commentary of their practice, the
inspiration of their speculative thought. If they have a proposition to
advance, they must back it by a citation: if they have a counsel to
offer, they must prop it with a verse. Not only for delight, but for
inspiration, warning and example, they were steeped from childhood
onwards in an ocean of melodious discourse; their national epics were to
them what the Bible was to the Puritans; and for every conjunction of
fortune, for every issue of home or state, they found therein a text to
prompt or reinforce their decision. Of this importance of poetry in the
life of ancient Greece, and generally of the importance of music and
art, the following passage from Plato is a striking illustration: "When
the boy has learned his letters and is beginning to understand what is
written, as before he understood only what was spoken, they put into his
hands the works of great poets, which he reads at school; in these are
contained many admonitions, and many tales, and praises, and encomia of
ancient famous men, which he is required to learn by heart, in order
that he may imitate or emulate them and desire to become like them. Then
again the teachers of the lyre take similar care that their young
disciple is temperate and gets into no mischief; and when they have
taught him the use of the lyre, they introduce him to the poems of other
excellent poets, who are the lyric poets; and these they set to music
and make their harmonies and rhythms quite familiar to the children's
souls, in order that they may learn to be more gentle and harmonious and
rhythmical, and so more fitted for speech and action; for the life of
man in every part has need of harmony and rhythm," [Footnote: Plato
Prot. 325c.--Translated by Jowett.]

From this conception of poetry as a storehouse of practical wisdom the
transition is easy to a purely ethical judgment of its value; and that
transition, as has been already noted, was actually made by Plato, who
even goes so far as to prescribe to poets the direct inculcation of such
morals as are proper to a tract, as that the good and just man is happy
even though he be poor, and the bad and unjust man miserable even though
he be rich. This didacticism, no doubt, is a parody; but it is a parody
of the normal Greek view, that the excellence of a poem is closely bound
up with the compass and depth of its whole ethical content, and is not
to be measured, as many moderns maintain, merely by the aesthetic beauty
of its form. When Strabo says, "it is impossible to be a good poet
unless you are first a good man," he is expressing the common opinion of
the Greeks that the poet is to be judged not merely as an artist but as
an interpreter of life; and the same presupposition underlies the remark
of Aristotle that poets may be classified according as the characters
they represent are as good as, better, or worse than the average man.

But perhaps the most remarkable illustration of this way of regarding
poetry is the passage in the "Frogs" of Aristophanes, where the comedian
has introduced a controversy between Aeschylus and Euripides as to the
relative merit of their works, and has made the decision turn almost
entirely on moral considerations, the question being really whether or
no Euripides is to be regarded as a corrupter of his countrymen. In the
course of the discussion Aeschylus is made to give expression to a view
of poetry which clearly enough Aristophanes endorses himself, and which
no doubt would be accepted by the majority of his audience. He appeals
to all antiquity to shew that poets have always been the instructors of
mankind, and that it is for this that they are held in honour.

     "Look to traditional history, look
     To antiquity, primitive, early, remote;
     See there, what a blessing illustrious poets
     Conferr'd on mankind, in the centuries past.
     Orpheus instructed mankind in religion,
     Reclaim'd them from bloodshed and barbarous rites;
     Musaeus deliver'd the doctrine of med'cine,
     And warnings prophetic for ages to come;
     Next came old Hesiod, teaching us husbandry,
     Ploughing, and sowing, and rural affairs,
     Rural economy, rural astronomy,
     Homely morality, labour, and thrift;
     Homer himself, our adorable Homer,
     What was his title to praise and renown?
     What, but the worth of the lessons he taught us
     Discipline, arms, and equipment of war?"
          [Footnote: Aristoph. Frogs, 1030.--Translated by Frere.]

While then there is, as we should naturally expect, plenty of Greek
poetry which is simply the spontaneous expression of passionate feeling,
unrestrained by the consideration of ethical or other ends; yet if we
take for our type (as we are fairly entitled to do, from the prominent
place it held in Greek life), not the lyrics but the drama of Greece, we
shall find that in poetry even (as was to be expected) to a higher
degree than in music and the plastic arts, the beauty sought and
achieved is one that lies within the limits of certain definite moral
pre-suppositions. Let us consider this point in some detail; and first
let us examine the character of Greek tragedy.


Section 6. Tragedy.

The character of Greek tragedy was determined from the very beginning by
the fact of its connection with religion. The season at which it was
performed was the festival of Dionysus; about his altar the chorus
danced; and the object of the performance was the representation of
scenes out of the lives of ancient heroes. The subject of the drama was
thus strictly prescribed; it must be selected out of a cycle of legends
familiar to the audience; and whatever freedom might be allowed to the
poet in his treatment of the theme, whatever the reflections he might
embroider upon it, the speculative or ethical views, the criticism of
contemporary life, all must be subservient to the main object originally
proposed, the setting forth, for edification as well as for delight, of
some episodes in the lives of those heroes of the past who were
considered not only to be greater than their descendants, but to be the
sons of gods and worthy themselves of worship as divine.

By this fundamental condition the tragedy of the Greeks is distinguished
sharply, on the one hand from the Shakespearian drama, on the other from
the classical drama of the French. The tragedies of Shakespeare are
devoid, one might say, or at least comparatively devoid, of all
preconceptions. He was free to choose what subject he liked and to treat
it as he would; and no sense of obligation to religious or other points
of view, no feeling for traditions descended from a sacred past and not
lightly to be handled by those who were their trustees for the future,
sobered or restrained for evil or for good his half-barbaric genius. He
flung himself upon life with the irresponsible ardour of the discoverer
of a new continent; shaped and re-shaped it as he chose; carved from it
now the cynicism of Measure for Measure, now the despair of Hamlet and
of Lear, now the radiant magnanimity of the Tempest, and departed
leaving behind him not a map or chart, but a series of mutually
incompatible landscapes.

What Shakespeare gave, in short, was a many-sided representation of
life; what the Greek dramatist gave was an interpretation. But an
interpretation not simply personal to himself, but representative of the
national tradition and belief. The men whose deeds and passions he
narrated were the patterns and examples on the one hand, on the other
the warnings of his race; the gods who determined the fortunes they
sang, were working still among men; the moral laws that ruled the past
ruled the present too; and the history of the Hellenic race moved, under
a visible providence, from its divine origin onward to an end that would
be prosperous or the reverse according as later generations should
continue to observe the worship and traditions of their fathers
descended from heroes and gods.

And it is the fact that in this sense it was representative of the
national consciousness, that distinguishes the Greek tragedy from the
classical drama of the French. For the latter, though it imitated the
ancients in outward form, was inspired with a totally different spirit.
The kings and heroes whose fortunes it narrated were not the ancestors
of the French race; they had no root in its affections, no connection
with its religious beliefs, no relation to its ethical conceptions. The
whole ideal set forth was not that which really inspired the nation, but
at best that which was supposed to inspire the court; and the whole
drama, like a tree transplanted to an alien soil, withers and dies for
lack of the nourishment which the tragedy of the Greeks unconsciously
imbibed from its encompassing air of national tradition.

Such then was the general character of the Greek tragedy--an
interpretation of the national ideal. Let us now proceed to follow out
some of the consequences involved in this conception.

In the first place, the theme represented is the life and fate of
ancient heroes--of personages, that is to say, greater than ordinary
men, both for good and for evil, in their qualities and in their
achievements, pregnant with fateful issues, makers or marrers of the
fortunes of the world. Tragic and terrible their destiny may be, but
never contemptible or squalid. Behind all suffering, behind sin and
crime, must lie a redeeming magnanimity. A complete villain, says
Aristotle, is not a tragic character, for he has no hold upon the
sympathies; if he prosper, it is an outrage on common human feeling; if
he fall into disaster, it is merely what he deserves. Neither is it
admissible to represent the misfortunes of a thoroughly good man, for
that is merely painful and distressing; and least of all is it tolerable
gratuitously to introduce mere baseness, or madness, or other
aberrations from human nature. The true tragic hero is a man of high
place and birth who having a nature not ignoble has fallen into sin and
pays in suffering the penalty of his act. Nothing could throw more light
on the distinguishing characteristics of the Greek drama than these few
remarks of Aristotle, and nothing could better indicate how close, in
the Greek mind, was the connection between aesthetic and ethical
judgments. The canon of Aristotle would exclude as proper themes for
tragedy the character and fate, say, of Richard III.--the absolutely bad
man suffering his appropriate desert; or of Kent and Cordelia--the
absolutely good, brought into unmerited affliction; and that not merely
because such themes offend the moral sense, but because by so offending
they destroy the proper pleasure of the tragic art. The whole aesthetic
effect is limited by ethical presuppositions; and to outrage these is to
defeat the very purpose of tragedy.

Specially interesting in this connection are the strictures passed on
Euripides in the passage of the "Frogs" of Aristophanes to which
allusion has already been made. Euripides is there accused of lowering
the tragic art by introducing--what? Women in love! The central theme of
modern tragedy! It is the boast of Aeschylus that there is not one of
his plays which touches on this subject:--

     "I never allow'd of your lewd Sthenoboeas
     Or filthy detestable Phaedras--not I!
     Indeed I should doubt if my drama throughout
     Exhibit an instance of woman in love!"
          [Footnote: Aristoph. Frogs, 1043.--Translated by Frere.]

And there can be little doubt that with a Greek audience this would
count to him as a merit, and that the shifting of the centre of interest
by Euripides from the sterner passions of heroes and of kings to this
tenderer phase of human feeling would be felt even by those whom it
charmed to be a declension from the height of the older tragedy.

And to this limitation of subject corresponds a limitation of treatment.
The Greek tragedy is composed from a definite point of view, with the
aim not merely to represent but also to interpret the theme. Underlying
the whole construction of the plot, the dialogue, the reflections, the
lyric interludes, is the intention to illustrate some general moral law,
some common and typical problem, some fundamental truth. Of the elder
dramatists at any rate, Aeschylus and Sophocles, one may even say that
it was their purpose--however imperfectly achieved--to "justify the ways
of God to man." To represent suffering as the punishment of sin is the
constant bent of Aeschylus; to justify the law of God against the
presumption of man is the central idea of Sophocles. In either case the
whole tone is essentially religious. To choose such a theme as Lear, to
treat it as Shakespeare has treated it, to leave it, as it were,
bleeding from a thousand wounds, in mute and helpless entreaty for the
healing that is never to be vouchsafed--this would have been repulsive,
if not impossible, to a Greek tragedian. Without ever descending from
concrete art to the abstractions of mere moralising, without ever
attempting to substitute a verbal formula for the full and complex
perception that grows out of a representation of life, the ancient
dramatists were nevertheless, in the whole apprehension of their theme,
determined by a more or less conscious speculative bias; the world to
them was not merely a splendid chaos, it was a divine plan; and even in
its darkest hollows, its passes most perilous and bleak, they have their
hand, though doubtful perhaps and faltering, upon the clue that is to
lead them up to the open sky.

It is consonant with this account of the nature of Greek tragedy that it
should have laid more stress upon action than upon character. The
interest was centred on the universal bearing of certain acts and
situations, on the light which the experience represented threw on the
whole tendency and course of human life, not on the sentiments and
motives of the particular personages introduced. The characters are
broad and simple, not developing for the most part, but fixed, and
fitted therefore to be the mediums of direct action, of simple issues,
and typical situations. In the Greek tragedy the general point of view
predominates over the idiosyncrasies of particular persons. It is human
nature that is represented in the broad, not this or that highly
specialised variation; and what we have indicated as the general aim,
the interpretation of life, is never obscured by the predominance of
exceptional and so to speak, accidental characteristics. Man is the
subject of the Greek drama; the subject of the modern novel is Tom and
Dick.

Finally, to the realisation of this general aim, the whole form of the
Greek drama was admirably adapted. It consisted very largely of
conversations between two persons, representing two opposed points of
view, and giving occasion for an almost scientific discussion of every
problem of action raised in the play; and between these conversations
were inserted lyric odes in which the chorus commented on the situation,
bestowed advice or warning, praise or blame, and finally summed up the
moral of the whole. Through the chorus, in fact, the poet could speak in
his own person, and impose upon the whole tragedy any tone which he
desired. Periodically he could drop the dramatist and assume the
preacher; and thus ensure that his play should be, what we have seen was
its recognised ideal, not merely a representation but an interpretation
of life.

But this without ceasing to be a work of art. In attempting to analyse
in abstract terms the general character of the Greek tragedy we have
necessarily thrown into the shade what after all was its primary and
most essential aspect; an aspect, however, of which a full appreciation
could only be attained not by a mere perusal of the text, but by what is
unfortunately for ever beyond our power, the witnessing of an actual
representation as it was given on the Greek stage. For from a purely
aesthetic point of view the Greek drama must be reckoned among the most
perfect of art forms.

Taking place in the open air, on the sunny slope of a hill, valley and
plain or islanded sea stretching away below to meet the blazing blue of
a cloudless sky, the moving pageant, thus from the first set in tune
with nature, brought to a focus of splendour the rays of every separate
art. More akin to an opera than to a play it had, as its basis, music.
For the drama had developed out of the lyric ode, and retained
throughout what was at first its only element, the dance and song of a
mimetic chorus. By this centre of rhythmic motion and pregnant melody
the burden of the tale was caught up and echoed and echoed again, as the
living globe divided into spheres of answering song, the clear and
precise significance of the plot, never obscure to the head, being thus
brought home in music to the passion of the heart, the idea embodied in
lyric verse, the verse transfigured by song, and song and verse
reflected as in a mirror to the eye by the swing and beat of the limbs
they stirred to consonance of motion. And while such was the character
of the odes that broke the action of the play, the action itself was an
appeal not less to the ear and to the eye than to the passion and the
intellect. The circumstances of the representation, the huge auditorium
in the open air, lent themselves less to "acting" in our sense of the
term, than to attitude and declamation. The actors raised on high boots
above their natural height, their faces hidden in masks and their tones
mechanically magnified, must have relied for their effects not upon
facial play, or rapid and subtle variations of voice and gesture, but
upon a certain statuesque beauty of pose, and a chanting intonation of
that majestic iambic verse whose measure would have been obscured by a
rapid and conversational delivery. The representation would thus become
moving sculpture to the eye, and to the ear, as it were, a sleep of
music between the intenser interludes of the chorus; and the spectator
without being drawn away by an imitative realism from the calm of
impassioned contemplation into the fever and fret of a veritable actor
on the scene, received an impression based throughout on that clear
intellectual foundation, that almost prosaic lucidity of sentiment and
plot, which is preserved to us in the written text, but raised by the
accompanying appeal to the sense, made as it must have been made by such
artists as the Greeks, by the grouping of forms and colours, the
recitative, the dance and the song, to such a greatness and height of
aesthetic significance as can hardly have been realized by any other
form of art production.

The nearest modern analogy to what the ancient drama must have been is
to be found probably in the operas of Wagner, who indeed was strongly
influenced by the tragedy of the Greeks. It was his ideal like theirs,
to combine the various branches of art, employing not only music but
poetry, sculpture, painting and the dance, for the representation of his
dramatic theme; and his conception also to make art the interpreter of
life, reflecting in a national drama the national consciousness, the
highest action and the deepest passion and thought of the German race.
To consider how far in this attempt he falls short of or goes beyond the
achievement of the Greeks, and to examine the wide dissimilarities that
underlie the general identity of aim, would be to wander too far afield
from our present theme. But the comparison may be recommended to those
who are anxious to form a concrete idea of what the effect of a Greek
tragedy may have been, and to clothe in imagination the dead bones of
the literary text with the flesh and blood of a representation to the
sense.

Meantime, to assist the reader to realise with somewhat greater
precision the bearing of the foregoing remarks, it may be worth while to
give an outline sketch of one of the most celebrated of the Greek
tragedies, the "Agamemnon" of Aeschylus.

The hero of the drama belongs to that heroic house whose tragic history
was among the most terrible and the most familiar to a Greek audience.
Tantalus, the founder of the family, for some offence against the gods,
was suffering in Hades the punishment which is christened by his name.
His son Pelops was stained with the blood of Myrtilus. Of the two sons
of the next generation, Thyestes seduced the wife of his brother Atreus;
and Atreus in return killed the sons of Thyestes, and made the father
unwittingly eat the flesh of the murdered boys. Agamemnon, son of
Atreus, to propitiate Artemis, sacrificed his daughter Iphigenia, and in
revenge was murdered by Clytemnestra his wife. And Clytemnestra was
killed by Orestes, her son, in atonement for the death of Agamemnon. For
generations the race had been dogged by crime and punishment; and in
choosing for his theme the murder of Agamemnon the dramatist could
assume in his audience so close a familiarity with the past history of
the House that he could call into existence by an allusive word that
sombre background of woe to enhance the terrors of his actual
presentation. The figures he brought into vivid relief joined hands with
menacing forms that faded away into the night of the future and the
past; while above them hung, intoning doom, the phantom host of Furies.

Yet at the outset of the drama all promises well. The watchman on the
roof of the palace, in the tenth year of his watch, catches sight at
last of the signal fire that announces the capture of Troy and the
speedy return of Agamemnon. With joy he proclaims to the House the long-
delayed and welcome news; yet even in the moment of exultation lets slip
a doubtful phrase hinting at something behind, which he dares not name,
something which may turn to despair the triumph of victory. Hereupon
enter the chorus of Argive elders, chanting as they move to the measure
of a stately march. They sing how ten years before Agamemnon and
Menelaus had led forth the host of Greece, at the bidding of the Zeus
who protects hospitality, to recover for Menelaus Helen his wife,
treacherously stolen by Paris. Then, as they take their places and begin
their rhythmic dance, in a strain of impassioned verse that is at once a
narrative and a lyric hymn, they tell, or rather, present in a series of
vivid images, flashing as by illumination of lightning out of a night of
veiled and sombre boding, the tale of the deed that darkened the
starting of the host--the sacrifice of Iphigenia to the goddess whose
wrath was delaying the fleet at Aulis. In verse, in music, in pantomime,
the scene lives again--the struggle in the father's heart, the
insistence of his brother chiefs, the piteous glance of the girl, and at
last the unutterable end; while above and through it all rings like a
knell of fate the refrain that is the motive of the whole drama:

"Sing woe, sing woe, but may the Good prevail."

At the conclusion of the ode enters Clytemnestra. She makes a formal
announcement to the chorus of the fall of Troy; describes the course of
the signal-fire from beacon to beacon as it sped, and pictures in
imagination the scenes even then taking place in the doomed city. On her
withdrawal the chorus break once more into song and dance. To the music
of a solemn hymn they point the moral of the fall of Troy, the certain
doom of violence and fraud descended upon Paris and his House. Once more
the vivid pictures flash from the night of woe--Helen in her fatal
beauty stepping lightly to her doom, the widower's nights of mourning
haunted by the ghost of love, the horrors of the war that followed, the
slain abroad and the mourners at home, the change of living flesh and
blood for the dust and ashes of the tomb. At last with a return to their
original theme, the doom of insolence, the chorus close their ode and
announce the arrival of a messenger from Troy. Talthybius, the herald,
enters as spokesman of the army and king, describing the hardships they
have suffered and the joy of the triumphant issue. To him Clytemnestra
announces, in words of which the irony is patent to the audience, her
sufferings in the absence of her husband and her delight at the prospect
of his return. He will find her, she says, as he left her, a faithful
watcher of the home, her loyalty sure, her honour undefiled. Then
follows another choral ode, similar in theme to the last, dwelling on
the woe brought by the act of Paris upon Troy, the change of the bridal
song to the trump of war and the dirge of death; contrasting, in a
profusion of splendid tropes, the beauty of Helen with the curse to
which it is bound; and insisting once more on the doom that attends
insolence and pride. At the conclusion of this song the measure changes
to a march, and the chorus turn to welcome the triumphant king.
Agamemnon enters, and behind him the veiled and silent figure of a
woman. After greeting the gods of his House, the King, in brief and
stilted phrase, acknowledges the loyalty of the chorus, but hints at
much that is amiss which it must be his first charge to set right.
Hereupon enters Clytemnestra, and in a speech of rhetorical exaggeration
tells of her anxious waiting for her lord and her inexpressible joy at
his return. In conclusion she directs that purple cloth be spread upon
his path that he may enter the house as befits a conqueror. After a show
of resistance, Agamemnon yields the point, and the contrast at which the
dramatist aims is achieved. With the pomp of an eastern monarch, always
repellent to the Greek mind, the King steps across the threshold, steps,
as the audience knows, to his death. The higher the reach of his power
and pride the more terrible and swift is the nemesis; and Clytemnestra
follows in triumph with the enigmatic cry upon her lips: "Zeus who art
god of fulfilment, fulfil my prayers." As she withdraws the chorus begin
a song of boding fear, the more terrible that it is still indefinite.
Something is going to happen--the presentiment is sure. But what, but
what? They search the night in vain. Meantime, motionless and silent
waits the figure of the veiled woman. It is Cassandra, the prophetess,
daughter of Priam of Troy, whom Agamemnon has carried home as his prize.
Clytemnestra returns to urge her to enter the house; she makes no sign
and utters no word. The queen changes her tone from courtesy to anger
and rebuke; the figure neither stirs nor speaks; and Clytemnestra at
last with an angry threat leaves her and returns to the palace. Then,
and not till then, a cry breaks from the stranger's lips, a passionate
cry to Apollo who gave her her fatal gift. All the sombre history of the
House to which she has been brought, the woe that has been and the woe
that is to come, passes in pictures across her inner sense. In a series
of broken ejaculations, not sentences but lyric cries, she evokes the
scenes of the past and of the future. Blood drips from the palace; in
its chambers the Furies crouch; the murdered sons of Thyestes wail in
its haunted courts; and ever among the visions of the past that one of
the future floats and fades, clearly discerned, impossible to avert, the
murder of a husband by a wife; and in the rear of that, most pitiful of
all, the violent death of the seer who sees in vain and may not help.
Between Cassandra and the Chorus it is a duet of anguish and fear; in
the broken lyric phrases a phantom music wails; till at last, at what
seems the breaking-point, the tension is relaxed, and dropping into the
calmer iambic recitative, Cassandra tells her message in plainer speech
and clearly proclaims the murder of the King. Then, with a last appeal
to the avenger that is to come, she enters the palace alone to meet her
death.--The stage is empty. Suddenly a cry is heard from within; again,
and then again; while the chorus hesitate the deed is done; the doors
are thrown open, and Clytemnestra is seen standing over the corpses of
her victims. All disguise is now thrown off; the murderess avows and
triumphs in her deed; she justifies it as vengeance for the sacrifice of
Iphigenia, and sees in herself not a free human agent but the incarnate
curse of the House of Tantalus. And now for the first time appears the
adulterer Aegisthus, who has planned the whole behind the scenes. He too
is an avenger, for he is the son of that Thyestes who was made to feed
on his own children's flesh. The murder of Agamemnon is but one more
link in the long chain of hereditary guilt; and with that exposition of
the pitiless law of punishment and crime this chapter of the great drama
comes to a close. But the "Agamemnon" is only the first of a series of
three plays closely connected and meant to be performed in succession;
and the problem raised in the first of them, the crime that cries for
punishment and the punishment that is itself a new crime, is solved in
the last by a reconciliation of the powers of heaven and hell, and the
pardon of the last offender in the person of Orestes. To sketch,
however, the plan of the other dramas of the trilogy would be to
trespass too far upon our space and time. It is enough to have
illustrated, by the example of the "Agamemnon," the general character of
a Greek tragedy; and those who care to pursue the subject further must
be referred to the text of the plays themselves.


Section 7. Comedy.

Even more remarkable than the tragedy of the Greeks, in its rendering of
a didactic intention under the forms of a free and spontaneous art, is
the older comedy known to us through the works of Aristophanes. As the
former dealt with the general conceptions, religious and ethical, that
underlay the Greek view of life, using as its medium of exposition the
ancient national myths, so the latter dealt with the particular phases
of contemporary life, employing the machinery of a free burlesque. The
achievement of Aristophanes, in fact, is more astonishing, in a sense,
than that of Aeschylus. Starting with what is always, _prima
facie_, the prose of everyday life, its acrid controversies, its
vulgar and tedious types, and even its particular individuals--for
Aristophanes does not hesitate to introduce his contemporaries in person
on the stage--he fits to this gross and heavy stuff the wings of
imagination, scatters from it the clinging mists of banality and spite
and speeds it forth through the lucid heaven of art amid peals of
musical laughter and snatches of lyric song. For Aristophanes was a poet
as well as a comedian, and his genius is displayed not only in the
construction of his fantastic plots, not only in the inexhaustible
profusion of his humane and genial wit, but in bursts of pure poetry as
melodious and inspired as ever sprang from the lips of the lyrists of
Greece or of the world. The basis of the comic as of the tragic art of
the Greeks was song and dance; and the chorus, the original element of
the play, still retains in the works of Aristophanes a place important
enough to make it clear that in comedy, too, a prominent aspect of the
art must have been the aesthetic appeal to the ear and the eye. In
general structure, in fact, comedy and tragedy were alike; aesthetically
the motives were similar, only they were set in a different key.

But while primarily Aristophanes, like the tragedians, was a great
artist, he was also, like them, a great interpreter of life. His dramas
are satires as well as poems, and he was and expressed himself supremely
conscious of having a "mission" to fulfil. "He has scorned from the
first," he makes the chorus sing of himself in the "Peace":

     "He has scorned from the first to descend and to dip
     Peddling and meddling in private affairs:
     To detect and collect every petty defect
     Of husband and wife and domestical life;
     But intrepid and bold, like Alcides of old,
     When the rest stood aloof, put himself to the proof
     In his country's behoof."
          [Footnote: Aristoph. Peace, 751 seq.--Translated by Frere.]

His aim, in fact, was deliberately to instruct his countrymen in
political and social issues; to attack the abuses of the Assembly, of
the Law-courts and the home; to punish demagogues, charlatans,
professional politicians; to laugh back into their senses "revolting"
sons and wives; to defend the orthodox faith against philosophers and
men of science. These are the themes that he embodies in his plots, and
these the morals that he enforces when he speaks through the chorus in
his own person. And the result is an art-product more strange to the
modern mind in its union of poetry with prose, of aesthetic with
didactic significance, than even that marvellous creation, the Greek
tragedy. Of the character of this comedy the reader may form an idea
through the admirable and easily accessible translations of Frere;
[Footnote: In Morley's Universal Library.] and we are therefore
dispensed from the obligation to attempt, as in the case of tragedy, an
account of some particular specimen of the art.


Section 8. Summary.

And here must conclude our survey of the character of Greek art. The
main point which we have endeavoured to make clear has been so often
insisted upon, that it is hardly necessary to dwell upon it further. The
key to the art of the Greeks, as well as to their ethics, is the
identification of the beautiful and the good; and it therefore is as
natural in treating of their art to insist on its ethical value as it
was to insist on the aesthetic significance of their moral ideal. But,
in fact, any insistance on either side of the judgment is misleading.
The two points of view had never been dissociated; and art and conduct
alike proceeded from the same imperative impulse, to create a harmony or
order which was conceived indifferently as beautiful or good. Through
and through, the Greek ideal is Unity. To make the individual at one
with the State, the real with the ideal, the inner with the outer, art
with morals, finally to bring all phases of life under the empire of a
single idea, which, with Goethe, we may call, as we will, the good, the
beautiful, or the whole--this was the aim, and, to a great extent, the
achievement of their genius. And of all the points of view from which we
may envisage their brilliant activity none perhaps is more central and
more characteristic than this of art, whose essence is the comprehension
of the many in the one, and the perfect reflection of the inner in the
outer.




