
ADVENTURES IN FRIENDSHIP

By David Grayson



I

AN ADVENTURE IN FRATERNITY


This, I am firmly convinced, is a strange world, as strange a one as I
was ever in. Looking about me I perceive that the simplest things are
the most difficult, the plainest things, the darkest, the commonest
things, the rarest.

I have had an amusing adventure--and made a friend.

This morning when I went to town for my marketing I met a man who was a
Mason, an Oddfellow and an Elk, and who wore the evidences of his
various memberships upon his coat. He asked me what lodge I belonged
to, and he slapped me on the back in the heartiest manner, as though he
had known me intimately for a long time. (I may say, in passing, that he
was trying to sell me a new kind of corn-planter.) I could not help
feeling complimented--both complimented and abashed. For I am not a
Mason, or an Oddfellow, or an Elk. When I told him so he seemed much
surprised and disappointed.

"You ought to belong to one of our lodges," he said. "You'd be sure of
having loyal friends wherever you go."

He told me all about his grips and passes and benefits; he told me how
much it would cost me to get in and how much more to stay in and how
much for a uniform (which was not compulsory). He told me about the fine
funeral the Masons would give me; he said that the Elks would care for
my widow and children.

"You're just the sort of a man," he said, "that we'd like to have in our
lodge. I'd enjoy giving you the grip of fellowship."

He was a rotund, good-humoured man with a shining red nose and a husky
voice. He grew so much interested in telling me about his lodges that I
think (I _think_) he forgot momentarily that he was selling
corn-planters, which was certainly to his credit.

As I drove homeward this afternoon I could not help thinking of the
Masons, the Oddfellows and the Elks--and curiously not without a sense
of depression. I wondered if my friend of the corn-planters had found
the pearl of great price that I have been looking for so long. For is
not friendliness the thing of all things that is most pleasant in this
world? Sometimes it has seemed to me that the faculty of reaching out
and touching one's neighbour where he really lives is the greatest of
human achievements. And it was with an indescribable depression that I
wondered if these Masons and Oddfellows and Elks had in reality caught
the Elusive Secret and confined it within the insurmountable and
impenetrable walls of their mysteries, secrets, grips, passes, benefits.

"It must, indeed," I said to myself, "be a precious sort of fraternity
that they choose to protect so sedulously."

I felt as though life contained something that I was not permitted to
live. I recalled how my friend of the corn-planters had wished to give
me the grip of the fellowship--only he could not. I was not entitled to
it. I knew no grips or passes. I wore no uniform.

"It is a complicated matter, this fellowship," I said to myself.

So I jogged along feeling rather blue, marveling that those things which
often seem so simple should be in reality so difficult.

But on such an afternoon as this no man could possibly remain long
depressed. The moment I passed the straggling outskirts of the town and
came to the open road, the light and glow of the countryside came in
upon me with a newness and sweetness impossible to describe. Looking out
across the wide fields I could see the vivid green of the young wheat
upon the brown soil; in a distant high pasture the cows had been turned
out to the freshening grass; a late pool glistened in the afternoon
sunshine. And the crows were calling, and the robins had begun to come:
and oh, the moist, cool freshness of the air! In the highest heaven
(never so high as at this time of the year) floated a few gauzy clouds:
the whole world was busy with spring!

I straightened up in my buggy and drew in a good breath. The mare, half
startled, pricked up her ears and began to trot. She, too, felt the
spring.

"Here," I said aloud, "is where I belong. I am native to this place; of
all these things I am a part."

But presently--how one's mind courses back, like some keen-scented
hound, for lost trails--I began to think again of my friend's lodges.
And do you know, I had lost every trace of depression. The whole matter
lay as clear in my mind, as little complicated, as the countryside which
met my eye so openly.

"Why!" I exclaimed to myself, "I need not envy my friend's lodges. I
myself belong to the greatest of all fraternal orders. I am a member of
the Universal Brotherhood of Men."

It came to me so humorously as I sat there in my buggy that I could not
help laughing aloud. And I was so deeply absorbed with the idea that I
did not at first see the whiskery old man who was coming my way in a
farm wagon. He looked at me curiously. As he passed, giving me half the
road, I glanced up at him and called out cheerfully:

"How are you, Brother?"

You should have seen him look--and look--and look. After I had passed I
glanced back. He had stopped his team, turned half way around in his
high seat and was watching me--for he did not understand.

"Yes, my friend," I said to myself, "I _am_ intoxicated--with the wine
of spring!"

I reflected upon his astonishment when I addressed him as "Brother." A
strange word! He did not recognize it. He actually suspected that he was
not my Brother.

So I jogged onward thinking about my fraternity, and I don't know when I
have had more joy of an idea. It seemed so explanatory!

"I am glad," I said to myself, "that I am a Member. I am sure the Masons
have no such benefits to offer in their lodges as we have in ours. And
we do not require money of farmers (who have little to pay). We will
accept corn, or hen's eggs, or a sandwich at the door, and as for a
cheerful glance of the eye, it is for us the best of minted coin."

(Item: to remember. When a man asks money for any good thing, beware of
it. You can get a better for nothing.)

I cannot undertake to tell where the amusing reflections which grew out
of my idea would finally have led me if I had not been interrupted. Just
as I approached the Patterson farm, near the bridge which crosses the
creek, I saw a loaded wagon standing on the slope of the hill ahead. The
horses seemed to have been unhooked, for the tongue was down, and a man
was on his knees between the front wheels.

Involuntarily I said:

"Another member of my society: and in distress!"

I had a heart at that moment for anything. I felt like some old
neighbourly Knight travelling the earth in search of adventure. If there
had been a distressed mistress handy at that moment, I feel quite
certain I could have died for her--if absolutely necessary.

As I drove alongside, the stocky, stout lad of a farmer in his brown
duck coat lined with sheep's wool, came up from between the wheels. His
cap was awry, his trousers were muddy at the knees where he had knelt in
the moist road, and his face was red and angry.

A true knight, I thought to myself, looks not to the beauty of his lady,
but only to her distress.

"What's the matter, Brother?" I asked in the friendliest manner.

"Bolt gone," he said gruffly, "and I got to get to town before
nightfall."

"Get in," I said, "and we'll drive back. We shall see it in the road."

So he got in. I drove the mare slowly up the hill and we both leaned out
and looked. And presently there in the road the bolt lay. My farmer got
out and picked it up.

"It's all right," he said. "I was afraid it was clean busted. I'm
obliged to you for the lift."

"Hold on," I said, "get in, I'll take you back."

"Oh, I can walk."

"But I can drive you faster," I said, "and you've got to get the load
to town before nightfall."

I could not let him go without taking tribute. No matter what the story
books say, I am firmly of the opinion that no gentle knight (who was
human) ever parted with the fair lady whose misery he had relieved
without exchanging the time of day, or offering her a bun from his
dinner pail, or finding out (for instance) if she were maid or married.

My farmer laughed and got in.

"You see," I said, "when a member of my society is in distress I always
like to help him out."

He paused; I watched him gradually evolve his reply:

"How did you know I was a Mason?"

"Well, I wasn't _sure_."

"I only joined last winter," he said. "I like it first-rate. When you're
a Mason you find friends everywhere."

I had some excellent remarks that I could have made at this point, but
the distance was short and bolts were irresistibly uppermost. After
helping him to put in the bolt, I said:

"Here's the grip of fellowship."

He returned it with a will, but afterward he said doubtfully.

"I didn't feel the grip."

"Didn't you?" I asked. "Well, Brother, it was all there."

"If ever I can do anything for you," he said, "just you let me know.
Name's Forbes, Spring Brook."

And so he drove away.

"A real Mason," I said to myself, "could not have had any better
advantage of his society at this moment than I. I walked right into it
without a grip or a pass. And benefits have also been distributed."

As I drove onward I felt as though anything might happen to me before I
got home. I know now exactly how all old knights, all voyageurs, all
crusaders, all poets in new places, must have felt! I looked out at
every turn of the road; and, finally, after I had grown almost
discouraged of encountering further adventure I saw a man walking in the
road ahead of me. He was much bent over, and carried on his back a bag.

When he heard me coming he stepped out of the road and stood silent,
saving every unnecessary motion, as a weary man will. He neither looked
around nor spoke, but waited for me to go by. He was weary past
expectation. I stopped the mare.

"Get in, Brother," I said; "I am going your way."

He looked at me doubtfully; then, as I moved to one side, he let his bag
roll off his back into his arms. I could see the swollen veins of his
neck; his face had the drawn look of the man who bears burdens.

"Pretty heavy for your buggy," he remarked.

"Heavier for you," I replied.

So he put the bag in the back of my buggy and stepped in beside me
diffidently.

"Pull up the lap robe," I said, "and be comfortable."

"Well, sir, I'm glad of a lift," he remarked. "A bag of seed wheat is
about all a man wants to carry for four miles."

"Aren't you the man who has taken the old Rucker farm?" I asked.

"I'm that man."

"I've been intending to drop in and see you," I said.

"Have you?" he asked eagerly.

"Yes," I said. "I live just across the hills from you, and I had a
notion that we ought to be neighbourly--seeing that we belong to the
same society."

His face, which had worn a look of set discouragement (he didn't know
beforehand what the Rucker place was like!), had brightened up, but when
I spoke of the society it clouded again.

"You must be mistaken," he said. "I'm not a Mason!"

"No more am I," I said.

"Nor an Oddfellow."

"Nor I."

As I looked at the man I seemed to know all about him. Some people come
to us like that, all at once, opening out to some unsuspected key. His
face bore not a few marks of refinement, though work and discouragement
had done their best to obliterate them; his nose was thin and high, his
eye was blue, too blue, and his chin somehow did not go with the Rucker
farm. I knew! A man who in his time had seen many an open door, but who
had found them all closed when he attempted to enter! If any one ever
needed the benefits of my fraternity, he was that man.

"What Society did you think I belonged to?" he asked.

"Well," I said, "when I was in town a man who wanted to sell me a
corn-planter asked me if I was a Mason----"

"Did he ask you that, too?" interrupted my companion.

"He did," I said. "He did----" and I reflected not without enthusiasm
that I had come away without a corn-planter. "And when I drove out of
town I was feeling rather depressed because I wasn't a member of the
lodge."

"Were you?" exclaimed my companion. "So was I. I just felt as though I
had about reached the last ditch. I haven't any money to pay into lodges
and it don't seems if a man could get acquainted and friendly without."

"Farming is rather lonely work sometimes, isn't it?" I observed.

"You bet it is," he responded. "You've been there yourself, haven't
you?"

There may be such a thing as the friendship of prosperity; but surely it
cannot be compared with the friendship of adversity. Men, stooping,
come close together.

"But when I got to thinking it over," I said, "it suddenly occurred to
me that I belonged to the greatest of all fraternities. And I recognized
you instantly as a charter member."

He looked around at me expectantly, half laughing. I don't suppose he
had so far forgotten his miseries for many a day.

"What's that?" he asked.

"The Universal Brotherhood of Men."

Well, we both laughed--and understood.

After that, what a story he told me!--the story of a misplaced man on an
unproductive farm. Is it not marvellous how full people are--all
people--of humour, tragedy, passionate human longings, hopes, fears--if
only you can unloosen the floodgates! As to my companion, he had been
growing bitter and sickly with the pent-up humours of discouragement;
all he needed was a listener.

He was so absorbed in his talk that he did not at first realize that we
had turned into his own long lane. When he discovered it he exclaimed:

"I didn't mean to bring you out of your way. I can manage the bag all
right now."

"Never mind," I said, "I want to get you home, to say nothing of hearing
how you came out with your pigs."

As we approached the house, a mournful-looking woman came to the door.
My companion sprang out of the buggy as much elated now as he had
previously been depressed (for that was the coinage of his temperament),
rushed up to his wife and led her down to the gate. She was evidently
astonished at his enthusiasm. I suppose she thought he had at length
discovered his gold mine!

When I finally turned the mare around, he stopped me, laid his hand on
my arm and said in a confidential voice:

"I'm glad we discovered that we belong to the same society."

As I drove away I could not help chuckling when I heard his wife ask
suspiciously:

"What society is that?"

I heard no word of his answer: only the note in his voice of eager
explanation.

And so I drove homeward in the late twilight, and as I came up the
lane, the door of my home opened, the light within gleamed kindly and
warmly across the darkened yard: and Harriet was there on the step,
waiting.



II


A DAY OF PLEASANT BREAD

They have all gone now, and the house is very still. For the first time
this evening I can hear the familiar sound of the December wind
blustering about the house, complaining at closed doorways, asking
questions at the shutters; but here in my room, under the green reading
lamp, it is warm and still. Although Harriet has closed the doors,
covered the coals in the fireplace, and said good-night, the atmosphere
still seems to tingle with the electricity of genial humanity.

The parting voice of the Scotch Preacher still booms in my ears:

"This," said he, as he was going out of our door, wrapped like an Arctic
highlander in cloaks and tippets, "has been a day of pleasant bread."

One of the very pleasantest I can remember!

I sometimes think we expect too much of Christmas Day. We try to crowd
into it the long arrears of kindliness and humanity of the whole year.
As for me, I like to take my Christmas a little at a time, all through
the year. And thus I drift along into the holidays--let them overtake me
unexpectedly--waking up some fine morning and suddenly saying to myself:

"Why, this is Christmas Day!"

How the discovery makes one bound out of his bed! What a new sense of
life and adventure it imparts! Almost anything may happen on a day like
this--one thinks. I may meet friends I have not seen before in years.
Who knows? I may discover that this is a far better and kindlier world
than I had ever dreamed it could be.

[Illustration: "Merry Christmas, Harriet!"]

So I sing out to Harriet as I go down:

"Merry Christmas, Harriet"--and not waiting for her sleepy reply I go
down and build the biggest, warmest, friendliest fire of the year. Then
I get into my thick coat and mittens and open the back door. All around
the sill, deep on the step, and all about the yard lies the drifted
snow: it has transformed my wood pile into a grotesque Indian mound, and
it frosts the roof of my barn like a wedding cake. I go at it lustily
with my wooden shovel, clearing out a pathway to the gate.

Cold, too; one of the coldest mornings we've had--but clear and very
still. The sun is just coming up over the hill near Horace's farm. From
Horace's chimney the white wood-smoke of an early fire rises straight
upward, all golden with sunshine, into the measureless blue of the
sky--on its way to heaven, for aught I know. When I reach the gate my
blood is racing warmly in my veins. I straighten my back, thrust my
shovel into the snow pile, and shout at the top of my voice, for I can
no longer contain myself:

"Merry Christmas, Harriet."

Harriet opens the door--just a crack.

"Merry Christmas yourself, you Arctic explorer! Oo--but it's cold!"

And she closes the door.

Upon hearing these riotous sounds the barnyard suddenly awakens. I hear
my horse whinnying from the barn, the chickens begin to crow and cackle,
and such a grunting and squealing as the pigs set up from behind the
straw stack, it would do a man's heart good to hear!

"It's a friendly world," I say to myself, "and full of business."

I plow through the snow to the stable door. I scuff and stamp the snow
away and pull it open with difficulty. A cloud of steam arises out of
the warmth within. I step inside. My horse raises his head above the
stanchion, looks around at me, and strikes his forefoot on the stable
floor--the best greeting he has at his command for a fine Christmas
morning. My cow, until now silent, begins to bawl.

I lay my hand on the horse's flank and he steps over in his stall to let
me go by. I slap his neck and he lays back his ears playfully. Thus I go
out into the passageway and give my horse his oats, throw corn and
stalks to the pigs and a handful of grain to Harriet's chickens (it's
the only way to stop the cackling!). And thus presently the barnyard is
quiet again except for the sound of contented feeding.

Take my word for it, this is one of the pleasant moments of life. I
stand and look long at my barnyard family. I observe with satisfaction
how plump they are and how well they are bearing the winter. Then I look
up at my mountainous straw stack with its capping of snow, and my corn
crib with the yellow ears visible through the slats, and my barn with
its mow full of hay--all the gatherings of the year, now being expended
in growth. I cannot at all explain it, but at such moments the circuit
of that dim spiritual battery which each of us conceals within seems to
close, and the full current of contentment flows through our lives.

All the morning as I went about my chores I had a peculiar sense of
expected pleasure. It seemed certain to me that something unusual and
adventurous was about to happen--and if it did not happen offhand, why I
was there to make it happen! When I went in to breakfast (do you know
the fragrance of broiling bacon when you have worked for an hour before
breakfast on a morning of zero weather? If you do not, consider that
heaven still has gifts in store for you!)--when I went in to breakfast,
I fancied that Harriet looked preoccupied, but I was too busy just then
(hot corn muffins) to make an inquiry, and I knew by experience that the
best solvent of secrecy is patience.

"David," said Harriet, presently, "the cousins can't come!"

"Can't come!" I exclaimed.

"Why, you act as if you were delighted."

"No--well, yes," I said, "I knew that some extraordinary adventure was
about to happen!"

"Adventure! It's a cruel disappointment--I was all ready for them."

"Harriet," I said, "adventure is just what we make it. And aren't we to
have the Scotch Preacher and his wife?"

"But I've got such a _good_ dinner."

"Well," I said, "there are no two ways about it: it must be eaten! You
may depend upon me to do my duty."

"We'll have to send out into the highways and compel them to come in,"
said Harriet ruefully.

I had several choice observations I should have liked to make upon this
problem, but Harriet was plainly not listening; she sat with her eyes
fixed reflectively on the coffeepot. I watched her for a moment, then I
remarked:

"There aren't any."

"David," she exclaimed, "how did you know what I was thinking about?"

"I merely wanted to show you," I said, "that my genius is not properly
appreciated in my own household. You thought of highways, didn't you?
Then you thought of the poor; especially the poor on Christmas day; then
of Mrs. Heney, who isn't poor any more, having married John Daniels; and
then I said, 'There aren't any.'"

Harriet laughed.

"It has come to a pretty pass," she said "when there are no poor people
to invite to dinner on Christmas day."

"It's a tragedy, I'll admit," I said, "but let's be logical about it."

"I am willing," said Harriet, "to be as logical as you like."

"Then," I said, "having no poor to invite to dinner we must necessarily
try the rich. That's logical, isn't it?"

"Who?" asked Harriet, which is just like a woman. Whenever you get a
good healthy argument started with her, she will suddenly short-circuit
it, and want to know if you mean Mr. Smith, or Joe Perkins's boys, which
I maintain is _not_ logical.

"Well, there are the Starkweathers," I said.

"David!"

"They're rich, aren't they?"

"Yes, but you know how they live--what dinners they have--and besides,
they probably have a houseful of company."

"Weren't you telling me the other day how many people who were really
suffering were too proud to let anyone know about it? Weren't you
advising the necessity of getting acquainted with people and finding
out--tactfully, of course--you made a point of tact--what the trouble
was?"

"But I was talking of _poor_ people."

"Why shouldn't a rule that is good for poor people be equally as good
for rich people? Aren't they proud?"

"Oh, you can argue," observed Harriet.

"And I can act, too," I said. "I am now going over to invite the
Starkweathers. I heard a rumor that their cook has left them and I
expect to find them starving in their parlour. Of course they'll be very
haughty and proud, but I'll be tactful, and when I go away I'll casually
leave a diamond tiara in the front hall."

"What _is_ the matter with you this morning?"

"Christmas," I said.

I can't tell how pleased I was with the enterprise I had in mind: it
suggested all sorts of amusing and surprising developments. Moreover, I
left Harriet, finally, in the breeziest of spirits, having quite
forgotten her disappointment over the non-arrival of the cousins.

"If you _should_ get the Starkweathers----"

"'In the bright lexicon of youth,'" I observed, "'there is no such word
as fail.'"

So I set off up the town road. A team or two had already been that way
and had broken a track through the snow. The sun was now fully up, but
the air still tingled with the electricity of zero weather. And the
fields! I have seen the fields of June and the fields of October, but I
think I never saw our countryside, hills and valleys, tree spaces and
brook bottoms more enchantingly beautiful than it was this morning. Snow
everywhere--the fences half hidden, the bridges clogged, the trees
laden: where the road was hard it squeaked under my feet, and where it
was soft I strode through the drifts. And the air went to one's head
like wine!

So I tramped past the Pattersons'. The old man, a grumpy old fellow, was
going to the barn with a pail on his arm.

"Merry Christmas," I shouted.

He looked around at me wonderingly and did not reply. At the corners I
met the Newton boys so wrapped in tippets that I could see only their
eyes and the red ends of their small noses. I passed the Williams's
house, where there was a cheerful smoke in the chimney and in the window
a green wreath with a lively red bow. And I thought how happy everyone
must be on a Christmas morning like this! At the hill bridge who should
I meet but the Scotch Preacher himself, God bless him!

"Well, well, David," he exclaimed heartily, "Merry Christmas."

I drew my face down and said solemnly:

"Dr. McAlway, I am on a most serious errand."

"Why, now, what's the matter?" He was all sympathy at once.

"I am out in the highways trying to compel the poor of this
neighbourhood to come to our feast."

The Scotch Preacher observed me with a twinkle in his eye.

"David," he said, putting his hand to his mouth as if to speak in my
ear, "there is a poor man you will na' have to compel."

"Oh, you don't count," I said. "You're coming anyhow."

Then I told him of the errand with our millionaire friends, into the
spirit of which he entered with the greatest zest. He was full of advice
and much excited lest I fail to do a thoroughly competent job. For a
moment I think he wanted to take the whole thing out of my hands.

"Man, man, it's a lovely thing to do," he exclaimed, "but I ha' me
doots--I ha' me doots."

At parting he hesitated a moment, and with a serious face inquired:

"Is it by any chance a goose?"

"It is," I said, "a goose--a big one."

He heaved a sigh of complete satisfaction. "You have comforted my mind,"
he said, "with the joys of anticipation--a goose, a big goose."

So I left him and went onward toward the Starkweathers'. Presently I saw
the great house standing among its wintry trees. There was smoke in the
chimney but no other evidence of life. At the gate my spirits, which had
been of the best all the morning, began to fail me. Though Harriet and I
were well enough acquainted with the Starkweathers, yet at this late
moment on Christmas morning it did seem rather a hair-brained scheme to
think of inviting them to dinner.

"Never mind," I said, "they'll not be displeased to see me anyway."

I waited in the reception-room, which was cold and felt damp. In the
parlour beyond I could see the innumerable things of beauty--furniture,
pictures, books, so very, very much of everything--with which the room
was filled. I saw it now, as I had often seen it before, with a peculiar
sense of weariness. How all these things, though beautiful enough in
themselves, must clutter up a man's life!

Do you know, the more I look into life, the more things it seems to me I
can successfully lack--and continue to grow happier. How many kinds of
food I do not need, nor cooks to cook them, how much curious clothing
nor tailors to make it, how many books that I never read, and pictures
that are not worth while! The farther I run, the more I feel like
casting aside all such impedimenta--lest I fail to arrive at the far
goal of my endeavour.

I like to think of an old Japanese nobleman I once read about, who
ornamented his house with a single vase at a time, living with it,
absorbing its message of beauty, and when he tired of it, replacing it
with another. I wonder if he had the right way, and we, with so many
objects to hang on our walls, place on our shelves, drape on our chairs,
and spread on our floors, have mistaken our course and placed our hearts
upon the multiplicity rather than the quality of our possessions!

Presently Mr. Starkweather appeared in the doorway. He wore a velvet
smoking-jacket and slippers; and somehow, for a bright morning like
this, he seemed old, and worn, and cold.

"Well, well, friend," he said, "I'm glad to see you."

He said it as though he meant it.

"Come into the library; it's the only room in the whole house that is
comfortably warm. You've no idea what a task it is to heat a place like
this in really cold weather. No sooner do I find a man who can run my
furnace than he goes off and leaves me."

"I can sympathize with you," I said, "we often have trouble at our house
with the man who builds the fires."

He looked around at me quizzically.

"He lies too long in bed in the morning," I said.

By this time we had arrived at the library, where a bright fire was
burning in the grate. It was a fine big room, with dark oak furnishings
and books in cases along one wall, but this morning it had a dishevelled
and untidy look. On a little table at one side of the fireplace were the
remains of a breakfast; at the other a number of wraps were thrown
carelessly upon a chair. As I came in Mrs. Starkweather rose from her
place, drawing a silk scarf around her shoulders. She is a robust,
rather handsome woman, with many rings on her fingers, and a pair of
glasses hanging to a little gold hook on her ample bosom; but this
morning she, too, looked worried and old.

"Oh, yes," she said with a rueful laugh, "we're beginning a merry
Christmas, as you see. Think of Christmas with no cook in the house!"

I felt as if I had discovered a gold mine. Poor starving millionaires!

But Mrs. Starkweather had not told the whole of her sorrowful story.

"We had a company of friends invited for dinner to-day," she said, "and
our cook was ill--or said she was--and had to go. One of the maids went
with her. The man who looks after the furnace disappeared on Friday, and
the stableman has been drinking. We can't very well leave the place
without some one who is responsible in charge of it--and so here we are.
Merry Christmas!"

I couldn't help laughing. Poor people!

"You might," I said, "apply for Mrs. Heney's place."

"Who is Mrs. Heney?" asked Mrs. Starkweather.

"You don't mean to say that you never heard of Mrs. Heney!" I exclaimed.
"Mrs. Heney, who is now Mrs. 'Penny' Daniels? You've missed one of our
greatest celebrities."

With that, of course, I had to tell them about Mrs. Heney, who has for
years performed a most important function in this community. Alone and
unaided she has been the poor whom we are supposed to have always with
us. If it had not been for the devoted faithfulness of Mrs. Heney at
Thanksgiving, Christmas and other times of the year, I suppose our
Woman's Aid Society and the King's Daughters would have perished
miserably of undistributed turkeys and tufted comforters. For years Mrs.
Heney filled the place most acceptably. Curbing the natural outpourings
of a rather jovial soul she could upon occasion look as deserving of
charity as any person that ever I met. But I pitied the little Heneys:
it always comes hard on the children. For weeks after every Thanksgiving
and Christmas they always wore a painfully stuffed and suffocated look.
I only came to appreciate fully what a self-sacrificing public servant
Mrs. Heney really was when I learned that she had taken the desperate
alternative of marrying "Penny" Daniels.

"So you think we might possibly aspire to the position?" laughed Mrs.
Starkweather.

Upon this I told them of the trouble in our household and asked them to
come down and help us enjoy Dr. McAlway and the goose.

When I left, after much more pleasant talk, they both came with me to
the door seeming greatly improved in spirits.

"You've given us something to live for, Mr. Grayson," said Mrs.
Starkweather.

So I walked homeward in the highest spirits, and an hour or more later
who should we see in the top of our upper field but Mr. Starkweather and
his wife floundering in the snow. They reached the lane literally
covered from top to toe with snow and both of them ruddy with the cold.

"We walked over," said Mrs. Starkweather breathlessly, "and I haven't
had so much fun in years."

Mr. Starkweather helped her over the fence. The Scotch Preacher stood
on the steps to receive them, and we all went in together.

I can't pretend to describe Harriet's dinner: the gorgeous brown goose,
and the apple sauce, and all the other things that best go with it, and
the pumpkin pie at the end--the finest, thickest, most delicious pumpkin
pie I ever ate in all my life. It melted in one's mouth and brought
visions of celestial bliss. And I wish I could have a picture of Harriet
presiding. I have never seen her happier, or more in her element. Every
time she brought in a new dish or took off a cover it was a sort of
miracle. And her coffee--but I must not and dare not elaborate.

And what great talk we had afterward!

I've known the Scotch Preacher for a long time, but I never saw him in
quite such a mood of hilarity. He and Mr. Starkweather told stories of
their boyhood--and we laughed, and laughed--Mrs. Starkweather the most
of all. Seeing her so often in her carriage, or in the dignity of her
home, I didn't think she had so much jollity in her. Finally she
discovered Harriet's cabinet organ, and nothing would do but she must
sing for us.

"None of the new-fangled ones, Clara," cried her husband: "some of the
old ones we used to know."

So she sat herself down at the organ and threw her head back and began
to sing:

"Believe me, if all those endearing young charms,
  Which I gaze on so fondly to-day----,"

Mr. Starkweather jumped up and ran over to the organ and joined in with
his deep voice. Harriet and I followed. The Scotch Preacher's wife
nodded in time with the music, and presently I saw the tears in her
eyes. As for Dr. McAlway, he sat on the edge of his chair with his hands
on his knees and wagged his shaggy head, and before we got through he,
too, joined in with his big sonorous voice:

"Thou wouldst still be adored as this moment thou art----,"

Oh, I can't tell here--it grows late and there's work to-morrow--all the
things we did and said. They stayed until it was dark, and when Mrs.
Starkweather was ready to go, she took both of Harriet's hands in hers
and said with great earnestness:

"I haven't had such a good time at Christmas since I was a little girl.
I shall never forget it."

And the dear old Scotch Preacher, when Harriet and I had wrapped him up,
went out, saying:

"This has been a day of pleasant bread."

It has; it has. I shall not soon forget it. What a lot of kindness and
common human nature--childlike simplicity, if you will--there is in
people once you get them down together and persuade them that the things
they think serious are not serious at all.



III


THE OPEN ROAD

"To make space for wandering is it that the world was made so wide."

--GOETHE, _Wilhelm Meister_.

I love sometimes to have a day alone--a riotous day. Sometimes I do not
care to see even my best friends: but I give myself up to the full
enjoyment of the world around me. I go out of my door in the
morning--preferably a sunny morning, though any morning will do well
enough--and walk straight out into the world. I take with me the burden
of no duty or responsibility. I draw in the fresh air, odour-laden from
orchard and wood. I look about me as if everything were new--and behold
everything _is_ new. My barn, my oaks, my fences--I declare I never saw
them before. I have no preconceived impressions, or beliefs, or
opinions. My lane fence is the end of the known earth. I am a discoverer
of new fields among old ones. I see, feel, hear, smell, taste all these
wonderful things for the first time. I have no idea what discoveries I
shall make!

So I go down the lane, looking up and about me. I cross the town road
and climb the fence on the other side. I brush one shoulder among the
bushes as I pass: I feel the solid yet easy pressure of the sod. The
long blades of the timothy-grass clasp at my legs and let go with
reluctance. I break off a twig here and there and taste the tart or
bitter sap. I take off my hat and let the warm sun shine on my head. I
am an adventurer upon a new earth.

Is it not marvellous how far afield some of us are willing to travel in
pursuit of that beauty which we leave behind us at home? We mistake
unfamiliarity for beauty; we darken our perceptions with idle
foreignness. For want of that ardent inner curiosity which is the only
true foundation for the appreciation of beauty--for beauty is inward,
not outward--we find ourselves hastening from land to land, gathering
mere curious resemblances which, like unassimilated property, possess no
power of fecundation. With what pathetic diligence we collect peaks and
passes in Switzerland; how we come laden from England with vain
cathedrals!

Beauty? What is it but a new way of approach? For wilderness, for
foreignness, I have no need to go a mile: I have only to come up through
my thicket or cross my field from my own roadside--and behold, a new
heaven and a new earth!

Things grow old and stale, not because they are old, but because we
cease to see them. Whole vibrant significant worlds around us disappear
within the sombre mists of familiarity. Whichever way we look the roads
are dull and barren. There is a tree at our gate we have not seen in
years: a flower blooms in our door-yard more wonderful than the shining
heights of the Alps!

It has seemed to me sometimes as though I could see men hardening before
my eyes, drawing in a feeler here, walling up an opening there. Naming
things! Objects fall into categories for them and wear little sure
channels in the brain. A mountain is a mountain, a tree a tree to them,
a field forever a field. Life solidifies itself in words. And finally
how everything wearies them and that is old age!

Is it not the prime struggle of life to keep the mind plastic? To see
and feel and hear things newly? To accept nothing as settled; to defend
the eternal right of the questioner? To reject every conclusion of
yesterday before the surer observations of to-day?--is not that the best
life we know?

And so to the Open Road! Not many miles from my farm there is a tamarack
swamp. The soft dark green of it fills the round bowl of a valley.
Around it spread rising forests and fields; fences divide it from the
known land. Coming across my fields one day, I saw it there. I felt the
habit of avoidance. It is a custom, well enough in a practical land, to
shun such a spot of perplexity; but on that day I was following the Open
Road, and it led me straight to the moist dark stillness of the
tamaracks. I cannot here tell all the marvels I found in that place. I
trod where human foot had never trod before. Cobwebs barred my passage
(the bars to most passages when we came to them are only cobwebs), the
earth was soft with the thick swamp mosses, and with many an autumn of
fallen dead, brown leaves. I crossed the track of a muskrat, I saw the
nest of a hawk--and how, how many other things of the wilderness I must
not here relate. And I came out of it renewed and refreshed; I know now
the feeling of the pioneer and the discoverer. Peary has no more than I;
Stanley tells me nothing I have not experienced!

What more than that is the accomplishment of the great inventor, poet,
painter? Such cannot abide habit-hedged wildernesses. They follow the
Open Road, they see for themselves, and will not accept the paths or the
names of the world. And Sight, kept clear, becomes, curiously, Insight.
A thousand had seen apples fall before Newton. But Newton was dowered
with the spirit of the Open Road!

Sometimes as I walk, seeking to see, hear, feel, everything newly, I
devise secret words for the things I see: words that convey to me alone
the thought, or impression, or emotion of a peculiar spot. All this, I
know, to some will seem the acme of foolish illusion. Indeed, I am not
telling of it because it is practical; there is no cash at the end of
it. I am reporting it as an experience in life; those who understand
will understand. And thus out of my journeys I have words which bring
back to me with indescribable poignancy the particular impression of a
time or a place. I prize them more highly than almost any other of my
possessions, for they come to me seemingly out of the air, and the
remembrance of them enables me to recall or live over a past experience
with scarcely diminished emotion.

And one of these words--how it brings to me the very mood of a gray
October day! A sleepy west wind blowing. The fields are bare, the corn
shocks brown, and the long road looks flat and dull. Away in the marsh I
hear a single melancholy crow. A heavy day, namelessly sad! Old sorrows
flock to one's memory and old regrets. The creeper is red in the swamp
and the grass is brown on the hill. It comes to me that I was a boy
once----

So to the flat road and away! And turn at the turning and rise with the
hill. Will the mood change: will the day? I see a lone man in the top of
a pasture crying "Coo-ee, coo-ee." I do not see at first why he cries
and then over the hill come the ewes, a dense gray flock of them,
huddling toward me. The yokel behind has a stick in each hand. "Coo-ee,
coo-ee," he also cries. And the two men, gathering in, threatening,
sidling, advancing slowly, the sheep turning uncertainly this way and
that, come at last to the boarded pen.

"That's the idee," says the helper.

"A poor lot," remarks the leader: "such is the farmer's life."

From the roadway they back their frame-decked wagon to the fence and
unhook their team. The leader throws off his coat and stands thick and
muscular in his blue jeans--a roistering fellow with a red face, thick
neck and chapped hands.

"I'll pass 'em up," he says; "that's a man's work. You stand in the
wagon and put 'em in."

So he springs into the yard and the sheep huddle close into the corner,
here and there raising a timid head, here and there darting aside in a
panic.

"Hi there, it's for you," shouts the leader, and thrusts his hands deep
in the wool of one of the ewes.

"Come up here, you Southdown with the bare belly," says the man in the
wagon.

"That's my old game--wrastling," the leader remarks, struggling with the
next ewe. "Stiddy, stiddy, now I got you, up with you dang you!"

"That's the idee," says the man in the wagon.

So I watch and they pass up the sheep one by one and as I go down the
road I hear the leader's thick voice, "Stiddy, stiddy," and the response
of the other, "That's the idee." And so on into the gray day!

My Open Road leads not only to beauty, not only to fresh adventures in
outer observation. I believe in the Open Road in religion, in education,
in politics: there is nothing really settled, fenced in, nor finally
decided upon this earth, Nothing that is not questionable. I do not
mean that I would immediately tear down well-built fences or do away
with established and beaten roads. By no means. The wisdom of past ages
is likely to be wiser than any hasty conclusions of mine. I would not
invite any other person to follow my road until I had well proven it a
better way toward truth than that which time had established. And yet I
would have every man tread the Open Road; I would have him upon occasion
question the smuggest institution and look askance upon the most ancient
habit. I would have him throw a doubt upon Newton and defy Darwin! I
would have him look straight at men and nature with his own eyes. He
should acknowledge no common gods unless he proved them gods for
himself. The "equality of men" which we worship: is there not a higher
inequality? The material progress which we deify: is it real progress?
Democracy--is it after all better than monarchy? I would have him
question the canons of art, literature, music, morals: so will he
continue young and useful!

And yet sometimes I ask myself. What do I travel for? Why all this
excitement and eagerness of inquiry? What is it that I go forth to
find? Am I better for keeping my roads open than my neighbour is who
travels with contentment the paths of ancient habit? I am gnawed by the
tooth of unrest--to what end? Often as I travel I ask myself that
question and I have never had a convincing answer. I am looking for
something I cannot find. My Open Road is open, too, at the end! What is
it that drives a man onward, that scourges him with unanswered
questions! We only know that we are driven; we do not know who drives.
We travel, we inquire, we look, we work--only knowing that these
activities satisfy a certain deep and secret demand within us. We have
Faith that there is a Reason: and is there not a present Joy in
following the Open Road?

"And O the joy that is never won,
But follows and follows the journeying sun."

And at the end of the day the Open Road, if we follow it with wisdom as
well as fervour, will bring us safely home again. For after all the Open
Road must return to the Beaten Path. The Open Road is for adventure;
and adventure is not the food of life, but the spice.

Thus I came back this evening from rioting in my fields. As I walked
down the lane I heard the soft tinkle of a cowbell, a certain earthy
exhalation, as of work, came out of the bare fields, the duties of my
daily life crowded upon me bringing a pleasant calmness of spirit, and I
said to myself:

"Lord be praised for that which is common."

And after I had done my chores I came in, hungry, to my supper.



IV


ON BEING WHERE YOU BELONG

Sunday Morning, May 20th.

On Friday I began planting my corn. For many days previously I went out
every morning at sun-up, in the clear, sharp air, and thrust my hand
deep down in the soil of the field. I do not know that I followed any
learned agricultural rule, but somehow I liked to do it. It has seemed
reasonable to me, instead of watching for a phase of the moon (for I do
not cultivate the moon), to inquire of the earth itself. For many days I
had no response; the soil was of an icy, moist coldness, as of death.
"I am not ready yet," it said; "I have not rested my time."

Early in the week we had a day or two of soft sunshine, of fecund
warmth, to which the earth lay open, willing, passive. On Thursday
morning, though a white frost silvered the harrow ridges, when I thrust
my hand into the soil I felt, or seemed to feel, a curious response: a
strange answering of life to life. The stone had been rolled from the
sepulchre!

And I knew then that the destined time had arrived for my planting. That
afternoon I marked out my corn-field, driving the mare to my home-made
wooden marker, carefully observant of the straightness of the rows; for
a crooked corn-row is a sort of immorality. I brought down my seed corn
from the attic, where it had hung waiting all winter, each ear suspended
separately by the white, up-turned husks. They were the selected ears of
last year's crop, even of size throughout, smooth of kernel, with tips
well-covered--the perfect ones chosen among many to perpetuate the
highest excellencies of the crop. I carried them to the shed next my
barn, and shelled them out in my hand machine: as fine a basket of
yellow dent seed as a man ever saw. I have listened to endless
discussions as to the relative merits of flint and dent corn. I here
cast my vote emphatically for yellow dent: it is the best Nature can do!

I found my seed-bag hanging, dusty, over a rafter in the shed, and
Harriet sewed a buckle on the strip that goes around the waist. I
cleaned and sharpened my hoe.

"Now," I said to myself, "give me a good day and I am ready to plant."

The sun was just coming up on Friday, looking over the trees into a
world of misty and odorous freshness. When I climbed the fence I dropped
down in the grass at the far corner of the field. I had looked forward
this year with pleasure to the planting of a small field by hand--the
adventure of it--after a number of years of horse planting (with
Horace's machine) of far larger fields. There is an indescribable
satisfaction in answering, "Present!" to the roll-call of Nature; to
plant when the earth is ready, to cultivate when the soil begins to bake
and harden, to harvest when the grain is fully ripe. It is the chief
joy of him who lives close to the soil that he comes, in time, to beat
in consonance with the pulse of the earth; its seasons become his
seasons; its life his life.

Behold me, then, with a full seed-bag suspended before me, buckled both
over the shoulders and around the waist, a shiny hoe in my hand (the
scepter of my dominion), a comfortable, rested feeling in every muscle
of my body, standing at the end of the first long furrow there in my
field on Friday morning--a whole spring day open before me! At that
moment I would not have changed my place for the place of any king,
prince, or president.

At first I was awkward enough, for it has been a long time since I have
done much hand planting; but I soon fell into the rhythmic swing of the
sower, the sure, even, accurate step; the turn of the body and the
flexing of the wrists as the hoe strikes downward; the deftly hollowed
hole; the swing of the hand to the seed-bag; the sure fall of the
kernels; the return of the hoe; the final determining pressure of the
soil upon the seed. One falls into it and follows it as he would follow
the rhythm of a march.

Even the choice of seed becomes automatic, instinctive. At first there
is a conscious counting by the fingers--five seeds:

One for the blackbird,
One for the crow,
One for the cutworm,
Two to grow.

But after a time one ceases to count five, and _feels_ five,
instinctively rejecting a monstrous six, or returning to complete an
inferior four.

I wonder if you know the feel of the fresh, soft soil, as it answers to
your steps, giving a little, responding a little (as life always
does)--and is there not something endlessly good and pleasant about it?
And the movement of the arms and shoulders, falling easily into that
action and reaction which yields the most service to the least energy!
Scientists tell us that the awkward young eagle has a wider wing-stretch
than the old, skilled eagle. So the corn planter, at noon, will do his
work with half the expended energy of the early morning: he attains the
artistry of motion. And quite beyond and above this physical
accomplishment is the ever-present, scarcely conscious sense of reward,
repayment, which one experiences as he covers each planting of seeds.

As the sun rose higher the mists stole secretly away, first toward the
lower brook-hollows, finally disappearing entirely; the morning coolness
passed, the tops of the furrows dried out to a lighter brown, and still
I followed the long planting. At each return I refilled my seed-bag, and
sometimes I drank from the jug of water which I had hidden in the grass.
Often I stood a moment by the fence to look up and around me. Through
the clear morning air I could hear the roosters crowing vaingloriously
from the barnyard, and the robins were singing, and occasionally from
the distant road I heard the rumble of a wagon. I noted the slow kitchen
smoke from Horace's chimney, the tip of which I could just see over the
hill from the margin of my field--and my own pleasant home among its
trees--and my barn--all most satisfying to look upon. Then I returned to
the sweat and heat of the open field, and to the steady swing of the
sowing.

[Illustration: "OFTEN I STOOD A MOMENT BY THE FENCE"]

Joy of life seems to me to arise from a sense of being where one
belongs, as I feel right here; of being foursquare with the life we have
chosen. All the discontented people I know are trying sedulously to be
something they are not, to do something they cannot do. In the
advertisements of the country paper I find men angling for money by
promising to make women beautiful and men learned or rich--overnight--by
inspiring good farmers and carpenters to be poor doctors and lawyers. It
is curious, is it not, with what skill we will adapt our sandy land to
potatoes and grow our beans in clay, and with how little wisdom we farm
the soils of our own natures. We try to grow poetry where plumbing would
thrive grandly!--not knowing that plumbing is as important and
honourable and necessary to this earth as poetry.

I understand it perfectly; I too, followed long after false gods. I
thought I must rush forth to see the world, I must forthwith become
great, rich, famous; and I hurried hither and thither, seeking I knew
not what. Consuming my days with the infinite distractions of travel, I
missed, as one who attempts two occupations at once, the sure
satisfaction of either. Beholding the exteriors of cities and of men, I
was deceived with shadows; my life took no hold upon that which is deep
and true. Colour I got, and form, and a superficial aptitude in judging
by symbols. It was like the study of a science: a hasty review gives one
the general rules, but it requires a far profounder insight to know the
fertile exceptions.

But as I grow older I remain here on my farm, and wait quietly for the
world to pass this way. My oak and I, we wait, and we are satisfied.
Here we stand among our clods; our feet are rooted deep within the soil.
The wind blows upon us and delights us, the rain falls and refreshes us,
the sun dries and sweetens us. We are become calm, slow, strong; so we
measure rectitudes and regard essentials, my oak and I.

I would be a hard person to dislodge or uproot from this spot of earth.
I belong here; I grow here. I like to think of the old fable of the
wrestler of Irassa. For I am veritably that Anteus who was the wrestler
of Irassa and drew his strength from the ground. So long as I tread the
long furrows of my planting, with my feet upon the earth, I am
invincible and unconquerable. Hercules himself, though he comes upon me
in the guise of Riches, or Fame, or Power, cannot overthrow me--save as
he takes me away from this soil. For at each step my strength is
renewed. I forget weariness, old age has no dread for me.

Some there may be who think I talk dreams; they do not know reality. My
friend, did it ever occur to you that you are unhappy because you have
lost connection with life? Because your feet are not somewhere firm
planted upon the soil of reality? Contentment, and indeed usefulness,
comes as the infallible result of great acceptances, great
humilities--of not trying to make ourselves this or that (to conform to
some dramatized version of ourselves), but of surrendering ourselves to
the fullness of life--of letting life flow through us. To be used!--that
is the sublimest thing we know.

It is a distinguishing mark of greatness that it has a tremendous hold
upon real things. I have seen men who seemed to have behind them, or
rather within them, whole societies, states, institutions: how they
come at us, like Atlas bearing the world! For they act not with their
own feebleness, but with a strength as of the Whole of Life. They speak,
and the words are theirs, but the voice is the Voice of Mankind.

I don't know what to call it: being right with God or right with life.
It is strangely the same thing; and God is not particular as to the name
we know him by, so long as we know Him. Musing upon these secret things,
I seem to understand what the theologians in their darkness have made so
obscure. Is it not just this at-one-moment with life which sweetens and
saves us all?

In all these writings I have glorified the life of the soil until I am
ashamed. I have loved it because it saved me. The farm for me, I decided
long ago, is the only place where I can flow strongly and surely. But to
you, my friend, life may present a wholly different aspect, variant
necessities. Knowing what I have experienced in the city, I have
sometimes wondered at the happy (even serene) faces I have seen in
crowded streets. There must be, I admit, those who can flow and be at
one with that life, too. And let them handle their money, and make
shoes, and sew garments, and write in ledgers--if that completes and
contents them. I have no quarrel with any one of them. It is, after all,
a big and various world, where men can be happy in many ways.

For every man is a magnet, highly and singularly sensitized. Some draw
to them fields and woods and hills, and are drawn in return; and some
draw swift streets and the riches which are known to cities. It is not
of importance what we draw, but that we really draw. And the greatest
tragedy in life, as I see it, is that thousands of men and women never
have the opportunity to draw with freedom; but they exist in weariness
and labour, and are drawn upon like inanimate objects by those who live
in unhappy idleness. They do not farm: they are farmed. But that is a
question foreign to present considerations. We may be assured, if we
draw freely, like the magnet of steel which gathers its iron filings
about it in beautiful and symmetrical forms, that the things which we
attract will also become symmetrical and harmonious with our lives.

Thus flowing with life, self-surrendering to life a man becomes
indispensable to life, he is absolutely necessary to the conduct of
this universe. And it is the feeling of being necessary, of being
desired, flowing into a man that produces the satisfaction of
contentment. Often and often I think to myself:

These fields have need of me; my horse whinnies when he hears my step;
my dog barks a welcome. These, my neighbours, are glad of me. The corn
comes up fresh and green to my planting; my buckwheat bears richly. I am
indispensable in this place. What is more satisfactory to the human
heart than to be needed and to know we are needed? One line in the Book
of Chronicles, when I read it, flies up at me out of the printed page as
though it were alive, conveying newly the age-old agony of a misplaced
man. After relating the short and evil history of Jehoram, King of
Judah, the account ends--with the appalling terseness which often crowns
the dramatic climaxes of that matchless writing:

"And (he) departed without being desired."

Without being desired! I have wondered if any man was ever cursed with a
more terrible epitaph!

And so I planted my corn; and in the evening I felt the dumb weariness
of physical toil. Many times in older days I have known the wakeful
nerve-weariness of cities. This was not it. It was the weariness which,
after supper, seizes upon one's limbs with half-aching numbness. I sat
down on my porch with a nameless content. I looked off across the
countryside. I saw the evening shadows fall, and the moon come up. And I
wanted nothing I had not. And finally sleep swept in resistless waves
upon me and I stumbled up to bed--and sank into dreamless slumber.



V


THE STORY OF ANNA

It is the prime secret of the Open Road (but I may here tell it aloud)
that you are to pass nothing, reject nothing, despise nothing upon this
earth. As you travel, many things both great and small will come to your
attention; you are to regard all with open eyes and a heart of
simplicity. Believe that everything belongs somewhere; each thing has
its fitting and luminous place within this mosaic of human life. The
True Road is not open to those who withdraw the skirts of intolerance or
lift the chin of pride. Rejecting the least of those who are called
common or unclean, it is (curiously) you yourself that you reject. If
you despise that which is ugly you do not know that which is beautiful.
For what is beauty but completeness? The roadside beggar belongs here,
too; and the idiot boy who wanders idly in the open fields; and the girl
who withholds (secretly) the name of the father of her child.

       *       *       *       *       *

I remember as distinctly as though it happened yesterday the particular
evening three years ago when I saw the Scotch Preacher come hurrying up
the road toward my house. It was June. I had come out after supper to
sit on my porch and look out upon the quiet fields. I remember the
grateful cool of the evening air, and the scents rising all about me
from garden and roadway and orchard. I was tired after the work of the
day and sat with a sort of complete comfort and contentment which comes
only to those who work long in the quiet of outdoor places. I remember
the thought came to me, as it has come in various forms so many times,
that in such a big and beautiful world there should be no room for the
fever of unhappiness or discontent.

And then I saw McAlway coming up the road. I knew instantly that
something was wrong. His step, usually so deliberate, was rapid; there
was agitation in every line of his countenance. I walked down through
the garden to the gate and met him there. Being somewhat out of breath
he did not speak at once. So I said:

"It is not, after all, as bad as you anticipate."

"David," he said, and I think I never heard him speak more seriously,
"it is bad enough."

He laid his hand on my arm.

"Can you hitch up your horse and come with me--right away?"

McAlway helped with the buckles and said not a word. In ten minutes,
certainly not more, we were driving together down the lane.

"Do you know a family named Williams living on the north road beyond the
three corners?" asked the Scotch Preacher.

Instantly a vision of a somewhat dilapidated house, standing not
unpicturesquely among ill-kept fields, leaped to my mind.

"Yes," I said; "but I can't remember any of the family except a gingham
girl with yellow hair. I used to see her on her way to school,''

"A girl!" he said, with a curious note in his voice; "but a woman now."

He paused a moment; then he continued sadly:

"As I grow older it seems a shorter and shorter step between child and
child. David, she has a child of her own,''

"But I didn't know--she isn't--"

"A woods child," said the Scotch Preacher.

I could not find a word to say. I remember the hush of the evening there
in the country road, the soft light fading in the fields. I heard a
whippoorwill calling from the distant woods.

"They made it hard for her," said the Scotch Preacher, "especially her
older brother. About four o'clock this afternoon she ran away, taking
her baby with her. They found a note saying they would never again see
her alive. Her mother says she went toward the river."

I touched up the mare. For a few minutes the Scotch Preacher sat silent,
thinking. Then he said, with a peculiar tone of kindness in his voice.

"She was a child, just a child. When I talked with her yesterday she
was perfectly docile and apparently contented. I cannot imagine her
driven to such a deed of desperation. I asked her: 'Why did you do it,
Anna?' She answered, 'I don't know: I--I don't know!' Her reply was not
defiant or remorseful: it was merely explanatory."

He remained silent again for a long time.

"David," he said finally, "I sometimes think we don't know half as much
about human nature as we--we preach. If we did, I think we'd be more
careful in our judgments."

He said it slowly, tentatively: I knew it came straight from his heart.
It was this spirit, more than the title he bore, far more than the
sermons he preached, that made him in reality the minister of our
community. He went about thinking that, after all, he didn't know much,
and that therefore he must be kind.

As I drove up to the bridge, the Scotch Preacher put one hand on the
reins. I stopped the horse on the embankment and we both stepped out.

"She would undoubtedly have come down this road to the river," McAlway
said in a low voice.

It was growing dark. When I walked out on the bridge my legs were
strangely unsteady; a weight seemed pressing on my breast so that my
breath came hard. We looked down into the shallow, placid water: the
calm of the evening was upon it; the middle of the stream was like a
rumpled glassy ribbon, but the edges, deep-shaded by overhanging trees,
were of a mysterious darkness. In all my life I think I never
experienced such a degree of silence--of breathless, oppressive silence.
It seemed as if, at any instant, it must burst into some fearful excess
of sound.

Suddenly we heard a voice--in half-articulate exclamation. I turned,
every nerve strained to the uttermost. A figure, seemingly materialized
out of darkness and silence, was moving on the bridge.

"Oh!--McAlway," a voice said.

Then I heard the Scotch Preacher in low tones.

"Have you seen Anna Williams?"

"She is at the house," answered the voice.

"Get your horse," said the Scotch Preacher.

I ran back and led the mare across the bridge (how I remember, in that
silence, the thunder of her hoofs on the loose boards!) Just at the top
of the little hill leading up from the bridge the two men turned in at a
gate. I followed quickly and the three of us entered the house together.
I remember the musty, warm, shut-in odour of the front room. I heard the
faint cry of a child. The room was dim, with a single kerosene lamp, but
I saw three women huddled by the stove, in which a new fire was blazing.
Two looked up as we entered, with feminine instinct moving aside to hide
the form of the third.

"She's all right, as soon as she gets dry," one of them said.

The other woman turned to us half complainingly:

"She ain't said a single word since we got her in here, and she won't
let go of the baby for a minute."

"She don't cry," said the other, "but just sits there like a statue."

McAlway stepped forward and said:

"Well--Anna?"

The girl looked up for the first time. The light shone full in her face:
a look I shall never forget. Yes, it was the girl I had seen so often,
and yet not the girl. It was the same childish face, but all marked upon
with inexplicable wan lines of a certain mysterious womanhood. It was
childish, but bearing upon it an inexpressible look of half-sad dignity,
that stirred a man's heart to its profoundest depths. And there was in
it, too, as I have thought since, a something I have seen in the faces
of old, wise men: a light (how shall I explain it?) as of experience--of
boundless experience. Her hair hung in wavy dishevelment about her head
and shoulders, and she clung passionately to the child in her arms.

The Scotch Preacher had said, "Well--Anna?" She looked up and replied:

"They were going to take my baby away."

"Were they!" exclaimed McAlway in his hearty voice. "Well, we'll never
permit _that_. Who's got a better right to the baby than you, I'd like
to know?"

Without turning her head, the tears came to her eyes and rolled
unheeded down her face.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Yes, sir, Dr. McAlway," the man said, "I was coming across the bridge
with the cows when I see her standing there in the water, her skirts all
floating around her. She was hugging the baby up to her face and saying
over and over, just like this: 'I don't dare! Oh, I don't dare! But I
must. I must,' She was sort of singin' the words: 'I don't dare, I don't
dare, but I must.' I jumped the railing and run down to the bank of the
river. And I says, 'Come right out o' there'; and she turned and come
out just as gentle as a child, and I brought her up here to the house."

       *       *       *       *       *

It seemed perfectly natural at this time that I should take the girl and
her child home to Harriet. She would not go back to her own home, though
we tried to persuade her, and the Scotch Preacher's wife was visiting in
the city, so she could not go there. But after I found myself driving
homeward with the girl--while McAlway went over the hill to tell her
family--the mood of action passed. It struck me suddenly, "What will
Harriet say?" Upon which my heart sank curiously, and refused to resume
its natural position.

In the past I had brought her tramps and peddlers and itinerant
preachers, all of whom she had taken in with patience--but this, I knew,
was different. For a few minutes I wished devoutly I were in Timbuctu or
some other far place. And then the absurdity of the situation struck me
all at once, and I couldn't help laughing aloud.

"It's a tremendous old world," I said to myself. "Why, anything may
happen anywhere!"

The girl stirred, but did not speak. I was afraid I had frightened her.

"Are you cold?" I asked.

"No, sir," she answered faintly.

I could think of nothing whatever to say, so I said it:

"Are you fond of hot corn-meal mush?"

"Yes, sir," very faintly.

"With cream on it--rich yellow cream--and plenty of sugar?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, I'll bet a nickel that's what we're going to get!"

"Yes, sir."

We drove up the lane and stopped at the yard gate. Harriet opened the
door. I led the small dark figure into the warmth and light of the
kitchen. She stood helplessly holding the baby tight in her arms--as
forlorn and dishevelled a figure as one could well imagine.

"Harriet," I said, "this is Anna Williams."

Harriet gave me her most tremendous look. It seemed to me at that moment
that it wasn't my sister Harriet at all that I was facing, but some
stranger and much greater person than I had ever known. Every man has,
upon occasion, beheld his wife, his sister, his mother even, become
suddenly unknown, suddenly commanding, suddenly greater than himself or
any other man. For a woman possesses the occult power of becoming
instantly, miraculously, the Accumulated and Personified Customs, Morals
and Institutions of the Ages. At this moment, then, I felt myself slowly
but surely shrinking and shriveling up. It is a most uncomfortable
sensation to find one's self face to face with Society-at-Large. Under
such circumstances I always know what to do. I run. So I clapped my hat
on my head, declared that the mare must be unharnessed immediately, and
started for the door. Harriet followed. Once outside she closed the door
behind her.

"David, _David_, DAVID," she said.

It occurred to me now for the first time (which shows how stupid I am)
that Harriet had already heard the story of Anna Williams. And it had
gained so much bulk and robustity in travelling, as such stories do in
the country, that I have no doubt the poor child seemed a sort of
devastating monster of iniquity. How the country scourges those who do
not walk the beaten path! In the, careless city such a one may escape to
unfamiliar streets and consort with unfamiliar people, and still find a
way of life, but here in the country the eye of Society never sleeps!

For a moment I was appalled by what I had done. Then I thought of the
Harriet I knew so well: the inexhaustible heart of her. With a sudden
inspiration I opened the kitchen door and we both looked in. The girl
stood motionless just where I left her: an infinitely pathetic figure.

"Harriet," I said, "that girl is hungry--and cold."

Well, it worked. Instantly Harriet ceased to be Society-at-Large and
became the Harriet I know, the Harriet of infinite compassion for all
weak creatures. When she had gone in I pulled my hat down and went
straight for the barn. I guess I know when it's wise to be absent from
places.

I unharnessed the mare, and watered and fed her; I climbed up into the
loft and put down a rackful of hay; I let the cows out into the pasture
and set up the bars. And then I stood by the gate and looked up into the
clear June sky. No man, I think, can remain long silent under the stars,
with the brooding, mysterious night around about him, without feeling,
poignantly, how little he understands anything, how inconsequential his
actions are, how feeble his judgments.

And I thought as I stood there how many a man, deep down in his heart,
knows to a certainty that he has escaped being an outcast, not because
of any real moral strength or resolution of his own, but because Society
has bolstered him up, hedged him about with customs and restrictions
until he never has had a really good opportunity to transgress. And some
do not sin for very lack of courage and originality: they are helplessly
good. How many men in their vanity take to themselves credit for the
built-up virtues of men who are dead! There is no cause for surprise
when we hear of a "foremost citizen," the "leader in all good works,"
suddenly gone wrong; not the least cause for surprise. For it was not he
that was moral, but Society. Individually he had never been tested, and
when the test came he fell. It will give us a large measure of true
wisdom if we stop sometimes when we have resisted a temptation and ask
ourselves why, at that moment, we did right and not wrong. Was it the
deep virtue, the high ideals in our souls, or was it the compulsion of
the Society around us? And I think most of us will be astonished to
discover what fragile persons we really are--in ourselves.

I stopped for several minutes at the kitchen door before I dared to go
in. Then I stamped vigorously on the boards, as if I had come rushing up
to the house without a doubt in my mind--I even whistled--and opened the
door jauntily. And had my pains for nothing!

The kitchen was empty, but full of comforting and homelike odours. There
was undoubtedly hot mush in the kettle. A few minutes later Harriet came
down the stairs. She held up one finger warningly. Her face was
transfigured.

"David," she whispered, "the baby's asleep."

So I tiptoed across the room. She tiptoed after me. Then I faced about,
and we both stood there on our tiptoes, holding our breath--at least I
held mine.

"David," Harriet whispered, "did you see the baby?"

"No," I whispered.

"I think it's the finest baby I ever saw in my life."

When I was a boy, and my great-aunt, who lived for many years in a
little room with dormer windows at the top of my father's house, used
to tell me stories (the best I ever heard), I was never content with the
endings of them. "What happened next?" I remember asking a hundred
times; and if I did not ask the question aloud it arose at least in my
own mind.

If I were writing fiction I might go on almost indefinitely with the
story of Anna; but in real life stories have a curious way of coming to
quick fruition, and withering away after having cast the seeds of their
immortality.

"Did you see the baby?" Harriet had asked. She said no word about Anna:
a BABY had come into the world. Already the present was beginning to
draw the charitable curtains of its forgetfulness across this simple
drama; already Harriet and Anna and all the rest of us were beginning to
look to the "finest baby we ever saw in all our lives."

I might, indeed, go into the character of Anna and the whys and
wherefores of her story; but there is curiously little that is strange
or unusual about it. It was just Life. A few days with us worked
miraculous changes in the girl; like some stray kitten brought in
crying from the cold, she curled herself up comfortably there in our
home, purring her contentment. She was not in the least a tragic figure:
though down deep under the curves and dimples of youth there was
something finally resistant, or obstinate, or defiant--which kept its
counsel regarding the past.

It is curious how acquaintanceship mitigates our judgments. We classify
strangers into whose careers the newspapers or our friends give us
glimpses as "bad" or "good"; we separate humanity into inevitable
goathood and sheephood. But upon closer acquaintance a man comes to be
not bad, but Ebenezer Smith or J. Henry Jones; and a woman is not good,
but Nellie Morgan or Mrs. Arthur Cadwalader. Take it in our own cases.
Some people, knowing just a little about us, might call us pretty good
people; but we know that down in our hearts lurk the possibilities (if
not the actual accomplishment) of all sorts of things not at all good.
We are exceedingly charitable persons--toward ourselves. And thus we let
other people live!

The other day, at Harriet's suggestion, I drove to town by the upper
road, passing the Williams place. The old lady has a passion for
hollyhocks. A ragged row of them borders the dilapidated picket fence
behind which, crowding up to the sociable road, stands the house. As I
drive that way it always seems to look out at me like some half-earnest
worker, inviting a chat about the weather or the county fair; hence,
probably, its good-natured dilapidation. At the gate I heard a voice,
and a boy about three years old, in a soiled gingham apron, a sturdy,
blue-eyed little chap, whose face was still eloquent of his recent
breakfast, came running to meet me. I stopped the mare. A moment later a
woman was at the gate between the rows of hollyhocks; when she saw me
she began hastily to roll down her sleeves.

"Why, Mr. Grayson!"

"How's the boy, Anna?"

And it was the cheerful talk we had there by the roadside, and the sight
of the sturdy boy playing in the sunshine--and the hollyhocks, and the
dilapidated house--that brought to memory the old story of Anna which I
here set down, not because it carries any moral, but because it is a
common little piece out of real life in which Harriet and I have been
interested.



