XI


AN OLD MAN

Today I saw Uncle Richard Summers walking in the town road: and cannot
get him out of my mind. I think I never knew any one who wears so
plainly the garment of Detached Old Age as he. One would not now think
of calling him a farmer, any more than one would think of calling him a
doctor, or a lawyer, or a justice of the peace. No one would think now
of calling him "Squire Summers," though he bore that name with no small
credit many years ago. He is no longer known as hardworking, or able, or
grasping, or rich, or wicked: he is just Old. Everything seems to have
been stripped away from Uncle Richard except age.

How well I remember the first time Uncle Richard Summers impressed
himself upon my mind. It was after the funeral of his old wife, now
several years ago. I saw him standing at the open grave with his
broad-brimmed felt hat held at his breast. His head was bowed and his
thin, soft, white hair stirred in the warm breeze. I wondered at his
quietude. After fifty years or more together his nearest companion and
friend had gone, and he did not weep aloud. Afterward I was again
impressed with the same fortitude or quietude. I saw him walking down
the long drive to the main road with all the friends of our
neighbourhood about him--and the trees rising full and calm on one side,
and the still greenery of the cemetery stretching away on the other.
Half way down the drive he turned aside to the fence and all unconscious
of the halted procession, he picked a handful of the large leaves of the
wild grape. It was a hot day; he took off his hat, and put the cool
leaves in the crown of it and rejoined the procession. It did not seem
to me to be the mere forgetfulness of old age, nor yet callousness to
his own great sorrow. It was rather an instinctive return to the
immeasurable continuity of the trivial things of life--the trivial
necessary things which so often carry us over the greatest tragedies.

I talked with the Scotch Preacher afterward about the incident. He said
that he, too, marveling at the old man's calmness, had referred to it in
his presence. Uncle Richard turned to him and said slowly:

"I am an old man, and I have learned one thing. I have learned to accept
life."

Since that day I have seen Uncle Richard Summers many times walking on
the country roads with his cane. He always looks around at me and slowly
nods his head, but rarely says anything. At his age what is there to say
that has not already been said?

His trousers appear a size too large for him, his hat sets too far down,
his hands are long and thin upon the head of his cane. But his face is
tranquil. He has come a long way; there have been times of tempest and
keen winds, there have been wild hills in his road, and rocky places,
and threatening voices in the air. All that is past now: and his face is
tranquil.

I think we younger people do not often realize how keenly dependent we
are upon our contemporaries in age. We get little understanding and
sympathy either above or below them. Much of the world is a little misty
to us, a little out of focus. Uncle Richard Summer's contemporaries have
nearly all gone--mostly long ago: one of the last, his old wife. At his
home--I have been there often to see his son--he sits in a large rocking
chair with a cushion in it, and a comfortable high back to lean upon. No
one else ventures to sit in his chair, even when he is not there. It is
not far from the window; and when he sits down he can lean his cane
against the wall where he can easily reach it again.

There is a turmoil of youth and life always about him; of fevered
incomings and excited outgoings, of work and laughter and tears and joy
and anger. He watches it all, for his mind is still clear, but he does
not take sides. He accepts everything, refuses nothing; or, if you like,
he refuses everything, accepts nothing.

He once owned the house where he now lives, with the great barns behind
it and the fertile acres spreading far on every hand. From his chair he
can look out through a small window, and see the sun on the quiet
fields. He once went out swiftly and strongly, he worked hotly, he came
in wearied to sleep.

Now he lives in a small room--and that is more than is really
necessary--and when he walks out he does not inquire who owns the land
where he treads. He lets the hot world go by, and waits with patience
the logic of events.

Often as I have passed him in the road, I have wondered, as I have been
wondering to-day, how he must look out upon us all, upon our excited
comings and goings, our immense concern over the immeasurably trivial. I
have wondered, not without a pang, and a resolution, whether I shall
ever reach the point where I can let this eager and fascinating world go
by without taking toll of it!



XII


THE CELEBRITY

Not for many weeks have I had a more interesting, more illuminating, and
when all is told, a more amusing experience, than I had this afternoon.
Since this afternoon the world has seemed a more satisfactory place to
live in, and my own home here, the most satisfactory, the most central
place in all the world. I have come to the conclusion that anything may
happen here!

We have had a celebrity in our small midst, and the hills, as the
Psalmist might say, have lifted up their heads, and the trees have
clapped their hands together. He came here last Tuesday evening and
spoke at the School House. I was not there myself; if I had been, I
should not, perhaps, have had the adventure which has made this day so
livable, nor met the Celebrity face to face.

Let me here set down a close secret regarding celebrities:

_They cannot survive without common people like you and me_.

It follows that if we do not pursue a celebrity, sooner or later he will
pursue us. He must; it is the law of his being. So I wait here very
comfortably on my farm, and as I work in my fields I glance up casually
from time to time to see if any celebrities are by chance coming up the
town road to seek me out. Oh, we are crusty people, we farmers! Sooner
or later they all come this way, all the warriors and the poets, all the
philosophers and the prophets and the politicians. If they do not,
indeed, get time to come before they are dead, we have full assurance
that they will straggle along afterward clad neatly in sheepskin, or
more gorgeously in green buckram with gilt lettering. Whatever the airs
of pompous importance they may assume as they come, back of it all we
farmers can see the look of wistful eagerness in their eyes. They know
well enough that they must give us something which we in our commonness
regard as valuable enough to exchange for a bushel of our potatoes, or a
sack of our white onions. No poem that we can enjoy, no speech that
tickles us, no prophecy that thrills us--neither dinner nor immortality
for them! And we are hard-headed Yankees at our bargainings; many a
puffed-up celebrity loses his puffiness at our doors!

This afternoon, as I came out on my porch after dinner, feeling content
with myself and all the world, I saw a man driving our way in a
one-horse top-buggy. In the country it is our custom first to identify
the horse, and that gives us a sure clue to the identification of the
driver. This horse plainly did not belong in our neighbourhood and
plainly as it drew nearer, it bore the unmistakable marks of the town
livery. Therefore, the driver, in all probability, was a stranger in
these parts. What strangers were in town who would wish to drive this
way? The man who occupied the buggy was large and slow-looking; he wore
a black, broad-brimmed felt hat and a black coat, a man evidently of
some presence. And he drove slowly and awkwardly; not an agent plainly.
Thus the logic of the country bore fruitage.

"Harriet," I said, calling through the open doorway, "I think the
Honourable Arthur Caldwell is coming here."

"Mercy me!" exclaimed Harriet, appearing in the doorway, and as quickly
disappearing. I did not see her, of course, but I knew instinctively
that she was slipping off her apron, moving our most celebrated
rocking-chair two inches nearer the door, and whisking a few invisible
particles of dust from the centre table. Every time any one of
importance comes our way, or is distantly likely to come our way.
Harriet resolves herself into an amiable whirlwind of good order,
subsiding into placidity at the first sound of a step on the porch.

As for me I remain in my shirt sleeves, sitting on my porch resting a
moment after my dinner. No sir, I will positively not go in and get my
coat. I am an American citizen, at home in my house with the sceptre of
my dominion--my favourite daily newspaper--in my hand. Let all kings,
queens, and other potentates approach!

And besides, though I am really much afraid that the Honourable Arthur
Caldwell will not stop at my gate but will pass on towards Horace's, I
am nursing a somewhat light opinion of Mr. Caldwell. When he spoke at
the School House on Tuesday, I did not go to hear him, nor was my
opinion greatly changed by what I learned afterward of the meeting. I
take both of our weekly county papers. This is necessary. I add the news
of both together, divide by two to strike a fair average, and then ask
Horace, or Charles Baxter, or the Scotch Preacher what really happened.
The Republican county paper said of the meeting:

"The Honourable Arthur Caldwell, member of Congress, who is seeking a
reelection, was accorded a most enthusiastic reception by a large and
sympathetic audience of the citizens of Blandford township on Tuesday
evening."

Strangely enough the Democratic paper, observing exactly the same
historic events, took this jaundiced view of the matter:

"Arty Caldwell, Republican boss of the Sixth District, who is out
mending his political fences, spellbound a handful of his henchmen at
the School House near Blandford Crossing on Tuesday evening."

And here was Mr. Caldwell himself, Member of Congress, Leader of the
Sixth District, Favourably Mentioned for Governor, drawing up at my
gate, deliberately descending from his buggy, with dignity stopping to
take the tie-rein from under the seat, carefully tying his horse to my
hitching-post.

I confess I could not help feeling a thrill of excitement. Here was a
veritable Celebrity come to my house to explain himself! I would not
have it known, of course, outside of our select circle of friends, but I
confess that although I am a pretty independent person (when I talk) in
reality there are few things in this world I would rather see than a new
person coming up the walk to my door. We cannot, of course, let the
celebrities know it, lest they grow intolerable in their top-loftiness,
but if they must have us, we cannot well get along without them--without
the colour and variety which they lend to a gray world. I have spent
many a precious moment alone in my fields looking up the road (with what
wistful casualness!) for some new Socrates or Mark Twain, and I have not
been wholly disappointed when I have had to content myself with the
Travelling Evangelist or the Syrian Woman who comes this way monthly
bearing her pack of cheap suspenders and blue bandana handkerchiefs.

"Good afternoon, Mr. Grayson," said the Honourable Mr. Caldwell, taking
off his large hat and pausing with one foot on my step.

"Good afternoon, sir," I responded, "won't you come up?"

He sat down in the chair opposite me with a certain measured and
altogether impressive dignity. I cannot say that he was exactly
condescending in his manners, yet he made me feel that it was no small
honour to have so considerable a person sitting there on the porch with
me. At the same time he was outwardly not without a sort of patient
deference which was evidently calculated to put me at my ease. Oh, he
had all the arts of the schooled politician! He knew to the last
shading just the attitude that he as a great man, a leader in Congress,
a dominant force in his party, a possible candidate for Governor (and
yet always a seeker for the votes of the people!) must observe in
approaching a free farmer--like me--sitting at ease in his shirt-sleeves
on his own porch, taking a moment's rest after dinner. It was a perfect
thing to see!

He had evidently heard, what was not altogether true, that I was a
questioner of authority, a disturber of the political peace, and that
(concretely) I was opposing him for reëlection. And it was as plain as a
pikestaff that he was here to lay down the political law to me. He would
do it smilingly and patiently, but firmly. He would use all the leverage
of his place, his power, his personal appearance, to crush the
presumptuous uprising against his authority.

I confess my spirits rose at the thought. What in this world is more
enthralling than the meeting of an unknown adversary upon the open
field, and jousting him a tourney. I felt like some modern Robin Hood
facing the panoplied authority of the King's man.

And what a place and time it was for a combat--in the quietude of the
summer afternoon, no sound anywhere breaking the still warmth and
sweetness except the buzzing of bees in the clematis at the end of the
porch--and all about the green countryside, woods and fields and old
fences--and the brown road leading its venturesome way across a distant
hill toward the town.

After explaining who he was--I told him I had recognized him on
sight--we opened with a volley of small shot. We peppered one another
with harmless comments on the weather and the state of the crops. He
advanced cabbages and I countered with sugar-beets. I am quite aware
that there are good tacticians who deprecate the use of skirmish lines
and the desultory fire of the musketry of small talk. They would advance
in grim silence and open at once with the crushing fire of their biggest
guns.

But such fighting is not for me. I should lose half the joy of the
battle, and kill off my adversary before I had begun to like him! It
wouldn't do, it wouldn't do at all.

"It's a warm day," observes my opponent, and I take a sure measure of
his fighting form. I rather like the look of his eye.

"I never saw the corn ripening better," I observe, and let him feel a
little of the cunning of the arrangement of my forces.

There is much in the tone of the voice, the cut of the words, the turn
of a phrase. I can be your servant with a "Yes sir," or your master with
a "No sir."

Thus we warm up to one another--a little at a time--we mass our forces,
each sees the white of his adversary's eyes. I can even see my
opponent--with some joy--trotting up his reserves, having found the
opposition stronger than he at first supposed.

"I hear," said Mr. Caldwell, finally, with a smile intended to be
disarming, "that you are opposing my reëlection."

Boom! the cannon's opening roar!

"Well," I replied, also smiling, and not to be outdone in the directness
of my thrust, "I have told a few of my friends that I thought Mr.
Gaylord would represent us better in Congress than you have done."

Boom! the fight is on!

"You are a Republican, aren't you, Mr. Grayson?"

It was the inevitable next stroke. When he found that I was a doubtful
follower of him personally, he marshalled the Authority of the
Institution which he represented.

"I have voted the Republican ticket," I said, "but I confess that
recently I have not been able to distinguish Republicans from
Democrats--and I've had my doubts," said I, "whether there is any real
Republican party left to vote with."

I cannot well describe the expression on his face, nor indeed, now that
the battle was on, horsemen, footmen, and big guns, shall I attempt to
chronicle every stroke and counter-stroke of that great conflict.

This much is certain: there was something universal and primal about the
battle waged this quiet afternoon on my porch between Mr. Caldwell and
me; it was the primal struggle between the leader and the follower;
between the representative and the represented. And it is a never-ending
conflict. When the leader gains a small advantage the pendulum of
civilization swings toward aristocracy; and when the follower, beginning
to think, beginning to struggle, gains a small advantage, then the
pendulum inclines toward democracy.

And always, and always, the leaders tend to forget that they are only
servants, and would be masters. "The unending audacity of elected
persons!" And always, and always, there must be a following bold enough
to prick the pretensions of the leaders and keep them in their places!

Thus, through the long still afternoon, the battle waged upon my porch.
Harriet came out and met the Honourable Mr. Caldwell, and sat and
listened, and presently went in again, without having got half a dozen
words into the conversation. And the bees buzzed, and in the meadows the
cows began to come out of the shade to feed in the open land.

Gradually, Mr. Caldwell put off his air of condescension; he put off his
appeal to party authority; he even stopped arguing the tariff and the
railroad question. Gradually, he ceased to be the great man, Favourably
Mentioned for Governor, and came down on the ground with me. He moved
his chair up closer to mine; he put his hand on my knee. For the first
time I began to see what manner of man he was: to find out how much real
fight he had in him.

[Illustration: "HE MOVED HIS CHAIR CLOSER TO MINE"]

"You don't understand," he said, "what it means to be down there at
Washington in a time like this. Things clear to you are not clear when
you have to meet men in the committees and on the floor of the house who
have a contrary view from yours and hold to it just as tenaciously as
you do to your views."

Well, sir, he gave me quite a new impression of what a Congressman's job
was like, of what difficulties and dissensions he had to meet at home,
and what compromises he had to accept when he reached Washington.

"Do you know," I said to him, with some enthusiasm, "I am more than ever
convinced that farming is good enough for me."

He threw back his head and laughed uproariously, and then moved up still
closer.

"The trouble with you, Mr. Grayson," he said, "is that you are looking
for a giant intellect to represent you at Washington."

"Yes," I said, "I'm afraid I am."

"Well," he returned, "they don't happen along every day. I'd like to see
the House of Representatives full of Washingtons and Jeffersons and
Websters and Roosevelts. But there's a Lincoln only once in a century."

He paused and then added with a sort of wry smile:

"And any quantity of Caldwells!"

That took me! I liked him for it. It was so explanatory. The armour of
political artifice, the symbols of political power, had now all dropped
away from him, and we sat there together, two plain and friendly human
beings, arriving through stress and struggle at a common understanding.
He was not a great leader, not a statesman at all, but plainly a man of
determination, with a fair measure of intelligence and sincerity. He had
a human desire to stay in Congress, for the life evidently pleased him,
and while he would never be crucified as a prophet, I felt--what I had
not felt before in regard to him--that he was sincerely anxious to serve
the best interests of his constituents. Added to these qualities he was
a man who was loyal to his friends; and not ungenerous to his enemies.

Up to this time he had done most of the talking; but now, having reached
a common basis, I leaned forward with some eagerness.

"You won't mind," I said, "if I give you my view--my common country view
of the political situation. I am sure I don't understand, and I don't
think my neighbours here understand, much about the tariff or the
trusts or the railroad question--in detail. We get general
impressions--and stick to them like grim death--for we know somehow that
we are right. Generally speaking, we here in the country work for what
we get----"

"And sometimes put the big apples at the top of the barrel," nodded Mr.
Caldwell.

"And sometimes put too much salt on top of the butter," I added--"all
that, but on the whole we get only what we earn by the hard daily work
of ploughing and planting and reaping: You admit that."

"I admit it," said Mr. Caldwell.

"And we've got the impression that a good many of the men down in New
York and Boston, and elsewhere, through the advantages which the tariff
laws, and other laws, are giving them, are getting more than they
earn--a lot more. And we feel that laws must be passed which will
prevent all that."

"Now, I believe that, too," said Mr. Caldwell very earnestly.

"Then we belong to the same party," I said. "I don't know what the name
of it is yet, but we both belong to it."

Mr. Caldwell laughed.

"And I'll appoint you," I said, "my agent in Washington to work out the
changes in the laws."

"Well, I'll accept the appointment," said Mr. Caldwell--continuing very
earnestly, "if you'll trust to my honesty and not expect too much of me
all at once."

With that we both sat back in our chairs and looked at each other and
laughed with the greatest good humour and common understanding.

"And now," said I, rising quickly, "let's go and get a drink of
buttermilk."

So we walked around the house arm in arm and stopped in the shade of the
oak tree which stands near the spring-house. Harriet came out in the
whitest of white dresses, carrying a tray with the glasses, and I opened
the door of the spring-house, and felt the cool air on my face and smelt
the good smell of butter and milk and cottage cheese, and I passed the
cool pitcher to Harriet. And so we drank together there in the shade and
talked and laughed.

I walked down with Mr. Caldwell to the gate. He took my arm and said to
me:

"I'm glad I came out here and had this talk. I feel as though I
understood my job better for it."

"Let's organize a new party," I said, "let's begin with two members, you
and I, and have only one plank in the platform."

He smiled.

"You'd have to crowd a good deal into that one plank," he said.

"Not at all," I responded.

"What would you have it?"

"I'd have it in one sentence," I said, "and something like this: We
believe in the passage of legislation which shall prevent any man taking
from the common store any more than he actually earns."

Mr. Caldwell threw up his arms.

"Mr. Grayson," he said, "you're an outrageous idealist."

"Mr. Caldwell," I said, "you'll say one of these days that I'm a
practical politician."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, Harriet," I said, "he's got my vote."

"Well, David," said Harriet, "that's what he came for."

"It's an interesting world, Harriet," I said.

"It is, indeed," said Harriet.

As we stood on the porch we could see at the top of the hill, where the
town road crosses it, the slow moving buggy, and through the open
curtain at the back the heavy form of our Congressman with his slouch
hat set firmly on his big head.

"We may be fooled, Harriet," I observed, "on dogmas and doctrines and
platforms--but if we cannot trust human nature in the long run, what
hope is there? It's men we must work with, Harriet."

"And women." said Harriet.

"And women, of course," said I.



