PART III. THE RECALCITRANT SOCIAL FORCES




Chapter VII. Leadership For Service


_Ambition Must Get Its Satisfaction by Serving Humanity_

The Kingdom of God was an ideal. If it was to be turned into concrete
realities, it would encounter the recalcitrant and stubborn instincts of
human nature and the conservative forces of society. Where did Jesus
locate the obstacles? At what points was he aware of resistance? Did he
realize the force of ambition and the love of power? Did he gauge the pull
of the property instinct? Did he feel religion as a help or a hindrance in
realizing the Kingdom of God? These questions we shall follow up in three
lessons.

DAILY READINGS



First Day: The Trustee


    And Peter said, Lord, speakest thou this parable unto us, or even
    unto all? And the Lord said, Who then is the faithful and wise
    steward, whom his lord shall set over his household, to give them
    their portion of food in due season? Blessed is that servant, whom
    his lord when he cometh shall find so doing. Of a truth I say unto
    you, that he will set him over all that he hath. But if that
    servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming; and
    shall begin to beat the menservants and the maidservants, and to
    eat and drink, and to be drunken; the lord of that servant shall
    come in a day when he expecteth not, and in an hour when he
    knoweth not, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint his portion
    with the unfaithful. And that servant, who knew his lord’s will,
    and made not ready, nor did according to his will, shall be beaten
    with many stripes; but he that knew not, and did things worthy of
    stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. And to whomsoever much
    is given, of him shall much be required: and to whom they commit
    much, of him will they ask the more.—Luke 12:41-48.


The preceding verses (v. 35-40) dealt with the faithfulness of the rank
and file; this parable deals with the responsibility of official position
and sketches the alternative of selfish and serviceable leadership. The
head steward had charge of a great estate, directing the labor of workmen
and maids, dealing out supplies, and controlling the welfare and happiness
of all. The absence of the master made his authority for the time
absolute. Would he use it for the good of all? If so, wider scope and
higher honor would come to him. Or would he become intoxicated with power,
take things easy, boss his fellow-servants around, and become a petty
tyrant? If so, he would get what was coming to him. Every man’s duty is
measured by his knowledge and by his power. If, therefore, a man rises to
leadership, and finds his elbow-room enlarging, let him stiffen his sense
of duty to correspond, or there will be trouble. Degeneration by power is
written all over history.

The functions of a head steward belong to the age of great landowners. How
would you modernize this parable to express the same ideas?



Second Day: Preparing for the Use of Power


    Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be
    tempted of the devil. And when he had fasted forty days and forty
    nights, he afterward hungered. And the tempter came and said unto
    him, If thou art the Son of God, command that these stones become
    bread. But he answered and said, It is written, Man shall not live
    by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth
    of God. Then the devil taketh him into the holy city; and he set
    him on the pinnacle of the temple, and saith unto him, If thou art
    the Son of God, cast thyself down: for it is written,

    He shall give his angels charge concerning thee: and,

    On their hands they shall bear thee up,
    Lest haply thou dash thy foot against a stone.

    Jesus said unto him, Again it is written, Thou shalt not make
    trial of the Lord thy God. Again, the devil taketh him unto an
    exceeding high mountain, and showeth him all the kingdoms of the
    world, and the glory of them; and he said unto him, All these
    things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me.
    Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan: for it is
    written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt
    thou serve.—Matt.4:1-10.


The baptism of Jesus was an act of dedication to the coming reign of God,
and it brought him a deep spiritual experience. He came out of it with the
sense of an immediate mission, of being called to a supreme leadership,
and with the consciousness of power to correspond with his destiny. At
once he confronted the question: How would he employ his Messianic power?
By what means would he obtain leadership? In the desert his mind was
concentrated on these problems. This story displays the temptations of a
leader, and sums up his settlement on three points: first, he realized
that he must not swerve aside for personal gratification, but must serve
the will of God only; second, he must not debase his power by playing for
popularity by means of spectacular, miraculous display; third, he must not
win his leadership by methods that would mortgage him to the prince of
this world, for instance by the use of force.

How would these points apply to a young man seeking political office,
intellectual eminence, or artistic achievement?

_Have we ever had a time of religious concentration to consider the
problems of our future leadership?_



Third Day: The New Principle of Leadership


    Then came to him the mother of the sons of Zebedee with her sons,
    worshipping him, and asking a certain thing of him. And he said
    unto her, What wouldest thou? She saith unto him, Command that
    these my two sons may sit, one on thy right hand, and one on thy
    left hand, in thy kingdom. But Jesus answered and said, Ye know
    not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink the cup that I am about to
    drink? They say unto him, We are able. He saith unto them, My cup
    indeed ye shall drink: but to sit on my right hand, and on my left
    hand, is not mine to give; but it is for them for whom it hath
    been prepared of my Father. And when the ten heard it, they were
    moved with indignation concerning the two brethren. But Jesus
    called them unto him, and said, Ye know that the rulers of the
    Gentiles lord it over them, and their great ones exercise
    authority over them. Not so shall it be among you: but whosoever
    would become great among you shall be your minister; and whosoever
    would be first among you shall be your servant: even as the Son of
    man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give
    his life a ransom for many.—Matt. 20:20-28.


This passage is fundamental for our subject. It is the clearest
formulation of the social principle involved in leadership. It contrasts
two opposite types of leadership throughout human history. Salome and her
sons thought Jesus was going to Jerusalem to inaugurate his Kingdom. They
asked for an advance pledge assuring them of the chief place. Jesus
replied that that place would not go by favoritism. There is a price to be
paid for leadership in his reign, and God alone will allot the final
honors. He felt in their request a relapse into conceptions that he
detested. In all political organizations he saw the tyrannical use of
power over the people. There must be an end of that in the new social
order. Ambition must seek its satisfaction by distinguished service, and
only extra-hazardous service shall win honor. He himself proposed to be a
leader of that new type, and to give his life as a ransom for the
emancipation of the people.

Our Master here offers each of us the conscious choice between two
principles of action. _Have we made our choice?_

He offers a norm for estimating the real value of men in public life.
_Have we ever tried to apply it?_



Fourth Day: The History of a Governing Class


    Hear another parable: There was a man that was a householder, who
    planted a vineyard, and set a hedge about it, and digged a
    winepress in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen,
    and went into another country. And when the season of the fruits
    drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, to receive his
    fruits. And the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and
    killed another, and stoned another. Again, he sent other servants
    more than the first: and they did unto them in like manner. But
    afterward he sent unto them his son, saying, They will reverence
    my son. But the husbandmen, when they saw the son, said among
    themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and take his
    inheritance. And they took him, and cast him forth out of the
    vineyard, and killed him. When therefore the lord of the vineyard
    shall come, what will he do unto those husbandmen? They say unto
    him, He will miserably destroy those miserable men, and will let
    out the vineyard unto other husbandmen, who shall render him the
    fruits in their seasons. Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read
    in the scriptures,

    The stone which the builders rejected,
    The same was made the head of the corner;
    This was from the Lord,

    And it is marvellous in our eyes? Therefore say I unto you, The
    kingdom of God shall be taken away from you, and shall be given to
    a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. And he that falleth on
    this stone shall be broken to pieces: but on whomsoever it shall
    fall, it will scatter him as dust. And when the chief priests and
    the Pharisees heard his parables, they perceived that he spake of
    them. And when they sought to lay hold on him, they feared the
    multitudes, because they took him for a prophet.—Matt. 21:33-46.


A delegation of the chief priests, lawyers, and elders challenged the
authority of Jesus to act as he did. He replied by challenging their
authority to act as they did. The vineyard parable sums up his view of the
moral history of the governing class in his nation. It was like a group of
men who had rented a vineyard on shares, but took advantage of the owner’s
absence to embezzle his share, insolently to beat up his representatives,
and to put themselves in possession of the farm. Every demand of God for
righteousness in the history of Israel had been resisted by those in
power. What title, then, did they have to the rights they claimed? Unless
they fulfilled the function of true leaders, why should they not be put
out of power and brought to justice? In this passage, then, we have a
characterization of leaders who take the profits and honors of leadership,
without performing its higher duties to God and humanity.

Is there any connection between this challenge of Jesus, and the
functional theories of society and the evolutionary conception of history?



Fifth Day: An Indictment of a Governing Class


    Then spake Jesus to the multitudes and to his disciples, saying,
    The scribes and the Pharisees sit on Moses’ seat, all things
    therefore whatsoever they bid you, these do and observe: but do
    not ye after their works; for they say, and do not. Yea, they bind
    heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men’s
    shoulders; but they themselves will not move them with their
    finger. But all their works they do to be seen of men: for they
    make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their
    garments, and love the chief place at feasts, and the chief seats
    in the synagogues, and the salutations in the marketplaces, and to
    be called of men, Rabbi. But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is
    your teacher, and all ye are brethren. And call no man your father
    on the earth: for one is your Father, even he who is in heaven.
    Neither be ye called masters: for one is your master, even the
    Christ. But he that is greatest among you shall be your servant.
    And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be humbled; and whosoever
    shall humble himself shall be exalted.

    But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye
    shut the kingdom of heaven against men: for ye enter not in
    yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering in to
    enter.—Matt. 23:1-13.


The invective against the scribes and Pharisees (Matt. 23) is a
characterization of selfish leadership in the field of religion. Its
fundamental elements have remained the same in all religions and through
all history: fine talk and little action; religion turned into a law and a
burden, in order to hold the people in obedience to the interests of the
leaders; pride and ambition exploiting religion to get honors. Jesus tells
the people to revolt against the titles in which this domination had found
decorative satisfaction. He demands democracy, humility, brotherliness.

Does this description justly apply to the Christian ministry today, or has
there been a great historical change by which that profession has become a
profession of service?

Where in modern social life would the invective of Jesus against selfish
leadership still be true?



Sixth Day: The Lost Leader


    And in these days Peter stood up in the midst of the brethren, and
    said (and there was a multitude of persons gathered together,
    about a hundred and twenty), Brethren, it was needful that the
    scripture should be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit spake before
    by the mouth of David concerning Judas, who was guide to them that
    took Jesus. For he was numbered among us, and received his portion
    in this ministry. (Now this man obtained a field with the reward
    of his iniquity; and falling headlong, he burst asunder in the
    midst, and all his bowels gushed out. And it became known to all
    the dwellers at Jerusalem; insomuch that in their language that
    field was called Akeldama, that is, The field of blood.) For it is
    written in the book of Psalms,

    Let his habitation be made desolate,
    And let no man dwell therein:

    and,

    His office let another take.—Acts 1:15-20.


The character and motives of Judas remain an unsolved riddle. The Gospels
leave no doubt that money played a part with him. But could a man whom
Jesus selected and trusted be actuated by so sordid a motive alone? Was he
perhaps embittered because he had staked his ambition on the Galilean
Messiah and Jesus failed to act the part assigned to him? Was he hoping to
force him to revolutionary action? We may be sure that Judas was no
slinking thief only. In Rubens’ picture of the Last Supper at Milano Judas
has a strong and noble face, but troubled and restless eyes, telling of a
hurt soul. The other disciples were deeply impressed by his betrayal of
the Master and of the common cause. Judas is the type of the lost leader.
“Just for a handful of silver he left us, just for a ribbon to stick in
his coat.” Some leaders blunder and learn better; some sag to lower levels
but plod on; some sell out. Judas could not bear to live. Read James
Russell Lowell’s “Extreme Unction.”

Have you known of cases today of men who have abandoned or betrayed a
cause to get office or income? Any who abandon humanity itself to get
thirty pieces for themselves?



Seventh Day: The New Order of Leaders


    And Jesus went about all the cities and the villages, teaching in
    their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and
    healing all manner of disease and all manner of sickness. But when
    he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion for them,
    because they were distressed and scattered, as sheep not having a
    shepherd. Then saith he unto his disciples, The harvest indeed is
    plenteous, but the laborers are few. Pray ye therefore the Lord of
    the harvest, that he send forth laborers into his harvest.

    And he called unto him his twelve disciples, and gave them
    authority over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all
    manner of disease and all manner of sickness.

    Now the names of the twelve apostles are these: The first, Simon,
    who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James the son of
    Zebedee, and John his brother; Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas,
    and Matthew the publican; James the son of Alphæus, and Thaddæus;
    Simon the Cananæan, and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed
    him.—Matt. 9:35-10:4.


We have studied part of this passage before as an expression of the social
feeling of Jesus. Note now that it was their leaderless condition which
impressed him. Plenty of priests, lawyers, and experts on the Bible, but
no friendly shepherds for the people. When he created the apostolate, he
initiated a new order of leadership, a band of men who would serve and not
exploit. Read the instructions he gave them (Chap. 10), and see how
carefully he fences out selfish gain. Service versus exploitation, that is
one of the tests of all who claim leadership in his name. We realize that
in the field of religion. But why should not the same test be made in
professional, political, and business life? Predatory action may not be as
glaringly shameful there, but is it any the more moral?

_Now what about you and me?_



Study for the Week


I


The desire to lead and excel is natural and right. Because men are
gregarious, they need leadership for their social groups, and social
progress depends largely on securing adequate leaders. Those who have the
natural gifts for leadership—and also those who merely think they
have—usually have a keen desire for its satisfactions. College life is a
miniature world of criss-cross ambitions and of contrivances for trying
out leaders.

Jesus did not demand self-effacement and the suppression of ability. He
welcomed evidences of noble self-assertion. His own Messianic call was a
summons to the highest leadership. His temptations were the settlement of
leadership problems. His final lament over the city of Jerusalem was a
burst of sorrow because he had failed to win his people to follow him.

Now, in moving about among men to win them for the Kingdom, Jesus
encountered the leaders who were on deck before he came—the wealthy men
who controlled the economic outfit; the official groups who held what
political power was left to the Jews; and the lawyers, theologians,
priests, and zealots who dominated the religious life of a very religious
people. These classes overlapped; together they constituted the oligarchy
of his nation. Both sides soon realized that there were fundamental
antagonisms between them. The conflict grew acute, until it headed up in
the great duel of the last days at Jerusalem. His experiences in this
conflict with hostile leadership are recorded in the passages which we
have studied and others like them.


II


In the fundamental reply to James and John he formulated his observations
in a great political generalization: “Ye know that the rulers of the
nations lord it over them and their great men hold down the rest by
force.” In its earlier and cruder forms, the State is a contrivance of a
victorious group to hold down the conquered, and exploit them. If anyone
has not yet read political history as an account of systematic
exploitation of nation by nation and class by class, he has some education
still coming to him.

Even where political leadership has not been plainly predatory but rested
on real service, humanity has often had a heavy price to pay for it.
Successful military leaders were able to perpetuate a royal dynasty and
perhaps fasten a race of hereditary incapables on a nation, to be
maintained in royal splendor. The feudal nobility performed useful work in
the earlier, turbulent times, but it continued to take rent and tribute
for centuries after its useful functions had lapsed. Modern business men
who have organized public service corporations have often served the
nation well, but they now own the highways and fundamental outfit of the
nation, and if their descendants or assignees collect tribute, perhaps on
inflated capitalization, for generations to come, it looks like rather
costly service. The obligations of power have a curious way of getting
lost in the shuffle of time, but titles, rank, legal privileges, rent, and
interest are carefully groomed. If one man loses them, some other man
nurses them, and the people always pay.

The Kingdom of God sets a fraternal and righteous social order against the
predatory and unrighteous order which humanity has inherited from the
past. The new order must have a new dynasty of leaders, for every social
order has its own kind of aristocracy. Jesus does not propose to abolish
leadership, but he proposes a new basis for greatness which is sharply
opposed to the old: “Whoever has ambition to be a great man among you, let
him be your servant; and whoever is ambitious to rank first among you, let
him be your bondservant. Just as the Son of Man did not come to have
others serve him, but to render service and to give his life as a ransom
for many.” Ability and ambition are still to lead, but they are to be
yoked to the service of all. Not he who kills and subjugates, but he who
makes life safe and happy, shall have the statue set up in his honor. Not
the great warrior and killer, but the great healer and the man who
multiplies the blades of grass and the ears of wheat and the size of
potatoes shall be the great names treasured. The higher the honor craved,
the more strenuous must be the service; if a man wants first prize, he
must get down to voluntary slavery. The old way to leadership was to knock
others down and climb up on them; the new way is to get underneath and
boost.


III


Jesus put himself under this law of leadership. We see from his words that
the cross was the outcome of a consistent principle adopted by him. The
rules he laid down for his apostolate were meant to bar out selfish
acquisition: “Freely ye received, freely give. Get you no gold, nor
silver, nor brass in your purses; no wallet for your journey, neither two
coats, nor shoes, nor staff; for the laborer is worthy of his food.” It is
a significant fact that again and again religious leaders who really cared
for the condition of the people, have tried to create a genuine leadership
for them along the same lines; Francis of Assisi gathered his “little
brothers”; Peter Waldus his Bible teachers; Wycliffe his “poor preachers”;
John Wesley his local preachers and itinerants; William Booth his ensigns
and captains with the big bass drum; and the entire foreign mission
propaganda calls for leaders who will go to the people and offers them
nothing but enough to live in health. Today practically the entire
Christian ministry, one of the most important bodies of men, has come
under the law of leadership for service. It was once, at least in its
upper-class sections, rich with unearned incomes, pervaded by graft, and
domineering in spirit; it is now a clean and plain-living profession;
whatever its shortcomings, graft and extortion are not of them.

The question is now, whether other professions will go through the same
historical process of cleansing. The religious spirit has pioneering
qualities; under its impulse men blaze the trail which broad social
movements or historical developments follow later. Greedy leadership first
seemed intolerable in the Church; after a time it may become intolerable
in politics and business. The trend of civilization is toward intelligent
service on plain pay. Educators, judges, scientists, doctors are on that
basis now. It has become dishonorable for them to use their positions for
a holdup. The great discoverers in the line of sero-therapy might have
taken toll in golden streams, but they did not. It would have been
contrary to the ethics of their profession. That means that their
profession is on a Christian basis. Where graft is taken out of politics,
officials become devoted public servants. The reproach has been made
against a man of great ability that at the end of his life his name is not
connected with any great cause or measure for the welfare of the people.
Whether the judgment was just or not, that point of view is the one to
take.

Can business be brought under the law of service? Or is commerce
constitutionally incapable of it? There are many indications that a
conscious spiritual change is coming over those men in business who have
enough intellect and character to look beyond immediate needs. The type of
business leadership which took millions out of filthy factory towns, wore
out women and took the youth out of children, cleared twelve per cent from
slum tenements, kept men and women from marriage by underpayment, and kept
the cradle empty by high prices and fear of the future—this type of
leadership is antiquated. It belongs to a pre-Christian and pagan age. It
is only a question whether business leaders will voluntarily turn their
back on such misuse of power or have a change forced on them. Those who
mark time on the old methods will become moral derelicts, and their wealth
will not forever screen their moral obtuseness.

The nation needs leaders who will persuade conservative farmers to use
scientific methods; who will teach our wasteful people the value of
self-restraint, and the beauty of cooperative buying and selling; who will
teach our communities that it is a sin to rob our own children by leaving
soil, water, and forests poorer than we found them; who will give the
people good housing without taking the unearned increment; who will
organize the dangerous industries for safety; who will place the relations
of leaders and workers in industry on a basis of justice and goodwill so
that industrial peace can be attained. Is such an object satisfying to a
young man of business capacity, or does he want to build a million dollar
house and populate it with one child? It is confessed that civilization
has been succeeding on the technical side and failing on the ethical. The
more the machinery of life is concentrated in the hands of a limited group
of business leaders, the more important does the social enlightenment and
moral objective of these leaders become to society. To which of the two
types do we belong?


IV


Will a life of service satisfy the capable and call out their best powers
for the service of humanity? Men will play the game according to the rules
of the game. If humanity changes the rules, its strong men will still let
out their energies, because they can not help it, and they will like
themselves all the better for being on the side of their fellow-men. There
is no pleasure in being isolated, eyed with resentment, and conscious of
hardness. If ten per cent net means long hours, low wages, and repression,
and if six per cent would mean good will and contentment, it might pay the
leaders of industry to take less in dividends and take it out in the
higher satisfactions.

For men of great ability this is the chance for enduring fame. Who will
remember the men that did nothing but amass wealth? Who of our presidents
are remembered and loved? Those who suffered with and for the people.

The leadership of service validates its rightness by its intellectual
results. Predatory and parasitic classes become intellectually sterile and
ignorant of real life. A man who wants to serve men, must get close to
them. If we carry a load uphill, we have to choose our footing, and will
perforce become intimately acquainted with the law of gravitation. Nothing
develops the intellect like heading a just cause and fighting for it.

Here, then, we have another social principle of Jesus. The ambition of the
strong must be yoked to the service of society. Power and honor must be
earned by distinguished and costly service. Progress along this direction
marks the progress of the Kingdom of God. Extortionate and domineering
leadership must be superseded where the Kingdom of God moves forward.


V


Does the life of our colleges and universities square with this principle?
College men and women crave honor from their fellows, or their
fraternities crave it for them vicariously. How do the “big men” in
college win it? Do they win it by raising the standards of intellectual
work for all? By making fun clean and honorable through the power of a
clean public opinion? By creating a college spirit which will put manhood
into every generation of Freshmen that plunges into it? Or do they win
honor by organizing parties, by intoxicating themselves and others with
frothy “social” successes, by acting for the gallery to see and applaud,
and by wasting the dynamics of youth on shooting rockets that look like
stars and come down like sticks? Such men are essentially selfish; even
their service is self-seeking and deserves no honor from others. The more
talented and attractive they are, the more damage do they do. They
perpetuate their kind. If fraternities or honorary societies honor and
reward that sort of leadership, they force individuals into futility, and
reenforce the natural temptation to shallow work and display by the
powerful pressure of socialized public opinion.

What has just been said applies to the inner life of the college group
during its brief command over young men and women. But meanwhile the
outside life is waiting for them. Society creates and finances the
colleges and universities from the social fund created by those who work.
A college man who toys with his work and fights those who want to make him
work, ought to be demoted and his chance given to some workingman who has
intellectual hunger and would use it. But even of the able and efficient
college men society has a right to inquire whether it is training enemies
and exploiters or friends and leaders. This question will be asked more
and more insistently by democracy as it becomes intelligent. Christianity
anticipates this inquiry by its appeal to the individual conscience. Every
college man and woman should choose the principle on which he proposes to
exercise leadership in case he wins it. Are we willing to gain wealth by
impoverishing others? Are we willing to get pleasure by degrading others?
Are we willing to gain power and freedom for ourselves by making others
powerless and unfree? Jesus distinguishes three kinds of men who are
interested in the sheep—the robber, the hireling, and the shepherd. You
can tell the presence of the robber by the death of the sheep; the
hireling by his cowardice; the true leader by his valor and love.

A special word should be said to college women. In her book on “Woman and
Labor,” Olive Schreiner has pointed out that as families rise to wealth,
the women slip into parasitism more readily than the men. They cease to do
productive work, accept the luxuries of life as their right, and fall in
with upper-class pretensions. The means of leadership—time, wealth, social
resources—are at their command. How will they use them? The number of
women with unearned incomes is increasing rapidly in America. Now, if much
is given them, much will be required. Can they produce enough social
values to justify what they consume? The least we can do is to give as
much as we get. Anything less is immoral.

What kind of influence do college girls exert on able young men who turn
toward them in love? Nothing will shrivel the idealistic conceptions of
life in a young man as thoroughly as love for a selfish woman. The world
is full of eyeless Samsons, grinding the money-mills, and whipped to a
quicker pace by smiling grafters—who would not recognize this description
of them if they saw it.



Suggestions for Thought and Discussion


I. _The Need of Leadership_

1. Does the need of leadership diminish with the spread of democracy? With
the growth of education?

2. Do we need leadership more or less in America today than fifty years
ago?

II. _Jesus on the Problems of Leadership_

1. Give proof that Jesus consciously confronted the problem of social
leadership.

2. What elements did he condemn in the old leadership of his nation?

3. What principle of leadership did he lay down for the new social order?

4. What body of leaders did he create, and what standards of special honor
did he impose on them?

5. What do we think of the historic effectiveness of the leadership he
created? What is the true interpretation of Judas Iscariot?

6. What evidences are there in Jesus’ career that he was true to his
ideals of leadership?

III. _The Problem of Leadership in History_

1. How have the great leaders in the field of religion attacked the
problem of leadership in the Church? What does the Protestant Reformation
signify from this point of view?

2. How have the landed aristocrats of the past met the Christian test of
leadership?

3. Give examples from history and from modern life of men who exercised
power in the way Christ condemned. Give examples of others who exercised
it according to Christ’s law.

IV. _The Problem of Leadership in Modern Life_

1. In what professions is ambition now securely tied up with service, so
that a man must serve well in order to rise?

2. In what positions can a man still gain power and wealth by exploiting
society?

3. Is the consciousness that they are public servants spreading among
business men? If so, to what is this due?

4. Is society paying too big a price for the leadership of the industrial
aristocracy today?

5. When the interests of the stockholders are set over against the health
of women and children, and the safety of employes, which consideration
determines the wages paid?

6. How have the social leaders of the past mortgaged the economic
resources of nations to their own families? To what extent is this true of
our country?

7. How can society protect itself against exploitation under present
conditions?

V. _For Special Discussion_

1. A corporation has averaged 24 per cent to its stockholders. It pays
twelve dollars a week to its ordinary workmen. Would you call this
predatory leadership? Where do you draw the line?

2. Does the salary of teachers in our country indicate that we give honor
according to service rendered?

3. How does the increasing size of business undertakings and their
importance for public welfare emphasize the ethical importance of right
leadership?




