Chapter IX. The Social Test Of Religion


_Religion Must be Socially Efficient_

The teaching of Jesus dealt with three recalcitrant forces, which easily
escape from the control of social duty and become a clog to spiritual
progress: ambition for power and leadership, and the love of property,
have been considered. How about religion? Is it a help or a hindrance in
the progress of humanity? Opinions are very much divided today. No student
of society can neglect religion as a social force. What did Jesus think of
it?

DAILY READINGS



First Day: Worship is not Enough


    What unto me is the multitude of your sacrifices? saith Jehovah: I
    have had enough of the burnt-offerings of rams, and the fat of fed
    beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs,
    or of he-goats. When ye come to appear before me, who hath
    required this at your hand, to trample my courts? Bring no more
    vain oblations; incense is an abomination unto me; new moon and
    sabbath, the calling of assemblies,—I cannot away with iniquity
    and the solemn meeting. Your new moons and your appointed feasts
    my soul hateth; they are a trouble unto me; I am weary of bearing
    them. And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes
    from you; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your
    hands are full of blood. Wash you, make you clean; put away the
    evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil; learn
    to do well; seek justice, relieve the oppressed, judge the
    fatherless, plead for the widow.—Isa. 1:11-17.

    Wherewith shall I come before Jehovah, and bow myself before the
    high God? shall I come before him with burnt-offerings, with
    calves a year old? will Jehovah be pleased with thousands of rams,
    or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give my first-born
    for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
    He hath showed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth Jehovah
    require of thee, but to do justly, and to love kindness, and to
    walk humbly with thy God?—Micah 6:6-8.


These two passages are classical expressions of a note which runs through
all the prophetic teaching of the Old Testament. There was a fundamental
antagonism between those who saw the service of God in the inherited
ritual and sacrificial action, and those who felt that the essential
service of God is righteousness of life. The prophets wanted a religion
that would change social conduct, and repudiated religious doings that had
no ethical value. They held that worship alone is not enough. God wants
life and conduct.

Suggest parallels from the history of the Christian or the non-Christian
religions.



Second Day: The Test of Social Value


    And it came to pass, that he was going on the sabbath day through
    the grainfields; and his disciples began, as they went, to pluck
    the ears. And the Pharisees said unto him, Behold, why do they on
    the sabbath day that which is not lawful? And he said unto them,
    Did ye never read what David did, when he had need, and was
    hungry, he, and they that were with him? How he entered into the
    house of God when Abiathar was high priest, and ate the showbread,
    which it is not lawful to eat save for the priests, and gave also
    to them that were with him? And he said unto them, The sabbath was
    made for man; and not man for the sabbath: so that the Son of man
    is lord even of the sabbath.

    And he entered again into the synagogue; and there was a man there
    who had his hand withered. And they watched him, whether he would
    heal him on the sabbath day; that they might accuse him. And he
    saith unto the man that had his hand withered, Stand forth. And he
    saith unto them, Is it lawful on the sabbath day to do good, or to
    do harm? to save a life, or to kill? But they held their peace.
    And when he had looked round about on them with anger, being
    grieved at the hardening of their heart, he saith unto the man,
    Stretch forth thy hand. And he stretched it forth; and his hand
    was restored.—Mark 2:23-3:5.


The Mosaic law intended the Sabbath to be a haven of rest for all who were
driven, the slave, the immigrant, even the cattle. It was a precious
institution of social protection. But the strict religionists of Jesus’
time had made a yoke of tyranny of it, so that hungry men could not rub
the kernels from ears of grain without being charged with threshing, and
Jesus could not heal a poor paralytic without getting black looks. A fine
institution of social welfare and relief had been turned into an
anti-social regulation. Jesus fell back on the fundamental maxim of the
prophets, “I desire kindness and not sacrifice,” and laid down the
principle that “the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the
Sabbath.” The religious institution of the Sabbath must have social value;
this is the essential test even in religion.

Is the Sabbath more useful to society now than in Puritan times?

From which do we suffer more today, from excessive strictness or excessive
looseness in Sabbath observance?

How is the social value of the rest-day frustrated for the working class?



Third Day: Natural Duty above Artificial


    And the Pharisees and the scribes ask him, Why walk not thy
    disciples according to the tradition of the elders, but eat their
    bread with defiled hands? And he said unto them, Well did Isaiah
    prophesy of you hypocrites, as it is written,

    This people honoreth me with their lips,
    But their heart is far from me.
    But in vain do they worship me,
    Teaching as their doctrines the precepts of men.

    Ye leave the commandment of God, and hold fast the tradition of
    men. And he said unto them, Full well do ye reject the commandment
    of God, that ye may keep your tradition. For Moses said, Honor thy
    father and thy mother; and, He that speaketh evil of father or
    mother, let him die the death: but ye say, If a man shall say to
    his father or his mother, That wherewith thou mightest have been
    profited by me is Corban, that is to say, Given to God; ye no
    longer suffer him to do aught for his father or his mother; making
    void the word of God by your tradition, which ye have delivered:
    and many such like things ye do.—Mark 7:5-13.


Contemporary Jewish religion was full of taboos, defilements, and
purifications. Read Mark 7:1-23. Jesus was so indifferent about the
religious ablutions that he was brought to book for it by the pious. He
replied that these regulations were not part of the divine law, but later
accretions the product of theological casuistry, and that they tended to
obscure the real divine duties. He cited a flagrant case. By eternal and
divine law a man owes love and support to his parents. But the scribes
held that if a man vowed to give money to the temple, this obligation,
being toward God, superseded the obligation to his parents, which was
merely human. To Jesus this seemed a perversion of religion.
Ecclesiastical claims were made to stifle fundamental social duty. To
Jesus the latter had incomparably higher value. Religion had become a
social danger through such teaching.

Give proof from modern history that religious institutions may become
injurious to social morality and welfare.



Fourth Day: Religion Which Obscured Duty


    Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye tithe mint
    and anise and cummin, and have left undone the weightier matters
    of the law, justice, and mercy, and faith: but these ye ought to
    have done, and not to have left the other undone. Ye blind guides,
    that strain out the gnat, and swallow the camel!

    Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye cleanse
    the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are
    full from extortion and excess. Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first
    the inside of the cup and of the platter, that the outside thereof
    may become clean also.—Matt. 23:23-26.

    Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass
    sea and land to make one proselyte; and when he is become so, ye
    make him twofold more a son of hell than yourselves.—Matt. 23:15.


The great invective of Jesus against the scribes and Pharisees (Matthew
23) deals wholly with the perversions of religion. In these verses he
emphasizes the fact that the solemn importance attached to external
minutiæ turned the attention of men from the really fundamental spiritual
duties, such as justice, mercy, and good faith. As the blood was supposed
to be the sacred element of life, it had to be drained off in butchering,
and a drowned animal could not be eaten. Jesus wittily describes the
Pharisee filtering out drowned gnats from the drinking water, but bolting
some camel of a sin without blinking. The outside of the cup was kept
scrupulously scoured, but the inside was filled with the products of
rapacity and the material for luxurious excess. When religion had become
of such a sort, even missionary activity became an actual damage, for the
converts were turned into fanatical sticklers on trifles. In all this we
can see him striking out for a kind of religion that would result in
righteous conduct and have social value.

_Have we had any experience of religion which obscured duty to us? Have we
had any experience of religion which revealed duty to us?_



Fifth Day: Religious Wonders and Social Realities


    And the Pharisees and Sadducees came, and trying him asked him to
    show them a sign from heaven. But he answered and said unto them,
    When it is evening, ye say, It will be fair weather: for the
    heaven is red. And in the morning, It will be foul weather to-day:
    for the heaven is red and lowering. Ye know how to discern the
    face of the heaven; but ye cannot discern the signs of the times.
    An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there
    shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign of Jonah. And he left
    them, and departed.—Matt. 16:1-4.


This demand for a miracle pursued Jesus all through his teaching activity.
He settled with it on principle in his desert temptation; he would not
leap from the pinnacles of the temple, or do anything to turn his work
into a holy circus. But the demand followed him to his death: “If thou art
the Son of God, come down from the cross.” A good, stunning miracle seemed
a short cut to faith, the most convincing way of furnishing proof of his
divine mission. Also, it would be mighty interesting. But he never catered
to the demand. His power was only for the relief of suffering. He tried to
keep his acts of healing private. In this passage he advised his opponents
to use their intellect in more useful directions than stargazing for signs
from heaven. They were weather-wise. Let them read the signs of the times.
Storms were brewing on the horizon. Forty years later Titus destroyed
Jerusalem and broke the back of the Jewish nation. The prophetic mind of
Jesus saw it coming (Luke 19:41-44).

If they had accepted his teaching of peace instead of getting intoxicated
by the visions of revolutionary apocalypticism, the doom might have been
averted. He was trying to bring their feet to the ground, turn their mind
to realities, and make their religion socially efficient.

Would the sight of a miracle have effected a moral change in a Pharisee?

How would religion be affected, if miraculous demonstrations could be
furnished at will?



Sixth Day: When Religion Separates Men


    And as Jesus passed by from thence, he saw a man, called Matthew,
    sitting at the place of toll: and he saith unto him, Follow me.
    And he arose, and followed him.

    And it came to pass, as he sat at meat in the house, behold, many
    publicans and sinners came and sat down with Jesus and his
    disciples. And when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto his
    disciples, Why eateth your Teacher with the publicans and sinners?
    But when he heard it, he said, They that are whole have no need of
    a physician, but they that are sick. But go ye and learn what this
    meaneth, I desire mercy, and not sacrifice: for I came not to call
    the righteous, but sinners.—Matt. 9:9-13.


The Jewish community, religious at the core, had a fringe of people who
had failed to live up to the requirements of the Law. They came under the
condemnation of the respectable people and of their own conscience, and
drifted into the despised and vicious occupations. These were the
“publicans and sinners,” the “publicans and harlots,” to whom the Gospels
refer. A socially efficient religion would have prompted the good people
to establish loving and saving contact with these people. Actually
religion so accentuated the social divergence that the Pharisees were
shocked when Jesus mingled in a friendly way with this class and even
added one of them to his traveling companions. The parables of the lost
coin, lost sheep, and prodigal son were spoken in reply to the slur, “This
man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them” (Luke 15). The elder brother
of the prodigal pictures this loveless and censorious religion.

Jesus crossed the line of demarcation and established social contact and
friendliness, through which salvation could come to these religious
derelicts. He quoted again the old saying of the prophets, “I desire
mercy, and not sacrifice.” God was not as much concerned about correct
religious performances as the Pharisees thought, and a great deal more
concerned about mercy for the fallen, and the simple human qualities which
bring the strong and the weak together.

What experiences have we had of refusal to associate? Was the cleavage
along lines of race, wealth, education, morals, or religion?

_Has religion with us been an impulse toward men, or away from men?_



Seventh Day: Be Useful or Die


    And he spake this parable; A certain man had a fig tree planted in
    his vineyard; and he came seeking fruit thereon, and found none.
    And he said unto the vinedresser, Behold, these three years I come
    seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none: cut it down; why
    doth it also cumber the ground? And he answering saith unto him,
    Lord, let it alone this year also, till I shall dig about it, and
    dung it: and if it bear fruit thenceforth, well; but if not, thou
    shalt cut it down.—Luke 13:6-9.


Jesus evidently had some interest in scientific agriculture. Both the
owner and the vine-dresser in this parable were out for agricultural
efficiency. The owner hated to see soil and space wasted; the vine-dresser
was reluctant to sacrifice a tree, and proposed better tillage and more
fertilizer. Taking this parable in connection with what precedes, we see
that Jesus was concerned about the future of his nation and its religion.
Both would have to validate their right to exist; God could not have them
cumber the ground. They must make good. This is the stern urge of the God
whom we know in history and evolution, with the voice of Christ pleading
for patience. But it is agreed between them that ultimately the law of
fitness must rule. Religion can not bank on claims of antiquity alone.
Every generation must find it newly efficient to create the social virtues
then needed. Remember that this was spoken by a Jewish patriot and the
supreme exponent of the Hebrew religion.

Give historical instances of the permanent downfall or decline of nations.
Trace the connection between their fate and their religion.



Study for the Week


Jesus Christ was the founder of the highest religion; he was himself the
purest religious spirit known to us. Why, then, was he in opposition to
religion? The clash between him and the representatives of organized
religion was not occasional or superficial. It ran through his whole
activity, was one of the dominant notes in his teaching, culminated in the
great spiritual duel between him and the Jewish hierarchy in the last days
at Jerusalem, and led directly to his crucifixion.


I


The opposition of Jesus was not, of course, against religion itself, but
against religion as he found it. It was not directed against any departure
from the legitimate order of the priesthood; nor against an improper
ritual or wrong doctrine of sacrifices. In fact, it did not turn on any of
the issues which were of such importance to the Church in later times. He
criticized the most earnest religious men of his day because their
religion harmed men instead of helping them. It was unsocial, or
anti-social.

The Old Testament prophets also were in opposition to the priestly system
of their time because it used up the religious interest of the people in
ceremonial performances without ethical outcome. It diverted spiritual
energy, by substituting lower religious requirements for the one
fundamental thing which God required—righteousness in social and political
life. They insisted over and over that Jehovah wants righteousness and
wants nothing else. Their aim was to make religion and ethics one and
inseparable. They struck for the social efficiency of religion.

At the time of Jesus the Jewish sacrifices had lost much of their
religious importance. During the Exile they had lapsed. They were
professional performances of one class. The numerous Jews scattered in
other countries perhaps saw the temple once in a lifetime. Modern feeling
in the first century was against bloody sacrifices. The recorded sayings
of Jesus hardly mention them. On the other hand the daily life of the
people was pervaded by little prescribed religious actions. The Sabbath
with its ritual was punctiliously observed.(3) There were frequent days of
fasting, religious ablutions and baths, long prayers to be recited several
times daily, with prayer straps around the arm and forehead, and a
tasseled cloth over the head. The exact performance of these things seemed
an essential part of religion to the most earnest men.

We have seen how Jesus collided with these religious requirements and on
what grounds. If men were deeply concerned about the taboo food that went
into their bodies, they would not be concerned about the evil thoughts
that arose in their souls. If they were taught to focus on petty duties,
such as tithing, the great ethical principles and obligations moved to the
outer field of vision and became blurred. The Sabbath, which had
originated in merciful purpose toward the poor, had been turned into
another burden. Religion, which ought to bring good men into saving
contact with the wayward by love, actually resulted in separating the two
by a chasm of religious pride and censoriousness. A man-made and
artificial religious performance, such as giving toward the support of the
temple, crowded aside fundamental obligations written deep in the
constitution of human society, such as filial reverence and family
solidarity.

Other reformers have condemned religious practices because they were
departures from the holy Book or from primitive custom. Jesus, too,
pointed out that some of these regulations were recent innovations. But
the real standard by which he judged current religious questions was not
ancient authority but the present good of men. The spiritual center on
which he took his stand and from which he judged all things, was the
Kingdom of God, the perfect social order. Even the ordinances of religion
must justify themselves by making an effective contribution to the Kingdom
of God. The Sabbath was made for man, and its observance must meet the
test of service to man’s welfare. It must function wholesomely. The candle
must give light, or what is the use of it? The salt must be salty and
preserve from decay, or it will be thrown out and trodden under foot. If
the fig-tree bears no fruit, why is it allowed to use up space and crowd
better plants off the soil? This, then, is Christ’s test in matters of
institutional religion. The Church and all its doings must serve the
Kingdom of God.


II


The social efficiency of religion is a permanent social problem. What is
the annual expense of maintaining the churches in the United States? How
much capital is invested in the church buildings? (See U. S. Census
Bulletin No. 103, of 1906.) How much care and interest and loving
free-will labor does an average village community bestow on religion as
compared with other objects? All men feel instinctively that religion
exerts a profound and subtle influence on the springs of conduct. Even
those who denounce it, acknowledge at least its power for harm. Most of us
know it as a power for good. But all history shows that this great
spiritual force easily deteriorates. _Corruptio optimi pessima._

Religion may develop an elaborate social apparatus of its own, wheels
within wheels, and instead of being a dynamic of righteousness in the
natural social relations of men, its energies may be consumed in driving
its own machinery. Instead of being the power-house supplying the Kingdom
of God among men with power and light, the Church may exist for its own
sake. It then may become an expensive consumer of social wealth, a
conservative clog, and a real hindrance of social progress.

Live religion gives proof of its value by the sense of freedom, peace, and
elation which it creates. We feel we are right with the holy Power which
is behind, and beneath, and above all things. It gives a satisfying
interpretation of life and of our own place in it. It moves our aims
higher up, draws our fellow-men closer, and invigorates our will.

But our growth sets a problem for our religion. The religion of childhood
will not satisfy adolescent youth, and the religion of youth ought not to
satisfy a mature man or woman. Our soul must build statelier mansions for
itself. Religion must continue to answer all our present needs and inspire
all our present functions. A person who has failed to adjust his religion
to his growing powers and his intellectual horizon, has failed in one of
the most important functions of growth, just as if his cranium failed to
expand and to give room to his brain. Being microcephalous is a
misfortune, and nothing to boast of.

Precisely the same problem arises when society passes through eras of
growth. Religion must keep pace. The Church must pass the burning torch of
religious experience from age to age, transmitting the faith of the
fathers to the children, and not allowing any spiritual values to perish.
But it must allow and aid religion to adjust itself. Its inspiring
teaching must meet the new social problems so effectively that no evil can
last long or grow beyond remedy. In every new age religion must stand the
test of social efficiency. Is it passing that test in Western
civilization?

Religion is a bond of social coherence. It creates loyalty. But it may
teach loyalty to antiquated observances or a dwarfed system of truth. Have
you ever seen believers rallying around a lost cause in religion? Yet
these relics were once a live issue, and full of thrilling religious
vitality.

Society changes. Will religion change with it? If society passes from
agriculture and rural settlements to industry and urban conditions, can
the customary practices of religion remain unchanged? Give some instances
where prescientific conceptions of the universe, embodied in religion,
have blocked the spread of scientific knowledge among the people. The
caste distinctions of Hinduism were the product of a combination between
religion and the social organization of the people; can they last when
industrialism and democracy are pervading India? The clerical attitude of
authority was natural when the Catholic clergy were the only educated
class in the community; is it justified today? Protestantism won the
allegiance of industrial communities when the young business class was
struggling to emancipate itself from the feudal system. It developed an
individualistic philosophy of ethics. Today society tends toward
solidaristic organization. How will that affect religion and its scheme of
duty? Thus religion, by its very virtues of loyalty and reverence, may
fall behind and lose its full social efficiency. It must be geared to the
big live issues of today if it is to manifest its full saving energies.

How does this problem of the efficiency of religion bear on the foreign
missionary movement? How will backward or stationary civilizations be
affected by the introduction of a modern and enthusiastic religion?

We may feel the defects of our church life at home, but there is no doubt
that the young men and women who go out from our colleges under religious
impulses, are felt as a virile and modernizing force when they settle to
their work in Turkey or Persia. Christian educational institutions and
medical missions have raised the intellectual and humane standards of
young China. Buddhism in Japan has felt the challenge of competition and
is readjusting its ethics and philosophy to connect with modern social
ideals. The historical effects of our religious colonization will not
mature for several generations, but they are bound to be very great. The
nations and races are drawing together. They need a monotheistic religion
as a spiritual basis for their sense of human unity. This is a big,
modern, social task. It makes its claim on men and women who have youth,
education, and spiritual power. Is the religious life of our colleges and
universities efficient enough to meet the need?

Here are the enormous tasks of international relations, which the Great
War has forced us to realize—the prevention of armed conflicts, the
elimination of the irritant causes of war, the protection of the small
nations which possess what the big nations covet, the freedom of the seas
as the common highway of God, fair and free interchange in commerce
without any effort to set up monopoly rights and the privilege of
extortionate gain, the creation of an institutional basis for a great
family of nations in days to come. These are some of the tasks which the
men and women who are now young must take on their mind and conscience for
life, and leave to their children to finish. What contributions, in your
opinion, could the spirit of the Christian religion make to such a
program, if it were realized intelligently and pressed home through the
agencies of the Christian Church? In what ways has American religion shown
its efficiency since the war broke out?

Christianity has been a great power in our country to cleanse and
fraternalize the social life of simple communities. Can it meet the
complex needs of modern industrialism in the same way? It can not
truthfully be claimed that it has done so in any industrial country. Its
immense spiritual forces might be the decisive element, but they have been
effectively organized against a few only of the great modern evils. On the
fundamental ethical questions of capitalism the Church has not yet made up
its own mind—not to speak of enforcing the mind of Christ. Nor have the
specialists in the universities and colleges supplied the leaders of the
Church with clear information and guidance on these questions. We can not
make much permanent progress toward a just social order as long as the
masses of the working people in the industrial nations continue in
economic poverty and political helplessness, and as long as a minority
controls the land, the tools, and the political power. We shall linger on
the borders of the Inferno until a new accession of moral insight and
spiritual power comes to the nations. How will it come?


III


What could the churches in an average village community accomplish if they
intelligently directed the power of religion to foster the sense of
fraternal unity and to promote the institutions which make for unity? How
could they draw the new, the strange, and the irregular families into the
circle of neighborly feeling? In what way could they help to assimilate
immigrants and to prevent the formation of several communities in the same
section, overlapping, alien, and perhaps hostile? How would it affect the
recreational situation if the churches took a constructive rather than a
prohibitive attitude toward amusements, and if they promoted the
sociability of the community rather than that of church groups?

With the rise of land prices and the control of transportation and
markets, the rural population is moving toward a social crisis like that
which transformed the urban population in the industrial revolution.
Agriculture will become capitalistic, and the weaker families will drop to
the position of tenants and agricultural laborers. Cooperation is their
way of salvation. Its effectiveness has been amply demonstrated in older
countries. It requires a strong sense of solidarity, loyalty, and good
faith to succeed. It has made so little headway in America because our
national character has not been developed in these directions. What could
the churches do to save the weaker families from social submergence by
backing cooperation and developing the moral qualities needed for it?

The strong religious life of our people might be more effective if the
churches were less divided. Their economic and human resources are partly
wasted by useless competition. Our denominational divisions are nearly all
an historical heritage, imported from Europe, and coming down from a
controversial age. Their issues all meant something vital and socially
important in the midst of the social order of that day; but in many cases
the real significance has quietly crumbled away, and they are not really
the same issues that deeply engaged our forefathers. We are all “tithing
mint, anise, and cummin,” and forgetting the weighty matters, such as
social justice and Christian fraternity. Everybody is ready to acknowledge
this about every denomination except his own. We need a revaluation of our
religious issues from the point of view of the Kingdom of God. That would
bring us into harmony with the judgment of Jesus. Nothing else will.


IV


The social efficiency of religion—what call is there in that to the
college men and women of this generation? Shall they cease to worship and
pray, seek the salvation of society in ethics and sociology, and abandon
religion to stagnation? Or shall they seek a new experience of religion in
full sight of the modern world, and work by faith toward that reign of God
in which his will shall be done?



Suggestions for Thought and Discussion


I. _When the Salt Loses its Savor_

1. What is the individual to do when religion becomes a hindrance to
religion?

2. What types of revolt against inherited religion have you met in
college?

II. _Prophetic Religion Against Traditional Religion_

1. What did the prophets criticize in the religion of their day?

2. What was Jesus’ test of religion?

3. Give instances in which he found religion to be a hindrance to the
highest welfare. How did religion obscure duty?

4. What was the essential cause of the clash between Jesus and the
religious leaders of his day?

III. _The Historic Reformation of Religion_

1. In studying history, what sins or failures of the Church have impressed
you most?

2. What did the Protestant Reformation contribute to make religion
efficient?

3. Has the Church been a rival or a feeder of the Kingdom of God?

4. Give historical examples of the failure of religion to meet the changed
requirements of a new epoch.

5. What contributions has the Church made to social progress?

IV. _Religion Today_

1. What have Christian missions done to change the social conditions in
non-Christian countries?

2. How do you rate the social service value of a first-class minister in a
community? On what does his value depend?

3. Of what social value to a community is a costly and beautiful church
building?

4. What investment in capital and annual expenditure does the maintenance
of the churches in your community entail? Does the social return to the
community justify the investment?

5. Are the issues which divided the Protestant denominations in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries still vital enough to justify the
continuance of the divisions? Summarize the evils of the divisions and
their counter-balancing good.

6. Is the ordinary criticism of the churches fair? Are ministers overpaid
or underpaid? Do the churches graft? How do the churches compare in social
efficiency with other similar social institutions?

V. _For Special Discussion_

1. Why did the reformation of the Church historically precede the reform
of politics and industry?

2. Do the unsolved social problems of Christian nations prove the social
inefficiency of religion? Could religion alone change the maladjustment of
society?

3. Why has religion been more effective in the field of private life than
of public life?

4. If you had full control of the churches in a given country or village
community, on what aims would you concentrate their forces?





