Chapter VI. A New Age And New Standards


_As the Kingdom Comes Ethical Standards Must Advance_

Every approximation to the Reign of God in humanity demands an advance in
the social relations of men, that is, an advance in ethics. Every really
epochal advance must have it or slip back. There must be, first, better
obedience to the moral principles already recognized and accepted by
society; second, an expansion of the sway of ethical duty to new fields
and wider groups of humanity; and third, a recognition of new duties and
the assimilation of new and higher ethical conceptions.

To what extent did Jesus appreciate these supreme needs?

DAILY READINGS



First Day: Living up to the Old Standards


    In the high-priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came
    unto John the son of Zacharias in the wilderness. And he came into
    all the region round about the Jordan, preaching the baptism of
    repentance unto remission of sins; as it is written in the book of
    the words of Isaiah the prophet,

    The voice of one crying in the wilderness,
    Make ye ready the way of the Lord,
    Make his paths straight.
    Every valley shall be filled,
    And every mountain and hill shall be brought low;
    And the crooked shall become straight,
    And the rough ways smooth;
    And all flesh shall see the salvation of God.

    He said therefore to the multitudes that went out to be baptized
    of him, Ye offspring of vipers, who warned you to flee from the
    wrath to come? Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance,
    and begin not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our
    father: for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to
    raise up children unto Abraham. And even now the axe also lieth at
    the root of the trees: every tree therefore that bringeth not
    forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.—Luke 3:2-9.


The ABC of social renewal and moral advance is for each of us to face our
sins sincerely and get on a basis of frankness with God and ourselves.
Therefore Christianity set out with a call for personal repentance. If we
only acted up to what we know to be right, this world would be a different
place. But we fool ourselves with protective coloring devices in order to
keep our own self-respect. Take our language, for instance; it reeks with
evasive euphemisms intended to make nasty sins look prettier. We call
stealing “swiping” and cheating “cribbing.” When we have been drunk we say
we were “squiffy.” As soon as we face the facts, we realize that what we
call peccadilloes in ourselves are the black sins that have slain the
innocents and have hag ridden humanity through all its history. That is
the beginning of social vision. Personal repentance is a social advance.

What equivalent have college men and women for the plea of the Pharisees
that they were Abraham’s children and had a pull with God?



Second Day: Expanding the Area of Obligation


    And behold, a certain lawyer stood up and made trial of him,
    saying, Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? And he
    said unto him, What is written in the law? how readest thou? And
    he answering said, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
    heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with
    all thy mind; and thy neighbor as thyself. And he said unto him,
    Thou hast answered right: this do, and thou shalt live. But he,
    desiring to justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who is my
    neighbor? Jesus made answer and said, A certain man was going down
    from Jerusalem to Jericho; and he fell among robbers, who both
    stripped him and beat him, and departed, leaving him half dead.
    And by chance a certain priest was going down that way: and when
    he saw him, he passed by on the other side. And in like manner a
    Levite also, when he came to the place, and saw him, passed by on
    the other side. But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came
    where he was: and when he saw him, he was moved with compassion,
    and came to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring on them oil and
    wine; and he set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn,
    and took care of him. And on the morrow he took out two shillings,
    and gave them to the host, and said, Take care of him; and
    whatsoever thou spendest more, I, when I come back again, will
    repay thee. Which of these three, thinkest thou, proved neighbor
    unto him that fell among the robbers? And he said, He that showed
    mercy on him. And Jesus said unto him, Go, and do thou
    likewise.—Luke 10:25-37.


A meaty story and a famous one. The lawyer found his own answer
uncomfortably simple when it was taken up in such a matter-of-fact way. It
was suddenly up to him to act on his own advice. He tried to hedge by
raising a new question: “Love my neighbor? Certainly. But who is my
neighbor?” Who is within the cordon of fraternal fellowship with me? All
men of my people and religion? Or only the good and desirable people?
Where do you draw the line? Follows the story of the Good Samaritan. “Your
neighbor? The alien and the heretic.” The logic of the reply demanded that
some good Jew would be shown caring for a wounded Samaritan. Jesus gives
it a smashing effectiveness by reversing the role and showing the hated
Samaritan as the heroic lover of his kind. To get the situation we must
remember the historic enmity between the Jews and the half-breed aliens
who had stolen their land and their religion while they were exiled. If we
substitute Spaniard and Moor, Kurd and Armenian, Serb and Bulgar, we may
get the tension.

_Who are our American Samaritans?_



Third Day: Raising the Standards


We must live up to what we know is right, and we must expand the area of
ethical obligation to take in even men of alien race and hostile religion.
But beyond that, we need a conscious advance in the ethical standards
themselves. Jesus worked out this principle with perfect clearness in a
part of the Sermon on the Mount, Matthew 5:17-48. He states the need, and
then shows in six cases how such an advance would work out. We shall take
these up in their order. Matthew has introduced scattered sayings of Jesus
which serve as corollaries, but which do not bear directly on the real
course of the argument; for instance, Matthew 5:23-26; 29-30. In our
quotations in this and the following days we shall confine ourselves to
the main line of thought in order to concentrate attention on that.


    Think not that I came to destroy the law or the prophets: I came
    not to destroy, but to fulfil.... For I say unto you, that except
    your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes
    and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of
    heaven.—Matt. 5:17, 20.


Apparently conservative Jews soon felt the spiritual freedom and force in
the teachings of Jesus. He seemed to them to be attacking the sacred Law,
the foundation of morality and religion. Jesus mentions the charge but
denies it. His purpose was not destructive but constructive. He demanded
not less righteousness but more. The lines of right living needed to be
prolonged. The traditional standards were no longer adequate. A man might
obey them and yet not be a good man. The scribes and Pharisees were the
model church members of Judaism and experts in piety, yet they were not
qualified to enter the Kingdom of God.

_Are we also good people who are not good enough?_



Fourth Day: The Sins of Hate


    Ye have heard that it was said to them of old time, Thou shalt not
    kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment:
    but I say unto you, that every one who is angry with his brother
    shall be in danger of the judgment; and whosoever shall say to his
    brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council; and whosoever
    shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of the hell of
    fire.—Matt. 5:21, 22.


The Law of Moses forbade murder; a man-slayer was amenable in the ordinary
court. Was this an adequate expression of the sacredness of human life and
personality? It never even scratched a man or woman who assaulted the soul
of another with anger and curses. Jesus proposed that these sins be
restandardized. Plain anger ought to be valued about as murder used to be.
And if anybody went so far as to revile a brother and deny his moral or
intellectual worth, the Supreme Court and Gehenna would be about right for
him. The lawyers’ gauge of culpability can not get down to the subtler
expressions of lovelessness which break the prime law of the Kingdom.

_By what methods is contempt expressed in our own social life?_

_How highly do we rate the moral value of self-respect?_



Fifth Day: The Sins of Sex


    Ye have heard that it was said, Thou shalt not commit adultery:
    but I say unto you, that every one that looketh on a woman to lust
    after her hath committed adultery with her already in his
    heart....

    It was said also, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give
    her a writing of divorcement: but I say unto you, that every one
    that putteth away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication,
    maketh her an adulteress; and whosoever shall marry her when she
    is put away committeth adultery.—Matt. 5:27, 28; 31, 32.


These two cases deal with sex. The old law forbade adultery, the
infringement of family life, and stopped there. Jesus goes back of the act
to the lustful imaginations and the wandering eye, which may lack
opportunity but which are the real spring of all uncleanness. He runs the
line of ethical obligation farther back.

The law of divorce (Deut. 24:1), especially as interpreted by the scribes,
was very comfortable—for the male. He could divorce his wife for almost
any cause. Her only protection was that a formal paper had to be given her
which enabled her to marry again. As a woman’s economic and social
standing in that age depended almost wholly on her family relations, she
was at the mercy of the man. Jesus demanded more protection for her. To
him the relation was indissoluble. The Mosaic provision for divorce was a
concession to the low moral level of the people. The ideal was the “one
man, one woman” provision of the Creator. (See Matt. 19:3-8). The
disciples ruefully remarked that such a strengthening of the bond did not
add to the attractiveness of marriage—for the male (19:10).

Where do we draw the line between the rightful, natural desire of sex and
lawless predatory lust?



Sixth Day: The Sins of Words


    Again, ye have heard that it was said to them of old time, Thou
    shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine
    oaths: but I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by the
    heaven, for it is the throne of God; nor by the earth, for it is
    the footstool of his feet; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of
    the great King. Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, for thou
    canst not make one hair white or black. But let your speech be,
    Yea, yea; Nay, nay: and whatsoever is more than these is of the
    evil one.—Matt. 5:33-37.


Current morality had reached the point of insisting on truthfulness when a
man was under oath. Solemnly to call God to witness a statement and yet to
fool your neighbor by it, was downright wicked. But it was very handy. So
they developed a joyful lot of casuistical distinctions as to which kind
of oaths were binding and which didn’t count. See how Jesus ridiculed this
(Matt. 23:16-22). Here he proposed that the obligation of veracity be
extended to all statements. A truthful man needs no oaths to assure a
doubting world that this time he is really telling what is so. Oaths are a
device of the devil to limit the amount of truth in the world.

How about oaths for legal purposes? Could they be dispensed with? Have
they done more good or harm?



Seventh Day: The Sins of Strife


    Ye have heard that it was said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for
    a tooth: but I say unto you, Resist not him that is evil: but
    whosoever smiteth thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other
    also. And if any man would go to law with thee, and take away thy
    coat, let him have thy cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee
    to go one mile, go with him two. Give to him that asketh thee, and
    from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou away.

    Ye have heard that it was said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and
    hate thine enemy: but I say unto you, Love your enemies, and pray
    for them that persecute you; that ye may be sons of your Father
    who is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and
    the good, and sendeth rain on the just and the unjust. For if ye
    love them that love you, what reward have ye? do not even the
    publicans the same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do
    ye more than others? do not even the Gentiles the same? Ye
    therefore shall be perfect, as your heavenly Father is
    perfect.—Matt. 5:38-48.


The Law restricted the natural desire for revenge to the limit of a strict
equivalent. If a man knocked out your tooth, you could knock out one for
him, but not two teeth, nor all he had. Of course retaliation never heals
a feud. Jesus proposes to limit revenge still farther and to retaliate
only by acts of kindness. That is, in fact, the only way to end a quarrel
completely and victoriously. It reestablishes fellowship and kills an
enemy.

The Law called for love for one’s neighbors; the scribes had added the
permission to hate one’s enemies. Jesus raises the standards of good-will.
The law of love applies to all. There is nothing great in loving those who
love us. Anybody can do that. Heroic love begins where no love comes to
meet it. Those who can win that triumph show the true family likeness of
God, and are now living in his Kingdom.

_What are our personal experiences as to the utility of revenge?_

_What is the difference between the non-resistance which Jesus proposed,
and cowardice?_

_Is there such a thing in fact as loving your enemies?_



Study for the Week


I


The Hebrew religion was an unfinished religion. That is one of the best
proofs of its divine inspiration. The prophets had the forward look. Great
things were yet to come. As one of the most daring expressed it, the old
and hallowed covenant, made by God at the Exodus, would be superseded by a
new and higher relation; God would write his law into the hearts of the
people; the old drill in outward statutes would disappear, for all men
would know God by an inward experience of forgiveness and love (Jeremiah
31:31-34).

Jesus not only shared this expectation of a new religious era, but set it
in the center of his teaching. Religion to him was not static. He lived in
a moving world. A new age was coming, and he would be the initiator of it.
“From the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of God suffereth
violence, and men of violence take it by force.” John had been the
greatest of the prophets; with him a new swift movement had begun; but
something far greater was coming; even the least in the new age would have
an advantage over John (Matt. 11:11-19).

The popular conception expected the new age to come by divine miraculous
interference simply. The Messiah would descend from heaven with angelic
legions, expel the Romans, judge the nation, punish the apostate Jews, and
then the new Jerusalem, which was already complete and waiting in heaven,
would descend from above. That was the Utopia of Jewish apocalypticism.
Jesus never eliminated the direct acts of God and the significance of
divine catastrophes from his outlook. But in his parables taken from
biological processes (see especially Matthew 13) he developed a conception
of continuous and quiet growth, culminating at last in the judgment act of
God. The Kingdom of God, he said, is like a farmer who sows his grain and
lets the forces of nature work; he goes about his daily tasks, and all the
time the tiny blades come up, the ear forms and gets heavy, and then comes
the harvest (Mark 4:26-29). Jesus was working his way toward evolutionary
conceptions. They were so new to his followers that he put them in parable
form to avoid antagonism.

Such a conception of the Kingdom brought it closer to human action. It was
already at work; it was in one sense already present (Luke 17:20-21). It
was possible then to help it along.

The most obvious duty was for every man to clean up his own backyard and
repent of his sins. Every one should approximate the life of the Kingdom
by living now as he would expect to live then. But, as we have seen from
his sayings, Jesus went far beyond this. He demanded an elevation of the
accepted ethical standards. It was not simply a matter of erring and
lagging individuals, but of the socialized norms of conduct. He had deep
reverence and loyalty for the religion of his nation, and never told his
followers to break with it. But he asserted boldly that the customary
ethics of Judaism, based on the Decalogue and its interpretation by the
Jewish theologians, was not good enough. It was good as far as it went,
and he had no destructive criticism of it, but it needed to be “fulfilled”
and to have its lines prolonged.

We have studied the six sample instances which he offered in order to
explain his principle of moral and social progress. In each case he
accepts the law as it stood, but asks for more of the same thing, more
respect for personality, more reverence for womanhood, more stability for
the home, more truthfulness, more peacefulness, more love. Thus he
combined continuity with progress, conservatism with radicalism.


II


The platform for ethical progress laid down in the Sermon on the Mount is
a great platform. When Tolstoi first realized the social significance of
these simple sentences, it acted as a revelation which changed his life.
Even men who reject the supernatural claims of Christianity uncover before
the Sermon on the Mount. Yet its fate is tragic. It has not been “damned
with faint praise,” but made ineffective by universal praise. Its
commandments are lifted so high that nobody feels under obligations to act
on them. Only small sections of the Christian Church have taken the
sayings on oaths, non-resistance, and love of enemies to mean what they
say and to be obligatory. Yet all feel that the line of ethical and social
advance must lie in the direction traced by Jesus, and if society could
only climb out of the present pit of predatory selfishness and meanness to
that level, it would be heaven.

Do you and I believe in it? Do we believe that it is not enough to keep
out of the spiritual hell and damnation of adultery, but that a clean mind
would be the most efficient and cheerful mind? Do we believe that a man
who forgives and keeps sweet is happier and safer than a man who always
resents things and stirs the witches’ caldron of hate in his soul? If a
man loved his enemy and turned the other cheek, would he be everybody’s
door-mat or everybody’s temple of refuge?

Suppose we mark for the present those parts which we are willing to accept
as our own standards of action. If there are portions which do not seem
practicable, let us post them in our minds as debatable propositions, as
points to be tested by the experience of coming years, or as working
hypotheses in the science of living.

But whatever we may think of single points, let us stick to the leading
thought of Jesus, that every advance toward the Kingdom of God, that is,
toward the true social order, involves a raising of the ethical standards
accepted by society. This is a principle of social progress which every
leading intellect ought to know by heart.


III


When Jesus offered his six sample cases of ethical progress, he had no
intention of exhausting the principle of advance which he laid down. There
was more to say about the Jewish law. It is now for his followers to treat
the inherited ethical conceptions of traditional Christianity with the
same combination of reverence and courage with which he treated the Jewish
law.

From the beginning Christianity taught self-control and the mastery of the
spirit over physical desires. It always condemned drunkenness. But ancient
Christianity never demanded abstinence from fermented drink. With modern
methods of manufacturing alcoholic drinks and modern capitalistic methods
of pushing their sale, the danger has become more pressing. With modern
scientific knowledge the physiological and social problems of drink have
become clearer. Modern life demands an undrugged nervous system for quick
and steady reactions. It was said of old time, “Thou shalt not get drunk”;
but today the spirit of Christianity and modern life says, “Thou shalt not
drink nor sell intoxicants at all.”

In every case in which the interests of woman came before Jesus, he took
her side. At that time woman was the suppressed half of humanity. The
attitude of historic Christianity has been a mixture between his spirit
and the spirit of the patriarchal family. Today Christianity is plainly
prolonging the line of respect and spiritual valuation to the point of
equality between men and women—and beyond.

From the beginning an emancipating force resided in Christianity which was
bound to register its effects in political life. But in an age of
despotism it might have to confine its political morality to the duty of
patient submission, and content itself with offering little sanctuaries of
freedom to the oppressed in the Christian fraternities. Today, in the age
of democracy, it has become immoral to endure private ownership of
government. It is no longer a sufficient righteousness to live a good life
in private. Christianity needs an ethic of public life.

It was said of old “Thou shalt not commit murder.” It is said to us, “Ye
shall not wear down life in the young by premature hard labor; nor let the
fear of poverty freeze the fountain of life; and ye shall put a stop to
war.”

It was said of old, “Thou shalt not steal.” It is said to us, “Ye shall
take no unearned gain from your fellows, but pay to society in productive
labor what ye take from it in goods.”


IV


This matter of raising the moral standards of society is preeminently an
affair of the young. They must do it or it will never be done. The Sermon
on the Mount was spoken by a young man, and it moves with the impetuous
virility of youth. The old are water-logged physically. They are mentally
bound up with the institutions inside of which they have spent a lifetime,
and they want to enjoy in peace the wealth and position they have
attained. We shall be just the same forty years from now. But while we are
young is the time to make a forward run with the flag of Christ, the
banner of justice and love, and plant it on the heights yonder. We must
not only be better men and women than we are now. We must leave a better
world behind us when we are through with it. Whatever we affirm in our
growing years will work out in some fashion in our years of maturity and
power. If fifty thousand college men and women a year would range
themselves alongside of Jesus Christ, look at our present world as
open-eyed as he looked at his world, see where the social standards of
conduct are in contradiction with his spirit and with modern need, and
work to raise them, the world would feel the effect in ten years. And
those who would strive in that way would live by faith in the higher
commonwealth of God and have some of its nobility of spirit.



Suggestions for Thought and Discussion


I. _Living Up to the Old Standards_

1. What would happen if a college community began to live up to the
standards of work and honor which all acknowledge?

2. Does human nature welcome a moral advance?

II. _The Ethical Program of Jesus_

1. What advance does Jesus’ program make necessary? State the main
principle in Matt. 5:17-48, and the six applications made by Jesus
himself. How was this principle connected with his idea of the Kingdom?

2. Can we agree with the principle? How far can we go with Jesus in his
application?

3. Would a man get more or less satisfaction out of life if he obeyed
these maxims in private life?

4. How far could a man hold his own if he obeyed them in a reasonable way
in business or in public life? If a man loved his enemies and turned the
other cheek, would he be everybody’s doormat or everybody’s friend and
refuge?

III. _Raising the Standards Today_

1. On what ethical questions have we come to the point where the moral
standards accepted by society can be and must be raised?

2. If you could purchase one single advance by your life, what would you
choose?

3. How does an expansion of the area of full social obligation operate to
raise the standards of conduct? Who is my neighbor, and who is not?

IV. _For Special Discussion_

1. A new intellectual age has opened with the rise of modern science; what
new moral standards should be the result of our new knowledge?

2. A new economic age opened with the invention of power machinery and the
social organization of labor; what new moral standards should have been
the result of the new wealth of civilization?

3. A new political era opened with the rise of democracy; what new moral
standards should be achieved in the life of States and cities?

4. A new era began in world-wide relations with the beginning of
steam-carried commerce; what new standards are needed for international
and inter-racial relations?





