Chapter VIII. Private Property And The Common Good


_Private Property Must Serve Social Welfare_

A glance across history or a simple acquaintance with human life in any
community will show us that private property is at the same time a
necessary expression of personality and stimulator of character, and, on
the other hand, a chief outlet and fortification of selfishness. Every
reformatory effort must aim to conserve and spread the blessings of
property, and every step toward a better social order will be pugnaciously
blocked by its selfish beneficiaries.

What were Jesus’ convictions about private property?

DAILY READINGS



First Day: The Rival Interest


    And he spake to them many things in parables, saying, Behold, the
    sower went forth to sow; and as he sowed, some seeds fell by the
    way side, and the birds came and devoured them: and others fell
    upon the rocky places, where they had not much earth: and
    straightway they sprang up, because they had no deepness of earth:
    and when the sun was risen, they were scorched; and because they
    had no root, they withered away. And others fell upon the thorns;
    and the thorns grew up and choked them: and others fell upon the
    good ground, and yielded fruit, some a hundredfold, some sixty,
    some thirty.... When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and
    understandeth it not, then cometh the evil one, and snatcheth away
    that which hath been sown in his heart. This is he that was sown
    by the way side. And he that was sown upon the rocky places, this
    is he that heareth the word, and straight-way with joy receiveth
    it; yet hath he not root in himself, but endureth for a while; and
    when tribulation or persecution ariseth because of the word,
    straightway he stumbleth. And he that was sown among the thorns,
    this is he that heareth the word; and the care of the world, and
    the deceitfulness of riches, choke the word, and he becometh
    unfruitful. And he that was sown upon the good ground, this is he
    that heareth the word, and understandeth it; who verily beareth
    fruit, and bringeth forth, some a hundredfold, some sixty, some
    thirty.—Matt. 13:3-8; 19-23.


This parable was intended to explain to the disciples why the Kingdom was
not coming with a rush, as they expected. The story embodies the practical
experiences of Jesus in his propaganda. He saw his work as a duplication
of the sower’s work on a higher level. The success of both depends on the
receptiveness of the soil. The sower encounters hard trodden ground, rocky
patches, and spots where hardy thorns or thistles drain the soil and where
his work produces only empty ears and futile beginnings. So Jesus met the
stolid conservative and also the emotional type. But the climax of his
difficulties was a mind preoccupied by property worries, or lured by the
illusions of wealth. He early found, then, that devotion to property is
likely to be a rival to the higher interests and the common good.

How do modern social groups line up when measured by spiritual
receptiveness?



Second Day: The Accumulator


    And one out of the multitude said unto him, Teacher, bid my
    brother divide the inheritance with me. But he said unto him, Man,
    who made me a judge or a divider over you? And he said unto them,
    Take heed, and keep yourselves from all covetousness: for a man’s
    life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he
    possesseth. And he spoke a parable unto them, saying, The ground
    of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully; and he reasoned
    within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have not where
    to bestow my fruits? And he said, This will I do: I will pull down
    my barns, and build greater; and there will I bestow all my grain
    and my goods. And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much
    goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, be
    merry. But God said unto him, Thou foolish one, this night is thy
    soul required of thee; and the things which thou hast prepared,
    whose shall they be? So is he that layeth up treasure for himself,
    and is not rich toward God.—Luke 12:13-21.


Most men today would have no fault to find with this man. He was only
doing what the modern world is unanimously trying to do. Having made a
pile, he proposed to make a bigger pile. Meanwhile he slapped his soul on
the back and smacked his lips in anticipation. To Jesus the fat farmer was
a tragic comedy. In the first place, an unseen hand was waiting to snuff
out his candle. To plan life as if it consisted in an abundance of
material wealth is something of a miscalculation in a world where death is
part of the scheme of things. In the second place, Jesus saw no higher
purpose in the man’s aim and outlook to redeem his acquisitiveness. The
man was a sublimated chipmunk, gloating over bushels of pignuts. If wealth
is saved to raise and educate children, or achieve some social good, it
deserves moral respect or admiration. But if the acquisitive instinct is
without social feeling or vision, and centered on self, it gets no
respect, at least from Jesus.

Unlimited acquisition used to be considered immoral and dishonorable. How
and when did public opinion change on this?



Third Day: Quit Grafting


    And the multitudes asked him, saying, What then must we do? And he
    answered and said unto them, He that hath two coats, let him
    impart to him that hath none; and he that hath food, let him do
    likewise. And there came also publicans to be baptized, and they
    said unto him, Teacher, what must we do? And he said unto them,
    Extort no more than that which is appointed you. And soldiers also
    asked him, saying, And we, what must we do? And he said unto them,
    Extort from no man by violence, neither accuse any one wrongfully;
    and be content with your wages.—Luke 3:10-14.


The social teachings of John the Baptist were so close to those of Jesus
that we can safely draw on them in this passage.

John told the people that a new era was coming and they would have to get
a new mind and manner of life as an outfit for it. The people asked for
specifications. John’s suggestions ran along two lines. He encouraged the
plain working people to be neighborly and friendly, and share with a man
who was hard up. With powerful individuals, like hired soldiers and Roman
tax-farmers, he insisted that they must quit using their physical force
and legal power as a cinch to extort money. In other words, they must quit
grafting. In the Kingdom of God the “big, black book of graft” will be
closed, and men will no longer eat their protesting fellow-men. The more
we realize that some form of graft is at the bottom of most easy incomes,
the more good sense will we see in this kind of evangelism.

Have we ever been a victim of extortion? How did it feel? Did it sour the
milk of human kindness in us?



Fourth Day: God versus Mammon


    Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon the earth, where moth and
    rust consume, and where thieves break through and steal: but lay
    up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust
    doth consume, and where thieves do not break through nor steal:
    for where thy treasure is there will thy heart be also. The lamp
    of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy
    whole body shall be full of light. But if thine eye be evil, thy
    whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that
    is in thee be darkness, how great is the darkness! No man can
    serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the
    other; or else he will hold to one, and despise the other. Ye
    cannot serve God and mammon.—Matt. 6:19-24.


Acquisition may operate on different planes. A man may accumulate material
stuff, or he may acquire spiritual faculties, memories, and relations. In
a balanced life the two work side by side in peace, and each may aid the
other. But the experience of all spiritual teachers shows that practically
the acquisition of property often becomes a passion which absorbs the man
and leaves little energy for the higher pursuits. Most men who have used
up their life to acquire wealth look back with homesickness to some
idealistic aspiration of their youth as to a lost Edenland. Jesus felt the
antagonism of private wealth and the Kingdom of God so keenly that he set
God and Mammon over against each other, and warned us that we must choose
between them. Placed in this connection, the saying about the darkening of
the inner light seems to refer to the influence of money-getting on the
higher vision of the soul. This entire passage is fundamental and will
explain other sayings which follow.

Do God and money come into flat collision in college life?



Fifth Day: The Divisive Influence of Riches


    Now there was a certain rich man, and he was clothed in purple and
    fine linen, faring sumptuously every day: and a certain beggar
    named Lazarus was laid at his gate, full of sores, and desiring to
    be fed with the crumbs that fell from the rich man’s table; yea,
    even the dogs came and licked his sores. And it came to pass, that
    the beggar died, and that he was carried away by the angels into
    Abraham’s bosom: and the rich man also died, and was buried. And
    in Hades he lifted up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth
    Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom. And he cried and said,
    Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may
    dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am
    in anguish in this flame. But Abraham said, Son, remember that
    thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and Lazarus in
    like manner evil things: but now here he is comforted, and thou
    art in anguish. And besides all this, between us and you there is
    a great gulf fixed, that they that would pass from hence to you
    may not be able, and that none may cross over from thence to us.
    And he said, I pray thee therefore, father, that thou wouldest
    send him to my father’s house; for I have five brethren; that he
    may testify unto them, lest they also come into this place of
    torment. But Abraham saith, They have Moses and the prophets; let
    them hear them. And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one go to
    them from the dead, they will repent. And he said unto him, If
    they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be
    persuaded, if one rise from the dead.—Luke 16:19-31.


Why does Jesus send the rich man to hell as if it were a matter of course?
No crimes or vices are alleged. It must be that a life given over to
sumptuous living and indifferent to the want and misery of a fellow-man at
the doorstep seemed to Jesus a deeply immoral and sinful life. Jesus
exerted all his energies to bring men close together in love. But wealth
divides. It creates semi-human relations between social classes, so that a
small dole seems to be a full discharge of obligations toward the poor,
and manly independence and virtue may be resented as offensive. The sting
of this parable is in the reference to the five brothers who were still
living as Dives had lived, and whom he was vainly trying to reach by
wireless. See verse 14 in explanation.

Is it fair to call the relations between the selfish rich and the
dependent poor “semi-human relations”?



Sixth Day: Get a Plank for the Deluge


    And he said also unto the disciples, There was a certain rich man,
    who had a steward; and the same was accused unto him that he was
    wasting his goods. And he called him, and said unto him, What is
    this that I hear of thee? render the account of thy stewardship;
    for thou canst be no longer steward. And the steward said within
    himself, What shall I do, seeing that my lord taketh away the
    stewardship from me? I have not strength to dig; to beg I am
    ashamed. I am resolved what to do, that, when I am put out of the
    stewardship, they may receive me into their houses. And calling to
    him each one of his lord’s debtors, he said to the first, How much
    owest thou unto my lord? And he said, A hundred measures of oil.
    And he said unto him, Take thy bond, and sit down quickly and
    write fifty. Then said he to another, And how much owest thou? And
    he said, A hundred measures of wheat. He saith unto him, Take thy
    bond, and write fourscore. And his lord commended the unrighteous
    steward because he had done wisely: for the sons of this world are
    for their own generation wiser than the sons of the light. And I
    say unto you, Make to yourselves friends by means of the mammon of
    unrighteousness; that, when it shall fail, they may receive you
    into the eternal tabernacles.—Luke 16:1-9.


This is one of the wittiest stories in the Bible and must be read with
some sense of humor. The tenant farmers of a great estate paid their rent
in shares of the produce. This elastic system offered the steward a chance
to make something on the side. He was found out and discharged, but while
he was closing up his accounts he still had a short spell of authority.
Things looked dark. He did not care to blister his white hands with a
hoe-handle, nor his social pride by begging. So he grafted one last graft,
but on so large a scale that the tenants would be under lasting
obligations to him. The scamp was a crook, but at least he was
long-headed. Jesus wished the children of light were as clever in taking a
long look ahead as the children of this world. In that case men would get
ready for the new age, in which mammon loses its buying power, by making
friends with it now, and their friends would take them in as guests after
the great reversal.

How do you like the humorous independence of Jesus?



Seventh Day: Stranded on His Wealth


    And a certain ruler asked him, saying, Good Teacher, what shall I
    do to inherit eternal life? And Jesus said unto him, Why callest
    thou me good? none is good, save one, even God. Thou knowest the
    commandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal,
    Do not bear false witness, Honor thy father and mother. And he
    said, All these things have I observed from my youth up. And when
    Jesus heard it, he said unto him, One thing thou lackest yet: sell
    all that thou hast, and distribute unto the poor, and thou shalt
    have treasure in heaven: and come, follow me. But when he heard
    these things, he became exceeding sorrowful; for he was very rich.
    And Jesus seeing him said, How hardly shall they that have riches
    enter into the kingdom of God! For it is easier for a camel to
    enter in through a needle’s eye, than for a rich man to enter into
    the kingdom of God.—Luke 18:18-25.


A fine young man, of clean and conscientious life, but with unsatisfied
aspirations in his soul. Jesus invites him to a more heroic type of
excellence, cutting loose from his wealth and devoting himself to the
apostolate of the Kingdom of God. It was a great chance for a great life.
He might have stood for God before kings and mobs, and ranked with Peter,
John, and Paul as a household name. He did not rise to his chance. What
held him? Jesus felt it was his wealth. A poor man would have had less to
leave, and might have left it cheerfully. So Jesus sums up the
psychological situation in the saddened exclamation that it is exceedingly
hard for a rich man to enter the Kingdom where men live in justice,
fraternity, and idealism.

Have you noticed that in recent years an increasing number of this man’s
grandsons are trying to cut loose and find the real life, eternal life?
Can you name any?



Study for the Week


Evidently the dangers connected with property were much in the mind of
Jesus. He seems to have emphasized them more fully and frequently than the
evils of licentiousness or drunkenness. The modern Church has reversed the
relative emphasis. Why?

Of course we must not look for the methods or viewpoints of political
economy in his teachings. His concern was for the spiritual vitality and
soundness of the individual, and for the human relations existing among
men. He was interested in property only in so far as it corrupted the
higher nature or made fraternity difficult. But let no one underestimate
the importance of these considerations. These things are the real end of
life. All the rest is scaffolding. We should be farther along if the
economic and social sciences had kept these fundamental questions more
sternly in sight.


I


Plainly Jesus felt that the acquisitive instinct, like the sex instinct,
easily breaks bounds and becomes ravenous; there is even less natural
limit to it. It absorbs the energies of intellect and will. As with the
rich fool, the horizon of life is filled with chances to make the pile
grow bigger. Life seems to consist of money, and the problems of money.

People are valued according to that standard. Marriages are arranged for
it. Politics is run for it. Wars are begun for it. Creative artistic and
intellectual impulses are shouldered aside, fall asleep, or die of
inanition. Property is intended to secure freedom of action and
self-development; in fact, it often chains men and clips their wings. This
is what Jesus calls “the deceitfulness of riches” and “the darkening of
the inner eye.”(2)

In addition to the blight of character, wealth exerts a desocializing and
divisive influence. It wedges apart groups that belong together. Dives and
Lazarus may live in the front and rear of the same block, but with no
sense of solidarity. Dives would have been deeply moved, perhaps, if one
of his own class had punctured a tire in the Philistian desert and gone
for two days without any food except crumbs. The separation of humanity
into classes on the lines of wealth is so universal and so orthodox that
few of us ever realize that it flouts all the principles of Christianity
and humanity.

In the case of the young ruler Jesus encountered the fact that wealth bars
men out of the world of their ideals. The question was not whether the
young man could get to heaven, but whether he could have a share in the
real life, in the kingdom of right relations. It is hard to acquire great
wealth without doing injustice to others; it is hard to possess it and yet
deal with others on the basis of equal humanity; it is hard to give it
away even without doing mischief.

We have seen that Jesus believed profoundly in the value and dignity of
human life; that he sought to create solidarity; that he was chiefly
concerned for the saving of the lowly; and that he demanded an heroic life
in the service of the Kingdom of God. But wealth, as he saw it, flouted
the value of life, dissolved the spiritual solidarity of whole classes,
and kept the lowly low; the wealthy had lost the capacity for an heroic
life.

This is radical teaching. What shall we say to it? Jesus is backed by the
Old Testament prophets and the most spiritual teaching of the Hebrew
people, which condemned injustice and extortionate money-making even more
energetically than did Jesus. Medieval Christianity sincerely assented to
the principle that private property is a danger to the soul and a
neutralizer of love. Every monastic community tried to cut under sex
dangers by celibacy, and property dangers by communism. This was an
enormous misinterpretation of Christianity, but it shows that men took the
teachings on the dangers of private property seriously. The modern
Christian world does not. It has quietly set aside the ideas of Jesus on
this subject, lives its life without much influence from them, and
contents itself with emphasizing other aspects.

Has the teaching of Jesus on private property been superseded by a better
understanding of the social value of property? Or has his teaching been
suppressed and swamped by the universal covetousness of modern life? “Our
moral pace-setters strike at bad personal habits, but act as if there was
something sacred about money-getting; and, _seeing that the master
iniquities of our time are connected with money-making_, they do not get
into the fight at all. The child-drivers, monopoly-builders, and crooked
financiers have no fear of men whose thought is run in the moulds of their
grandfathers. Go to the tainted-money colleges, and you will learn that
Drink, not Graft, is the nation’s bane” (Edward A. Ross, “Sin and Society,
an Analysis of Latter-day Iniquity,” p. 97—the italics are his).


II


The machinery for making money which Jesus knew, was simple, crude, and
puny compared with the complicated and pervasive system which the magnates
of modern industry have built up. There was probably not a millionaire in
all Palestine. What would he have said to our great cities?

We need a Christian ethics of property, more perhaps than anything else.
The wrongs connected with wealth are the most vulnerable point of our
civilization. Unless we can make that crooked place straight, all our
charities and religion are involved in hypocrisy.

We have to harmonize the two facts, that wealth is good and necessary, and
that wealth is a danger to its possessor and to society. On the one hand
property is indispensable to personal freedom, to all higher
individuality, and to self-realization; the right to property is a
corollary of the right to life; without property men are at the mercy of
nature and in bondage to those who have property. On the other hand
property is used as a means of collecting tribute and private taxes, as a
club with which to extort unearned gain from laborers and consumers, and
as the fundamental tool of oppression.

Where do we draw the line? Is it true that property created by productive
labor is a great moralizer, and that property acquired without productive
labor is the great demoralizer? Is it correct that property for use is on
the whole good, and property for power is a menace?

What is the relation between property and self-development? At what point
does property become excessive? At what point does food become excessive
and poisonous? At what point does fertilizer begin to kill a plant? Would
any real social values be lost if incomes averaged $2,000 and none
exceeded $10,000?

To what extent does a moral purpose take the dangers out of acquisition?

Is any life moral in which the natural capacities are not sincerely taxed
to do productive work? If a man’s wealth is destined to cut his
descendants off from productive labor, is it a blessing? What is the moral
difference between strenuous occupation and labor? How large a proportion
of our time and energy can be devoted to play and leisure without
softening our moral fiber?

At what points does private property come to be anti-social? If we could
eliminate the monopoly elements and the capacity to levy tribute, would
there be much danger in the remainder?

Does private property, in the enormous aggregations of today and in
control of the essential outfit of society, still correspond to the
essential theoretical conception of private property, or have public
properties and public functions fallen under private control? “Much that
we are accustomed to hear called legitimate insistence upon the rights of
property, the Old Testament would seem to call the robbery of God, and
grinding the faces of the poor” (The Bishop of Oxford).


III


The religious spirit will always have to call the individual farther than
the law can compel him to go. After all unjust and tainted portions have
been eliminated from our property, religion lays its hands on the rest and
says, “You are only a steward over this.” In the parables of the talents,
the pounds, and the unjust steward, Jesus argues on the assumption that
our resources are a trust, and not absolute property. We manage and
control them, but always under responsibility. We hold them from God, and
his will has eminent domain. But the will of God is identical with the
good of mankind. When we hold property in trust for God, we hold it for
humanity, of which we are part. We misuse the trust if by it we deprive
others of health, freedom, joy, hope, or efficiency, for instance, by
overworking others and underworking our own children.



Suggestions for Thought and Discussion


I. _The Love of Money_

1. Define graft. What is wrong in it? Where do we see it? Where are we
myopic about it?

2. Why did Jesus have so much to say about money and so little about
drink? Why does Paul call the love of money “the root of all evil”?

II. _Jesus’ Fear of Riches_

1. On what ground does Jesus fear the influence of riches and of their
accumulation?

2. Summarize Jesus’ teachings regarding wealth.

3. In what respects is his attitude different from the ordinary viewpoint
of the modern world?

4. Was Jesus opposed to the owning of farming tools or fishing smacks?
Where would he draw the line between honest earnings and dangerous wealth?

5. Was his teaching on wealth ascetic? Was it socialistic?

6. To what extent should we recognize his insight on this question as
authority for us?

III. _The Problem of Wealth in the Modern World_

I. Are the "master iniquities" of our age located in sex life, politics,
or business?

2. Distinguish between “property for use” and “property for power.”

3. What are the moral evils created by mass poverty? By aggregations of
wealthy families?

4. Why has the modern world set aside Jesus’ teachings about wealth? To
what extent have we substituted a better understanding of the social value
of property? How far should we be satisfied with our present adjustment of
the property question?

5. What methods of money making are condemned by the common sentiment of
the Church? Is there anything which ought to be included in this
condemnation? If so, what?

IV. _The Christian Attitude Toward Property and Wealth Under Modern
Conditions_

1. At what point does the amassing of private property become contrary to
the principles of Jesus?

2. What legalized property rights are antagonistic to Jesus’ principles?

3. How can society accumulate wealth without the injustice and social
divisions which now accompany the amassing of private fortunes?

4. If a man has an invested income, has he the right to live a life of
leisure? When is it right to be a non-producer?

5. How rich has a Christian a right to be? In a Christian society what is
the minimum limit of income?

6. Would economic democracy eliminate or enforce the doctrine of
stewardship?

7. How can we pluck the sting of sin out of private property?

V. _For Special Discussion_

1. Are millionaires a symptom of social disease or a triumph of
civilization?

2. Should social science reckon with the influence of wealth on personal
character?

3. What moral conviction is expressed in the condemnation of usurious
interest and of rack-rent? Should excessive profit be included?

4. How could industry be financed if there were no wealthy investors with
accumulations?

5. When is a college student a parasite?

6. If college communities had less money would they breed better men and
women?

7. How have the successes of predatory finance affected the outlook and
morality of college students?




