PART II. THE SOCIAL IDEAL OF JESUS




Chapter IV. The Kingdom Of God: Its Values


_The Right Social Order is the Highest Good for All_

The first three chapters dealt with simple human principles which are
common and instinctive with all real men. Jesus simply expanded the range
of their application, clarified our comprehension of them, placed them in
the very center of religious duty, and so lifted them to the high level of
great social and religious principles.

In the next three chapters we shall take up a conception which is not
universally human, but which Jesus derived from the historic life of the
Hebrew people—the idea of the “Kingdom of God.” A better translation would
be “the Reign of God.” This conception embodied the social ideal and
purpose of the best minds of one of the few creative nations of history.

How did Jesus interpret this inherited social ideal? What did the Kingdom
of God seem to him to offer men? What did it demand of them? What
immediate ethical duty did this social ideal involve? Our inquiry will
move along these lines in the next three chapters.

DAILY READINGS



First Day: The Main Chance


    The kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure hidden in the field;
    which a man found, and hid; and in his joy he goeth and selleth
    all that he hath, and buyeth that field.

    Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is a merchant
    seeking goodly pearls: and having found one pearl of great price,
    he went and sold all that he had, and bought it.—Matt. 13:44-46.


When war was common, property insecure, and safe deposit vaults were
scarce, it was common for men to bury treasure in time of trouble and to
forget it when they were dead. Whoever accidentally found it “struck pay
dirt” and hastened to locate his claim. An extraordinary jewel, too, was a
bonanza. The infant capitalists of that day were wise enough to liquidate
their other holdings and invest everything in the main chance. Jesus calls
for the application of the same method on the higher level. The Kingdom of
God is the highest good of all; why not stake all on the chance of that?
These parables were spoken out of his own experience. He was gladly
surrendering home, comfort, public approval, and life itself to realize
the Reign of God in humanity.

Imagine that Jesus had surrendered his religious idealism, had gained
wealth and official standing, and died of old age. Would he have gained?
What would the world have lost?



Second Day: The Master Fact


    From that time began Jesus to preach, and to say, Repent ye; for
    the kingdom of heaven is at hand.—Matt. 4:17.


The Kingdom of God is a master fact. It takes control. When the Kingdom
becomes a reality to us, we can not live on in the old way. We must
repent, begin over, overhaul the values of life and put them down at their
true price, and so readjust our fundamental directions. The conduct of the
individual must rise in response to higher conceptions of the meaning and
possibilities of the life of humanity. Tolstoi has described his
conversion in the simplest terms in the introduction to “My Religion:”


    “Five years ago faith came to me; I believed in the doctrine of
    Jesus, and my whole life underwent a sudden transformation. What I
    had once wished for I wished for no longer, and I began to desire
    what I had never desired before. What had once appeared to me
    right now became wrong, and the wrong of the past I beheld as
    right. My condition was like that of a man who goes forth upon
    some errand, and having traversed a portion of the road, decides
    that the matter is of no importance, and turns back. What was at
    first on his right hand is now on his left, and what was at his
    left hand is now on his right; instead of going away from his
    abode, he desires to get back to it as soon as possible. My life
    and my desires were completely changed; good and evil interchanged
    meanings. Why so? Because I understood the doctrine of Jesus in a
    different way from that in which I had understood it before.” ...
    “I understood the words of Jesus, and life and death ceased to be
    evil; instead of despair, I tasted joy and happiness.”


Some seek religion to escape hell and attain heaven; some to attain a
perfect personality; some to bring in the Reign of God. Give cases.
Estimate the relative religious and social significance of these different
spiritual experiences.



Third Day: Baptism and the New Order


    Even as it is written in Isaiah the prophet,
    Behold, I send my messenger before thy face,
    Who shall prepare thy way;
    The voice of one crying in the wilderness,
    Make ye ready the way of the Lord,
    Make his paths straight;

    John came, who baptized in the wilderness and preached the baptism
    of repentance unto remission of sins. And there went out unto him
    all the country of Judæa, and all they of Jerusalem; and they were
    baptized of him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins. And
    John was clothed with camel’s hair, and had a leathern girdle
    about his loins, and did eat locusts and wild honey. And he
    preached, saying, There cometh after me he that is mightier than
    I, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and
    unloose. I baptized you in water; but he shall baptize you in the
    Holy Spirit.—Mark 1:2-8.


The men who were baptized by John were not looking forward to death and to
salvation after death, but to the coming of the Kingdom of God and of his
Messiah. They repented and accepted the badge of baptism in order to have
a share in the blessings of the Kingdom and to escape the imminent
judgment of the Messiah. Baptism was then the mark of a national and
social movement toward a new era, and was a personal dedication to a
righteous social order. This original idea of baptism was practically lost
to the Christian consciousness in later times. Every man who today
realizes the Kingdom of God as the supreme good, can reaffirm his own
baptism as a dedication to the social ideal and to the leadership of Jesus
who initiated it. Such a social interpretation of our personal
discipleship will bring us into closer spiritual agreement with the
original aim of Christianity.

_Has our baptism ever had a social significance to us?_



Fourth Day: The Way to Happiness


    Therefore I say unto you, Be not anxious for your life, what ye
    shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye
    shall put on. Is not the life more than the food, and the body
    than the raiment? Behold the birds of the heaven, that they sow
    not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns, and your
    heavenly Father feedeth them. Are not ye of much more value than
    they? And which of you by being anxious can add one cubit unto the
    measure of his life? And why are ye anxious concerning raiment?
    Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not,
    neither do they spin: yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all
    his glory was not arrayed like one of these. But if God doth so
    clothe the grass of the field, which to-day is, and to-morrow is
    cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of
    little faith? Be not therefore anxious, saying, What shall we eat?
    or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed? For
    after all these things do the Gentiles seek; for your heavenly
    Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things. But seek ye
    first his kingdom, and his righteousness; and all these things
    shall be added unto you. Be not therefore anxious for the morrow:
    for the morrow will be anxious for itself. Sufficient unto the day
    is the evil thereof.—Matt. 6:25-34.


This is a song of divine carelessness; not the recklessness of a tramp who
has lost his self-respect and his capacity for long outlooks, but the
carelessness of an aristocratic spirit, conscious of his high human
dignity. God has given us life; will he not give what life needs? If the
birds and the lilies can make a living, can not we? It is pagan and
low-bred to wear out our souls with worry about minor needs.

The key to this passage lies in the words “your Father,” and “his
Kingdom.” Man is a child of God, and that dignity gives some calm and
assurance amid the worries of life. If we set our life toward the Kingdom
as the supreme aim, all the lesser interests will drop to their proper
place. In the measure in which the will of God is done and his
righteousness practiced among men, the satisfaction of the main material
wants will be easy. The Kingdom, the true social order, is the highest
good; all other good things are contained in it.

To worry or not to worry, that is the question. _Have we ever tried the
adoption of a high aim as the way to happiness?_



Fifth Day: Sunny Religion


    And John’s disciples and the Pharisees were fasting: and they come
    and say unto him, Why do John’s disciples and the disciples of the
    Pharisees fast, but thy disciples fast not? And Jesus said unto
    them, Can the sons of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom
    is with them? as long as they have the bridegroom with them, they
    cannot fast. But the days will come, when the bridegroom shalt be
    taken away from them, and then will they fast in that day. No man
    seweth a piece of undressed cloth on an old garment: else that
    which should fill it up taketh from it, the new from the old, and
    a worse rent is made. And no man putteth new wine into old
    wine-skins; else the wine will burst the skins, and the wine
    perisheth, and the skins: but they put new wine into fresh
    wine-skins.—Mark 2:18-22.


Fasting was an important part of piety with strict Jews. It was an
expression of religious sorrow and self-abasement. Afflicting the body
intensified this spiritual emotion. The disciples of the Pharisees and of
John were surprised and shocked by the fact that Jesus and his group
disregarded this custom. The reply of Jesus shows the religious temper of
Jesus in a new light. He says his disciples were happy, like guests at a
wedding; why should they act as if they were mournful? Fasting was alien
to the spirit which ruled in his company. It would be just as
inappropriate as to patch a piece of unshrunken stuff on an old garment,
or to put fermenting wine in old and brittle skin bottles. The religion of
Jesus, then, was distinguished from other earnest religion by its happy
and sunny character. See also the sharp distinction he makes between the
ascetic life of John and his own enjoyment of social life (Matt.
11:16-19). Yet Jesus was a homeless man, moving toward death.

There seems to be a difference between the self-denial of ascetic
religion, and the surrender of self to the Kingdom of God. What is it?



Sixth Day: The Poise of Expectancy


    Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins, who
    took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom. And five
    of them were foolish, and five were wise. For the foolish, when
    they took their lamps, took no oil with them: but the wise took
    oil in their vessels with their lamps. Now while the bridegroom
    tarried, they all slumbered and slept. But at midnight there is a
    cry, Behold, the bridegroom! Come ye forth to meet him. Then all
    those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said
    unto the wise, Give us of your oil; for our lamps are going out.
    But the wise answered, saying, Peradventure there will not be
    enough for us and you: go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for
    yourselves. And while they went away to buy, the bridegroom came;
    and they that were ready went in with him to the marriage feast:
    and the door was shut. Afterward came also the other virgins,
    saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. But he answered and said, Verily I
    say unto you, I know you not. Watch therefore, for ye know not the
    day nor the hour.—Matt. 25:1-13.


The Lord was to return soon and consummate the establishment of his
Kingdom. The first two generations of Christians took this hope very
seriously. Expectancy was the true pose of Christians. Under the
conditions of that time this was their way of declaring that the Kingdom
of God is the highest good and that all our life should be concentrated on
it. If Jesus lived today he could find even more effective exhortations to
look sharp and not get left. But is the constant expectation of a divine
catastrophe from heaven possible for modern minds? Must we translate that
expectation into the hope of moral and social development? By doing so,
can we still have a religious sense of a great and divine future
overhanging humanity which will give to our life the same value and
solemnity which the first generation felt?

_Explain what a strong social hope and faith would contribute to a
person’s life in the course of years._

How do faith and practical social effort react on each other?



Seventh Day: The Coming Joys


    Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.
    Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness: for
                they shall be filled.
    Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.
    Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.
    Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called sons of God.
    Blessed are they that have been persecuted for righteousness’
                sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.—Matt.
                5:5-10.


In the Sermon on the Mount Jesus formally outlined his conceptions of
ethical and religious life as distinguished from those then current. It
was the platform of the Kingdom of God. We might expect it to begin with
denunciation. Instead it opens with a spontaneous burst of joy. A great
good was coming. It would bring a store of blessings to all who had the
inward qualifications to receive them. All who felt the divine
dissatisfaction with themselves and the craving for social justice and
righteousness, would get their satisfaction (v. 3, 4, 6). The higher
social virtues, gentleness, purity of heart, peaceableness, would get
recognition and gain ascendancy (v. 5, 7, 8, 9). But the climax of praise
and promise is for those who propagated righteousness where it was not
wanted, and suffered for it (v. 10-12). “These words belong to the
greatest ever uttered” (Hegel). They are pure religion, and they were
called forth by religious faith in a social ideal.

Have we known men and women who had some of these qualities, who lived
within the Kingdom of God, and who enjoyed its blessings? If they have
ennobled our life, let us think of them a moment with a silent
benediction.



Study for the Week


We see from the passages we have studied that the mind of Jesus was
centered on a great hope which was just ahead. It was so beautiful that
even in anticipation it was filling his soul with joy and he knew it would
bless all who shared in it. It seemed to him so valuable and engrossing
that a man ought to stake his whole life on attaining it, and subordinate
all other aims to this dominant desire.


I


He spoke of this great good as “the Kingdom of God.” Even a superficial
reading of the first three Gospels shows that this was the pivot of his
teaching. Yet he nowhere defines the phrase. He took an understanding of
it for granted with his hearers, and simply announced that it was now
close at hand, and they must act accordingly. What did the words mean to
them? The idea covered by the phrase was an historic product of the Jewish
people, and we shall have to understand it as such.

The Hebrew prophets had concentrated their incomparable religious energy
on the simple demand for righteousness, especially in social and national
life. The actual life of the nation, especially of its ruling classes, of
course never squared with the religious ideal. The injustice and
oppression around them seemed intolerable to the prophets, just because
the ethical imperative within them was so strong. So their unsatisfied
desire for righteousness took the form of an ardent expectation of a
coming day when things would be as they ought to be. God would make bare
his holy arm to punish the wicked, to sift the good, to establish his law,
and to vindicate the rights of the oppressed. This great “day of Jehovah”
would inaugurate a new age, the Kingdom of God, the Reign of God. The
phrase, then, embodies the social ideal of the finest religious minds of a
unique people. The essential thing in it is the projection into the future
of the demand for a just social order. The prophets looked to a direct
miraculous act of God to realize their vision, but they were in close
touch with the facts of political life and always demanded social action
on the human side.

Plato’s Republic and More’s Utopia are intellectual productions which have
appealed to single idealistic minds. The Hebrew prophets succeeded in
socializing their ideal. By the force of religion they wrought the
conception of the Kingdom of God into the common mind of a nation as a
traditional conviction which was assimilated by every new generation.

But when a great idea is appropriated by the masses, it is sure to become
cruder to suit their intellect and their need; and when a national ideal
is handed on for centuries, it will change with the changing fortunes of
the people that holds it. When the Hebrew nation came under the foreign
rule of the Assyrians, Persians, and finally the Romans, its freedom and
chance for political action were lost, and its political ideals, too,
deteriorated. The Kingdom hope became theological, artificial, a scheme of
epochs of predetermined length and of marvelous stage settings. Yet, even
in this form, it was a splendid hope of emancipation, of national
greatness, and of future justice and fraternity, and it helped to keep the
nation’s soul alive amid crushing sorrows.

The people at the time of Jesus in the main held this apocalyptic
conception of the Kingdom. It was to come as a divine catastrophe,
beginning with an act of judgment and resulting in a glorious Jewish
imperialism. Jesus shared the substance of the expectation, but as a true
spiritual leader he reconstructed, clarified, and elevated the hope of the
masses. He would have nothing to do with any plans involving blood-shed
and force revolution. The Hebrew Jehovah became "our Father in heaven" and
this democratized the Reign of Jehovah. The pious Jew expected God to
enforce the ceremonial laws; Jesus had little to say about religious
ceremonial, and a great deal about righteousness and love. Under his hands
the Jewish imperialistic dream changed into a call for universal human
fraternity. He repeatedly and emphatically explained the coming of the
Kingdom in terms taken from biological growth, and his thoughts seem to
have verged away from the popular catastrophic ideas toward ideas of
organic development. These changes—if we have correctly interpreted
them—represent Jesus’ own contribution to the history of the Kingdom
ideal, and they are all in the same direction in which the modern mind has
moved. (For a fuller statement of these modifications see Rauschenbusch,
“Christianizing the Social Order,” p. 48-68.)


II


So much by way of historical information. Now let us emphasize again that
this social ideal seemed to Jesus so fair and fine that he gave his whole
soul to it. Naturally he would. Since he loved men and believed in their
solidarity, the conception of a God-filled humanity living in a righteous
social order, which would give free play to love and would bind all in
close ties, would be the only satisfying outlook for him. He promised that
all who hungered and thirsted after righteousness would be satisfied in
the Kingdom, and he was himself the chief of these. The Kingdom of God was
his fatherland, in which his spirit lived with God; and with that vision
of perfect humanity before him, he kept its calm and tranquillity amid the
enmity of men as he sought to win men to its better ways.

The Kingdom of God is the highest good. The idea of God is the highest and
most comprehensive conception in philosophy; the idea of the Kingdom of
God is the highest and broadest idea in sociology and ethics. It is so
high and broad that many find it hard even to grasp the idea. Just as a
barbaric tribe of hunters or fishermen would find it impossible to
comprehend the social coherence and the patriotism of a nation of a
hundred millions; just as the narrow nationalist of today falls down
intellectually and morally when he confronts world-forces and relations:
so we who are trained to think in terms of family and State, give out when
we are to treat the Kingdom of God as a reality. It takes faith of the
intellect to comprehend a stage of evolution before it is reached. It
takes faith of character to launch yourself toward a great moral goal
before its tangible and profitable elements are within reach. It takes
more moral daring today than for a century past to believe in the
reemergence and final victory of God’s social order. But this is the time
for all true believers to square their shoulders and say with Galileo,
“And yet it moves.”

Any man whose soul is kindled by the conception of the Kingdom of God is a
real man. Whoever loves the idea, must turn it into reality as far as life
lets him. Whoever tries it, will suffer. But even if he suffers, he will
be more blessed and more truly a man than he would be if he did not try.
In seeking the Kingdom he realizes himself. “He that loseth his life for
my sake, shall find it.”


III


Jesus bade us “seek first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness,” and
he obeyed his own call. The main object of his life was the ideal social
order and the perfect ethic. Now if Jesus is our ideal of human goodness,
is any goodness good unless it works in the same direction? If a man is of
flawless private life, but is indifferent to any social ideal, or even
hostile to all attempts at better justice and greater fraternity, is he
really good? Even a strong desire for personal perfection, if there is no
desire for a regeneration of society in it, must be rated as sub-Christian
because it is lacking in the sense of solidarity and may be lacking in
love.



Suggestions for Thought and Discussion


I. _The Power of a Great Idea_

1. Did the idea of the Kingdom of God ever play a part in your religious
education?

2. Did you feel any response to it in studying this lesson? Does it have
reality?

3. Suppose an entire study group should fail to see anything in it, would
that prove it valueless?

II. _Historical Changes in the Kingdom Ideal_

1. How did the Kingdom ideal take shape in the minds of the Hebrew
prophets?

2. Explain the nature of the apocalyptic hope and its divergence from the
prophetic ideal.

3. What passages seem to throw the most light on Jesus’ conception of it,
and his feeling about it? What do you think about the Beatitudes from this
point of view?

4. At what points did Jesus clarify and elevate the hereditary hope of his
nation? Summarize the conception of the Kingdom as it lay in the mind of
Jesus.

III. _Present Possibilities of the Kingdom Idea_

1. What value would the preaching of the Kingdom of God have in
evangelistic work today?

2. How would it affect religious education and the moral outlook of the
young?

3. How would the possession of the Kingdom faith equip the Church for
leadership in an age of social movements and unrest?

4. How does the Kingdom hope add to the joyousness of the Christian life?

5. How does Jesus’ conception of the Kingdom of God connect with the great
social and national hopes of today?

IV. _For Special Discussion_

1. How does a man realize himself in seeking the Kingdom? How does a man
realize the Kingdom in developing himself?

2. Does the idea seem to offer a religious vehicle for conceptions you
have derived from sociological work?

3. Does a social concept like the “Kingdom of God” gain anything for its
practical efficiency today from being ancient, and from being religious?

4. Will such a concept ever be effective with the masses unless it is
essentially religious?




