CHAPTER XXVIII.

A TRIFLING RETROSPECT.

“BLESS my heart,” cries my young, volatile reader, “I shall never have
patience to get through these volumes, there are so many ahs! and
ohs! so much fainting, tears, and distress, I am sick to death of the
subject.” My dear, cheerful, innocent girl, for innocent I will
suppose you to be, or you would acutely feel the woes of Charlotte,
did conscience say, thus might it have been with me, had not Providence
interposed to snatch me from destruction: therefore, my lively, innocent
girl, I must request your patience: I am writing a tale of truth: I
mean to write it to the heart: but if perchance the heart is rendered
impenetrable by unbounded prosperity, or a continuance in vice, I expect
not my tale to please, nay, I even expect it will be thrown by with
disgust. But softly, gentle fair one; I pray you throw it not aside till
you have perused the whole; mayhap you may find something therein to
repay you for the trouble. Methinks I see a sarcastic smile sit on your
countenance.--“And what,” cry you, “does the conceited author suppose
we can glean from these pages, if Charlotte is held up as an object of
terror, to prevent us from falling into guilty errors? does not La Rue
triumph in her shame, and by adding art to guilt, obtain the affection
of a worthy man, and rise to a station where she is beheld with respect,
and cheerfully received into all companies. What then is the moral
you would inculcate? Would you wish us to think that a deviation
from virtue, if covered by art and hypocrisy, is not an object of
detestation, but on the contrary shall raise us to fame and honour?
while the hapless girl who falls a victim to her too great sensibility,
shall be loaded with ignominy and shame?” No, my fair querist, I mean no
such thing. Remember the endeavours of the wicked are often suffered to
prosper, that in the end their fall may be attended with more bitterness
of heart; while the cup of affliction is poured out for wise and
salutary ends, and they who are compelled to drain it even to the bitter
dregs, often find comfort at the bottom; the tear of penitence blots
their offences from the book of fate, and they rise from the heavy,
painful trial, purified and fit for a mansion in the kingdom of
eternity.

Yes, my young friends, the tear of compassion shall fall for the fate of
Charlotte, while the name of La Rue shall be detested and despised. For
Charlotte, the soul melts with sympathy; for La Rue, it feels nothing
but horror and contempt. But perhaps your gay hearts would rather
follow the fortunate Mrs. Crayton through the scenes of pleasure and
dissipation in which she was engaged, than listen to the complaints
and miseries of Charlotte. I will for once oblige you; I will for once
follow her to midnight revels, balls, and scenes of gaiety, for in such
was she constantly engaged.

I have said her person was lovely; let us add that she was surrounded by
splendor and affluence, and he must know but little of the world who can
wonder, (however faulty such a woman's conduct,) at her being followed
by the men, and her company courted by the women: in short Mrs. Crayton
was the universal favourite: she set the fashions, she was toasted by
all the gentlemen, and copied by all the ladies.

Colonel Crayton was a domestic man. Could he be happy with such a woman?
impossible! Remonstrance was vain: he might as well have preached to the
winds, as endeavour to persuade her from any action, however ridiculous,
on which she had set her mind: in short, after a little ineffectual
struggle, he gave up the attempt, and left her to follow the bent of
her own inclinations: what those were, I think the reader must have seen
enough of her character to form a just idea. Among the number who paid
their devotions at her shrine, she singled one, a young Ensign of mean
birth, indifferent education, and weak intellects. How such a man came
into the army, we hardly know to account for, and how he afterwards rose
to posts of honour is likewise strange and wonderful. But fortune is
blind, and so are those too frequently who have the power of dispensing
her favours: else why do we see fools and knaves at the very top of the
wheel, while patient merit sinks to the extreme of the opposite abyss.
But we may form a thousand conjectures on this subject, and yet never
hit on the right. Let us therefore endeavour to deserve her smiles, and
whether we succeed or not, we shall feel more innate satisfaction, than
thousands of those who bask in the sunshine of her favour unworthily.
But to return to Mrs. Crayton: this young man, whom I shall distinguish
by the name of Corydon, was the reigning favourite of her heart. He
escorted her to the play, danced with her at every ball, and when
indisposition prevented her going out, it was he alone who was permitted
to cheer the gloomy solitude to which she was obliged to confine
herself. Did she ever think of poor Charlotte?--if she did, my dear
Miss, it was only to laugh at the poor girl's want of spirit in
consenting to be moped up in the country, while Montraville was enjoying
all the pleasures of a gay, dissipated city. When she heard of his
marriage, she smiling said, so there's an end of Madam Charlotte's
hopes. I wonder who will take her now, or what will become of the little
affected prude?

But as you have lead to the subject, I think we may as well return to
the distressed Charlotte, and not, like the unfeeling Mrs. Crayton, shut
our hearts to the call of humanity.




CHAPTER XXIX.

WE GO FORWARD AGAIN.

THE strength of Charlotte's constitution combatted against her disorder,
and she began slowly to recover, though she still laboured under a
violent depression of spirits: how must that depression be encreased,
when, upon examining her little store, she found herself reduced to
one solitary guinea, and that during her illness the attendance of an
apothecary and nurse, together with many other unavoidable expences,
had involved her in debt, from which she saw no method of extricating
herself. As to the faint hope which she had entertained of hearing from
and being relieved by her parents; it now entirely forsook her, for
it was above four months since her letter was dispatched, and she had
received no answer: she therefore imagined that her conduct had either
entirely alienated their affection from her, or broken their hearts, and
she must never more hope to receive their blessing.

Never did any human being wish for death with greater fervency or
with juster cause; yet she had too just a sense of the duties of the
Christian religion to attempt to put a period to her own existence. “I
have but to be patient a little longer,” she would cry, “and nature,
fatigued and fainting, will throw off this heavy load of mortality, and
I shall be released from all my sufferings.”

It was one cold stormy day in the latter end of December, as Charlotte
sat by a handful of fire, the low state of her finances not allowing her
to replenish her stock of fuel, and prudence teaching her to be careful
of what she had, when she was surprised by the entrance of a farmer's
wife, who, without much ceremony, seated herself, and began this curious
harangue.

“I'm come to see if as how you can pay your rent, because as how we hear
Captain Montable is gone away, and it's fifty to one if he b'ant killed
afore he comes back again; an then, Miss, or Ma'am, or whatever you may
be, as I was saying to my husband, where are we to look for our money.”

This was a stroke altogether unexpected by Charlotte: she knew so little
of the ways of the world that she had never bestowed a thought on the
payment for the rent of the house; she knew indeed that she owed a
good deal, but this was never reckoned among the others: she was
thunder-struck; she hardly knew what answer to make, yet it was
absolutely necessary that she should say something; and judging of the
gentleness of every female disposition by her own, she thought the best
way to interest the woman in her favour would be to tell her candidly to
what a situation she was reduced, and how little probability there was
of her ever paying any body.

Alas poor Charlotte, how confined was her knowledge of human nature, or
she would have been convinced that the only way to insure the friendship
and assistance of your surrounding acquaintance is to convince them you
do not require it, for when once the petrifying aspect of distress and
penury appear, whose qualities, like Medusa's head, can change to stone
all that look upon it; when once this Gorgon claims acquaintance with
us, the phantom of friendship, that before courted our notice, will
vanish into unsubstantial air, and the whole world before us appear a
barren waste. Pardon me, ye dear spirits of benevolence, whose benign
smiles and cheerful-giving hand have strewed sweet flowers on many a
thorny path through which my wayward fate forced me to pass; think not,
that, in condemning the unfeeling texture of the human heart, I forget
the spring from whence flow an the comforts I enjoy: oh no! I look up
to you as to bright constellations, gathering new splendours from the
surrounding darkness; but ah! whilst I adore the benignant rays that
cheered and illumined my heart, I mourn that their influence cannot
extend to all the sons and daughters of affliction.

“Indeed, Madam,” said poor Charlotte in a tremulous accent, “I am at a
loss what to do. Montraville placed me here, and promised to defray all
my expenses: but he has forgot his promise, he has forsaken me, and I
have no friend who has either power or will to relieve me. Let me hope,
as you see my unhappy situation, your charity--”

“Charity,” cried the woman impatiently interrupting her, “charity
indeed: why, Mistress, charity begins at home, and I have seven children
at home, HONEST, LAWFUL children, and it is my duty to keep them; and do
you think I will give away my property to a nasty, impudent hussey, to
maintain her and her bastard; an I was saying to my husband the other
day what will this world come to; honest women are nothing now-a-days,
while the harlotings are set up for fine ladies, and look upon us no
more nor the dirt they walk upon: but let me tell you, my fine spoken
Ma'am, I must have my money; so seeing as how you can't pay it, why you
must troop, and leave all your fine gimcracks and fal der ralls behind
you. I don't ask for no more nor my right, and nobody shall dare for to
go for to hinder me of it.”

“Oh heavens,” cried Charlotte, clasping her hands, “what will become of
me?”

“Come on ye!” retorted the unfeeling wretch: “why go to the barracks and
work for a morsel of bread; wash and mend the soldiers cloaths, an cook
their victuals, and not expect to live in idleness on honest people's
means. Oh I wish I could see the day when all such cattle were obliged
to work hard and eat little; it's only what they deserve.”

“Father of mercy,” cried Charlotte, “I acknowledge thy correction just;
but prepare me, I beseech thee, for the portion of misery thou may'st
please to lay upon me.”

“Well,” said the woman, “I shall go an tell my husband as how you can't
pay; and so d'ye see, Ma'am, get ready to be packing away this very
night, for you should not stay another night in this house, though I was
sure you would lay in the street.”

Charlotte bowed her head in silence; but the anguish of her heart was
too great to permit her to articulate a single word.




