CHAPTER XXV.

RECEPTION OF A LETTER.

“AND where now is our poor Charlotte?” said Mr. Temple one evening, as
the cold blasts of autumn whistled rudely over the heath, and the yellow
appearance of the distant wood, spoke the near approach of winter. In
vain the cheerful fire blazed on the hearth, in vain was he surrounded
by all the comforts of life; the parent was still alive in his heart,
and when he thought that perhaps his once darling child was ere this
exposed to all the miseries of want in a distant land, without a friend
to sooth and comfort her, without the benignant look of compassion to
cheer, or the angelic voice of pity to pour the balm of consolation on
her wounded heart; when he thought of this, his whole soul dissolved in
tenderness; and while he wiped the tear of anguish from the eye of his
patient, uncomplaining Lucy, he struggled to suppress the sympathizing
drop that started in his own.

“Oh, my poor girl,” said Mrs. Temple, “how must she be altered, else
surely she would have relieved our agonizing minds by one line to
say she lived--to say she had not quite forgot the parents who almost
idolized her.”

“Gracious heaven,” said Mr. Temple, starting from his seat, “I, who would
wish to be a father, to experience the agonizing pangs inflicted on a
parent's heart by the ingratitude of a child?” Mrs. Temple wept: her
father took her hand; he would have said, “be comforted my child,”
 but the words died on his tongue. The sad silence that ensued was
interrupted by a loud rap at the door. In a moment a servant entered
with a letter in his hand.

Mrs. Temple took it from him: she cast her eyes upon the superscription;
she knew the writing. “'Tis Charlotte,” said she, eagerly breaking
the seal, “she has not quite forgot us.” But before she had half gone
through the contents, a sudden sickness seized her; she grew cold and
giddy, and puffing it into her husband's hand, she cried--“Read it: I
cannot.” Mr. Temple attempted to read it aloud, but frequently paused
to give vent to his tears. “My poor deluded child,” said he, when he had
finished.

“Oh, shall we not forgive the dear penitent?” said Mrs. Temple. “We
must, we will, my love; she is willing to return, and 'tis our duty to
receive her.”

“Father of mercy,” said Mr. Eldridge, raising his clasped hands, “let
me but live once more to see the dear wanderer restored to her afflicted
parents, and take me from this world of sorrow whenever it seemeth best
to thy wisdom.”

“Yes, we will receive her,” said Mr. Temple; “we will endeavour to heal
her wounded spirit, and speak peace and comfort to her agitated soul. I
will write to her to return immediately.'

“Oh!” said Mrs. Temple, “I would if possible fly to her, support and
cheer the dear sufferer in the approaching hour of distress, and tell
her how nearly penitence is allied to virtue. Cannot we go and conduct
her home, my love?” continued she, laying her hand on his arm. “My
father will surely forgive our absence if we go to bring home his
darling.”

“You cannot go, my Lucy,” said Mr. Temple: “the delicacy of your frame
would but poorly sustain the fatigue of a long voyage; but I will go and
bring the gentle penitent to your arms: we may still see many years of
happiness.”

The struggle in the bosom of Mrs. Temple between maternal and conjugal
tenderness was long and painful. At length the former triumphed, and she
consented that her husband should set forward to New-York by the first
opportunity: she wrote to her Charlotte in the tenderest, most consoling
manner, and looked forward to the happy hour, when she should again
embrace her, with the most animated hope.




CHAPTER XXVI.

WHAT MIGHT BE EXPECTED.

IN the mean time the passion Montraville had conceived for Julia
Franklin daily encreased, and he saw evidently how much he was beloved
by that amiable girl: he was likewise strongly prepossessed with an idea
of Charlotte's perfidy. What wonder then if he gave himself up to the
delightful sensation which pervaded his bosom; and finding no obstacle
arise to oppose his happiness, he solicited and obtained the hand of
Julia. A few days before his marriage he thus addressed Belcour:

“Though Charlotte, by her abandoned conduct, has thrown herself from my
protection, I still hold myself bound to support her till relieved
from her present condition, and also to provide for the child. I do not
intend to see her again, but I will place a sum of money in your hands,
which will amply supply her with every convenience; but should she
require more, let her have it, and I will see it repaid. I wish I could
prevail on the poor deluded girl to return to her friends: she was an
only child, and I make no doubt but that they would joyfully receive
her; it would shock me greatly to see her henceforth leading a life of
infamy, as I should always accuse myself of being the primary cause of
all her errors. If she should chuse to remain under your protection, be
kind to her, Belcour, I conjure you. Let not satiety prompt you to treat
her in such a manner, as may drive her to actions which necessity might
urge her to, while her better reason disapproved them: she shall never
want a friend while I live, but I never more desire to behold her; her
presence would be always painful to me, and a glance from her eye would
call the blush of conscious guilt into my cheek.

“I will write a letter to her, which you may deliver when I am gone, as
I shall go to St. Eustatia the day after my union with Julia, who will
accompany me.”

Belcour promised to fulfil the request of his friend, though nothing
was farther from his intentions, than the least design of delivering the
letter, or making Charlotte acquainted with the provision Montraville
had made for her; he was bent on the complete ruin of the unhappy girl,
and supposed, by reducing her to an entire dependance on him, to bring
her by degrees to consent to gratify his ungenerous passion.

The evening before the day appointed for the nuptials of Montraville and
Julia, the former refired early to his apartment; and ruminating on the
past scenes of his life, suffered the keenest remorse in the remembrance
of Charlotte's seduction. “Poor girl,” said he, “I will at least write
and bid her adieu; I will too endeavour to awaken that love of virtue in
her bosom which her unfortunate attachment to me has extinguished.” He
took up the pen and began to write, but words were denied him. How could
he address the woman whom he had seduced, and whom, though he thought
unworthy his tenderness, he was about to bid adieu for ever? How should
he tell her that he was going to abjure her, to enter into the most
indissoluble ties with another, and that he could not even own the
infant which she bore as his child? Several letters were begun and
destroyed: at length he completed the following:

TO CHARLOTTE.

“Though I have taken up my pen to address you, my poor injured girl, I
feel I am inadequate to the task; yet, however painful the endeavour, I
could not resolve upon leaving you for ever without one kind line to bid
you adieu, to tell you how my heart bleeds at the remembrance of what
you was, before you saw the hated Montraville. Even now imagination
paints the scene, when, torn by contending passions, when, struggling
between love and duty, you fainted in my arms, and I lifted you into
the chaise: I see the agony of your mind, when, recovering, you found
yourself on the road to Portsmouth: but how, my gentle girl, how could
you, when so justly impressed with the value of virtue, how could you,
when loving as I thought you loved me, yield to the solicitations of
Belcour?

“Oh Charlotte, conscience tells me it was I, villain that I am, who
first taught you the allurements of guilty pleasure; it was I who
dragged you from the calm repose which innocence and virtue ever enjoy;
and can I, dare I tell you, it was not love prompted to the horrid deed?
No, thou dear, fallen angel, believe your repentant Montraville, when
he tells you the man who truly loves will never betray the object of his
affection. Adieu, Charlotte: could you still find charms in a life of
unoffend-ing innocence, return to your parents; you shall never want the
means of support both for yourself and child. Oh! gracious heaven!
may that child be entirely free from the vices of its father and the
weakness of its mother.

“To-morrow--but no, I cannot tell you what to-morrow will produce;
Belcour will inform you: he also has cash for you, which I beg you will
ask for whenever you may want it. Once more adieu: believe me could I
hear you was returned to your friends, and enjoying that tranquillity of
which I have robbed you, I should be as completely happy as even you,
in your fondest hours, could wish me, but till then a gloom will obscure
the brightest prospects of MONTRAVILLE.”

After he had sealed this letter he threw himself on the bed, and enjoyed
a few hours repose. Early in the morning Belcour tapped at his door: he
arose hastily, and prepared to meet his Julia at the altar.

“This is the letter to Charlotte,” said he, giving it to Belcour: “take
it to her when we are gone to Eustatia; and I conjure you, my dear
friend, not to use any sophistical arguments to prevent her return to
virtue; but should she incline that way, encourage her in the thought,
and assist her to put her design in execution.”




