CHAPTER XXXI.

SUBJECT CONTINUED.

WHEN the door was opened, Charlotte, in a voice rendered scarcely
articulate, through cold and the extreme agitation of her mind, demanded
whether Mrs. Crayton was at home. The servant hesitated: he knew that
his lady was engaged at a game of picquet with her dear Corydon,
nor could he think she would like to be disturbed by a person whose
appearance spoke her of so little consequence as Charlotte; yet there
was something in her countenance that rather interested him in her
favour, and he said his lady was engaged, but if she had any particular
message he would deliver it.

“Take up this letter,” said Charlotte: “tell her the unhappy writer of
it waits in her hall for an answer.” The tremulous accent, the tearful
eye, must have moved any heart not composed of adamant. The man took the
letter from the poor suppliant, and hastily ascended the stair case.

“A letter, Madam,” said he, presenting it to his lady: “an immediate
answer is required.”

Mrs. Crayton glanced her eye carelessly over the contents. “What stuff
is this;” cried she haughtily; “have not I told you a thousand times
that I will not be plagued with beggars, and petitions from people one
knows nothing about? Go tell the woman I can't do any thing in it. I'm
sorry, but one can't relieve every body.”

The servant bowed, and heavily returned with this chilling message to
Charlotte.

“Surely,” said she, “Mrs. Crayton has not read my letter. Go, my
good friend, pray go back to her; tell her it is Charlotte Temple who
requests beneath her hospitable roof to find shelter from the inclemency
of the season.”

“Prithee, don't plague me, man,” cried Mrs. Crayton impatiently, as the
servant advanced something in behalf of the unhappy girl. “I tell you I
don't know her.”

“Not know me,” cried Charlotte, rushing into the room, (for she had
followed the man up stairs) “not know me, not remember the ruined
Charlotte Temple, who, but for you, perhaps might still have been
innocent, still have been happy. Oh! La Rue, this is beyond every thing
I could have believed possible.”

“Upon my honour, Miss,” replied the unfeeling woman with the utmost
effrontery, “this is a most unaccountable address: it is beyond my
comprehension. John,” continued she, turning to the servant, “the
young woman is certainly out of her senses: do pray take her away, she
terrifies me to death.”

“Oh God,” cried Charlotte, clasping her hands in an agony, “this is too
much; what will become of me? but I will not leave you; they shall
not tear me from you; here on my knees I conjure you to save me from
perishing in the streets; if you really have forgot me, oh for charity's
sweet sake this night let me be sheltered from the winter's piercing
cold.” The kneeling figure of Charlotte in her affecting situation might
have moved the heart of a stoic to compassion; but Mrs. Crayton remained
inflexible. In vain did Charlotte recount the time they had known each
other at Chichester, in vain mention their being in the same ship, in
vain were the names of Montraville and Belcour mentioned. Mrs. Crayton
could only say she was sorry for her imprudence, but could not think of
having her own reputation endangered by encouraging a woman of that kind
in her own house, besides she did not know what trouble and expense
she might bring upon her husband by giving shelter to a woman in her
situation.

“I can at least die here,” said Charlotte, “I feel I cannot long
survive this dreadful conflict. Father of mercy, here let me finish
my existence.” Her agonizing sensations overpowered her, and she fell
senseless on the floor.

“Take her away,” said Mrs. Crayton, “she will really frighten me into
hysterics; take her away I say this instant.”

“And where must I take the poor creature?” said the servant with a voice
and look of compassion.

“Any where,” cried she hastily, “only don't let me ever see her again. I
declare she has flurried me so I shan't be myself again this fortnight.”

John, assisted by his fellow-servant, raised and carried her down
stairs. “Poor soul,” said he, “you shall not lay in the street this
night. I have a bed and a poor little hovel, where my wife and her
little ones rest them, but they shall watch to night, and you shall be
sheltered from danger.” They placed her in a chair; and the benevolent
man, assisted by one of his comrades, carried her to the place where his
wife and children lived. A surgeon was sent for: he bled her, she gave
signs of returning life, and before the dawn gave birth to a female
infant. After this event she lay for some hours in a kind of stupor; and
if at any time she spoke, it was with a quickness and incoherence that
plainly evinced the total deprivation of her reason.




CHAPTER XXXII.

REASONS WHY AND WHEREFORE.

THE reader of sensibility may perhaps be astonished to find Mrs. Crayton
could so positively deny any knowledge of Charlotte; it is therefore but
just that her conduct should in some measure be accounted for. She had
ever been fully sensible of the superiority of Charlotte's sense and
virtue; she was conscious that she had never swerved from rectitude, had
it not been for her bad precepts and worse example. These were things as
yet unknown to her husband, and she wished not to have that part of her
conduct exposed to him, as she had great reason to fear she had already
lost considerable part of that power she once maintained over him. She
trembled whilst Charlotte was in the house, lest the Colonel should
return; she perfectly well remembered how much he seemed interested in
her favour whilst on their passage from England, and made no doubt, but,
should he see her in her present distress, he would offer her an asylum,
and protect her to the utmost of his power. In that case she feared the
unguarded nature of Charlotte might discover to the Colonel the part
she had taken in the unhappy girl's elopement, and she well knew the
contrast between her own and Charlotte's conduct would make the former
appear in no very respectable light. Had she reflected properly, she
would have afforded the poor girl protection; and by enjoining her
silence, ensured it by acts of repeated kindness; but vice in general
blinds its votaries, and they discover their real characters to the
world when they are most studious to preserve appearances.

Just so it happened with Mrs. Crayton: her servants made no scruple of
mentioning the cruel conduct of their lady to a poor distressed
lunatic who claimed her protection; every one joined in reprobating her
inhumanity; nay even Corydon thought she might at least have ordered her
to be taken care of, but he dare not even hint it to her, for he lived
but in her smiles, and drew from her lavish fondness large sums to
support an extravagance to which the state of his own finances was very
inadequate; it cannot therefore be supposed that he wished Mrs. Crayton
to be very liberal in her bounty to the afflicted suppliant; yet vice
had not so entirely seared over his heart, but the sorrows of Charlotte
could find a vulnerable part.

Charlotte had now been three days with her humane preservers, but
she was totally insensible of every thing: she raved incessantly for
Montraville and her father: she was not conscious of being a mother, nor
took the least notice of her child except to ask whose it was, and why
it was not carried to its parents.

“Oh,” said she one day, starting up on hearing the infant cry, “why, why
will you keep that child here; I am sure you would not if you knew
how hard it was for a mother to be parted from her infant: it is like
tearing the cords of life asunder. Oh could you see the horrid sight
which I now behold--there there stands my dear mother, her poor bosom
bleeding at every vein, her gentle, affectionate heart torn in a
thousand pieces, and all for the loss of a ruined, ungrateful child.
Save me save me--from her frown. I dare not--indeed I dare not speak to
her.”

Such were the dreadful images that haunted her distracted mind, and
nature was sinking fast under the dreadful malady which medicine had
no power to remove. The surgeon who attended her was a humane man; he
exerted his utmost abilities to save her, but he saw she was in want of
many necessaries and comforts, which the poverty of her hospitable host
rendered him unable to provide: he therefore determined to make her
situation known to some of the officers' ladies, and endeavour to make a
collection for her relief.

When he returned home, after making this resolution, he found a message
from Mrs. Beauchamp, who had just arrived from Rhode-Island, requesting
he would call and see one of her children, who was very unwell. “I do
not know,” said he, as he was hastening to obey the summons, “I do not
know a woman to whom I could apply with more hope of success than Mrs.
Beauchamp. I will endeavour to interest her in this poor girl's behalf,
she wants the soothing balm of friendly consolation: we may perhaps save
her; we will try at least.”

“And where is she,” cried Mrs. Beauchamp when he had prescribed
something for the child, and told his little pathetic tale, “where is
she, Sir? we will go to her immediately. Heaven forbid that I should
be deaf to the calls of humanity. Come we will go this instant.” Then
seizing the doctor's arm, they sought the habitation that contained the
dying Charlotte.




