CHAPTER V.

THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE.


By the supremacy of conscience is meant its right to exercise moral
control. It expresses its proper authority. This authority is not
to be thought of as original or independent, but as resting on and
revealing the absolute authority of God, who has constituted the moral
relations of the world and has set the conscience, with its discerning
and regulative function, in the human soul. The question involved is
not the right of one merely subjective faculty to impose obligation on
another faculty or on all the human capacities and powers--one part
of the personal self playing the role of sovereign over the other
parts. This would be a shallow and misleading notion of this authority.
The whole conception of the conscience is theistic, and implies, as
it also testifies to, an absolute law of righteousness over all the
world, established by Him who is creator and sovereign of all. It is
in the discernment of this principle of rightness, with its demand
for obedience to it, that the conscience comes into its position of
authority and its authority becomes _de jure_ supreme.


=1.= But the proof that such authority rightly belongs to it needs to
be more fully exhibited. It is explained and made unquestionable in the
following facts:

==Its Sphere of Judgments.==

(1) It is involved in the very sphere of its discernments. This sphere
is the sphere of right and duty, which, by very conception, subordinate
everything else. Its primary perception is of "the right," as having
claim on every rational free agent--and then of obligation which
immediately presses its moral requirement into the presence of our
capacity for conformity to it. There is, indeed, a degree of authority
belonging to each and all the psychical faculties, in the functions
they fulfil for the direction and welfare of life. But the peculiarity
of the conscience is that the realm of its functions and direction
is higher than that of the other powers, the realm in which manhood
reaches its supreme purpose and worth. Moral goodness, excellence
of character, is the summit of the ascent to which human nature is
adapted. In this our nature reaches the "supreme" and all-inclusive
"good," compared with which all things else are of inferior claim
and merit. The authority of the conscience, as a faculty, is thus
identified with the supremacy which belongs to the idea of the morally
right, of obligation, duty, the irrepealable "ought" for the conduct of
life.

==Shown by Nature of Action.==

(2) This is more distinctly apparent when we recall the nature of its
action. Psychologically, the conscience does not stand as a thing of
our own personal will, or as in any way making the obligation which it
presents. When we examine it, as it appears in our consciousness, its
movement is in the form of a necessary perception of an obligation
that is upon us irrespective of our will, a law of duty not of our
own framing, but imposing itself on us and demanding the homage of
our will. It possesses its authority, therefore, in the fact that it
is the discernment of something higher than our will or ourselves, a
principle transcending our personality and appearing as supreme law for
our life and conduct. And the law connotes a lawgiver and a judge. The
conscience thus puts us in the presence of One who has sovereign and
absolute right to rule in us and over us. It thus becomes authoritative
by its being the power or faculty through which is made known to us the
principle or law of righteousness which God has established for the
moral order of the world.[24]

==The Contrary is Absurd.==

(3) These facts, at once psychologically and metaphysically well
certified, would themselves be sufficient to explain and vindicate the
peculiar right of supremacy almost universally conceded to belong to
the moral sense. But the proof, thus given, is confirmed by the fact
that the contrary conclusion involves a manifest absurdity.

In the first place, it is incredible to suppose that man, as an
intelligent, rational, free agent, capable of character, should have no
provision in his mental make-up, no faculty of knowledge, furnishing a
principle of guidance for meeting the responsibilities of life. For,
such an absence of endowment for this purpose, would necessarily mean,
either that responsibility is an illusion, a conclusion belied by the
hard fact that the organization of human life inexorably treats and
exacts it as real, or that man's nature is constructed in a falsehood,
being bound to a high task for which it contains no endowment.
Somewhere, therefore, among the human faculties, must appear a power
or complex of powers whose disclosures or impulses shall furnish
a rightful principle of control. To say that there is no rightful
principle--that the morally good has no more right than the morally
bad--would be not only absurd to reason, but fly in the face of the
spontaneous and ineradicable sense of mankind, which makes the moral
distinction.

Further: While the authority for self-control, to meet the ethical task
and responsibilities of life, must thus be found somewhere in man's
constitution, careful consideration makes it also clear that the right
of supremacy cannot be attributed to any other capacity, function or
impulse of our nature. The well-known _argumentum ad absurdum_ is fully
applicable here.

Besides the conscience itself, the only other motive-forces for conduct
are the physiological appetites, the desires for enjoyment, and the
benevolent affections. The right of supreme control cannot be supposed
to belong to the physical appetites and passions. The supremacy of
these would be subversive of character and deadly to personal and
social welfare. This is not simply the judgment of reason, but a fact
attested by the most melancholy experiences in which blight and woe
have fallen on men. Nor can the right of ruling authority belong to
the desire of enjoyment. When this dominates it becomes the reign of
selfishness, which, according to the consent of mankind, is utterly
inconsistent with the development of noble character, or the discharge
of those inter-human duties on which both individual and social
well-being depends. It forms the soul of anarchy, in which the family,
society, and the state would be dissolved. The true excellence and
happiness of man would be impossible. The rulership of this class of
motive forces is thus inconsistent with the highest and best ends to
which his nature has been correlated.

Nor can the supremacy belong to the benevolent affections. These,
summed up in the word love, are indeed very high and must be regarded
as among the worthiest and best elements of character and principles
of action. "God is love," and so near does love come to being the
very essence of virtue, that it is declared to be "the fulfilling
of the law." But the "love" that God is said to be is not alone in
His character, nor does it rule without regard to holiness, justice,
purity, or righteousness. It cannot be conceived as subordinating these
to a desire to make creatures happy. On the other hand we are obliged
to think of love as able to confer its favors only in accordance with
the principle of righteousness. Even in its supreme exhibition, in the
salvation of men, in giving its gifts, it could only act through a
way that declared the divine righteousness while granting forgiveness
to those that repent and forsake wrong. In human life, the love that
in its own degree and order helps to the fulfillment of the law is
not alone, or unregulated, or superior to the principle of duty, of
truth, purity and holiness. It cannot get above these, but is itself
right only when it holds its ends, of making its objects happy, in
subordination to what is morally good. We must remind ourselves exactly
what the supremacy of the benevolent affections would mean. Unless
guided in the action through which they reach their object, they
would subject everything to their own ends and take no account of the
character of the ways and means, as right or wrong. As unregulated love
they would lack an essential element for the office of moral control.
If it be true, as it unquestionably is, that some things are wrong,
no matter how lovingly they may be done, the benevolent affections
cannot be the supreme guide for even the loving activities of life.
Blind affection may run, as it does in thousands of relations and
instances, into the widest departures from good character and into
gross vices. However high the benevolent feeling may be as a motive,
all its purposes and the activities through which these purposes are
accomplished need the guidance of the law of righteousness, if they
are to be maintained in harmony with essential virtue, holy character
and human welfare. Their function must therefore be held subordinate
to the authority of conscience as the capacity through which the
law of rectitude, with its obligation, is presented and kept before
the mental view. This conclusion does not remove love from its high
position, at the very summit of things that are right and good and
essential for character. It allows it to stand, as it does all other
springs of action, in its full rights and value among human motives and
virtues in determining duty in conduct. But it is the conscience, and
not love itself, that judges and decides the obligation to it and the
high rank that ought to be given it as an element of character. Thus
the regulative function, even for benevolence, belongs to the ethical
sense, through perception of what sentiments and acts are right in
conduct. And so the peculiar business of the conscience is to watch all
the forces of our nature and keep each in its place.

The view which gives the right of moral control to the conscience is
thus vindicated by the plain fact that there is no other faculty or
spring of action in the human constitution adapted to this function, so
unquestionably requisite for the order and welfare of life.


==Difficulties.==

=2.= An apparent difficulty, however, arises in connection with this
conclusion. It calls for a brief consideration, lest it should be
thought to form a refutation of the correctness of our view:

It comes from the acknowledged fallibility of the conscience. This
seems, at first sight, inconsistent with a right to such ruling
authority. If its discernment of duty in particular relations may
not be fully clear and is liable to be misled, how can it be justly
regarded as having this authoritative office? If its applicatory
judgments are often found erroneous and need to be revised and
superseded by better judgments, can we fairly hold it as charged
with such regulative function? In different men, as already stated,
it exhibits differing and even conflicting directions. In different
nations and times its indications of duty fail to agree. Advance
in civilization, knowledge and culture is marked by higher ethical
standards, modifying, if not reversing, former judgments. But this
large fact, so unquestionable and, apparently, so formidable, becomes,
when analyzed, easily reconcilable with the position of authority
given to the conscience-discernments and imperatives. For a faculty
may be highest in human nature, and yet, like every other capacity,
limited. Its functional action may be comparatively undeveloped, or
may be strengthened and clarified. In its applicatory judgments, for
fixing the ethical law of right in all the varied and complex relations
and conditions of human life, it is dependent on all the subordinate
faculties for the requisite light. Whatever limitations may rest on
its ability, whatever partialness may mark its development, whatever
complications may perplex it in adjusting duty to all the actual
situations in human life, it yet remains the faculty through which
the law of duty is disclosed to view, and if duty is not indicated
through it, it is not indicated through any human insight at all. But
no faculty loses its own particular special authority in its own place
by its natural limitations and liability to error. Authority must not
be confounded with infallibility. Despite its fallibility every faculty
of the soul carries the authority for its own psychical office--the
intellect for knowledge, the sensibility for feeling, the will for
choices. The sense-perception has decisive authority for phenomena
about us, the logical faculty for just conclusions from given data,
the memory for recall of past experiences, the intuitional reason for
axiomatic truths and first principles. If the liability to error in
the psychic functions and their application to the myriad conditions
in which their immediate data are used, does not vacate their place of
authority in their spheres, no more does the similar liability vacate
the unique authority of the conscience, which it has by its action in
the supreme realm of the right and of moral obligation. Its position
of authority in its sphere remains, and remains supreme, because the
sphere of its action and discernments is, as pointed out, the supreme
sphere of eternal righteousness and obligation.

But a further question arises at this point. If it is sometimes in
error and, like an imperfect watch, gives an incorrect indication,
should the conscience always be followed? Does not this fact, if it
does not wholly take away its right to supremacy, at least modify the
positiveness of our duty to follow its dictates? This has sometimes
been a perplexing casuistic question. But the perplexity arises from
failure to keep in mind the precise points involved in the problem, and
to take account of the whole process through which particular duties
become apparent and obligatory. Since the decision of the conscience,
when rightly and fully reached, is, at the time it is given and as to
the point it decides, the soul's conviction as to what is right and
duty, to violate or disregard it becomes necessarily the very essence
of the immoral spirit and conduct. To go contrary to what the soul
sees as duty, through the only capacity it has for knowing it, is
essentially moral rottenness. Whewell's statement: "To disobey the
commands and prohibitions of conscience, under any circumstances, is
utterly immoral: it is the very essence of immorality,"[25] is hardly
too emphatic. To some writers this has seemed extravagant, in view
of the fact that some of the greatest wrongs and foulest crimes of
history, such as the burning of Latimer and Ridley, the St. Bartholomew
massacre, the gun-powder plot, might be palliated or even justified
under the plea of conscientiousness in the perpetrators.[26] But the
reconciliation of this seeming conflict between conscience and real
duty is made plain by remembering two things:

First, that the conscience, being a complex faculty or power, its
particular judgments of duty in particular cases, being judgments
of application of the principle of rightness, are reached often
through very complex processes, in which the obscuration of imperfect
information, or misconception of the relations involved, or the
misleading effect of prejudice created by wrong training, or some
falsely imagined divine authority, may leave not only a state of doubt
as to duty, but throw the decision into error. Examples of the process
occur in daily experience. A question of duty is presented. We come to
it with sincere, honest mind, and study it by taking into consideration
all the facts and relations concerned. We get all the light we can,
and we decide what the moral principle requires of us. This is the
course that fair dealing with ourselves and duty requires us to pursue.
But suppose that, after all this, in the fallibility of the applicatory
judgments, we are thus led to do the very thing that "ought not" to be
done, and violate instead of fulfil the duty which the actual relations
call for from us. The following of conscience may thus have put "wrong"
conduct, objectively viewed, in place of the "right" conduct which was
due from us in the case. The deed, in its external form and bearing,
may have been unfitting and one that ought not to have been done. But
this is not the whole view or full account of the matter. For though,
while in obeying our fallible conscience, we have thus failed to bring
our whole outward action in the case into harmony with full duty, or
have even done what to others about us or to God above us was wrong,
we have maintained our own subjective personal moral integrity, in
maintaining that which is the fundamental and essential element of
all morality, the right intention and effort. This is the prime and
the grandest element of all moral character, and is itself more than
"four-fifths of conduct." There is such a thing as being innocent
even when we have done what, viewed objectively, ought not to have
been done. The aim, in genuine integrity of moral purpose, was to do
right. The deed was a mistake. The moral status in which we may thus be
placed as a result of following our conscience, is, ethically, at the
opposite pole from that which we make ours when we disregard duty as
fixed for us in and by our own moral judgments. This is disobedience to
obligations as perceived and felt--an attitude in its nature immoral.

Secondly, the crimes and wrongs often attributed to obeying the
conscience are, probably, not fairly credited to the action of
conscience at all. We must distinguish what men, even conscientious
men, have done or do in the name of conscience, and what the moral
judgment itself has pointed out and urged as duty. It is safe to
affirm that nearly all these crimes have come not by the light and
dictates of the conscience, but by its suppression. There are, as all
history, observation and experience testify, many other strong and
bad motive-forces in human nature. The appetites and passions, the
lusts of ambition, the desire of wealth and power, the striving for
place and fame, the willfulness of selfishness and prejudice, are
forever suggesting their objects, filling the soul with their varied
and plausible pleadings, until life is driven hither and thither under
the restless forces. In some men these forces hardly allow any place
for the conscience to act. Not from the intuition of the moral sense
or the force of conscience, but from the suggestion and direction of
other motives, come the crimes that are credited to zeal inspired by
conscience. Conscience is not at the helm in this business. The wrongs
are a result of failure to consult its dictates--of the force and
direction of other elements and tendencies of action in human nature.
It was not conscience that burnt Latimer and Ridley, but intolerant
fanatical hate, hot passion ruling the hour. It was not conscience
that made St. Bartholomew's day full of cruelty, blood and horror,
but prejudice, hatred, the unreasoning rush of excited passions. It
may, indeed, seem plausible to say "that day was made by the Church's
conscience asserting the duty of repressing or overthrowing heresy."
And it is conceivable that that conscience should testify against
the evil of heresy, and the duty of endeavoring to overcome it. But
the suggestion of torture, blood and slaughter as the means of such
repression, was not the work of conscience. Its guidance was thrust
aside in that conduct. For this use of violence, cruelty and murder,
with all their repulsive horrors, conscience did not give the command,
even as God did not.

The truth with respect to the authority of conscience may be summed
up as its right to control our lives in all things involving moral
quality or character. Specifically: (1) In the regulation of our
physical appetencies; (2) In the use to which we put our intellectual
endowments and capacities; (3) In the direction and relations in which
we use our emotional and affectional capacities, embracing our natural
disposition, desires and aims; (4) In deciding our choices or the way
we use our power of free self-determination, covering our intentions
and aims; and (5) In the use we make of our capacities for physical
action by which thought, feeling and the preferences of choice are
turned into conduct which either fulfils or violates the duties which
are evolved by our relations to being around us or above us.

The authority of conscience touches at each and all of these different
points, because at each and all human life is taking shape in moral
character, as either conformed to duty or variant from it. Our personal
life is, in its deepest reality, a single self-conscious unit, and
the action of all its capacities and powers needs to be rhythmically
adjusted to the morally good. But the imperative of the conscience
addresses itself pre-eminently and peculiarly to the will, or the
personal self as free in choosing, and thus capable of directing and
using all the personal capacities and functions. It is upon the self
as free-will, as the self-determining and directive power, that the
responsibility for the conduct of life is thrown, and through it, if at
all, the responsibility is to be met.

And this authority becomes supreme not by any arbitrary right of one
subjective faculty over another or over all the rest, but from the fact
of the supremacy of what the conscience discerns and discloses, the
authority of right over wrong, the obligation to eternal righteousness.
Righteousness is king.




