CHAPTER VIII.

THE GROUND OF RIGHT.


This topic carries the inquiry concerning moral law one step further
than that determined in the last chapter. It being settled that that
law is objectively and permanently real, for the recognition of
conscience, we must yet seek some explanation of the basis of the
reality. Why are some things right and others wrong? What is the reason
of the difference? On what is the law of right grounded? We seek the
explanation of its existence and the obligation it imposes.

It must be remembered that even those who hold the moral behests
to be merely subjective, products in some way of the psychological
constitution, nevertheless endeavor to account for them in some
relations or forces back of themselves. These accounts, as will
appear, are exceedingly varied. Inasmuch, therefore, as nearly all the
differing ethical theories seek to give some explanation and ground
for moral obligation, the inquiry now before us presents the point
about which the chief contests of moral philosophy have been waged.
The different answers have been the main determinants of the different
systems.

Our examination must include three things: a clear definition of the
point of inquiry; some notice of the leading theories; and a positive
statement of the ground as demanded by reason and the interests of
moral life.

==The Question Defined.==

I. Definition. This is necessary because it has sometimes been
confounded with the question: What is the ground of obligation?[38]
We must distinguish between the "ground of right" and the "ground of
obligation." The point before us is not why we are under obligation
to do a right act, but why the act is right. Manifestly the rightness
of the proposed action is the ground of the obligation to do it; that
is, the obligation is grounded on the right. The exact inquiry is--and
must be, in order to reach the real and abiding moral foundations--on
what is the right, whose perception obligates, grounded? A quest after
the ground of the "obligation" simply, might satisfy those who reduce
conscience to a mere instinct or sentiment, and the moral standard to
a mere internal product of association, education or of biological
organization. To them it might seem enough to give an explanation of
the felt obligation. In such case they might plausibly, as they often
do, affirm that the moral bond, being thus organically insured and
fixed in the moral consciousness, must remain the same, no matter
what theories, even though purely materialistic, may be formed of its
genesis and nature. But so soon as the ethical reality is seen in its
cosmic place and transcendental character we want an explanation not
only of the ground of obligation to right conduct, but also of the
ground of the right which evokes the sense of obligation.

==Various Theories.==

II. Leading Theories. We must include, in this review, both the
theories which offer only an explanation of the phenomenon of
obligation and those that seek an elucidation of the principle of
righteousness as objective moral law. In the long continued discussion
of the subject these theories have been immensely varied and modified,
but the differences thus noted divide all explanations into two
classes, viz., those which make the moral stand in something subjective
and those that find it objective. In the cursory rehearsal of them,
here needed, we will present them in chronological order, irrespective
of their belonging to one class or the other, noting, however, their
relation to this distinction which divides them. Such historical glance
will give an outline of the development of thought on the subject, and
help us to reach and appreciate the true conclusion.


==Egyptian Teaching.==

=1.= Egypt's golden age was in the morning of the world's historical
period, and we must look far back for its best ethical thought.
With the Egyptians morality and religion were closely identified.
The ethical view was united with the theological and determined by
it. They, however, dealt with the subject of duty only in separate
maxims and precepts, without framing a theory of obligation. But the
purity and elevation of these precepts have been a wonder to many in
our modern days. It is, however, easily explained. Their religion
was monotheistic. God was a good and righteous Being, with power and
rulership, the source of all things for man. The Egyptians connected
all that was pure and good with God and recognized their dependence
on Him and their duty to live according to His will. Thus their moral
consciousness rose above the function of a mere subjective instinct
or a feeling of responsibility to their fellow-men, and included a
sense of direct amenability to divine authority. The goal of the moral
endeavor, ever overcoming evil, was regarded as attained, not in this,
but in a future life of blessedness under the divine approval. Their
view grounded all duty objectively, and practically identified it with
piety.[39]


==Chinese Teaching.==

=2.= Chinese teaching, too, was theological. The theology was
essentially monotheistic, but overgrown with superstitions and
idolatrous practices. It taught that man is the creature of God, and
was endowed by heaven with a nature for the practice of good, a nature
that, if followed properly--_i. e._ in the "golden mean"--invariably
leads men aright. The path indicated by nature is the will of God
concerning duty. "What heaven has conferred is called the nature; an
accordance with this nature is called the path of duty; the regulation
of this path is called instruction."[40] The chief contribution to
the Chinese teaching by the sage Confucius (B. C. 551-478) was his
proclamation of the principle of "reciprocity," _i. e._ doing as we
would have others do to us. Though the elements of the moral problem
were thus included fairly well for ordinary conduct, they were not
framed into a distinct philosophy of the ground of right.


==Views in India.==

=3.= India's sacred books abound in moral maxims and counsels.
Brahmanism is substantially a philosophy of life rather than a
religion. But its pantheism and doctrine of the pre-existence and
transmigration of souls have distorted and misdirected the moral idea.
Its pantheism confounds the human with the divine, both in its origin
and destination. Its belief in transmigration, with its perpetual
succession of rebirths into conditions of woeful individual life unless
the soul's unhappy agitations and unrest should be composed by virtue,
shapes the moral task mainly, not only into restraint of the appetites
and passions, but into such austerity and stern self-abnegation as
may prepare the soul, on the death of the body, to attain the perfect
repose of Nirvana the complete extinction of human passions, or,
as Buddhism represents, annihilation of conscious individuality in
reabsorption into the absolute existence. In this system the aim
of morality is not "the right," but the desired good of tranquil
happiness, or the final goal of merging self-conscious personality back
again into the Great All from which it arose. The ground of the moral
striving--it can hardly be called obligation--is the adaptedness of it
to secure this result.[41]


==Persian Teaching.==

=4.= Zoroastrianism (Mazdæism), from about B. C. 1500-1000, confessedly
presents an ethical teaching that, among oriental views, is second
only to that of the Hebrews. Its theological dualism, which seems
to have encroached upon an earlier purer monotheism, of two eternal
principles or powers, Ormuzed (Ahura Mazda) the good power, and Ahriman
(Angra Mainyou) the evil power, manifestly arose from the effort to
solve the dread problem of evil in the world. Zoroastrian teaching
represents Ormuzed as the all-knowing and the holy creator of the
world. He cannot create evil. He is the source of all purity, order and
righteousness. Wrong and misery have come into the world from Ahriman,
the opposite contending power in the universe. Zoroastrianism thus
gives the world-system a moral foundation and law of order. The moral
life is a holy conflict with the forces of evil within human nature and
assailing it. The supreme end of life is to increase the ascendency
of righteousness and establish its everlasting reign of truth and
goodness. The goal of it comes in a future life of blessedness. The
ground of righteousness is thus placed in the nature and will of the
eternal creator, to whom obedience is due, against the influences of
the malign power of evil.[42]


==Greek Theories.==

=5.= Among the Greeks ethical philosophy began with Socrates. Their
earlier writers dealt with the subject of duty but little in a
speculative way. When the philosophy of it came to be sought the
theories mainly connected it closely with "the good" or "the highest
good," the _summum bonum_ of life. This designation was ambiguous.
"The good" (τὸ ἀγαθόν, τὰ ἀγαθά [Greek: to agathon], [Greek: ta
agatha]) might be conceived of as either intellectual or sensuous
good, as consisting in one's intrinsic state or in outward condition,
as either happiness or personal well-being. And because this method
failed to distinguish clearly and fully between this indefinite
"good"--having at best no more authority than "the beautiful"--and "the
right" which forms the true essence of the ethical principle, their
explanations failed to become clear, and stopped short of being actual
explanations of the ground of right. Hence their theories, though not
always consistently exhibited, and variously interpreted by expounders
of them, were substantially _eudæmonistic_[43] and _utilitarian_.
Specifically:

(1) Socrates made all virtue consist in knowledge, especially self
knowledge or wisdom, leading men to proper self-regulation and
happiness. He put emphasis upon man's rational nature as essentially
good, and to this rational nature belonged the office of self-mastery
and control of all appetites, dispositions, and passions. The life
in knowledge became the good and happy life. Though this great sage
maintained that the world is governed by a supreme intelligence, he
failed to connect clearly and closely the moral law with this high
source, and rested the moral life simply subjectively.

(2) Plato developed his view substantially on the basis of that of
Socrates. He identified the highest good with the intellect rather than
the sensibility, and looked upon all virtues as united in _knowledge_,
not only as guiding the soul in acting out its proper destination,
but, according to some statements, even as in itself all-sufficing.
Though Plato's speculative view of the universe contains the elements
for the construction of a sublime immutable ethical standard, and he
even suggests God-likeness as the goal of man's moral life,[44] the
implications of his view are not consistently carried out; and when he
comes to apply his ideas to life in his ideal Republic he lapses into
what seems a caricature of his better thought, and is content to rest
morality simply on the authority and laws of the state.[45]

(3) Aristotle, in whom Plato's theistic view of the world receded into
the background, made the "chief good" consist in happiness or felt
well-being, which depends on man's living according to his rational
nature. Such living includes both the activities of the mind and
habitual conduct. The reason must not only develop its own energies,
but rule the lower powers and passions. On this double requirement
he founded two kinds of virtue, the intellectual (dianoetic) and the
practical. The one consists in "knowledge" or "wisdom," the other in
formed "habits" or "character." The moral life, therefore, consists
in the true use, without abuse, of our rational nature. The rule
for it, as taught by Aristotle, is to avoid extremes and pursue the
golden mean. The theory thus rests morality wholly on subjective good
and identifies it with the calculations of prudence. It is simply
secularistic, without religious element or appeal.[46]

(4) In Epicurus (B. C. 341-270) and his followers eudæmonism descended
into hedonism. The supreme good is happiness in the sense of personal
enjoyment, pleasure. The universe, without theistic ground, was
regarded as eternal, forever evolving in fortuitous concourse of atoms.
It is without rational order, design, or government. The human soul is
material, and at death men cease to be. The good of life consists in
the avoidance of pain and the securing of pleasure. The pleasure may
be intellectual or sensuous and gross, as men may prefer. The pursuit
of it is the highest virtue and best wisdom. Enjoyment is the end of
life. The whole question of ethics thus came to be a calculation and
balancing of pains and pleasures, and the cardinal virtue prudent
selfishness. It was complete subjectivism.

(5) In Stoicism (founded by Zeno of Citium, about 308 B. C.) we have
a view that, in its principal features, was in strong contrast with
Epicureanism. It arose in close relation to the teaching of Socrates.
But it taught that "happiness" was not necessary, and should never be
made the end of endeavor. Virtue itself was the highest good, and to
be sought for its own sake. Itself was sufficient for happiness--not
because it could make men insensible to pain or pleasure, but because
it made them superior to it. Virtue was immutably excellent in itself,
a permanent reality for man's realization, and subordinated everything
else. It consisted essentially in living "according to nature,"[47]
_i. e._ not simply in harmony with one's self, but with the nature of
the universe, with the whole constitution of the world as ordained and
ruled by God, of which a man's own nature forms a part. The stress
was not at all to be laid on self, but upon the great total of being.
Man exists for society, and virtue is impossible apart from the
social state. So Stoic teaching inculcated subordination of self to
more general interests--to family, country, mankind. It taught that
all creatures are "children of one father,"[48] and duty was owed
to all. We may hardly, however, speak of this as "altruism," in the
sense of unselfish benevolence or self-sacrificing goodness; since,
in the general Stoic philosophy, not the sentiment of sympathetic
helpfulness, but of victorious superiority to pain, was the temper
fostered. Love was almost submerged in the stern spirit of duty. The
blessedness of virtue was to stand independent of the sufferings which
befell men. In fact the dreadful inexorableness of fate (εἱμαρμένῃ
[Greek: heimarmenê]), conceived by the Stoic philosophy as eternally
embracing the life of both God and nature, gave to virtue, not so much
the temper of free, loving obedience to either God or righteousness,
as the sternness of a proud intellectual resoluteness in yielding, for
virtue's sake, to the inevitable in the fate-bound universe. Under
this conception the Stoic moral obedience could never rise to the free
joyousness that belongs to the obedient life under the light of the
Christian truth that God is love--eternal love, ruling in absolute
freedom and desiring to exalt His children to the perfect holiness to
which alone happiness forever belongs.

All these Greek theories, except the Stoic, are thus seen to have been
marked by two features. First, they dissolved "the right," which alone
has direct authority and forms moral law, into "the good," which is
simply something offered to us as an object of desire, but which has
no "imperative" for the conscience, and may be innocently foregone.
Secondly, despite the clear better implications supplied to them in
their accepted theistic conceptions of the world, they failed to define
distinctly any grounding of the moral law on anything higher or more
permanent than the subjective elements of the human constitution. For,
even Plato's objective basing of it, for citizen duty, on the law of
the state, assumed only a subjective basis in the person of the ruler
himself. The Stoic theory, however, had glimpses of some higher and
broader ground, though it failed to see it truly.


==Roman Teaching.==

=6.= The Roman moralists adopted substantially the doctrine of the
Greek Stoics. This was finely exhibited and commended, especially by
Seneca, Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius. But we have no new theory among
the Roman philosophers.

After the establishment of Christianity, whose progress thenceforward
determined and marked the intellectual activity and advancing
philosophy and culture of mankind, the discussion of ethics became
simply a part of theology. And according to the spirit and method of
theology in the early Church and during the middle ages, even down to
modern times, the discussion was not philosophical, but biblical. It
was concerned simply to set forth human duty, especially the duties
of the Christian life, as taught in the scriptures of the Old and New
Testaments. Resting the moral law upon revealed divine authority, it
paid small attention to the question of its metaphysical validation.
But when modern philosophy began its investigations, it of necessity
soon came upon this point, and inquired after the natural basis or
ultimate ground of the great law whose unique authority both the sacred
Scriptures and the moral consciousness of men agreed in asserting.


==Divine Absolutism.==

=7.= Modern theories begin with that of Divine absolutism--making the
moral law, like physical laws, only a product of God's will. It makes
it rest absolutely optional in His sovereignty of choice. It not only
seeks no ulterior reason, or logical _prius_, for his choice, but
distinctly disconnects it from any. God's will is not the expression or
revelation, but the originator, of the moral distinction, constituting
it, with its obligatoriness, as He has done, when He might have
constituted it otherwise, even the very contrary. He determined "the
right" according to no norm, but as creating and establishing a norm.
Whether there should be any moral distinction and what it should be,
was a matter of the divine choice. The view is a one-sided conception
of God's sovereignty. It was set forth by Hugo Grotius (1583-1645) and
René Descartes (1596-1650), and has found prominent advocacy frequently
since. But it collides with both sound theology and an adequate moral
philosophy.

(1) It fails to recognize any eternal essential moral character in
God Himself. The interests of both morality and religion require
faith in Him as Himself eternally the righteous and holy creator
and moral ruler, in His immutable nature. The morally good can not
be something "contingent," but must be absolute, irrepealable and
irreversible even by God. We need for both religion and character, to
hold fast to the great truth which represents God in His moral will
as choosing righteousness as righteousness, loving the "morally good
as good"[49]--not as by mere will originating the moral distinction
and fixing a code of conduct upon arbitrary ordination. For real moral
character in God we must go even further and regard Him as loving
righteousness, not simply as good in Himself, but as good in itself,
good by the immutable quality of its own nature. For a moral government
we must have a moral governor. And God can be such, not by enforcing
responsibility to an arbitrary code, but by ruling according to
distinctions that are _per se_ supreme in eternal reason--enforcing not
a mere rule of power but of essential rightness.

(2) Further, the action of the conscience itself, in discerning right
and wrong where it has received no information as to the will of God,
implies that the distinction is rationally based. To discern it is not
always conditioned on such information. Reason itself--the human in the
image of the divine--in some degree reveals the right. So clear is this
discernment, and so independent of all "contingency" does the right
appear, that even pagan writers have been wont to make virtue superior
even to the displeasure of the gods, nobly standing self-approved.[50]

(3) The true relation between the will of God and the ethically good
must be conceived of as, indeed, involving a profound and indissoluble
identity--what He wills being always and necessarily right, though He
wills it in perfect freedom--but yet as moving in the logical order of
thought, that right is not made right by His willing it, but that He
wills it because it is right.


==Civil Authority.==

=8.= Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679), holding the natural state of man as
utterly selfish and a state of war, gave to civil government, as
necessary to the social order, supreme authority, and asserted that the
basis of all moral obligation was positive law issued by the sovereign.
Duty rested on the legal statute, whose direction was final. It knew no
higher law. The theory was a repetition of the travesty of ethics in
Plato's Republic. It has had no following, and needs no confutation.

But a theory that thus ignored individual conscience and essential
right, reducing morality to civic obedience, with no other foundation
than the positive enactment of a monarch, at once and strongly re-acted
in strengthening the conviction of the necessity and truth of the
intuitional view of the moral faculty, and of the importance of finding
a better basis for the ethical principle, both in the constitution of
mankind and in the author of nature.


==The Sympathetic Theory.==

=9.= The Sympathetic Theory is naturally associated with that
conception of conscience which makes it consist fundamentally, not in
intellect, but in instinct or feeling. Taking the suggestion from Hume,
the theory was elaborated by Adam Smith (1723-1790). It explained moral
obligation as produced by the special action of our nature in which
we spontaneously sympathize with certain intentions or conduct of our
fellow-men--this sympathy taking the form of approval. The bond to duty
was viewed as thus formed by these instinctive sentiments pointing
out what is morally good and obligating to corresponding behavior. Of
course the individual's sympathetic appreciation had to be broadened
and trained by the standard of general sentiment. And the explanation
was helped out by noting the adaptation of this rule of conduct to
promote personal and social happiness. But a theory resting duty on a
basis so thoroughly subjective, and so uncertain and changeful as are
men's unguided feelings, likely often to be in sympathy with evil,
could not commend itself to wide acceptance. It presented neither the
ground of right nor a safe rule.


==Utilitarianism.==

=10.= The theory of Utilitarianism had its prototypes in the teachings
of Socrates, Aristotle, and the Epicureans. Its modern forms have been
greatly varied, but they all agree in founding the morally good in
utility. That which experience shows to be useful, as promotive of
personal or social interests and happiness, becomes thereby right,
or the norm of moral choices and conduct. The theory, in all its
modifications, is a "goods" theory,[51] interpreting obligation as
simply the behest to conform life to the attainment of the various
forms of good, even the chief, as happiness or enjoyment, provided for
in man's nature and condition. Named from the object or objects sought,
it is eudæmonism; named from the way or means of its attainment, it
is utilitarianism. Sometimes the good is simply happiness, sometimes
personal well-being, sometimes social welfare. Sometimes it is purely
selfish, sometimes altruistic or in some sense benevolent. But a
few examples will make plain both its general character and chief
variations.

(1) William Paley (1743-1805), adopting eudæmonistic principles, rested
all obligation to duty on its tendency to secure everlasting happiness.
He says: "Actions are to be estimated by their tendency. Whatever is
expedient is right. It is the utility of any moral rule alone, which
constitutes the obligation to it."[52] "The will of God" is accepted
as "the rule of virtue," seemingly not, however, as the direct ground
of it, but rather as the sure guide as to what has the "tendency" to
gain for us "everlasting happiness." For, Paley explains: "Such is the
divine character that what promotes the general happiness is required
by the will of God." This view makes the spirit of duty, even in
religion, supreme selfishness. It places the self-regarding impulses on
the throne.

(2) Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832), the chief apostle of modern
utilitarianism, gave it great popularity by making it distinctly
altruistic. Adopting suggestions in this direction by Shaftsbury
(1713), Hutcheson, Butler, and Hume, he measurably lifted its aim above
the individual's care of his own interests, and made the principle of
right authoritative because promotive of "the greatest happiness of the
greatest number." This seemed to subordinate, without excluding, the
individual's advantage to that of the many, and the selfish instinct
to the higher and nobler aims of love. It developed a rule by which
the brotherhood of man could have place, and character could rise and
broaden into magnanimity and worth. It gave an objective standing and
broadly human aim to the principle of obligation. James Mill, J. S.
Mill and Alexander Bain have been conspicuous recent representatives of
this general view, while modifying some particular features of it.

It must be added, however, that this modern "altruism," when analyzed
to its final view, does not become "disinterested benevolence." For
the greatest general good is viewed as conditioning the best good of
each individual, and the individual is to include it for the sake of
his own share. So this so-called "altruism," after all, is still ruled
by the self-regarding aim, and stands only for the broadest and most
successful utilitarianism.

(3) Evolutionist Utilitarianism. This is its recent and present
most characteristic form. The variety of types of evolutionism,
however, has prevented the bringing of it, thus far, into a definite
universally accepted formulation. Although, as already stated,[53]
monistic evolutionism, whether materialistic or pantheistic, by
excluding freedom from the universe, leaves no place for moral action
or responsibility, it still continues to speak about obligation and
the reality of personal character. In this case the "obligation" can
be only acquiescence in the fatalistic onward evolution of nature with
its inevitable events. Theistic evolution, however, holding itself as
only the mode of the divine creation, though it has difficulties in
explaining the genesis of an authoritative conscience, maintains both
its existence in some sense and a ground for the obligation which it
urges. Its utilitarianism differs from earlier forms in substituting an
historical and biological explanation of the origin and force of the
moral sentiments for the purely psychological one. These sentiments
are declared to be "the results of accumulated experiences of utility,
gradually organized and inherited."[54] In its better forms of
statement this process of organizing a guiding instinct or intuition is
represented as the divine work of transferring the moral law over us
into our subjective consciousness--a process, however, that moves on
the principle of utility and is always incomplete.[55]

Against the whole utilitarian theory, as a widely urged explanation
of the ground of right and the sense of obligation, the following
considerations are decisive:

First, the idea of right is generically distinct and different from
that of happiness or utility. However closely related they refuse
to be identified and must not be confounded. In reference to any
particular act or to any general course of conduct, beyond the question
of pleasure or advantage arises the further question: Is it right?
Every day of their lives men are required to forego enjoyment and the
forwarding of what appears to be their interests, in order to do right
and follow their conscience. Perceived adaptations to happiness are not
the same as the obligation to right. Utilitarianism stands apart from
the moral idea, in a by-play with the idea of profit.[56]

Secondly, as a matter of fact, clear in our consciousness, we do not,
in deciding the right or wrong of purposes and conduct, go through the
process of first determining the question of utility or adaptedness to
secure the greatest happiness to the greatest number or even our own
greatest happiness. In actual moral experience, the first fact is the
notion of right and duty. Even when pleasure or advantage is making an
appeal, duty is decided by the further question: Is it right? If it be
claimed that the process of calculation has become largely unnecessary
through the experience which has been teaching lessons and training
into judgments so spontaneous as to seem almost intuitive, there are
still cases enough where the right is a distinct issue, irrespective of
advantage, and where it is chosen in the face of loss and suffering.
This fact shows that right is a distinct principle and higher than
pleasure. To do right rather than seek sensitive good is the noblest
exaltation of character.

It is especially in evolutionist utilitarianism that the absence of
such conscious calculating of advantage in questions of duty, is
supposed to be explained. The enjoyment of the useful is represented as
gradually organized and transformed into moral approbation, and through
hereditary descent appears, as Herbert Spencer says, in "certain
emotions responding to right and wrong, which have no apparent basis in
the individual experiences of utility." But philosophy fails to explain
how the idea of the useful can thus become identical with the idea of
the right, or even explanatory of it. If a lifetime's experience of
utility does not suffice to transmute the idea of one into the other,
why should we think a longer time would do it? If duty does not become
the same as happiness or as the tendency of conduct to promote it, in
the ascending steps of individual evolution, what warrant have we to
assume that it did so in some period far back of the consciousness of
the present individuals of the race?

Thirdly, utilitarianism is inconsistent with the authority which
belongs to right, as witnessed in the moral consciousness. It is
the distinctive peculiarity of conscience that it reveals a law or
principle of obligation, not of our own making, and which our wills
cannot displace. Manifestly this authority is not of the faculty
itself, but belongs to the law of right which it discloses. It
is right, therefore, that is authoritative, with and through the
conscience, because right is a revelation of that absolute authority
not ourselves which makes for righteousness in the world and the whole
universe. It represents the perfections and will of God. No theory of
obligation is adequate which does not square with this fact of unique
authority in right, as recognized and enforced by the moral imperative.
But neither happiness nor the utilities that tend to promote it,
possess it. They are not obligatory in the peculiar sense in which
the ethical behest binds to righteousness. They are offered to our
enjoyment, as sensitive good, but we may forego them or neglect to seek
them, without direct criminality. Duty may, and often does, require us
not to make them a controlling object of desire.

Among pleasures, some are higher or larger than others, and appeal to
some persons more strongly than to others. We can innocently choose
between them. To seek the greater instead of the smaller, or indeed
to neglect them all, is a prudential characteristic, not a moral one.
Where a person has simply foregone pleasure, he may regret it as
an error, but not repent of it as a sin. Considered with respect to
the individual alone, and free from relations that may incidentally
involve other points than his own personal pleasure, a man's happiness
may be regarded as his own free concern. If he chooses to neglect its
pursuit, or sacrifice it to other aims, so far as it is only and purely
a question as between greater or less enjoyment, his choice cannot
be challenged as guilty, but only as poor economy. Unquestionably it
ought to be believed that God desires men to be happy, and has provided
the needful conditions for happiness, but its enjoyment is an offer
of His love, and not a requirement of law. Happiness is a thing to be
gratefully appreciated; right is a thing we are bound to. Happiness
is a thing the less likely to be enjoyed the more covetously it is
sought after; right claims our unforgetful and completest loyalty.
Utilitarianism, therefore, assuming to ground right, which has direct
authority in the moral consciousness, upon happiness which in itself
has none, necessarily falls short of being an adequate theory of the
ethical reality. It attempts to deduce the moral from the non-moral.

This difference between questions of right and questions of utility
easily solves a supposed difficulty in the moral freedom of the
will. If choices were simply between greater or less degrees of
pleasure or advantage, it might easily be imagined that the will
would be necessarily determined by the greater pleasure. As between
inducements of the same kind, the larger would prevail. But the ethical
choices have their place in the presence of motives of different
_kinds_, between right and enjoyment, duty or gain; and here there is
unquestionable room for free ethical choices. The question of freedom
in moral life is at once relieved by taking it out of the utilitarian
view into the clear atmosphere where the profitable is no longer
confounded with the right.

Fourthly, utilitarianism inverts the true relation between right and
utility. Unquestionably the connection between them is very close. In a
moral system true happiness belongs to righteousness. Man cannot attain
his true welfare in sin. Whatever uncertainties and inequalities the
abuse of free agency may bring temporarily into human enjoyment, in
the long run right in its very nature promotes the happiness which has
been intended for us. But the logical order of relations is, not that
an act is right because it is useful, but useful because right. Under a
moral government happiness, in the highest and fullest sense, comes as
the legitimate fruit of righteousness, as wrong-doing, also, brings its
true consequences in suffering, pain and misery. Right is the quality
of highest rank, and all blessedness comes into unity and harmony under
it. Their rightness gives to actions their quality of usefulness, which
cannot, therefore, ground the right. Utilitarianism inverts the real
relation.

This true relation explains how it is that the right stands the very
highest in the grade of values, without its becoming right by its
profitableness. It is of supreme worth, the greatest good, but it is so
by what it is in itself. Its good consequences spring from its nature.

But while utilitarianism is thus utterly inadequate as a statement of
the ground of right, it nevertheless, especially in its altruistic
form, brings to view some genuine and profound principles of the
philosophy of duty. This has given it its plausibility and wide
acceptance. It is proper, therefore, to mark and recognize the truth
that belongs to the theory.

(1) The tendencies of conduct to promote true happiness, or the
contrary, furnish, in fact, a valuable practical rule in questions
of right and duty. For, by the moral constitution of the world,
right-doing, despite the disorders that temporarily obstruct and
confuse the real law of consequences, is the way of true welfare.
Happiness, in the true, though not hedonistic sense, is an end of our
being, and virtue is conducive to it. "The way of the transgressor
is hard," under the law of natural cause and effect. The utilitarian
theory therefore justly appeals to the great lessons of experienced
utility to show the way of duty and guide conduct into righteousness.
So that while utility does not explain why an act is right, it becomes,
if correctly interpreted, a principle of great value in determining the
right.

(2) It is unquestionably true that the altruistic principle of "the
greatest good to the greatest number" presents a principle of genuine
moral authority. It opens to view the whole realm of obligation to
beneficent activity and self-sacrifice. It points to deeds that are
noblest in life and highest in ethical character. It even gives a
reason for their obligatoriness. In this form the theory no longer
bases duty simply on one's own personal enjoyment or advantage,
identifying morality with supreme selfishness, but lifts it into the
sphere of benevolence and doing good. For, in altruism individual
enjoyment and interests are necessarily subordinated to the well-being
of the many. And when utility is thus put into the service of love
or good-will, it carries the quality of right into wide ranges of
purpose and conduct. It will be observed, however, that the theory
thus obtains its appearance of explaining the foundation of right and
duty only after "utility" has been itself changed and identified with
the virtue of active good-will or beneficence which, of course, is
right and obligatory to the degree of every man's ability. In other
words, only when it ceases to be purely and really a utilitarian
theory, and stands in the name and rights of benevolence--getting
ethical authority surreptitiously from the quality of love instead of
"profitableness"--does it also get the plausibility that it seems to
possess.

(3) It is true, too, that a person's opportunities to promote his
own happiness and true interests involve a degree of obligation to
do so, as far as this may be consistent with other duties. A proper
self-regard is right. In general, on the one hand, we may justly make,
as we have done, a distinction between enjoyment, which is offered
to our option, and right, which is required by moral law. Were there
no considerations involved but that of one's own happiness, this
distinction would be unqualified. On the other hand, it must, at
the same time, be confessed that the moral consciousness of mankind
often condemns the conduct of men reckless of their own happiness
or well-being, not simply as "poor economy," but also as morally
wrong. Except in benevolent sacrifice no man can innocently throw away
his own happiness. The explanation of this is easy. There are other
considerations involved than his own happiness. To understand the whole
truth at this point the underlying fact must be borne in mind, that man
is created for two great ends, primarily for excellence of character,
secondarily and consequently for happiness. In moral order the way
to the latter is in and through the former. Character stands as the
irrepealable condition of reaching man's proper and true happiness.
And it is, therefore, true that in throwing away his happiness a man
may be guilty of more than "poor economy," but only in case he does
this by violating the law of right in surrendering his nature to vice.
It is not the consent to surrender enjoyment in itself that involves
guilt. For, one may innocently and virtuously forego this for the sake
of doing right. He may sacrifice pleasure or present happiness to serve
the good of others. In such disregard and sacrifice of enjoyment to do
good, there is no sin against the law of right; for we are not bound to
enjoyment as we are to right. Nor is there in it any sin against the
divine provision for happiness in our own nature; for under the rule of
moral order righteousness and happiness must finally coincide. While,
therefore, there is a sense in which to throw away one's happiness is
morally wrong, as well as bad policy, it is only when it is thrown away
by conduct that is first a violation of the law of right.

There are two other profound ethical facts which help to explain how
men are bound to regard their own happiness, although right is not
grounded in it. One is, that every man sustains relations to the
welfare of his fellow-men, being a unit in the solidarity of social
humanity, making it impossible to separate his own happiness from
the well-being and rights of others. The other is that he sustains
also relations to an intended possible personal destiny. In the first
of these he is bound in duty to his fellow-men. In the second he is
obligated in duty to God. In the former case, he cannot wantonly trifle
with his own interests without wrong and injury to those to whom he is
bound in the relationships of life. In this way a moral wrong comes
in. In the latter case, as God has rights in His plan for each man's
worthy and happy destiny, it is a sin against Him when men make their
own welfare inferior by failure to observe the moral principle which
conditions true happiness in righteousness. Sacrifice of happiness
by such disregard of moral principle is not to be confounded with
sacrifice of it through loyalty to right and holy self-denial in doing
good.

It thus, however, becomes evident, even in this discussion and
exhibition of the truth which utilitarianism has in its favor, that the
theory fails to present the real ground of right. For in its primary
and fundamental form, viewing conduct as right because promotive of
our personal interests and happiness, it plainly resolves morality
into mere calculation of selfishness. It presents supreme egoism. And
in its altruistic form it either maintains its selfish character, by
explaining that only by the rule of "the greatest good to the greatest
number" can the common interest, and consequently each man's share be
fully secured, implying that he is to contribute to the common welfare
for the sake of his own larger portion; or by subordinating the idea
of "utility" to that of "good-will" actively seeking the interests of
others, it practically confesses that it must seek some other ground
than mere utility or the consequences of conduct, in which to find
the principle of right. And this good-will, benevolence or love, thus
added, also fails. For since good-will is a virtue, it cannot be
placed as the ground of virtue, both in itself and in all virtues. The
moral law is by no means exhausted in benevolence; it must include
also justice, purity, veracity and many other duties. A benevolence
that would be unaccompanied by condemnation of the evil-doer and his
wrongs, might quickly go astray. It has often been pointed out that
good-will itself throws no light as to the right methods of realizing
even itself. Itself needs a guide as to how it may proceed--the very
principle of right after whose basis we are inquiring. Love, unless
united with reprobation of evil-doing, is as likely to act immorally as
morally. Benevolent endeavor, however excellent in itself, must subject
its methods to the fundamental principles of right. And not until we
find the relations that require both benevolence and its utilities, do
we reach the ground of right and obligation.


==Theory of Relations.==

=11.= The Theory of _Relations_ is variously modified. As expressed by
Dr. Samuel Clarke, right is based on "the fitness of things." Wollaston
grounded it on "the truth of things," wrong action being in all cases
out of harmony with the realities of existence. Jouffroy found it in
the demands of "universal order," the particular good and duty of each
man being elements or parts of an absolute good and universal order
appearing to reason as obligatory. Dr. Wayland makes right rest upon
"conformity of action to the relations which man sustains in life."[57]

We shall come upon the essential features of this theory in our next
chapter, in our positive account of the development and basis of right.


==Spiritual Excellence Theory.==

=12.= As defined by Dr. Hickok: "The ground in which the ultimate rule
of right is seen, is the intrinsic excellency of spiritual being."...
"Every man has consciously the bond upon him to do that and that only
which is due to his spiritual excellency."[57] But it is a plain matter
of fact that men do not go through a process of correlating their
proposed conduct with the spiritual excellency of their nature, before
deciding on its moral character. And even if they did so, it would give
them but a self-centred rule. Dr. Gregory well says of this attempt to
put one's own spiritual excellency as the principle of right: "It is
only by a self-deification, by making man a god to himself, that it can
be made a supreme end."[58]

==Theory of Intuitions.==

=13.= Some writers search for no ground beyond the immediate intuition.
This view forbears to seek for any basis behind the immediate
affirmation of the moral sense. Right is ultimate in its own intuition.
"The intuition creates law." This seems to be the teaching of Cudworth,
Kant, Coleridge, Calderwood, and others.




