CHAPTER X.

THE OBJECTS OF MORAL JUDGMENT.


A full view of the ethical reality and its meaning for us requires yet
an examination into the question: Of what may we justly affirm moral
quality? Where does the conscience apply the distinctions of right and
wrong? What are properly the objects, and the only objects, of moral
approval or condemnation? Or, to put it in a way possibly more easily
understood, to what human activities or features of life does moral
quality belong?

It has already been noted in general that only personal beings
can be moral agents or become, in what they are and do, objects
of moral judgment. Apart from personality, no place for virtue or
vice can be found. Of things, whether natural products or products
of human industry, as rock or star or stream, or ship or watch or
engine, we cannot predicate moral character. We may speak of them
as beautiful, useful, or perfect, or as ugly, useless, or faulty,
but all distinctly ethical terms are inapplicable to them. The moral
approbation or condemnation which we feel for the temper, words, and
actions of men is felt toward them as personal phenomena. Detached from
personality they would no more be subjects of praise or blame than
the temperature of the sea, the noise of the wind, or the down-pour
of rain Moral character belongs to them only as the characteristics
and manifestations of the self-conscious and self-directed life of a
moral agent. To the question what activities of a moral agent may have
ethical quality, it ought to be sufficient to say that it belongs to
all his conscious and self-directed conduct. Obligation claims sway
over the whole personality. But for clearness and definiteness, it is
necessary to specify.


==Personal Actions.==

=1.= The action itself, in its external form, may be right or wrong, as
in conformity to moral relations or incongruous with them. It may be
either the deed that is due to the relations and a fulfilment of the
duty they call for, or it may be one that clashes with their rational
and actual requirement. It may be in itself just the action in which
conduct is rightly adjusted to the actual relations--an act that ought
to appear in them. Or it may be in itself an action whose very form
contradicts the moral demand of the relations, and which ought not to
be done, no matter how good a motive may prompt the deed. For example,
the motive to use them in a worthy charity could never justify a theft
of goods or money, nor could filial care of a helpless parent be in
itself wrong, even should a bad motive inspire it. Moral law repudiates
the first deed; it condemns the wrong motive in the second, but
declares the material of the deed itself to be right and good.

We must here distinguish between the moral character of the doer and of
the deed. The quality of right and wrong belongs to the action; guilt
or innocence belongs to the person. This is the basis of the well
known fact that in some cases the doer of a wrong act may nevertheless
be held as innocent and even virtuous in it. He may have honestly
meant to do right, and acted from praiseworthy motives, but from not
understanding correctly or fully the situation, may have done what has
violated the moral call of the relations. The action may be condemned,
while he himself may be acquitted of guilt. The full ethical demand,
however, requires such a use of all our faculties of knowledge and
behavior, as not only to maintain a good intention, but to keep our
outward conduct in harmony with objective righteousness.

Many writers have shown a disposition to deny moral quality to the
external action. Locating it all in the inner sentiment or intention,
their analysis separates the visible part from its source, and
holds up to view the action, so separated, as mere physical motion,
characterizable as useful and expedient or the contrary, but neither
moral nor immoral. Independently of its motive it is resolved into mere
natural movement, as non-ethical as a muscular spasm, sleepwalking,
the dashing of a wave, or the biting of frost. But this is as
misleading as it is plausible. The error becomes clear by the following
considerations:

(1) The supposed separation of the deed from the inward intention
falsifies the actual facts in the case. The essential element in the
problem is that we are contemplating, not physical movement only,
like spasms or waves, but personal deeds, as acts of moral agents.
Of course, moral quality does not attach to the action of non-moral
beings, as the striking of clocks or the barking of dogs, but to deeds
of self-directing personality. Let it be freely admitted that the inner
sentiment does give quality to conduct. The obligation to the conduct
that shall fulfil duty attaches to the personal agent; the innocence
or guilt also belongs to him. But there is obligation upon him with
respect to conduct only because conduct, in its external forms as well
as inward springs, forms the total material of morality. There could be
no responsibility for conduct if no moral quality belonged to actions.
To separate--after the manner referred to--the action from the personal
moral agent and think of it as physical motion only, makes it no longer
the action about whose character we are inquiring.

(2) We must bear in mind several just distinctions in the application
of the term right. Along with duty, obligation, merit, innocence,
or guilt, it may be affirmed of the moral agent. We may say, "he is
right," in doing so or so. We may speak of the inner sentiment as
right or wrong. So we may of the external action. For the true and
full extent of moral quality, we must make it cover the agent himself,
and both the inner and outer sides of his personal conduct. Conduct
has an internal and an external part. The motive is only one part. An
action is relatively right, with respect to the agent, when he has the
right will in right motive; it is absolutely right only when it is
also shaped into accordance with the relations so as to realize the
moral demand upon the person. The distinction, often made, between
formal right and material right, throws the point into clear light. It
is well stated by Prof. Bowne: "The former depends upon the attitude
of the agent's will toward his ideal of right, the latter depends on
the harmony of the act with the laws of reality and its resulting
tendency to produce and promote well-being. Conduct which is formally
right may be materially wrong; and conduct which is materially right
may be formally wrong; but no conduct can be even formally right when
the agent does not aim to be materially right. The ideal of conduct
demands both formal and material rightness, and as long as either is
lacking the outcome is imperfect.... If one does 'the best he knows,'
it is often said nothing more can be demanded of him. And yet it is
plain that this formal righteousness is altogether insufficient for
the person's well-being. The reason is that the law of well-being
is independent of our will. If we misconceive that law and act
accordingly, we may be formally right, but because of the misconception
we should be materially wrong. It is, then, by no means sufficient
that one be formally right, that is, true to his convictions of duty;
he must also be materially right, that is, in harmony with reality
and its laws. Formal rightness, of course, is ethically the more
important, as it involves the good will; but material rightness is only
less important, as without it our action is out of harmony with the
universe."[62]

(3) The moral consciousness, when unperverted by speculative theory,
does in fact judge the actions of men. It steadily holds them as
essentially right or wrong, over and above all question as to the
motives for them. It is found perpetually condemning even well-meant
deeds as traversing duty and righteousness, hardly able to excuse the
blundering ignorance to which they are due. This feeling of reprobation
is genuine, normal, and wholesome. On the other hand the overthrow of
this feeling and the adoption of the claim of a non-ethical character
for actions, tends directly and strongly to consequences which witness
against the validity of the claim. The demoralizing effect has often
been illustrated. The resolving of duty into a mere matter of good
intentions has led off into ways and forms of behavior shocking to
enlightened consciences. It has made quite plausible the illusion
that "the end sanctifies the means," and in the name of religion has
stretched men on the rack and lighted the faggots at the stake. Under a
fancy that purity is simply a thing of the heart, men have been known
to excuse not a little sensualism of life. While ethics must lay stress
on the inner good-will, it must also look after the harmony of the
outward acts with the law of right relations. No amount of good motive
can make blasphemy or murder right or virtuous.


==The Feelings, Passions and Desires.==

=2.= The various feelings, passions, and desires are not only springs
of action that may issue in conduct, but are in themselves either right
or wrong, according as they are exercised in harmony with moral law or
in conflict with it.

(1) Though our feelings spring spontaneously and immediately out of
our knowledge and fundamental psychical character, they are subject to
training and regulation by the will, and their states and movements
are part of our moral life. And though by natural unperverted
constitution all these primary feelings and affections have right
and good functions, their activities, under noxious stimulation, may
run into forms and in directions thoroughly immoral. Love, which,
in its holiest direction, toward God, and in its purest forms of
benevolence, toward men, is the highest virtue, may take forbidden
directions and corrupt and disorder life. Hate, the reverse of love,
instead of being directed against evil which ought to be hated, often
emits its venom against that which ought to be loved for its goodness.
Self-esteem, as a proper respect for what has been put into a person's
being to be cared for and enjoyed, frequently runs into condemnable
selfishness. Many of the "desires" are apt to be in offense because of
over-development, clashing in anarchic insubordination in the soul, or
rushing toward unlawful objects. Desire for possessions tends to grow
into covetousness, desire for honor into unscrupulous ambition, desire
for pleasure into a ruling passion. Such feelings as malice and envy,
mongrel products of selfishness and ill-will, are at once adjudged to
be sinful.

(2) Were further proof needed that morality attaches to the affections
and desires, it is found in their relations as motives to conduct.
We have not traced actions completely to their moral source when we
have ascertained the volition from which they proceed. We must go a
step further back and mark the impulses that either rightly or wrongly
influenced the will. We must do as do courts of justice in seeking the
character of an act, and ascertain not only that the act was done in
free-will, but also what feelings influenced the free-will in doing
it. An act of volition may have very different motives behind it. The
immoral character of the volition is not only from the immorally-acting
will itself, but also from the wrong feelings or desires acting on
the will. Indeed, the very will is betrayed into wrong-doing by their
perverting persuasions. It becomes clear, therefore, that if it be at
all true that "actions take moral character from their motives," this
character must be predicable of these motive sensibilities.

(3) A special question has place here--whether moral quality belongs
even to the personal dispositions, propensities and inclinations
that lie back of the _exercise_ of the feelings, as attitudes or
habitudes of the soul with respect to good and evil? The facts of life
unquestionably show the existence of such propensities or tendencies
derived through heredity and descending from generation to generation.
The scientific theory of evolution recognizes them and draws many of
its conclusions, both psychological and moral, from them. They express
rather a state of the personal constitution than any exercise of its
faculties. They denote so basally the psychical life-condition, that
they characterize rather what the person is than what he does morally.
Since they, as states of the personal agent, constitute his attitude,
among other things, toward good and evil, an attitude either right or
wrong, this question manifestly requires an affirmative answer.


==Aims and Intentions.==

=3.= Intentions. In judging conduct we inquire especially into the aim,
purpose, intention, which directed it. We look at the end sought. And
in a peculiar degree conduct is pronounced right or wrong according to
this. For the intention is pre-eminently the very heart and informing
principle of the moral act. Besides largely shaping the material action
in agreement or conflict with objective duty it is the inner soul of
the total deed.

It may make an act that in its external form is morally indifferent
thoroughly virtuous or deeply criminal--such as that of handing a sum
of money to another, in one case to relieve suffering, in another to
secure murder. The intention to do what is known to be wrong, even
when the overt deed is prevented, stamps upon the person its own moral
character.

In intentions we find the teleology of the ethical conduct--the chosen
ends at which men are aiming in their constant endeavor--and they have
a place of importance corresponding to this directive relation. Life
moves as these turn, and the great body of human activity, in its
mighty sweep of purposive conduct, whether rising into its loftiest and
purest virtues or descending to its lowest and most horrid crimes, is
their result. In this teleological position they differ as "motives"
from the motives found in the simple feelings, affections and passions
which act non-voluntarily and unconscious of ends, but are springs of
impulse and incentives from the subjective psychical organization.
Intentions are deliberate voluntary purposes aiming at chosen objects
and adjusting means to ends. For this class of motives, therefore, we
are peculiarly and pre-eminently responsible.


==Activities of the Intellect.==

=4.= The activities and uses of the intellect. Often theorists have
denied any moral element in these, mainly because of a certain
"necessity" in intellect under psychical law, and because its function
is simply "to know." It does nothing, either good or bad; "it only
knows." Its sphere is the sphere of knowledge, not of conduct. But
this is a very inadequate view of its total activity, and of its place
in the moral agent's life. As to the question of "necessity," the
activities of the intellect are as much under the command of the moral
agent as are his sensibilities, his affections, desires, and passions.
It would be difficult to see why he should be amenable for the
direction and regulation of these desires and passions, and not also
for the direction and character of his intellectual work and the use
he makes of these high endowments. As to the question of the non-moral
character of cognitive or thought activities, they are correctly
conceded to be, in very large measure, without any ethical quality. But
it is also true, that there may be activities, as for example, in the
imagination, and in purposive scheming, which are impure and grossly
violative of justice and right. Because the intellect in itself, as
contradistinguished from the will, does not choose and has no choice,
we may not, indeed, say of its activity: "It is guilty," "it is under
obligation," since obligation and guilt pertain not to the act but
to the moral person; but yet we may speak of intellectual activity
or work as morally "right" or "wrong," according as it is in harmony
or in conflict with the true ends for which the intellectual powers
have been framed and the well-being they are designed to serve. It
would be difficult to see why the intellectual activity which plans
out the details of a theft or a murder is not as really immoral,
_i. e._ something morally condemnable, as is the desire or wish to
commit it, or why the person is less blameworthy for the one than the
other. In both cases it is part of his personal activity. And if he is
"blameworthy," it is only because the activity is in itself "wrong." Is
he any less guilty for allowing his intellect to think out the wrong
than his feelings to desire it? The moral sense must condemn this
intellectual work as inconsistent with the relations of the intellect
to human well-being and righteousness. In these days of worship of
intellectual brilliancy, and the large prostitution of the imagination
to activities which flood literature with thoughts that defile and
suggestions that carry moral blight and desolation, producing every
form of vice and crime, it is of prime importance to recognize that
this intellectualism does not stand altogether apart from moral
quality, and that men are under the completest obligation to keep it
all in harmony with righteousness and the ethical ends of life.


==Acts of the Will.==

=5.= Our view of intentions has touched on part of the functions of
the _will_ with respect to moral quality, but its acts in the stricter
sense and more specific forms require further statement. "Intentions"
are, indeed, under the command of the will, yet they are there as
motives, whose force and quality stand specially in the objects desired
and aimed at. They draw their quality rather from the ends sought than
from the working of the will which consents to the ends. We must see
yet whether the conscience judges also the proper and specific acts of
the will.

Of course that which we name "the will" is simply the soul's power of
choosing, or rather, it is the personal self as causal for choices
and executive action. Its acts are "volitions." Does moral quality
attach to these? There can be no doubt of it. Upon these volitions,
preferential and executive choices, electing between duty and its
opposite, between conduct in harmony or in conflict with moral
requirement, between indulgence of good or wicked feelings, between
virtuous and evil intentions, between higher and lower motives, between
actions materially right or wrong, making the decision for or against
righteousness and goodness and purity, in all the questions of daily
behavior in which life rises into ethical excellence and blessedness
or descends into wrong, vice, crime, and consequent wretchedness,
the moral sense of mankind pours its most unequivocal approvals or
reprobations. It not only judges them as right or wrong in themselves,
but as, among all human activities, most creative or most destructive
of moral character. It is a fundamental postulate in ethical thinking
that moral law binds the will.[63]

In the action of the will the moral judgment finds its object of
highest approval and of most thorough condemnation. It is to the will,
_i. e._ the personal self, that moral law presents its claims. It is
the point in which personality is summed up in free and responsible
selfhood, and where the great reality of responsibility is pivoted. The
will, as another name for the soul's power of choosing, sustains the
decisive relation between all the motives that precede and the actions
which follow the volitions. The action contemplated may be right or
wrong, the motive may be good or bad, but when the question is brought
by the conscience into the presence of the will, the place of supreme
and final responsibility for virtue or sin is reached.

This justifies the conclusion that moral character belongs to the
exercise of the will as it does not to any other activity of our
moral nature. For it is the point, and the only point, of freedom
in our whole constitution. Necessity marks the action of each and
every part from the lowest functions up to the will; and beyond this
there stretches on another realm of necessity in the consequences
of volition. For example, necessity rules in the physical nature.
The processes go on under fixed uniform laws, with no freedom or
choice. So in the intellect and the sensibility. We begin to think in
non-optional spontaneity, or we would not think at all. In perception,
representation, in the discursive and intuitive powers, and in the
emotions, affections and desires that arise from the activity of the
intellect, the movement is bound up under laws of cause and effect.
Whatever power of regulation, change or control we possess over these
functions does not belong to the powers themselves, but to the will or
the personal capacity of free choice and self-regulation. It is only
through our will-power that we can handle and direct our thinking or
control the direction and force of our feelings. So, too, the ideas of
right and wrong, the perceptions of duty and the sense of obligation
come into the presence of the will of necessity. All before the will
is of necessity. Thus men see the right and perceive obligation. At
this point all the responsibility of character is thrown upon the will.
If contemplated action appear right or wrong, as action that ought or
ought not to be done, the will must decide whether it shall be done. If
good or bad motives plead for rulership, the will must say which shall
prevail. If feelings are out of harmony with duty and right in the
relations of life, with respect to God or man, it is to be remembered
that the feelings cannot choose, and the will alone can guide them in
virtuous action. To it, therefore, virtue or guilt belongs as nowhere
else. For it not only accepts and makes its own all the right or wrong
that appears elsewhere, but it also remains true or becomes false to
its own supreme duty and obligation to moral law, when, under the
behests of conscience, it directs life and character either up the
heights of moral excellence and happiness, or into the wrong and guilt
and miseries of immorality. Where the will is moral the man is moral;
for the will is the zenith of personality. Where it is immoral the man
is immoral.




