CHAPTER IV.

THE FACULTY OF MORAL DISTINCTIONS--THE NATURE OF CONSCIENCE.


==Right View Necessary.==

In close connection with the indubitable fact of conscience, as an
essential faculty of the human soul, follows a more careful inquiry
into the nature of this faculty. It is necessary to ascertain
precisely, if possible, what it is as a peculiar psychical power, as
revealed and defined in and by its own action.


=1.= The importance of determining, at this place, the exact nature of
the conscience is apparent from two considerations.

==Scientific Accuracy.==

(1) Scientific accuracy in the whole ethical view is possible only
through a true and thoroughly accurate understanding of the power that
gives rise to the whole phenomenon of obligation. The final theoretical
view is dependent on finding the truth at this point. Mistake or
inexactness here must inevitably introduce, or at least allow,
confusion or error in all the dependent questions of the science. A
false conception of the conscience will at once mislead. Even an only
partial or obscure view of it will fail to afford sufficient light
for the subsequent steps of the investigation. A conception of it,
with true and false elements combined, must necessarily introduce
perplexity or contradiction and weaken or distort the conclusion.

Such differing views have in fact introduced the utmost confusion into
the problems of this science. The conscience has sometimes been spoken
of as an "instinct," which identifies it with the non-intelligent,
blind action in the bee which builds cells after geometrical
principles, or in birds or fishes which migrate with the changing
seasons. Often it has been represented as but a special "feeling" or
"sentiment" that arises inexplicably, if not fortuitously, prior to
perception of any ethical quality, itself the basis of judgments of
duty.[15] Again it has been made to stand simply for accumulated or
established approbative judgments from experiences of pleasure or
advantage, transformed and fixed as rules of conduct.[16] Sometimes it
has been regarded as an immediate, almost supernatural "voice of God"
within men, with its inexplicable direct imperative of duty. It is
plain that these and other differing notions of conscience must always
affect, as they always have affected, the whole theory of ethics.

==Condition of Authority.==

(2) A right view of its nature is necessary to a correct conception of
its authority. This makes the question more than simply speculative
or important for correct ethical theory. It involves the interests of
practical morality. The right of the conscience to rule us is sustained
or denied according as one or another conception of its nature is
entertained.

It is natural that we should feel prompted to examine the nature of a
part of our constitution that is constantly obtruding its distinctions
and asserting a ruling authority over us. As it has its place within us
irrespective of our will and presents laws of duty to the will, we want
to see on what ground its asserted authority can be justified. But not
all views of its nature afford equal explanation of this peculiarity
in its action. For instance, if the conscience be nothing but a
blind, irrational "instinct," or a "feeling" without any perception
of reality to give rise or right to the feeling, or if it be but a
standard judgment of prudence or utility from experiences of what has
been helpful or hurtful, perhaps slowly accumulated and hereditarily
transmitted, a clear and rational ground of ethical authority cannot
be made out. Such a power may indicate what is useful, but can, if
this be all, impose on us no obligation. It may tell us what is
pleasurable or desirable, but cannot speak to us concerning the other
question: What is right? It cannot hold us guilty because we may choose
to forego personal advantage or enjoyment. If, however, examination
can show that the conscience is a faculty of actual perception,
discerning a fundamental distinction between right and wrong and an
immutable obligation to apply it in the constituted relations of
life, its rightful authority is at once vindicated. It is seen to be
an authoritative guide in its sphere of perception, as are the other
cognitive powers, each in its own sphere of real knowledge. When it
becomes clear that the moral faculty, in the presence of the existing
conditions and relations of life, perceives what ought to be done, and
what men are obligated to do, and what they cannot disregard without
demerit, ill-desert or guilt, then the right of conscience to direct
conduct is justified.

At any rate, whether the examination may confirm or discredit this
claim of rightful rulership, the inquiry into the nature of the
conscience is essential to a correct settlement of the great question
of its authority and the grounds of it.


==Question of Psychology.==

=2.= The primary and proper source of information to settle the
question of the nature of this faculty is to be found, not in
speculative theorizing or arbitrary assumptions, but in the actual
working of the human mind. It is a psychological question, and must be
settled, as all psychological questions must, by the facts as they are
discovered in experience and consciousness. The method of inductive
inquiry is here the true and essential one. The full phenomena of
action must be carefully examined, analyzed and traced to their
psychical genesis. Such examination can leave but little doubt in the
conclusion. In the facts of consciousness, as found in connection with
the operations of our minds in the sphere of moral self-determination
and action, the entire movement can be observed, marked and recorded.


==Place of Conscience.==

=3.= In a preliminary way, it must be noted and remembered that the
power and action of conscience can have place only in connection with
the total complex of man's psychical powers. It is not an isolated,
independent faculty in the midst of the different powers of the
soul. This truth will require fuller consideration in another place,
but it is necessary to note it here so far as to show the essential
psychological conditions of conscience.

The very possibility of such a faculty or power is conditioned in
all the human faculties of intelligence, sensibility and choice, in
which man becomes a moral agent. While the soul or self is a unit,
its powers act under a law of inter-dependence, exhibiting a striking
and beautiful order of conditioning and being conditioned, from the
primary and fundamental forms of activity to those that are highest
and crown all the rest. At the very base and beginning of its action
are sense-perception and consciousness--these furnishing knowledge
of the outer and inner worlds, of the realities and relations in the
system of things in the midst of which man finds himself. Dependent
upon the percepts by the senses and the states of consciousness thus
furnished comes the further capacity of "representative knowledge" in
the forms of memory and the imagination. Only as the original acts of
perception and consciousness have supplied their data, is the memory
or the imagination possible. But the representative power and action
are then necessary to the action of the higher powers. Without memory
the logical power, the discursive function in comparison, judgment
and conclusion, in analysis, synthesis and systemization, would have
no materials and could do no work. The mind could not do this advance
work except upon the basis of work of a different kind done before.
And then, too, the reason, as the power of intuitive or _a priori_
truths, would be without a knowledge of the phenomenal world, in the
midst of which, or on occasion of the experiences of which, these
_a priori_ truths appear and are seen to be necessary. The various
kinds of knowing exercised by the undivided and indivisible self are
plainly arranged in an ascending order, till at their summit they are
crowned with the intuitional power which we may term, as we here do,
the reason--the power of discerning necessary universal truths. But it
is equally clear that of the powers below the reason--sense-perception
and consciousness furnishing facts objective and subjective, memory
restoring them before the mental eye, and the logical power rushing
to necessary conclusions--none, either singly or together, can stand
for the conscience. Sense and consciousness can give us only what is,
not what ethically ought to be. The memory can but renew to mental
view what was before known. The sense of logical necessity is clearly
different from the perception of moral rightness and obligation.
But the action of these antecedent powers or faculties supplies the
conditions for the existence and action of the conscience--gives
knowledge of the personal self and the relations of life, in the midst
of which moral right and wrong and obligation and duty are developed
and are seen to arise. Upon this knowledge, in which man knows himself
and his relations to the world of which he forms a part, the soul
rises to an outlook in the clear atmosphere of which the reality of
ethical distinctions, duty and responsibility become visible. And
to the crowning power of the reason, as rational insight, must be
assigned the central function of this ethical perception of right and
obligation--somewhat as to it belong, in another field of view, also
the intuitions into the realities of time and space and the categories
of substance, attribute, and causality.

This position of the conscience as, in its fundamental action, a form
of rational intuition, among the summit forms of the mind's powers,
makes evident its relation of dependence on the entire complex of
psychical faculties which furnish the conditions for its discernments
and imperative. But there is something more. As we shall yet see, its
total function, in guiding the moral life, includes the action of many
of the common functions of both intellect and sensibility.


=4.= The specific psychology of the conscience itself, under close and
complete analysis, will disclose the following clearly distinguishable
elements in its action. They reveal the nature of the conscience-power
in its total complex reality. These elements are not separable in fact,
but are distinguishable in the analytic thinking that examines them.

==Ethical Distinctions.==

(1) The primary element is a simple irreducible perception of the
distinction between right and wrong. This is the first and fundamental
ethical idea. In it we have the initial point in the moral action
of the mind. "The universal ethical fact is the recognition of a
distinction between right and wrong in conduct."[17] This distinction
appears among the necessary ideas of the human mind. It is a phenomenon
in the psychology of the race. It is developed, in the presence of
the facts and relations of life, as something provided for in the
normal and necessary action of the rational self-conscious _ego_. It
must be viewed as an "intuition" of the reason. It can not otherwise
be accounted for. In its nature it is not a feeling, though it gives
rise to feeling. It is not a volition, for it comes irrespective of
choice and asserts its own rights before the will. It is not a mere
experience, though it arises on occasion of experience. The idea stands
for something beyond experience--experience being limited to the
profitable, the enjoyable or the painful. We experience the useful and
the agreeable, but the right, the ethical idea, must be perceived or
rationally seen, as a super-sensible reality in the ideal realm of the
demands of duty. It is not a perception of relations themselves, but
of a distinction as to something due in human relations and life.

If we describe this primary and fundamental distinction, as it appears
in the action of the conscience, it will be found marked by the
following characteristics. First, the distinction is perceived--a datum
of the cognitive intellect. As discerned by the knowing faculty, its
object, viz.: the distinction, exists. For knowing always involves that
the thing known is. The distinction between right and wrong is real
in the sphere of moral relations. Second, it is universal, marking
the human mind's action everywhere and in all ages. Third, it cannot
be obliterated. Through all questions about it and objections to its
validity, it remains undestroyed and seemingly indestructible. It
disappears only with the wreck of rationality itself. Fourth, it is
unique and simple, an original perception, incapable of being resolved
into more elementary ideas or deduced from them. Fifth, it is the first
of its kind of discernments, _i. e._ of ethical perceptions.

==Obligation Perceived.==

(2) Along with, though dependent on, the perception of the moral
distinction between right and wrong, there is also a perception of
obligation with respect to right and wrong--to do or not to do. This
is an essential part of the aggregate conscience-discernment. The
perception of the right is thus the discovery also of law for conduct.

The soul, it must be specially noted, perceives this obligation as
truly as it does the ethical distinction itself. The term "obligation"
may express also a feeling, but the _ego_, or personal self, perceives
the obligation before it feels it. For in all cases rational emotion or
feeling can arise in the mind only as the mind discerns something to
awaken it.

==Belongs to the Agent.==

It is to be particularly observed, further, that the obligation, thus
perceived and then felt, is perceived and felt as due by the moral
agent with respect to right and wrong. The ethical quality of rightness
belongs to the act or principle of action. The motive, the intention,
the conduct of men, is in itself morally right or wrong, good or evil.
But the obligation appears as what is owed by the moral agent to what
is right. The relation between right and obligation corresponds to
that between right and duty. Right is in the conduct; duty is for
the responsible person. The terms express two sides in the ethical
reality, the first the objective side, the second the subjective. The
two imply and call for each other. The right in the contemplated action
means obligation or duty in the person. To the right there is always a
corresponding duty; for duty in fact expresses what is due to the right
forever by all persons.[18]

This perception of obligation, with its attendant feeling of it, is
the central reality of the conscience. It is the very core of it. For
in this the moral faculty carries and asserts its "imperative" for the
regulation of conduct. On the basis of the idea of right, it affirms
duty, and brings mankind under the reality and behests of moral law.
The distinction of right and wrong, if conceived of as unattended with
this further discernment of obligation, would manifestly fall short of
establishing the principle of duty or fixing in the soul a conscious
bond to righteousness. But in this further discernment is revealed the
nexus that binds together perceived right and man's responsibility to
it. Hence, this is the cardinal thing in the conscience, for which the
ethical idea prepares, and upon which the moral life rests. It is the
point at which humanity is organized under a moral constitution and the
behests of moral law. It is the sublime endowment in which man's nature
is capacitated for its position, as standing face to face with the
sublimer reality of the divine government over the world.

It is to be distinctly observed, however, that the "imperative"
disclosed in this perceived obligation, does not mean compulsion. The
idea of "obligation" can have no place where there can be no choice as
to accepting it. The whole sphere of morals, as we have already seen
and shall need often to be reminded, exists, and can exist only in
connection with personality or intelligent free agency. Its realm is
that of freedom. Law in ethics is something in clear contrast with law
in the processes of physical nature. The perception of it is not the
perception of what must be or will be, or shall be, but what ought to
be. Its appeal is to our freedom, and the duty is ideated before it is
performed.

Further, it is well to observe here again how distinctly peculiar
is this percept of obligation among the data of our cognitive
faculties. The sense-perception notifies us of what is. So does the
consciousness. Memory renews to consciousness a knowledge of what
was. The logical processes reveal abstract relations. That two and
two make four, or that a straight line is the shortest between two
points, or that oxygen and hydrogen united in certain proportions form
water, are truths distinctly known when the mind is directed to these
subjects; but the perception of these truths is without the unique
idea of obligation or the duty of cherishing any particular feeling
or of conforming to a standard of righteousness. Only through the
discernments of right and wrong by the conscience, is there given this
peculiar intuition of the reality of obligation.

==Moral Quality Identified.==

(3) A third thing to be marked in this psychological analysis of the
action of conscience, and revealing its nature, is the affirmation of
right or wrong to particular acts or principles of conduct. In this
the function of conscience passes from its fundamental idea into the
form of an applicatory judgment. The ideas of right and obligation
are applied to the actual affairs and activities of life. The quality
of right or wrong is connected with particular actions, feelings or
purposes, and these are affirmed to be right or wrong according as
they have or have not such moral quality. This application is both a
perception and a judgment--a perception in that it sees the ethical
quality in the deed or motive, and a judgment in that it affirms the
connection. These judgments take the forms of approval or disapproval,
as the conduct is discerned to be morally good or bad. It is plain
that such judgments of application would be impossible were there not
in the mind the fundamental ethical distinctions already explained.

Manifestly these judgments of application belong to the general judging
power of the mind. All knowing may be said to be judging, or at least
tends to take the form of judgment. They are specific here, only with
respect to the material they take account of. They are the acts of the
judging faculty in the sphere of applying the ethical distinctions and
obligations. As a basis for the judgments, not only must the ethical
distinction exist in the mind, but the action or conduct to be judged
must be seen or understood in all its essential relations and motives.
As duties are developed by relations, the moral character of the
contemplated conduct or deed cannot be determined apart from a correct
knowledge of those relations. The judging capacity will err without the
light of true and full information concerning the place and purposes
of the action. And its insights and affirmations will vary in their
approximation to entire correctness according to the degree in which
all the elements entering into the particular conduct are understood
and considered.

==Merit and Demerit Perceived.==

(4) The action of the conscience includes also perception of merit
and demerit in connection with conduct. The meaning of these terms
needs to be carefully defined and limited. They express something more
than the simple approval or disapproval already noted in connection
with the discernment of the rightness or wrongness of an action. The
terms stand for a step of discernment and judgment beyond these, and
denote the ethical reality of good-desert or ill-desert for the moral
agent who conforms to rightness, or offends against its claims. He who
conforms deserves well; he that offends deserves ill. They, therefore,
mark distinctly and definitely the point in the psychology of the
conscience where the faculty discerns that those who do right ought to
receive favor and those who do wrong ought to experience disfavor. They
express a principle of just consequences. The principle is, that for
right conduct good is due, for wrong done evil is due. The wrong-doer
is guilty, _i. e._ justly subject to punitive action. His deed deserves
it for him. On the other hand doing right is worthy of reward, or of
the good that befits the good done. The conscience discerns and affirms
this reality of good and evil-desert.

Here is reached the psychological source of the great fact of
responsibility in the world. It emerges into consciousness and into
actual force in human life from this point in the disclosures and
affirmations of the moral sense. Hence arises the unspeakably varied
but ever persistent human necessity under which men are compelled
to regard themselves and others as justly amenable to the law of
moral consequences. Its application is seen in every sphere of life,
personal, domestic, social, and national. A moral administration is
seen in the world only as the administration is found to be conformed
to and carrying out the principle of distributing good according to
moral desert. Any failure in the adjustment of recompense or given good
under this idea is felt to be a lapse from justice and proper order. It
stands as something abnormal and monstrous. So firmly does the decision
of conscience establish this principle of happy consequences as due to
right conduct and punitive effects to wrong-doing, so strongly does it
fix the conviction that the divine administration must on the whole
adjust award and happiness on this basis, that thoughtful philosophers
have ever been wont to find here one of the most assuring guarantees of
a future life in which the fragmentary justice of this world will be
filled out in fully given recompense.

It must be noted, as is apparent, that this merit or demerit does not
belong to men's acts, but to themselves as the moral agents. To action
and conduct pertain the moral qualities of rightness and wrongness, but
what is done is itself altogether impersonal and not responsible for
its own occurrence. The doer of the deed deserves whatever good or evil
is due in connection with it.

The practical application of this principle of moral desert is found
to be almost infinitely varied, both with respect to the import of
the principle and the measure of merit and demerit. With respect
to its _import_, good desert may mean simply that he who chooses
the morally right is entitled to his own self-approbation and the
approval of others and the moral excellence which he thus prefers.
Or it may signify various degrees and kinds of more positive reward
which the divine constitution and moral administration of the
world may be adjusted to give in the way of happiness and the best
external conditions of existence. On the other hand, the demerit of
the wrong-doer may mean anything he deserves, from the simple loss of
the moral good which he does not choose, to the extremest penalties,
objective and subjective, which a righteous divine government may have
to employ for the repression of wickedness. In its import, both merit
and demerit may refer to endlessly varied experiences and forms of
good and evil. With respect to the _measure_ of merit and demerit and
the adjustment of due recompense, a similar wide range of difference
must be recognized when we come to the application of the principle
to human acts and conduct. Conformity to right and offense against it
are exhibited in myriad degrees under conditions as varied as are the
positions and relations and inner state of all the individuals of the
race. The very nature of different persons is in unequal adjustment
to virtue and vice. Environment, too, brings stronger temptations to
some than to others. Hereditary forces and early training strengthen
or weaken the moral perceptions and forces. Thousands of differences
perplex the attempt to equate the measure of moral desert to men. It
can be determined only in full and perfect view of all the conditions
within and the relations surrounding the moral agent; and the
apportionment of the due award, it would seem, can be perfectly made
only by a being of infinite knowledge and justice.

The measurement of merit and demerit is, however, but another form
of judgments of application, in which the moral sense can act in only
approximate determinations. Here variation and uncertainty find place.
But there can be none as to the fact of good desert and guilt where
right and wrong are done.

==Emotions Awakened.==

(5) Emotions or feelings, awakened by the perceptions of right
and wrong, obligation, merit and demerit, complete the action of
conscience. These feelings are peculiar and original, unlike the
feelings springing from any other perceptions and incapable of being
resolved into or deduced from others. Psychologically, it is to be
remembered, feeling is in no case a part of perception or cognition,
but an additional psychical action of a different kind. "A purely
cognitive intelligence might have perfect knowledge of things and
their relations to itself; it might know that things, or courses of
action, would destroy its own existence; it might even know that its
own existence was about to be destroyed; but this knowledge alone
would imply no feeling. Such intellect would be like a mirror; it
would accurately reflect all that passed before it; but it would be as
indifferent as the mirror."[19] But knowing is followed by feeling, a
different kind of action of the soul. This is not its action in the
form of intellect, but in the form of sensibility. It is action of
another order--not itself a cognition, but arising out of cognition.
This is the place and relation of these moral feelings. They are
awakened in the soul by and through the ethical perceptions. They are
determined by these, and form the final element in the total action of
the conscience.

These moral feelings, while they form one class, as having their origin
in the ethical discriminations, exhibit distinguishing differences.
These differences develop in a twofold way, presenting special forms of
feeling. They must be noted as they differ by these two conditions of
their development.

==Correspondent to Right or Wrong.==

First, according as the moral quality, the perception of which awakens
them, is good or evil. The soul cannot discern the great distinctions
between right and wrong without correspondent emotional awakening. The
sensibility is moved by the perception, and takes the form of a feeling
of approval for the morally good, and a feeling of reprobation for
the wrong. Our language furnishes no single term to designate either
of these feelings, but this phraseology is sufficiently descriptive
to point them out. The feeling toward the right may be denoted as
moral love; that toward wrong as moral aversion. When the quality
of rightness or wrongness is exhibited in specially intense degree
in particular conduct, the feelings may take the form of ethical
admiration or of abhorrence.

==Before and After Action.==

Secondly, as arising before or after the moral action. If the feeling
is awakened in view of action proposed to be done, it may be described,
in the absence of a more specific designation, as a sense of obligation
to do or not to do the deed--this feeling of obligation being based on
a perception of the obligation. From the intellectual discernment the
emotional sensibility springs as a sentiment which forms part of the
impelling force of conscience. When the feeling arises with respect
to an act already done, it takes the nature of ethical satisfaction,
a peculiar pleasure in which are blended a sense of self-approbation
and of joy, if the deed be right; of self-reproach and remorse, if
wrong. Remorse--"a gnawing sense of guilt," whether the feeling be
the slightest disquiet of emotion or of agonizing and unsolaceable
compunction--appears to be the aptest term to express this state of
mind.

==Differences of Degree.==

Besides the differences thus arising, there are differences in the
degree or intensity of these moral feelings. Innumerable causes may
affect the differences in this respect. Personal temperament, acquired
character, or external conditions may make the feeling greater or less.
The mental organization of some persons is more emotional. Education
may have given a peculiar development. Temporary circumstances may
heighten the excitation. But other things being equal the degree of
positiveness in the moral emotions is generally dependent on two
things: (_a_) the clearness with which the moral distinction and
the consequent obligation is discerned, and (_b_) the pureness and
tenderness of the person's moral nature. If the ethical idea and
obligation are unclearly seen or hardly seen at all, the impression in
the feelings must be comparatively slight. But if seen under strong
light and with their supreme import, the intuition impresses with
greater force. So, too, the state of the whole moral nature is a
reason of higher or lower moral sensibility. The more unblighted is the
condition of personal life, the more is it responsive to the ethical
discernment. Habitual refusal of duty, easy and indifferent familiarity
with wrong-doing, or any continued enslavement of the higher nature to
the lower, necessarily blunts the delicateness of the sensibilities and
lowers the strength of the moral feelings. The process of injury may
go on until a condition of callousness is reached which fulfils the
striking description: "Seared as with a hot iron."

==Motive Power.==

It is through these feelings that the conscience becomes a motive power
for moral life. The perception of duty alone, as purely intellectual,
would be, as said, "like a mirror accurately reflecting the ethical
reality passing before it, but as indifferent as the mirror." But upon
the perception the emotional nature springs into action. Knowledge, if
at all, always goes into effect mediately through the sensibilities
in which the soul is stirred by affections and desires. These may be
toward moral good as truly as toward sensuous good. We may love the
true and the beautiful and the right. We may love the right as right.
According to our choices we make the ethically good our own and mould
our life into its excellence and blessedness, or the contrary. These
feelings are motive powers, bringing occasions for choices.

It is proper to take note, however, that it is only the feelings in
view of the right or wrong of an act yet to be done, that are directly
moral motives. For it is only through these that we are face to face
with the question of choosing or refusing the right in the proposed
conduct. The feelings that arise, as satisfaction or remorse after
wrong acts, have no existence till the conduct is in retrospect,
and can have no motive force for it. And when memory brings these
experiences as motives for subsequent conduct, they stand mainly, if
not wholly, as considerations for enjoyment. They are not feelings of
pure obligation to rightness, but remembrances of pleasure or pain
influential as prompting or dissuading on the lower ground of comfort.
There is a generic and indelible difference between the feeling of
duty, under the pure behests of right, and the natural desire to gain
the enjoyment or avoid the misery which we have learned to anticipate
from experiences in conduct. In the one case it presents love of the
right as right; in the other a love of the more agreeable consequences
of right. Unquestionably, indeed, a desire of the better consequences
is a proper motive for choices. In these consequences virtue is proving
its adaptation to bring its own reward. But the merit of virtue is not
in seeking the reward, but in seeking virtue itself. The mercenary
spirit is not the love of righteousness, nor as high as it.


=5.= This analysis makes clear the following characteristics of the
conscience.

==Conscience is Intellectual.==

First, it is primarily and fundamentally intellectual. It is a power
of rational perception. It perceives, in direct or intuitive way, the
primary ethical distinction between right and wrong, perceives the
quality of rightness or wrongness in particular acts or conduct,
perceives the obligation of the moral agent with respect to right and
wrong, as also the merit or demerit of the moral agent. But along with
and blended in inseparable concurrence, moves the function of the
sensibility, in feelings of approval and obligation, satisfaction or
remorse. Both the intellectual and emotional action of the soul are,
therefore, included in what is named the conscience--the perceptive
action, here as everywhere else, being primary and conditional for the
emotional. If there were no ethical distinction perceived, none would
be felt. The conscience, taken in its totality, thus includes both
sides of the human psychology, the intellect and the sensibility, and
it addresses its behests of duty to the will in its own peculiar way of
moral law for conduct.

The strife between intuitional theories and sentimental theories of
conscience is, therefore, composed by the concurrence of both knowing
and feeling in the action of this power. But the intellectual part
is necessarily logically prior to the emotional, and conditional for
it. To make a feeling of obligation the basal fact in the psychology
of conscience would be an inversion of the whole order of dependence
revealed in consciousness. And, surely, the feelings here developed
are rational, not physiological sensations. They cannot, for a moment,
be identified with the physical sensations which condition the
sense-perceptions. Their true place is among the rational emotions.

==Sole Percept Moral Quality.==

Secondly, the sole object of perception by the conscience is moral
quality--the quality of rightness or wrongness, together with the
correspondent obligation. It is something supersensible and ideal; not
actions themselves as known by sense, but their quality as morally good
or evil as discovered by the ethical reason. The thing discerned by the
conscience is generically different from the things discerned by the
sense-perception or consciousness. Through our senses we know the whole
world of objective existences, events and their relations; through
consciousness the states, acts and experiences of the subjective
personal self are given. But the conscience does not furnish us with
a knowledge of any of the substances, events or relations which
constitute the world about us or the world within us, but solely of the
moral quality of conduct and sentiment, as duty is developed in these
relations. It takes notice of the ethical character of the actions and
motives of intelligent and responsible beings.

==Conscience Acts of Necessity.==

Thirdly, the action of the conscience is marked by necessity. And by
this we are to understand something more than the simple uniformity in
which all the psychical activity, except that of the choices of the
will, is held under "fixed laws of thought and feeling." The necessity
here affirmed is that unique necessity which distinguishes and marks
intuitive or _a priori_ cognition, as of time, space, and causality.
"Necessity" is justly conceded to be one of the criteria of these and
other intuitional "first truths." It is not at the option of the human
mind whether it will think the world under the relations of time and
space, or events as occurring under the principle of causation. These
are "forms of knowledge," knowledge of super-sensible realities, that
come not at our choice but by an unavoidable insight. The primary and
fundamental ethical distinction belongs to such rational intuition,
and is marked by the peculiar necessity of intuitional action. As
on occasion of knowing material bodies with three dimensions, or of
changes in consciousness or in the outer world, with the fact of
co-existence or succession and duration, the phenomenal sphere is
necessarily transcended and time and space are necessarily discerned,
so when we understand the manifold relations in which our lives are to
be lived, in which we may use our personal powers, either in harmony
with or in violation of our given adaptations, and with either great
injury or rich good to others, in the same necessary way the conscience
must discern the distinction of right and wrong and the reality of duty.

The great implication in this necessity, as we shall hereafter see in
examining the nature of virtue, is that the principle of righteousness
or the law of duty is something that belongs to the objective order
of the world as constituted by God, a divine reality permanent and
immutable, not produced but perceived by the conscience. It is not
made by man but finds him--finds him through the intelligence by which
he is informed of the realities to which he must adjust his life.
Moral law stands for a reality that rays itself into view in the human
reason whether men will or not. The intuitions of it do not come at
the call, or desire, or even at the consent of man. The law revealed
stands independent of the individual's personality or choices and
asserts itself over him. While this is true of the law revealed, the
perception of the law becomes a necessity with the moral agent that is
normally endowed and developed. Man does not furnish the moral law to
himself. He is not the giver of it, but the recipient. The conscience,
therefore, is an open window of our being, through which the objective
law of righteousness to which the Creator has adjusted our nature and
the constitution of the universe may be discerned by us, a sphere
of reality enfolding us, with which our freedom is to harmonize our
conduct. Francis Newman has admirably marked the position of this
conscience-power in our constitution:

        "This energy of life within is ours, yet it is not we.
        It is in us, belongs to us, yet we cannot control it,
        It acts without our bidding, and when we do not think of it,
        Nor will it cease its acting at our command, or otherwise obey
                us,
        But while it recalls from evil, and reproaches us for evil,
        And is not silenced by our effort, surely it is not _we_;
        Yet it pervades mankind, as one life pervades the trees."[20]

The reason of these intuitions of the conscience is that back of it
and around it and above it is a realm of moral obligations which must,
without contingency, be made known to us, that we may order our lives
aright.


==Erroneous Theory.==

=6.= It is proper at this place to express dissent from some forms of
theory which are at variance with the truth thus brought to light.
Almost all of them are the outcome of the philosophical phenomenalism
of which Kant's Critique of Pure Reason is the best illustration. It
discredits the competency of our cognitive faculties to reach knowledge
of things as they really are. We can know, it is said, only phenomena,
while the noumena or things in themselves are incognizable; and
doubt is raised whether there is a reality corresponding to what our
faculties report. It is suggested that the data of these faculties,
especially in the forms of intuition and universal judgments, may
be mere "forms of thought," forms of knowing but not of real being,
created within as well as by the mind itself, and projected thence in
connection with apprehended phenomena. They may be mental fictions
in whole or in part, in which the ideal must not be held as standing
for actual being. Thus while time and space are necessary "forms of
thought" under which all bodies and events must be known, yet time
and space, it is alleged, may be but subjective forms given to the
phenomena by and in the cognitive action. We are obliged, indeed,
it is conceded, in practical life to follow the guidance of our
necessary forms of thought. But the knowledge is merely regulative
for present activity; and being a product created and shaped largely
by the particular organization of our minds, this merely relative and
regulative perception of truth may be different in other minds or be
hereafter so changed as to present changed phenomena, superseding
the judgments now given by other judgments under other views. When
the adherents of the Positive Philosophy proceed to define matter
as merely "a permanent possibility of sensations,"[21] faith in the
reliability of our knowledge of the realities about us, as true for
those realities, is thoroughly undermined. This tendency toward an
invalidating of our knowledge as real for objective truth, has been
fostered by recent physiological psychology which, under materialistic
implications, magnifies the effect of the physical organization and
condition upon the mental products. In these ways extreme idealism and
positive materialism join hands in effort to reduce to uncertainty
or illusion what our cognitive faculties perceive of reality and
truth in both the material and moral systems about us. But ethical
science, in harmony with the soundest and best sustained philosophy of
the Christian centuries, rejects these agnostic suggestions, as not
only unproved but untenable. They form a theory of our intellectual
faculties which cuts away the foundations of all knowledge, even
of that which is most clear, fixed, necessary and unchangeable
in the intelligence of the race. The theory becomes intellectual
suicide, as it nullifies the real validity of all the fundamental
perceptions of both sense and reason, on which its own conclusion
rests. Its suggestions discredit themselves by confessing that their
own foundation is but a part of the illusory, phantasmal action of
faculties which, instead of perceiving what is, present but forms which
they produce. While it is conceded that, even on this agnostic basis,
the conscience would still possess "regulative" authority--as it still
asserts its imperative "ought" for life--yet rational ethics, like
self-respecting philosophy, must not vacate for our cognitive faculties
the great function of knowing while attempting to exercise it, nor
fail to maintain that they have been organized for real knowledge,
within the sphere and measure opened to them, of the genuine realities
with which we have to do, in both the material and moral worlds. The
conscience, therefore, must be held, not as formative of its peculiar
phenomena, but perceptive of the ethical realities of right and
obligation.


==Consistent with Theistic Evolution.==

=7.= It is proper also to point out here that this view of the
nature of the conscience is not necessarily affected by the question
of its evolutionary origin. Should the theory of man's derivative
origin, under some form of theistic and teleological evolution, ever
pass from its position as an hypothesis into that of scientific
truth, this would not require us essentially to alter our account
of the nature of this faculty. For the nature of the faculty has
not been found in considerations of the mode of its origin, but
from analysis of the elemental facts in its action. The adherents
of the evolution hypothesis have, indeed, found one of their most
formidable difficulties in attempting a satisfactory explanation of a
possible origination of this faculty in the assumed forces and laws
of evolutionary action. Keeping in view the fact that the very center
of the conscience-function appears in regulation and often in denial
of inherited feelings and habits, the difficulty of attributing its
creation to hereditary action is clearly seen and deeply felt. It
has been well pointed out that "the injunctions of conscience do not
run with the stream of our hereditary tendencies, but rather against
them."[22] That a law of the work and victory of hereditary forces
should issue in organizing an endowment for control and repression of
hereditary tendencies, seems to involve too much of a contradiction
to be accepted. That the survival of the strongest in the battle of
individual existence, the reign of "tooth and talon," should gradually
create a faculty for asserting the obligation and law of love and
kindness to the weak, fails to come properly under our conception of
the working of cause and effect.[23] Even in the theistic form of
the theory, in which evolution offers itself as presenting not the
cause but only the mode of creation, it is hard to conceive of the
adaptation of such a process for the production of such a result--a
result standing apart from the means by a total difference in both
their nature and direction. It is as if the flow of the stream should
create the principle of repression of flowing. The actual attempts of
evolutionist writers to construct an ethical view which shall explain
the phenomena of conscience and justify its authority, has added
further evidence of the difficulty on this point. No such attempts
have thus far been satisfactory. But the nature of the conscience, as
has already been shown, is properly settled, not by the mode of its
origin, but by an examination of its actual psychology and intrinsic
powers. If this makes it clear, as it unquestionably does, that it is
primarily intellectual and percipient in its function, then any failure
of evolution or any other theory to explain its origin must much
rather discredit the theory than disprove the nature of the endowment
which stands as a fact. But an origin of the conscience by evolution,
should it ever be proved, would introduce no trouble at this point in
the science of ethics. For the faculty is competent for its office in
virtue of what it is, and not by the mode through which the divine
creative power worked in its formation. The necessity in the case would
be met should the evolutionary mode be shown to be capable of evolving
an intellectual endowment high enough in perceptive power to discern
the ethical distinctions and bind their obligations on men.




