CHAPTER VII.

THE REALITY OF RIGHT AND WRONG.


In this chapter we pass the dividing line between the two great
parts of ethics. Thus far we have considered only the facts and
manifestations of our moral nature. We have traced the unquestionable
phenomena of moral distinctions and obligation in human thinking,
feeling, and conviction. We have found the explanation of these
phenomena in the action of a faculty or complex of faculties of the
human soul, that discerns and affirms these distinctions. We have
studied this power and marked its data from its initial perception of
the ethical distinction through its further discernments, emotions and
judgments to its full assertion of moral responsibility. We have seen
its unique authority explained by the supremacy of the law of right
and duty which it reveals, and have noted the aggregate of endowments
belonging to man's moral agency.

But the mere registry of these moral phenomena is not the full
explanation of them. We must examine yet what they imply. From the
faculty that perceives we must turn to look at the nature of that which
is perceived. We may call the part already traversed the science of
ethics, as dealing with and systematizing the facts of experience.
The part that remains takes us into the metaphysics of ethics, as
exhibiting the abiding verities so perceived and to which we find
ourselves so responsibly related--not what is in us, but what is above
and over us to which our moral consciousness corresponds. Having
visited "the moral consciousness in its own home" and listened to its
story of "right" and "duty" and "responsibility," we must go forth
and explore the realm that answers to that story. This realm is the
objective moral system to which human conduct is to be adjusted.

The precise question of this chapter is whether the distinction
of right or wrong, subjectively and psychologically made, is also
objectively true and real, marking an actual qualitative difference in
the deeds and intentions of men, or is a mere appearance, a fiction
and illusion of our own minds. Is the principle of duty a reality for
right life, as something belonging to the constitution of the world, or
only an idea which our minds have manufactured--only our own thought
reflected back upon us, as is our face that seems so real in the mirror?

It would seem that the very asking of this question should be itself
a sufficient answer. But doubt has been raised by speculative
metaphysics. Hence we must examine it.


==Source of Doubt.==

=1.= The doubt comes from misleading representations of the relativity
of knowledge. Unquestionably there is a sense in which our knowledge
may justly be said to be "relative." It is not absolute, unconditioned
or unlimited. We can know only as we have facilities for knowing,
and under the conditions and aspects in which objects are presented
to them. We are restricted to the modes and degrees of our given
capacities. There are probably many realities about us of which we can
know nothing. We have no organs for their perception. Even the things
that we do know reach off into transcendent relations. Philosophy
has long confessed the relative character of our knowledge. Even the
percepts of sense-experience, say for instance, of sight or hearing,
when analyzed in physical science are found to be, in their objective
cause or material conditions, somewhat different from the simple
report of the organ of sense--color being the subjective sensation
of light-rays on the retina of the eye, and sound the effect of
vibrations of the atmosphere upon the sensorium. But in recent times
various theories have represented our knowing faculties as largely
untrustworthy and their data as invalid in spheres where their
functions appear most certain and explicit. Locke gave basis for a
movement in this direction by teaching that the immediate objects of
the mind are not things, but "ideas." Berkeley's idealism repudiated
the sufficiency of sense-perception to prove the objective existence
of the material world. Hume questioned the substantial existence of
both matter and mind. In the view of Kant human knowledge reaches only
to "phenomena," the appearance of things, while the things as they are
"in themselves" can not be known. The mind projects and imposes its own
subjective forms of thought upon the universe. Sir Wm. Hamilton, Dean
Mansel, J. S. Mill, Alexander Bain and Herbert Spencer have developed
theories, variously modified but agreeing in this, that even our
necessary forms of rational perception are not to be held as standing
for more than relative truth, _i. e._ subjective impressions in our
minds in the presence of environment. Doubt is cast upon the point
whether what is true to our necessary or actual thought is also really
true for the objective world.

The teaching will be best understood by several quotations. Sir Wm.
Hamilton, though a natural realist, influenced by the speculations of
Kant, while acknowledging an underlying reality for phenomena, taught
that we can never know them except "under modifications determined by
our own faculties."[33]

J. S. Mill, going further, says: "Our knowledge of objects, and even
our fancies about objects, consist in nothing but the sensations
they excite, or which we imagine them exciting in ourselves.... This
knowledge is merely phenomenal.... The object is known to us only in
one special relation, namely, as that which produces, or is capable of
producing certain impressions on our senses; and all that we really
know is these impressions."[34]

Herbert Spencer asserts the relativity of all knowledge, and says:
"Clearly as we seem to know it, our apparent knowledge proves on
examination to be utterly irreconcilable with itself. Ultimate
religious ideas and ultimate scientific ideas, alike turn out to be
merely symbols of the actual, not cognitions of it."[35]

Plainly these theories do not make our knowledge a genuine apprehension
of reality, but merely internal and unreliable mental states. It is
only a subjective phenomenon. We cannot know that it stands for the
real truth of things. Rather, we are told, it does not. It is but an
effect within the mind, determined, it may be, by things without, but
modified, if not created, by the constitution and action of the mind
itself. The receiving mind, like the receiving lens, determines the
shape and color of the apprehended phenomenon. If there be any reality
behind it and correspondent to it, we can never assure ourselves
of it. The theory thoroughly discredits the trustworthiness of our
faculties, both of sense-perception and of reason. They do not report
the things of the world as they really are, but merely as they affect
us. Our necessary conceptions, such as time, space, beauty, cause,
moral law, cannot be proved to be anything else than phenomena within
us. The conclusion is well stated in the language of Mr. Grote in his
explanation of the views of the Greek sophists: "As things appear to
me, so they are to me; as they appear to you, so they are to you."[36]
It is altogether a subjective matter. We can have only a relative
morality--not conformed to an objective and universal standard, but to
the particular impressions we find within us.

Evidently this doctrine of relativity lands us in universal
intellectual skepticism. It gives us agnosticism. Nothing is sure in a
single department of knowledge. If our minds are forever presenting to
us internal "forms of thought" that stand not really for the "forms
of being" in the real world, if they are actually creating or painting
for us what we seem to perceive and what appear to be realities
objective to our faculties and existing independently of them, there
is no possibility of reaching truth of any kind. But in the domain of
morals this theory would prove peculiarly destructive. If the qualities
of right and wrong be not in very truth real, if they be not verities
of conduct in the constituted relations of human life, if the ideas
answer not to a true distinction set before us for our recognition
and conformity, then virtue is a dream, obligation an illusion, and
conscience a fraud.

Over against this false we must place the true conception of the
relativity of knowledge. We must hold, as the spontaneous sense of
mankind and the best sustained psychology and philosophy of the
centuries affirm, that our cognitive powers are genuine faculties
for discerning the truth of things, that, while not infallible nor
unlimited, they give us substantially correct knowledge, as far as it
goes, of the realities of the natural and moral world in which we are
placed. These powers of intelligence are not set to act delusively and
imprison us in phantasmagoria or a factitious system false to that
which actually exists. The correct theory, the only one that is really
rational and can be lived out, must ever be that, as far as we have
faculties to know at all and use them loyally, we know what is and
because it is. The true reason of our knowing is the real existence of
knowable realities.[37] Instead of knowing only appearances, we know
the very things that appear--not perfectly, or without possibility
of mistake, but yet truly. The end of knowledge is not to give us a
phantasmagorical world for endless illusion, but the actual world, with
its divine constitution and movement, in which we are to live, and with
whose facts and laws, physical and moral, we are to harmonize our lives.


=2.= The false conception of the relativity of knowledge being thus
set aside, and the psychological law, that the correlate of knowing
is reality, being recognized, we are prepared to see the truth on the
point of inquiry in this chapter, as follows:

==Objective Reality.==

(1) The qualities of right and wrong, involved in the ethical
distinction, are not merely subjective impressions or appearances,
imposed on conduct by the human mind, but are objective, belonging to
the external world of relations and action, real for apprehension and
conformity. They are without us as well as within us. And they come
within us because they are realities without us for us to know and
observe. The moral qualities, as real features of required behavior
of free beings in their given relations to each other, belong to the
constitution of the world as well as to the faculties of the human
mind. They are real qualities of action and motives to action whether
men perceive or take note of them or not. As truly as the starry sky
is above us, before we open our eyes to see it, so the principle
of righteousness is established for life before we enter it or our
faculties awake to discover it. The principle of moral law is framed
into the constitution of the world and human life. It is back of
the discernment of it, imbedded in the demand which the constituted
relations of nature make for proper behavior of free, intelligent
beings. The law of duty is fixed in these relations. It abides there to
be recognized and fulfilled by all beings endowed with moral perception
and freedom. Moral law is a profounder and broader thing than a
simple uncertain mental fiction in personal thinking. It belongs to
the immense, almost infinite realm of creature inter-relations of the
universe.

The reality, however, is not to be thought of as a material entity or
substantive essence, but solely as a quality of the intentions and
conduct demanded by and in the relations sustained by men and other
moral beings. It is the reality of an established obligation. It
belongs to character.

The right, as moral law, has ever been venerated as something
supersensible, absolute, and divine. The early Egyptian teaching
represented its home as in Deity. Buddhistic philosophy conceives of
it as an imperishable dominion over gods and men. Christianity has
enforced it as based in the very nature of God, and as a principle of
order ordained for the whole universe of personal life and behavior.
Not more real are the solid rocks of the mountain or the strong
waves of the sea. Not more real for the material realm is the law of
gravitation than is the law of ethical righteousness for the spiritual
realm, the realm of free conduct. And the latter is superior and of
higher value than the former. This truth speaks in the old apothegm:
"_fiat justitia, ruat cœlum_."

==Not Dependent on Organization.==

(2) The qualities of right and wrong in conduct are not dependent
on the peculiar mental organization or temperament of the race.
This results from the objectivity of the law of obligation. Only
the perception of them is so dependent, while the moral qualities
are abidingly real for all beings high enough in the scale of being
to discern them. Just as we must believe that the sun exists as an
extended body independently of our eyes or minds, and would have to
be so apprehended by any inhabitant of Neptune or Jupiter endowed
with capacity to perceive it as it is, so we must believe that truth
and love and kindness are right, and falsehood, injustice, malignity
and ingratitude are wrong, not as made so by our peculiar personal
constitution, but _per se_, in any inhabited world of the stellar
heavens; and that the only subjective condition for their so appearing
is the possession of the faculty for perception of moral quality.

There may, indeed, be a doubt among finite moral agents, with limited
knowledge, how far a certain thing may be true or false, kind or
malignant, just or unjust, but the quality of truth or falsehood,
kindness or malignity, justice or injustice being perceived in it,
it is impossible that such truth, kindness and justice should not
be judged right and their opposites wrong. The ethical distinction,
objectively viewed, is an ethical difference, perceived as such, if
perceived at all.

==Immutable and Eternal.==

(3) The moral distinctions, with the moral qualities involved, being
thus objective, and not the product of a special temporary organization
of the percipient, are immutable and eternal. This is involved in the
very nature of the qualities themselves. By eternal necessity of what
they are, justice and love must be unchangeably and forever right. They
are not thus right because we think or feel them so, but we think and
feel them so because they are so, because of the immutable and enduring
nature of justice and love themselves. They hold and carry the kind of
motive and action that ought to prevail in the relations of intelligent
personal life, everywhere and in all time. So malignity, injustice,
falsehood, and cruelty are wrong by the very nature of the qualities
that make and mark them; and the personal intentions and conduct that
hold them can never be right any more than a thing can be itself and
yet other than itself.

Men's judgments as to whether particular conduct is fair or just or
kind or honest, may change and do change. Different nations and ages
class certain acts and ways of men very differently. But these are only
judgments of application, and so only secondary ethical judgments. This
has already been pointed out in Chap. IV, pp. 67-68. They depend on the
degree to which the moral qualities of the conduct may be discerned
amid the complicated relations and obscurities that often perplex a
right understanding of it. But while men change their judgments of
the justice, benevolence, or truth of particular forms of behavior,
they do not change their judgments that justice, love and truth are
right--necessarily and immutably so. The behests of duty are imbedded
in the necessary relations of intelligent free beings. Virtue is no
shifting subjective illusion, shaped by our inner mental mould. No
change of the percipient's intellectual constitution can change the
realities of right and wrong. No removal from world to world can change
them. No distant age in eternity can reverse them, and discover virtue
to be wrong or sin right, or either as without moral quality. The
distinction is eternal, and no future can arrest our responsibility
with respect to it. God calls us to identify ourselves with what
is right and shun all wrong, as realities with which we stand in
immutable, unending relation, for good or evil.


==Grandeur of Moral Law.==

=3.= The truth thus reached on this point is one of exceeding
importance. It brings to view the grandeur of the moral law. It shows
this law to be truly transcendental, belonging not to transient
material forms or physiological structure, nor to special psychical
constitutions of men or races, nor organized instinct, nor subjective
mental illusion, nor peculiar hereditary experience, nor transformed
sense of realized or supposed utility, nor any local adventitious
circumstances and training, but to the supreme super-sensible realm
of universal and necessary ideas and truth, in which the universe of
rational thought and divine order lives and moves and has its being and
welfare. In this truth, therefore, the moral law begins to appear in
its true greatness and value, in its universal dominion and infinite
importance. It comes down upon us with a mighty impression. It thrills
us into enthusiasm. As long as the moral idea is accounted a mere
product of environment and biological evolution or experienced utility,
a blind hereditary instinct, an organized impulse, a fiction of
education, or a temporary behest of individual or racial organization,
it is a thing of but little dignity and of limited moment. It is worthy
of no more reverence than a form of protoplasm or a passing mental
impression. Not reflecting an objective reality of universal, supreme
and permanent validity, but only a special phenomenon of the human
organization and this transient life, it can inspire but small respect.
Only in the truth here reached does the authority of the moral law
stand out in its majesty and illimitable range and sweep. Only in it
can that law be rightly effective for the good conduct of men and the
safe formation of character in the mould of immortal excellence.


==Reality is Dividing Line.==

=4.= The recognition of the objective validity of the moral
distinctions marks one of the chief dividing lines between true and
false theories of moral philosophy. A failure to recognize this point
not only leaves the point itself a blank, but usually means error
both in the conception of the nature and function of conscience
and of the grounds and claims of right and virtue. With respect to
conscience the failure reduces it from a power of true discernment
of what is, into an instinct acting blindly or a make-believe of
obligation through judgments indistinguishable from those of utility,
pleasure or advantage, or into a passing product of racial experience
or education. So instead of explaining the unique authority of the
conscience it undermine and dissolves that authority into non-moral
elements. Obligation itself becomes but a synonym for an impulse toward
certain forms of pleasure or advantage. As to the grounds and claims
of right, these are thus caused to disappear in the non-moral elements
into which right and wrong are dissolved. The ethical distinctions, the
great moral phenomena of the ages, with all the interests of practical
morality, instead of being explained and justified, are explained
away. If, therefore, ethical theory is to exhibit the metaphysical
validity of the moral consciousness of men, no view can reasonably
be regarded as correct that dissipates the very reality which the
conscience assumes to see and without which the moral judgments lose
their rational foundations. For if the objective and transcendent
character of the ethical distinction be denied, morality necessarily
drops down into, at best, a temporary biological provision for the
utilities of this ephemeral life, or, at worst, into a deep fraud of
our faculties, estopping the use of our freedom by a phantom bugbear
of moral distinctions. If, therefore, virtue is not to be disrobed of
its honor, if righteousness is not to be cast down from the supreme
place which the reason of mankind has ever accorded it, if the idea of
duty is not to be belittled, invalidated and overthrown, ethical theory
must recognize and emphasize the objective and permanent reality of the
moral law as an unchanging law of obligation and responsibility for
the conduct of free agents. Otherwise the so-called ethical theory is
not a theory of the ethical reality, but one that sinks the supposed
ethical reality into non-moral elements and illusion. To vindicate the
authority of conscience, the immutable foundations of righteousness
must be maintained, not dissolved.


==Relation to Evolution.==

=5.= The relation of this truth to the wide-spread hypothesis of
the evolutionary origin of man dare not be ignored at this place.
Frank admission has already been made that this hypothesis, as
setting forth a mere mode of creation by God, does not appear to be
necessarily inconsistent with the existence of conscience. Any mode
that can produce a faculty of mental power capable of perceiving
or making the ethical distinction, suffices on that point--though
grave difficulties stand in the way of accounting for it under any
evolutionist explanation thus far given. But how is it with respect to
the supersensible reality of the moral law, as the reality perceived by
the conscience? Can evolution account for it, or even allow any place
for it?

==Theistic Evolution.==

To these questions, the answer must be, first, that evolution, in the
theistic conception, if supposed capable of developing the faculty of
conscience, must also be regarded as consistent with existence and
place of the moral law. The infinite intelligence and purpose back of
the creative evolution, and through it originating a power for ethical
perception, must be conceded to be equally capable, in that method of
forming the universe, of establishing the principle and law of duty in
the relations in which rational and self-determining creatures are to
live. Provided only that a rational first cause be assumed and the
plan of the world be viewed as laid in aims of divine order, a moral
system as well as moral agents may, surely, be created by slow advance
of life no less completely than by instantaneous fiat of power. The
theistic theory of evolution, assuming the cosmic system to be grounded
in the will and power of God and filled with his ever-working presence
does not necessarily bring any trouble into the question of fixed moral
law. The moral law, resting in the same divine source whence arise the
laws that are revealed in physical nature, comes into play as soon as
moral agents are created in relations which call for right sentiments
and conduct. The rational purpose which ordained physical laws, in
necessity, for material order, ordains moral law for order of personal
agents acting in freedom. The question, therefore, with respect to this
kind of evolution need not embarrass the question of the reality of
immutable moral law--at least when the theory of evolution is so shaped
as to give its fundamental assumptions full and consistent place and
force.

==Atheistic Evolution.==

But, secondly, on the other hand, answer must be made, that under no
theory of atheistic and merely materialistic and naturalistic evolution
can the objective existence of moral law be logically or rationally
maintained. This kind of evolutionism is not only helpless before the
task of accounting for it, but logically excludes the possibility of
it. For any theory that presents the cosmos as a pure naturalism of
matter, or is agnostic as to an intelligent author of nature, furnishes
no realm or materials for moral law. This becomes evident, beyond
doubt, from the following considerations:

(1) According to the hypothesis "the potency of all things" is in
matter with its energy and modes of motion. This is the "all and
the one" τὸ πᾶν καὶ ἕν ([Greek: to pan kai hen]) of the universe,
at once the only essence and ground of its existence and ongoing.
No intelligent first cause is assumed, no creative reason to begin
or determine the evolution. There is no ordering mind or purpose in
it--for its origin, in the process, or as to its end. It is avowedly
a purely mechanical theory of the universe--matter and force acting
in self-contained energy without design. All rational, purposive,
or teleological idea is wanting. Now it is evident that this pure
mechanism of matter and energy must be not only without any moral
element whatever, but necessarily incapable of evolving the moral. It
is an infinite and endless automatism. Though it should run on æon
after æon it is still only a mechanism of atoms in eternally unfree
material movement. The unmoral elements can never produce moral law;
and, _ex hypothesi_, there is no intelligent free moral being behind or
in the movement to create or establish moral law through it.

(2) Further, this form of evolutionism, returning, as it does, to the
ancient notion of the universe as a perpetual flux, even if imagined to
be able to evolve the moral out of non-moral elements, could present
no permanent and stable ethical law. In such evolution, without
beginning and without end, all things are only a continual becoming,
"an eternal process moving on." There is and can be nothing fixed,
whether of forms or relations, but only a shifting, necessitated,
everlasting scene of aimless beginnings and disappearances. Could we
even conceive--which we cannot, because the concept is possible only
in connection with purpose and ideal order--that the ethical "ought"
should momentarily appear, it would soon be broken up and passed by,
like the bubble on a stream,

        "A moment here, then gone forever."

Manifestly, this perpetual motion, forever changing and superseding its
own forms and products, cannot be considered father to even a rational
stable conscience, much less a sure abiding moral law for its steady
recognition and eternally reverent regard. "The child of contingency
remains contingent." And so the advocates of this empirical,
materialistic, and atheistic evolutionism consistently maintain that
there is no absolute moral law, and that what seems so is only shifting
hereditary judgments generated by experience and utility or some
instinct formed by biological processes.

(3) But further. In this merely naturalistic evolution all the
essential presuppositions of moral law are wanting and excluded. This
is easily seen. (_a_) It has already been pointed out that the action
of conscience is theistic, its authority arising from its perception
of a law of duty imposed on it and representing a moral law-giver (See
Chap. IV, pp. 79-80; Chap. V, pp. 87-88). So moral law, as a rule of
ethical righteousness, is necessarily theistic. It is thinkable only
as a requirement made by rational intelligence for fitting conduct
among personal agents. It rests in a world-system of rational ends
and ideal requirements. The standard is established by intelligence.
Should it be objected, that we may regard the standard as made by the
mind of men only, and altogether a human and subjective thing, it is
enough to remind the reader that according to the hypothesis, there is
no human mind as a different entity from matter, the only "mentality"
left being merely particular effects of molecular or brain activity,
and therefore only successive passive products, simply revealing what,
if it exists at all, must exist as the molecular matter behind them.
The autocratic moral law which the conscience finds, but does not
make, is conceivable therefore, only as part of intelligent ordering
in a rational world-system. But according to the hypothesis no moral
reason has framed or regulates the order of the physical forces that
create the relations of life. (_b_) Moral law, with responsibility, is
inconceivable except in connection with personal freedom in the subject
of it. But in this kind of evolutionism, everything is reduced to the
mechanism of matter; and its supporters agree that our personal freedom
is an illusion. There can be no more morality in the thoughts, aims and
conduct of men than in the digestion of food or the growth and decay of
a tree.

While, therefore, theistic evolution does not present anything
inconsistent with the reality and recognition of moral law, every
hypothesis which exhibits the world, in its ground and processes,
as the mere mechanism of material forces, stands in logical and
irreconcilable antagonism. This antagonism, however, is not to be
taken as overthrowing or even weakening the truth set forth in this
chapter. Rather, the antagonistic hypothesis, which fails in so many
other respects to meet the necessities of a rational or scientific
account of the phenomena of the universe, discredits itself still
further by its incongruity on this great point.




