CHAPTER III.

FACULTY OF MORAL DISTINCTIONS--THE EXISTENCE OF CONSCIENCE.


==The Moral Faculty.==

The great fact of moral distinctions, found to be universal in human
thought and life, must be traced back to the particular power of
the mind which discerns and feels these distinctions. Back of the
phenomenon must be recognized the psychical capacity and action out of
which the discriminations arise. The moral faculty answers to and in
part accounts for the moral fact. In modern general literature it is
usually called the conscience. Ethical science properly accepts the
designation. It is sometimes called the moral consciousness, or the
moral sense. It expresses a power of the personal _ego_ or self to
make the moral discrimination and discern the obligation to rectitude.
Without such power, as an adequate capacity for the ideas, it is
plain that the ethical judgments could not arise. The very idea of
obligation, the ethical "ought," would be wanting. The whole realm of
what this science considers would be a blank. In the moral faculty or
conscience itself, as the immediate source of the ethical distinctions
and laws of duty, we are furnished with additional material for this
study.

No particular stress is here laid on the term "faculty," as a
designation of the moral power. There is, indeed, no validity in the
claim of some recent psychologists that the term must be abandoned
on the ground that psychology discovers only mental acts, without a
psychic subject with distinct faculties back of the acts. Yet the term
faculty has often been used and understood in a way inconsistent with
the essential and conscious unity of the personal _ego_ or self, making
the soul seem a bundle of independent and separately acting parts of a
psychical organism. The perfect oneness of the personal self must be
maintained, and the term faculty, when used for any form of psychical
ability, must be understood simply as expressing the soul's capacity
or power to do any specific form of work, or to act in any particular
and distinctively definable way, as, for instance, to know, to feel, to
will, to remember, to compare. In this sense the use of the term stands
fully justified in psychological usage and propriety. But the reason
for abating from the claim of strict exactness in the term in this
connection is that the conscience, in its full conception and action,
as will hereafter appear, while exhibiting a specific and simple power
as its central reality, will be found to include also subordinately
the conjoint action of several other forms of psychical power. It
stands for a complex of capacities and powers. This will appear when we
reach its analysis. But the question of the absolute simplicity of the
faculty does not affect the substance of our inquiry into its existence
nor the propriety of employing the term for the power in its totality.
For, as naming the central and decisive reality in the conscience, it
is justly spoken of as a special faculty. Even when it is viewed as
standing for a complex of powers converging, in their functions, to
the discernment of moral distinctions and the reality of duty, it has
sufficient individuality to be rightly and scientifically designated
in this way. The question to be considered, and upon which the logical
conclusions of the science will depend, is not its absolute simplicity,
but the fact of such a power as a normal part in the soul's essential
constitution of powers. If the power be found integral and normal in
the soul's actual capacities, we have all that is essential for the
foundation of ethics.

The existence of the conscience as a specific and natural faculty of
discernment of right and duty may seem to the student or reader to need
no formal proof, as something substantially everywhere acknowledged.
But as various theories undertake to question its existence, in the
sense thus explained, and resolve the affirmations of right and duty
into pseudo-products developed in a roundabout way, or by some illusive
transformation of ideas or sentiments given by the other faculties of
the soul, ideas or sentiments which in fact are really unethical, it
becomes necessary to vindicate the asserted existence of this moral
faculty.


==Moral Distinctions Prove Conscience.==

=1.= The primary and fundamental evidence is the great fact, already
set forth, of the moral distinctions which arise out of its action
and fill personal consciousness and the life of the world with their
attesting presence. The known object implies a power by which it
is known. Without the faculty, in the sense of a power to know, the
knowledge here in question could not exist. Its existence is proof
of the reality and action of the faculty perceptive of it. The only
alternative to this would be a total denial of the ethical distinction,
even as a genuine phenomenon, and an assertion that the supposed
knowledge of it is, and always has been, illusory and unreal. And
this would be equivalent to a claim that men may and should abandon
the ethical distinction and believe that there is absolutely no moral
difference between justice and injustice, between kindness and hatred,
between truth and lying, between friendship and treachery, between
charity and murder. And this again would mean that we are to repudiate,
as without validity, the whole notion which the ages, especially the
most intelligent and best ages, have cherished, that man is capable
of character, as good or bad, excellent or blameworthy. But this
whole alternative becomes impossible, by reason of the necessary
and invincible contrary judgment by which the moral distinctions
are affirmed as actual and valid for human life. The faculty of
moral discernment proves its existence by making the contrary of its
discernment an impossible conception.


==The Moral Perceptions Peculiar.==

=2.= Its existence is further proved by the unique and peculiar
character of its data or perceptions. These are unlike any other, _sui
generis_. They are original and cannot be deduced from other data. The
ethical percept is something that can be understood only in terms
of itself. It cannot be described or expressed in the terms of the
percepts or knowledge given by the other faculties of the soul, either
general or special, either separately or in combination. Hence we must,
according to all sound psychological procedure, postulate a special
faculty, as distinctive and normal as is the percept, for this original
and irresolvable ethical idea.

A little explanation will help to show this. Let us make search for
the ethical idea or perception among the well-known data of the other
faculties. Manifestly it is not given by the "sense-perception," for
it presents none of the physical properties which this makes known.
Clearly, too, it is not created by the "consciousness," which presents
simply the states or acts of the mind, with the personal self as
their subject, but which does not itself originate the states or acts
it reveals--any more than does the light of the morning create the
objects of the landscape which it discloses. Further, it is evidently
not given by the power of "representation," for this merely reproduces
and re-knows what was before known through the "sense-perception"
and revealed in "consciousness," revived in the form of memory or
rearranged and recombined in the forms of the constructive imagination.
It supplies no original data. It, further still, cannot be the product
of the "logical" faculty, as the power or function of discursive
reasoning, because this originates no new material, but only reconnects
and judges of relations in the material already known, simply dealing
with ideas furnished to it. Nor can the ethical percept, as an
intuition to the obligation to rectitude, be at all identified with
the _a priori_ ideas of time and space, or the categories of substance
and attribute, identity and difference, means and end, or the law of
causation. And yet it stands out in an originality as positive and
distinct as do any of the unquestionable data or percepts of the soul's
acknowledged specific faculties.

Just as little can the ethical idea, as the discrimination of right and
wrong, be referred to the "sensibility," as the pleasure or dislike
with which we regard what is found useful and conducive to enjoyment
or the reverse. For, though a certain pleasure is connected with the
ethically right, this specific feeling follows, and is dependent on
no other perception than of the right. It is a satisfaction which
the ethically good thus awakens. But the knowledge which experience
gives of what is useful and conducive to enjoyment is generically
different from the moral idea and its sense of obligation. Utility and
the ethical discrimination are not the same conception. They belong
to two diverse realms of thought and knowledge. Whatever relations
may be traced between them, they cannot be identified or held as
convertible percepts. The autonomous imperative of the ethical idea
often positively prohibits the very things men judge to be profitable
and pleasurable. It is a remarkable fact that the testimonies from
literature and life to the phenomenon of moral distinctions everywhere
maintain the difference between the idea of right and that of the
pleasurable or profitable. What is right is one thing; what is
agreeable is another thing. The two conceptions are not identical, but
are often placed in immediate and irreducible antithesis. Those who do
right, choosing it and heroically loyal to it despite the appeals of
ambition, the temptations of avarice, the enticements of ease, and the
favor or the wrath of the wicked, are approved and honored. To such the
gates of the divine favor and recompense are pictured as ever standing
open.

There is another consideration in this connection which shows beyond
question that this ethical faculty, whose action is everywhere
traceable, is not to be confounded with mere intellectuality or
the action of simply the general intellectual powers. It exhibits
itself in a distinct line of working and results, like a particular
current in the common sea, and often in open contrast. It is a
peculiar and significant fact, often observed by historians, that
as the civilizations of antiquity, of Assyria, Egypt, Phenicia,
Greece and Rome, advanced in intellect they declined in morals.
Intellectualism may be at its height while the moral side of life
may suffer a submergence beneath the floods of luxury and refined
social vices. Buckle confesses that intellect and morals are not
only distinguishable, but separable.[10] Herbert Spencer says: "The
belief in the moralizing effects of intellectual culture, flatly
contradicted by facts, is absurd _a priori_."[11] Lord Wolseley makes
a statement not flattering to the boasted advantage claimed for simple
intellectualism: "The virtue of the Zulu women was superior to that
of any civilized people I know of."[12] The function of the conscience
in human nature and life stands clearly distinguishable from the
common data and powers of mere intellectualism. The world will not
be ethically saved by intellect alone. The conscience must dominate
mere intellectual results and forces. And the high distinctive place
and peculiar character of the conscience-perception is seen when it
is thus observed that the perception is not of something that is,
but of what ought to be, in the sphere of conduct and character. Its
object is apprehended as lying in the ideal realm of obligation. The
reality perceived is transcendent, as what should be in life, in order
that life may accord with a super-sensible reality in the realm of
righteousness. It as truly reaches beyond sense as do the intuitions
of time and space or the law of causation; and, as truly as they, it
calls for the recognition of a special and original psychical faculty
or provision, among the powers of the soul, for its perception. The
conscience,

        "Deep-seated in our mystic frame,"

discerns a law of righteous obligation, which is not the dictate of
mere desire or pleasure or self-advantage, but a law established
at once over us and in us not dependent on our will or choice but
demanding conformity of will and choice to itself.


==Feelings from Conscience Perceptions.==

=3.= The existence of the conscience as an integral power of the
human constitution is evidenced also by the special feelings which
attend its perceptions. They are distinctively peculiar. This is
illustrated in the sense of obligation arising from the idea of right
and the perception of duty. It is even more clearly illustrated in the
satisfaction which attends and follows duty done, and the remorse which
follows wrong or crime committed.

The sense of obligation, _i. e._ the emotion awakened by the perception
of obligation, is unique among the emotions of the sensibility. In the
presence of recognized right or wrong men feel bound to correspondent
action as they feel bound under no other perceptions. The conscience,
indeed, uses no compulsion, but it presents the right or wrong and
correspondent obligation. Freedom is not annulled, but appealed to.
The feeling, as the sensibility excited, is the feeling of ought or
ought not, added to the perception of it. Nothing like this appears
in connection with any of the other perceptions. We may perceive
truth, but if the truth is not the particular truth of obligation
itself, there is only the pleasure, gratification or admiration in
its discovery and attainment. We may perceive beauty, but if the
beauty be apart from that of ethical excellence, the feeling is simply
æsthetic and different from the obligatory feeling: "I ought." We may
perceive utility or understand what is simply profitable, but the
feeling awakened is but desire. All these and like simply intellectual
perceptions awaken no sense of obligation to cherish any special
sentiments or perform any special acts. But as soon as men, in pure
and normal state of their rational and emotional nature, perceive
the right as over against the wrong, the sensibility which always in
greater or less degree responds to every act of knowledge, presents a
form of feeling, in the ethical "ought," generically different from
the feelings that arise out of all other kinds of knowledge. This
feeling is itself a part and parcel of the aggregate or complex of the
conscience. But its presence marks the conscience as a special power
normally constituent of human nature.

The other moral emotions named, viz.: satisfaction in duty done
and remorse or compunction for wrong, bring us to the same conclusion.
These feelings are _sui generis_. They are distinctively characteristic,
and are never called forth but in connection with the moral intuitions.
These peculiar satisfactions or compunctions never appear upon
perception of a truth of mathematics or a fact in chemistry or a gem of
art. Such knowledge evokes no sense of duty and is followed by no
feeling of remorse or rush of compunction, flooding the soul with
self-condemnation. A sense of loss, in failing to gain a possible
advantage, is incapable of being confounded with the feeling of having
done wrong. Some of the highest elevations of ethical satisfaction are
felt when men have maintained their fidelity to the right in face of
the most enormous losses and of the most desolating sufferings. The
deepest remorse the human soul ever knows may spring up in view of ways
and acts which have given men all the things they have coveted and
judged to be the most useful and enjoyable. There must surely be a
special power whose peculiar discernments call the sensibilities into
such unique and peculiar forms of feeling.


==Conflict of Moral Judgements.==

=4.= This conclusion is not weakened, as has sometimes been supposed,
by the diversity and seeming conflict of moral judgments among men.
This diversity seems, in the view of many persons, inconsistent with
the supposition of a conscience, in the sense given. The fact of such
diversity is freely conceded. The progress of history shows many
changes in moral judgments. An advance is clearly traceable, in which
once accepted rules of conduct have been superseded by different
requirements. Things approved in one land and tribe are condemned in
another. Pascal has said that conscience is one thing north of the
Pyrenees and another south. In every community what some look upon as
right others declare wrong. Infanticide, which under our civilization
is punished as murder, on the banks of the Ganges has been esteemed a
high religious duty. Polygamy, which our government is trying to wipe
out as an immorality and foul blot, is held by the Mormons as a sacred
right. Slavery is still regarded by some as right though condemned by
the convictions of the nation as morally indefensible. Most startling
diversities and contrasts are continually appearing. Hence it has often
been said that our moral judgments rest, in fact, on no original and
permanent principles discerned by a distinct and universal faculty of
the soul, but are a purely adventitious and accidental product, shaped
in ideas that come of circumstances, education or the shifting spirit
of the age.[13] The law of morality is reduced to the dictates of
expediency or to sentiment and caprice born of our changeful desires.
This virtually denies both the validity of the ethical behests and the
reality of an ethical faculty provided for perception of rectitude and
duty. But the difficulty from this diversity and apparent contradiction
loses its force when carefully considered. It disappears when we recall
the following indubitable facts:

==Ethical Sense Persists.==

First, that in the midst of this variety and conflict in the moral
judgments, the ethical sense still persists in maintaining its
function. If convicted of acting inconsistently, it still acts. Though
it is found judging differently, it still judges, asserting its place
and office, and imposing its decisions as obligatory in conduct. Under
the view alleged in the objection, the sense of obligation ought to
disappear, its supposed authority having been explained away. The
person finds that in very truth the moral behest, though in him is not
of him, is not of his will or choice, but arises out of the necessary
action of a power that he cannot displace by refusal to obey it. The
faculty or power does not consent, so to speak, to omit or withdraw its
ethical distinction and assertion of duty. It does not abdicate, when
men allege the illegitimacy of its authority.

==Agreement in Judgments.==

Secondly, that while there is diversity as to many points, there is
none in its judgments as to the great body of virtues and vices of
human life. As to all the leading qualities of character and conduct
there is full and universal agreement. With respect to all the cardinal
virtues, such as justice, kindness, veracity, love, courage, fidelity,
generosity, the moral judgments approve them as the magnet owns its
pole, in all the multi-form relations and offices of life. On the other
hand, injustice, falsehood, enmity, treachery, cruelty, adultery,
theft, murder and similar dispositions and acts in their thousand forms
of unmistakable manifestation, are universally condemned. There is no
question anywhere around our globe that one who deliberately kills his
mother or mangles his father, or tortures the innocent or defrauds his
friend, is a wrong-doer, of abhorrent guilt. Over almost the entire
broad field of moral obligation there is a consentient, clear and
consistent judgment by the moral sense of man in all ages and places.
It is only along dividing lines, wider or narrower as they may be,
that, by reason of the fainter presence of the moral element or the
complexity of the relations concerned, the moral judgments exhibit this
diversity or act with less assured and certain accuracy. The perplexity
and difference find place only in limited degree and on remoter points,
where the distinctions are so subtle as to require the nicest balancing
of all the complex relations and elements which develop the ethical
obligations.

If, indeed, the conscience reported entirely different codes
throughout, from bottom to top and from center to circumference, or
codes with contradictions as to the cardinal virtues and vices, then
we might well question the existence and action of a real, original
and normal faculty as actually perceiving a real moral distinction and
principle of duty. But if such diversities are found only in limited
degree, on marginal ground and in complex situations, we are simply in
the presence of a fact of great similarity of the conscience with all
the rest of the finite and fallible faculties of the human mind. Upon
a hundred points of practical morals the intelligent conscience would
be likely to agree quite as well as the judgments of men in any other
sphere of practical knowledge and life.

==Agreement in Principles.==

Thirdly, that even with respect to the cases in which there is the most
startling diversity, there is often an underlying agreement, overlooked
by superficial thought. Take, for instance, the Hindu mother's act of
infanticide. Underneath her act and guiding it, is one or the other,
or possibly both, of these principles: 1. Whatever sacrifice God calls
for ought to be made; or, 2. Whatever is best for the child ought to
be done. Falsely taught to believe that God calls for the sacrifice of
her child, or that this surrender of it to him is the best thing for
it, the mother makes the offering. Essentially as to the principles
from which she acts her conscience and the Christian conscience are at
one. But she has been misled as to the will of God. Her understanding
is without correct information as to matters of fact, and she applies
mistakenly the principles of duty which are in her moral nature.
Take, again, the crimes of religious intolerance and persecution. The
religious zealot believes that every man is to be, without weakness or
shadow or turning, faithful to the truth. So also does the dissenter
from the creed which the persecutor defends. They agree as to the
underlying principle of action. Each feels bound by the same ethical
law of "fidelity to the truth," but the persecutor is in grievous error
in understanding that this fidelity binds him to coerce the mind of his
dissenting brother.

==Difference of Perceptions.==

Fourthly, the difference must be clearly kept in view between the
essential ethical perception, viz.: the distinction of right and
wrong with the involved obligation, and the application of that
perception--between the primary and secondary moral judgment. The
primary is the intuition of the law of right, the secondary affirms
the quality of right or wrong with respect to particular actions. In
the one case the moral sense perceives that justice, love, veracity,
kindness, etc., are right, and injustice, hatred, falsehood and
cruelty are wrong; in the other the judgment is concerned with the
further question whether this, that, or the other act comes under one
or the other of these categories. The fundamental ethical distinction
and obligation, with approval of justice, truth, etc., are generic,
and altogether irrespective of any particular actions or instances.
The secondary judgments apply the distinction to particular modes of
conduct or forms of temper and feeling. The latter are only in part
moral judgments, _i. e._ only so far as the particular feeling or deed
exhibits to the conscience the presence of the ethical quality. It is
an unquestionable fact that in many of the activities of life there
are open alternatives of choice where the question of moral quality is
not raised at all. As, for instance, between taking one path or another
to a certain point, or in writing a letter with a pen or typewriter,
the choice is morally indifferent. The decision involves no ethical
judgment. But in most contemplated action there are relations that
raise the question of right or wrong--in some cases only by remote
implication, in others in clear and burning emphasis. There are degrees
in this respect, all the way from the faintest glimmering of ethical
quality to the boldest and most transparent certainty. We are by no
means entitled to doubt the existence of conscience, because in all
these unequal conditions, with imperfect knowledge of the relations
of particular actions and feelings, it fails to apply its unchanging
affirmations of generic duty, with equal or unmistaken certainty and
exactness, to all the varied motives, feelings and deeds of men. It is
clear how differing moral judgments may occur, without any impeachment
whatever of either the ethical reality or the existence of the faculty
for its discernment.

==Infallibility Not Involved.==

Fifthly, we must add that the reality of this faculty, as an essential
endowment of the human soul, by no means involves infallibility in its
action. No one of the human faculties is, in all its range and the
application of its data, absolutely infallible, incapable of error or
of being misled. The sense-perceptions, the memory, the logical power,
the power of applying the notions of time and space, are all liable to
error. Yet these are all original, constitutional and normal faculties
of man, divinely-given guides for his self-direction and suited to the
ends for which they exist. The reality of a faculty is not disproved by
its fallibility. Finiteness, limitation and consequent incompetence to
exclude mistake or only partial discernment, are no reason for denying
the existence of any faculty within the range of its given action and
real discriminations. The very errors that appear in its action are at
once evidence of its existence and proof of limitations which harmonize
it with the aggregate human psychology. The objection against the
conscience from its fallibility, which is but another name for this
diversity in its applicatory judgments, if applied to all the psychical
faculties, would discredit the reality of the aggregate complex of the
psychical powers and overthrow the basis of all our knowledge, even of
that which is employed to effect such overthrow. No diversity occurs
in the primary judgment of distinction between moral good and evil. As
already explained, it is easy to see how differences, varied and great,
should appear in the application of the distinction to the complicated,
obscure and ever-changing aspects and relations of human conduct.


==Proofs Independent of Origin.==

=5.= These proofs of conscience as a distinct endowment of the
human mind are independent of the whole question of the mode of its
origin. For they consist of facts, as clear, peculiar, indisputable
and irreducible as are the facts that guarantee any particular
science whatever. They are capable of verification under perpetual
tests, as they have been verified in the consentient experience of
mankind in all its normally developed conditions. And the logic
of the facts is altogether irrespective of any theory of the mode
of the origin of conscience. It is needful that this point should
be clearly fixed in mind, especially in view of the wide favor at
present shown to the hypothesis of an evolutionary genesis of man.
Except in the materialistic and atheistic form of the hypothesis the
theory distinctly presents evolution not as the cause, but only as
the mode of the creation of man with all his now given endowments.
It is, of course, incumbent on the supporters of the hypothesis, in
any form whatever, in order to vindicate its scientific claims, to
show its competency to account for the existence and action of the
moral faculty with its ethical discernment and law. An hypothesis
that fails to solve any of the involved phenomena discredits itself,
not the facts. So far as the materialistic, non-teleological form of
evolutionism is concerned, which proposes matter and force as the full
cause and account of man, it is condemned by its own utter inadequacy
to explain the genesis of conscience with its moral law, as well as
of the other great psychical realities in the nature and life of
man. It is helpless before the task. Its only resource is to seek to
resolve both the ethical fact and the ethical faculty into illusion.
With respect to theistic evolutionism, which stands simply as an
hypothesis of the mode of creation by God, the existence of the moral
faculty may still be admitted, as having its all-sufficient cause in
the divine creative power as the source of all things. If, instead of
an immediate creation of man, the idea of his gradual creation from
the inferior animal orders be maintained as the actual method of the
divine work, then the law of evolution must be regarded as having been
adjusted and used for the production of man with the faculty of moral
discernment. The teleological principle, everywhere illuminating the
structure of organisms and the constitution of life, must, from the
first, have guided the development for this enthronement of right in
the human personality. Asserting its method of a progressive genesis of
conscience, this kind of evolutionism confesses its existence. Whether
or not its account is satisfactory is another question, to be decided
according to the evidence furnished. It is more than doubtful if it has
yet succeeded in making clear the possibility of its origin under the
hypothesis. Some serious difficulties have still to be overcome.[14] If
it ever does succeed it must be, not by denial of the conscience, but
by showing the evolutionary movement in some way or other competent to
its creation.

This lengthened presentation of the evidence of the existence of the
conscience as an essential endowment and part of human nature, may
seem to the reader to have been unnecessary or beyond the importance
of the question involved. But, as will appear hereafter, the firm
establishment of this point is vitally needful, in order to exclude
various forms of erroneous teaching and secure a firm and immovable
foundation for a just ethical system.




