CHAPTER VI.

MORAL AGENCY.


Our consideration of the great truth of the distinction between right
and wrong which marks human life in all ages and places, and of the
existence and nature of the moral faculty discerning and enforcing
this distinction, leads up to an inquiry into the aggregate complex of
endowments which are essential to moral agency. The great fact of moral
agency is implied and made certain in what has already been brought
into view. But the pre-supposition of such moral agency is manifestly
the moral agent, with all the requisite endowments for the sublime
reality of ethical life. What are the constituents of the moral nature,
in which man rises to the lofty grade of moral agency?

There are two special reasons for examining and fixing the truth on
this point. First, it is needful in order to complete the scientific
ethical view. Such view must be comprehensive enough to include the
sum total of the powers or faculties concerned in living the moral
life. The view remains faulty if any parts or features of the actual
constitution are omitted or their relations to each other and to the
whole are misconceived. Secondly, false and confusing representations
have often been made on this point. For instance, because all the moral
life moves so closely about the conscience there has been a tendency
to think of the conscience and the moral nature as the same. In the
eighth edition of the Encyclopædia Britannica, Dr. Alexander taught:
"The moral nature of man is summed up in the word conscience. Moral
nature and conscience are two names for the same thing. An analysis of
conscience, therefore, will unfold man's moral nature." This resolves
the whole of our moral nature into this one particular faculty. A
full and correct statement must make it embrace much more. Though the
conscience may be the culminating thing, it is by no means all that
is requisite to endow a being with the capacities necessary for moral
agency.

The truth of this is easily made clear. It is self-evident that all
the essentials for moral action must be embraced in the moral nature.
Some of these, manifestly, are not identical with the faculty of
conscience, however closely allied to it they may be. For example,
the general function of knowing is not the same as the conscience,
yet it is necessary to moral action. The faculty of choice is not
itself conscience or a part of conscience. Still moral action is
impossible without it. Some of these essential elemental functions may
in themselves possess no moral character whatever. For instance, "to
know" is not itself a moral act, yet it is necessary for moral agency.
The faculty of feeling is not _per se_ moral. The emotions arise
necessarily or at least spontaneously from acts of knowledge, and may
be neither meritorious nor blameworthy. Yet the emotional function,
through which thought passes into action and conduct, is involved in
meeting the obligations of life. Thus it becomes plainly evident that
besides the conscience by which the ethical quality and obligation
are perceived, other powers by which conduct may be conformed to
this obligation are requisite to fit beings for the responsibilities
of moral agency. In other words, our moral nature is not only the
conscience by which we approve and condemn, but also all the other
endowments by which we originate or work out what is approvable or
condemnable. Illustrations of this appear in our lives every day.
Conscience does not love, yet love of what is good is a moral act or
temper. Conscience does not care for the sick or feed the hungry, yet
such charities are acts of the moral life.

We must, therefore, mark the constituents which together form man's
moral constitution.


==Rational Intelligence.==

=1.= The first and fundamental thing, unquestionably, is his rational
intelligence. A being incapable of knowledge is incapable of the
idea or sense of duty. In a world in which creative production
should present no creature able to know or think, there could be no
moral agency whatever. Between rocks and trees and irrational living
organisms no moral relations can exist nor duties be developed.
Rational intelligence, which is the basal reality of personality, is
the first essential for moral agency. And this must be understood to
mean the whole intellectual endowment, embracing self-consciousness,
perception, memory, imagination, intuitional insight, and the varied
powers of reflection and the discursive understanding. Since, as will
hereafter appear (Chapter IX), duties are developed by the relations in
which men stand in the system of which they are made to form a part, a
knowledge of themselves and of their relations is clearly essential to
a discharge of these duties. Their very constitution carries also an
adaptation to an end which they must know, in order to meet their duty
to themselves and others.

This dependence of ethical life upon knowledge makes itself
impressively clear in the experiences and course of common life and
the lessons of history. While the absence of rational intelligence,
as in the case of idiocy, annuls all possibility of character and
responsibility, the lower the grade of men and races in mental
development, the poorer is their equipment for the demands of the full
ethical standard of conduct. It is almost axiomatic that we should not
look for as high grade of moral ideals and rules among ignorant people
and savage tribes as in the life of intelligent civilizations. Though
the principle of duty is not always turned into character in proportion
to the measure of mental development and secular culture, yet
experience and history affirm a clear tendency in increased knowledge
to bring better sense of obligation and more prevalent rectitude of
life. So well established is the recognition of this relation between
intelligence and conduct, that the advocates of the evolutionist origin
of man with one consent represent the emergence of intelligence as
conditional for the appearance of moral agency. A knowledge of one's
self and of his relations to the world around him and God above him,
and the destiny to which his powers appoint him, is thus fundamental in
the constitution of a nature for the sphere and reality of moral life.


==The Conscience.==

=2.= The conscience--resting in the general rational intelligence and
rising into the peculiar discernments and judgments which mark it--is
another constituent. This is universally conceded by moral philosophy.
There is, therefore, need here only to recall the place and relations
of this special power in the total organism of psychical powers. The
conscience, in its essential perceptions and judgments, as appears from
the analysis already given, is part of the rational intelligence. It
designates the power and function of the intelligent _ego_, or personal
self, for discernment in the sphere of right and duty--for insight
into the reality of ethical law and obligation which belong to good
conduct among rational, self-directing beings. It expresses, therefore,
the highest ascent of the rational intelligence, where, overlooking
the whole realm of existence and relations known in other forms of
knowledge, it sees, and through the emotional nature, feels, how to
live as life ought to be lived.

Further, while thus the summit point in the rational intelligence,
the conscience employs for its perceptions and judgments the data of
all the other functions of the mind. Its discernments are made in the
light of all the truth which in any way illuminates the understanding.
This explains why and how the conscience is educable. It is dependent
on all the other intellectual powers for a knowledge of the relations
of life which develop duties and in view of which every duty is to
be determined and judged. The very position of the conscience, as
highest of all the powers of the intelligence, makes it, not the most
independent, but the most dependent of all. All knowledge should
supply light for the right conduct of life. The clearer the light,
other things being equal, the clearer and more correct will be the
ethical judgments. Ignorance is a darkened atmosphere to see duty in.
The advance of general civilization, the progress of knowledge, the
widening of the realm of science, the supernatural information given by
special divine revelation, are all, therefore, if used as they should
be, factors in developing the faculty of conscience into its best
ability for insight into duty and for practical morality.


==Free Will.==

=3.= Free-will. The only truly satisfactory psychological account of
the will is that which presents it as the soul's power of causation
for choices. It is the capacity of the personal _ego_ or self for
real choosing or free election. As in intellectual action the soul
is causal for knowing or thinking, and in the sensibility it is
causal for feeling or really feels, so in will the _ego_ or rational
self is acting as the cause of the choices which it makes. Using the
term for this capacity of the personal self to choose, the will is
self-determining. It originates movement. It is creative of its own
acts. It is causal of its volutions. Morality consists in deliberate
self-submission to the law of rectitude. Duty must be freely chosen;
and the autonomy of the will, _i. e._ of the personal self, is
involved in the very conception of virtue. Freedom must, therefore,
be a prime characteristic of a moral nature. The whole fabric of
obligation and responsibility is built upon it. It is this, as well
as rational intelligence, that lifts man above the order and ongoing
of material nature and makes him amenable to the claims of right and
duty. It is essential to personality and its presence or absence
makes and marks the deepest difference between persons and "things."
We can imagine intellectual automatism; but the most brilliant
intellectuality, a corruscation of mental mechanism, without reaching
up into a capacity for free choice and voluntary action, would,
manifestly, not make a free agent or exalt into the high realm of
ethical life. The idea of duty is inapplicable except in the sphere of
freedom. Moral responsibility is inconceivable without it.

In this, more than in anything else, the whole aggregation of
human endowments comes to its crown. In it man becomes, in a real
sense, a supra-natural being, endowed with the lofty distinction of
self-direction, self-dominion and self-rulership in the presence of
the great realities of right and obligation. He becomes capable of
character and answerable for his conduct, as he shapes that character
and determines that conduct.

And this freedom cannot be merely the freedom of simple spontaneity or
voluntariness. It must be the capacity of alternative choice.[27] There
could not be real choice without capacity and room to elect between
different possibilities. It is a well known definition: "Free will is
possessed when, the conditions of doing something being given, one can
either do or not do it."[28] A capacity simply to act, even though it
should be through intelligence and consciousness, in a way that can
have no alternative and allows no choice or option, could not open a
field of personal virtue or responsibility. Where only one thing is
really made possible in action, and that one possible thing is already
somehow necessitated, there can be no place for choice. It presents
no sphere for the exercise of election--even though the faculty of
election should exist. A field of choice and the faculty of choice
imply and call for each other. Both are necessary for the freedom
implied in responsibility. Human responsibility rests on the possession
of a real capacity to make decision between real alternatives. Without
these there could be no more place for morality among men than there is
among the atoms or molecules of the chemical elements in their behavior
in the laboratory.

The proof of free-will, in this sense, might be left to rest upon the
fact that it is a necessary pre-supposition to the very conception of
morality and of actual accountability. This accountability, recognized
in conscience and exacted by the constitution of the world, is an
omnipresent and inerasable reality. So must free-will also be. Freedom
is part of the moral idea, and the idea falls apart and lapses into
contradiction and confusion without it. The same necessity that obliges
us to accept the truth of morality itself, obliges us to assert
free-will as an attribute of a moral nature and a condition of moral
agency.

But the truth of freedom is sustained by other proofs. It is proper to
recall and fix clearly in mind several of these.

(1) The testimony of consciousness. This is clear and explicit. We
are directly conscious of free choice. And there can be no evidence
more immediate and authoritative than that of consciousness. It is the
form of evidence in which all psychical facts, activities, powers, and
laws, are made known and stand certified in our knowledge. It is the
certifying element for both the form and reality of all our knowing. It
is that in which we "know that we know," and without which there can be
no knowledge. It is, therefore, the foundation certitude. Our systems
of science, our conclusions in philosophy, our intuitions into first
truths and laws, and all the confidence with which we accept truth in
all these great realms of mental life, rest back on the observations,
reasonings and conclusions for whose reality and order consciousness
is our most fundamental voucher. To its tests and verifications all
the processes of knowing must submit. No truth is even visible except
in the light in which consciousness holds all our acts and forms
of intelligence. No form of our knowing can be surer than this.
To discredit it is to discredit that without whose help not a step
in knowledge can be taken. Upon this fundamental and unsurpassable
evidence rests the great fact of free-will. No person, in the simple
light of his unperverted and unperplexed consciousness, doubts his
free-will. He finds himself in exercise and use of it every day and
every hour. He knows himself to be perpetually making decisions within
his own liberty, if he knows anything. The witness to it is direct, and
he holds himself, and others hold him, responsible for his choices and
the deeds he does in carrying them out. He deliberately and consciously
elects his way through clearly seen open alternative possibilities. If
he is to believe that in reality he does not do so, he must believe
that his consciousness is a perpetual fraud upon him. But thus the
authority for the reality of all his psychical capacities and acts is
overthrown, and he does not "know that he knows" in any of his knowing.

It is not a sufficient answer to all this, when it is said that in
this way of proof we are making the testimony of consciousness reach
further than it actually does. Some psychologies undertake to limit
consciousness to a disclosure of simply the actual volition, or other
psychical acts, and not of acts or volitions which we imagine might
have been but were not. Thus, it is said, the proof of another possible
choice, as an alternative to that of the actual volition, fails to be
covered by the consciousness. The supposed act is outside of its reach
of purview and testimony. But such a psychology is untrue to the full
deliverance of the consciousness. A just and full account of it, as
is clearly seen in our experience, must hold it as covering not only
the act of choice, but the _power to choose_. The human consciousness
is a self-consciousness, and in it we truly know the personal self
as the power for the various forms of activity which it reveals. Not
more truly are we conscious of the power really to think or feel than
really to choose, among diverse possibilities. We have direct knowledge
of the power of electing in the very act of election. And thus, not
only the untutored consciousness, but one trained to the sharpest and
deepest self-inspection, will be found a full witness to free-will as a
capacity of alternative choice.

(2) The implications of the natural constitution of the world. Mankind
are in fact framed into and held under the principle of freedom. The
whole system of which man forms a part answers to the testimony of
consciousness. Bishop Butler, in his immortal Analogy, has shown with
resistless clearness and force that in the constitutional organism
of society and the experiences of actual life free-will is assumed
for human nature.[29] Both by natural and moral law men are governed
as free agents. The physical order of the earth, as a place where
bodily and moral welfare are conditioned on obedience to discoverable
relations and principles, pre-supposes human intelligence and
liberty. Nature in her ongoings requires every individual to adjust
himself carefully to its laws of health, safety and happiness. There
is an incessant appeal to him to use his intelligence and liberty
in accordance with the demands of his ever-changing conditions and
relations in life. The idea that everything takes place by necessity is
not only at variance with his sense of freedom, but is found utterly
inapplicable in practical living. A youth, if such a case be supposed,
trained under the notion that he must not be held responsible for
his acts, since they take place by necessity, would soon find his
dream of irresponsibility disturbed and disallowed. At every turn he
would find the inexorable forces of nature and society refusing to
recognize his claim. Government, law, administration, all the various
functions through which human affairs are held together in orderly
movement, assume the individual's power and obligation to determine
his conduct and hold him chargeable with consequences. Though supposed
speculatively true, the doctrine proves false in practice. It is in
fact untrue to the constitution of human life. "The thing here insisted
on," says Butler, "is that under the present natural government of the
world we find ourselves treated and dealt with as if we were free,
prior to all consideration whether we are or not. Were this opinion,
therefore, of necessity admitted to be ever so true, yet such is in
fact our condition and the natural course of things, that whenever we
apply it to life and practice, this application of it always misleads
us, and cannot but mislead us, in a most dreadful manner, with
regard to our present interests." Beyond all question, as is evident
to every thoughtful person, mankind deal one with another on the
pre-supposition and principle of freedom, and of the responsibility
which is ethically unthinkable except on that freedom. Personal,
social, and governmental relations are framed upon this principle,
and are a perpetual expression of it. Men universally treat each
other--and under the actual inter-relations of life cannot but treat
each other--as free beings. The inference is direct and necessary that
they are such, unless we concede that human life is organized into a
necessary order of living that is false to their real nature and unjust
in its penalties.

(3) It is to be further noted that while freedom rests thus on the
direct and positive evidence of consciousness and the actual order of
life, the contrary doctrine of necessity or determinism arises only
from assumptions or implications of speculative thought. This is a fact
that needs to be clearly and fully fixed in mind. Necessitarianism
is without any direct witness of consciousness, and is not forced or
even suggested by the natural sense of mankind. It is not required as
a working theory for the business or natural conduct of life. It is
only a product of speculation or ideal theorizing. It is constructed
from different standpoints of thought. In some speculation it rests
simply on certain ontological assumptions, sometimes pantheistic as in
Spinozism, sometimes materialistic as in non-theistic evolutionism.
In both these cases freedom disappears in the absoluteness with
which the substance of the universe unfolds into all its products
and manifestations.[30] In some other speculations it appears as a
conclusion from certain metaphysical views of the law of causation and
its supposed application in the realm of psychical activity. In this
form of theory every volition is viewed as standing in the relation
of a mere effect to a cause which determines the will to it, in fixed
connection and force of antecedence and consequence. The volition
comes, it is represented, as the necessary result--not as a real choice
by self-determining personality, but produced by environment, mental
structure, and disposition. Not the _ego_ or personal self, as free
spirit endowed with capacity for real election, but the environment,
motives, and disposition decide and fix the volition for the person,
which by an illusion of consciousness appears as done by himself. In
still other speculation necessitarianism comes as an inference from
conceptions formed as to the divine sovereignty and the absoluteness
with which it must direct creature movement. The doctrine thus has its
plausibility, not from the conscious working of the human mind or the
natural order of conduct and welfare, but as theoretical conclusions
from certain forms of speculative thinking. It is therefore the product
of metaphysical theorizing. It is not a datum of pure psychology. It
is not taught by life. It is not known as a fact. It is not called
for by the practical needs of daily self-direction. It has only
secondary forms of suggestion and support--the precarious evidence
from special theorizing in ontology and metaphysics. And it introduces
more difficulties than it shuts off, while it collides with the moral
consciousness of mankind and its sense of responsibility for conduct
and the formation of character. In the light of these truths it ought
not to be regarded as having any validity. It is surely incredible that
the doctrine of necessity should be true when the actual constitution
of human life, in all its personal, social, and governmental relations,
requires us to treat it as false, being practically inapplicable.
Utterly beyond belief is it that while the inexorable necessities of
daily behavior bind us to the principle of freedom and responsibility,
there should be in the real constitution of the world no actual freedom
in deciding on choices or determining our conduct.[31] Moral agency
must be free agency, in open alternatives of choice. It involves both
the subjective capacity to choose and a realm for its exercise in
diverse possibilities.


==Sensibility and Actions.==

=4.= Powers of sensibility and action, by which the dictates of
conscience may be turned into actual conduct and character, complete
the moral constitution.

(1) It has already been seen (pages 44-47) that in the complex action
of the conscience itself the sensibility awakened in the form of
emotion, as a feeling of obligation arising from a perception of
obligation. This has already shown the sensibility to be a part of the
moral organization. Conscience itself includes emotion. Duty perceived
becomes duty felt, if the moral life is normal; and the feeling is
motive-force for the choice and the fulfillment of duty. Emotional
powers are thus constituent in the structure of man's moral nature. The
moral emotions are occasions for ethical choices and deeds.

(2) But, further, the movements of the sensibilities are themselves
either morally good or evil, and form a sphere of personal life
to which moral quality belongs. Man's affections and desires, his
loves and hatreds, his enjoyments and aversions, constitute a domain
where the ethical distinctions are to be applied. They hold and
exhibit elements of character. We may not, indeed, say that a being
of pure intellect, void of all emotion, would be utterly incapable
of character and irresponsible, but we are compelled to think that
the moral life in such case would be without what forms the highest
ethical excellence and glory of character, viz.: love, benevolence,
delight in righteousness and joy in pure affection. The regulation of
the affections and passions, the purification of the inmost "thoughts"
of what the sacred scriptures call "the heart" is vital to right
character. The capacity to love is an equipment for the moral life. It
is virtuous to love what ought to be loved. The capacity to hate is
also such an equipment--the obligation being to hate what ought to be
hated as morally wrong. Benevolence may not be, as some have contended
it is, the essence or ground of all virtue, but, unquestionably, it
is a virtue of highest rank, and the capacity for it is a prominent
element in man's moral organization. The same is true of the whole
emotional and affectional capacity in the human soul. It is part of the
constitution for true character and life.

(3) Still further, man's powers of action, in which the ethical
distinctions and choices are wrought out into their proper deeds, are
part of his organization for the true moralities of life. However
deeply the foundations of ethics may be laid in personal individuality,
the ethical life concerns more than self, and finds its largest
field in inter-human relations. Human solidarity is as real as human
individuality. Humanity is an organism, in which each person has his
place and mission. The individual's sphere of duty is not simply his
own soul, but the broad reach of all his relations to the world about
him, in which duties are developed and right conduct is required. In
all this wide sphere obligation can be met only through his endowment
with power to carry into effect, in action, his moral judgments and
convictions of right. Moral science must consider man not merely as a
knower and contemplator or lover of the right, but also as a doer of it
in righteous deeds. Hence man's moral nature, as his endowment for the
moral life, is not all brought under review until it is seen to include
the realm of his feelings and those executive powers which turn the
ethical discriminations and choices into righteous conduct.

We thus sum up the constituents of man's moral nature: intelligence,
the conscience, free-will, and capacities for affection and doing.
Where these are united the subject is organized for knowing duty
and fulfilling it. But a final fact, of profound import, needs yet
to be added, not as a further faculty, but rather as a consequence
resultant from the union and co-action of these endowments, viz.:
that this organism of faculties presents not simply a capacity as a
possibility of the moral life, but a positive, vital motive adjustment
and organic pre-disposition toward it. It is not simply framed to it
as an articulation of dead timber, but is adapted to it as a complex
of living forces for normal movement. The moral constitution, if not
disordered or wrecked, carries thus a living trend or impulse toward
knowing duty and doing it. This impulse, seemingly pervading, if
not standing behind, the whole mental activity, as a sub-conscious
pre-disposition, appears as an original aptitude or incorporated
purpose in the total human psychical organization. Hence human nature,
if normal, is not indifferent to right and wrong. Its true life is
one of positive affinity for the good. If, under internal disorder
or particular circumstances, counter-tendencies appear and prevail,
this does not disprove the fundamental and normal set of humanity for
the moral life. Man is made for the right as he is made for God. This
conception of the positiveness of his total moral organization is
necessary to complete the view of man as a moral agent.[32]




