CHAPTER II.

THE FACT OF MORAL DISTINCTIONS.


==Moral Distinctions.==

The primary fact underlying the science of ethics is the great
phenomenon of moral distinctions in the world. Scarcely anything
in human life has been more conspicuous and indubitable than the
existence of ideas of right and wrong and their application to human
conduct. This has characterized mankind everywhere and in all ages.
Its prevalence is as broad as humanity. A phenomenon so universal and
permanent must necessarily be regarded as in some way organic in the
human constitution. It calls for examination and justifies scientific
inquiry into its cause and implications.

The certainty and largeness of the phenomenon become deeply impressive
when it is traced out and fairly considered.


==Revealed in Personal Consciousness.==

=1.= The distinction between right and wrong appears in every man's
personal consciousness. Each one is directly and fully aware of it in
his own case. He approves and condemns on this basis, and in doing so
finds himself in harmony with a principle marking the sentiments of
others around him. He passes quick, spontaneous judgments on his own
conduct and on that of his fellow-men. The distinction, to greater
or less degree, shapes itself into a sense of obligation and a law of
duty. Nothing can wipe it out from his knowledge and feelings.


==Incorporated in Social Organism.==

=2.= It is found incorporated into the social organism. What each man
is conscious of doing in his own inner life, society, in its solidarity
or constitutional unity, is found doing and enforcing. Organic humanity
reveals the presence of the ethical conception and sure lines of its
action everywhere. However diverse may be its judgments, there is
such a thing as a public conscience that holds up conduct to favor
or reprobation, not simply as beneficial or injurious but as being
intrinsically right or wrong.

The social constitution is in fact framed together under the human
capacity and necessity of perceiving and fulfilling the duties that
arise in the inter-relations of associated life. For, the very laws and
administrations on which the social order and welfare are dependent,
and through which they are in a measure secured, are the embodiment
of the ethical ideas and judgments of the people. No adjustment of
relations is possible except upon this foundation. The obliteration of
these ideas would mean social anarchy. "Society," says Prof. Borden P.
Bowne, "in its organized form, is a moral institution with moral ends.
However selfish individuals may be, they cannot live together without a
social order which rests on moral ideas."[7]


==Witnessed in History.==

=3.= The great volume of history is witness to the universal
phenomenon. Its records testify to the presence and action of the
moral distinctions everywhere and in all the ages of the world. Whether
these records present the customs and habits of early tribes, the rise
and fall of nations, the reigns of princes and emperors, the exploits
of generals and conquerors, the march and overthrow of armies, the
relentless cruelty of tyrants or the noble service of patriots and
benefactors, the establishment of just institutions or the miseries of
the people where the oppressor's millstones grind on, all the pages
are replete with evidence that men, around all the globe and through
all the centuries, have been wont either to accuse or excuse the
conduct and motives of one another according to some standard of moral
judgment or sentiments of right and wrong. It is true that from some
pages of history the moral sense seems darkened out of sight. They
bring before us thousands of men, often the most conspicuous in the
ever-changing drama of public life, from whose thinking the notions
of right and wrong seem to have been wanting or obliterated, acting
only from selfishness, avarice, or ambition, monsters of injustice,
heartlessness, cruelty and blood. Many of its chapters are but the
sickening stories of tribal and national feuds and wars, of crime,
plunder and devastation, of hate, scheming and treachery, of thirst
for power, fame and treasure, of moving armies and fields of carnage
and fire-swept lands, seeming to report that the moral sense had
no place or force whatever in the men who were the actors in those
scenes. But these chapters of lurid crime and wrong, like the records
of crime to-day, do not represent all the thought of the humanity
of such times. They tell of the men and deeds that most completely
defied the moral ideas that belonged to their own nature, and whose
remorseless wrong-doing evoked the deep, indignant reprobation of the
thousands and millions of innocent and injured sufferers. And when
the pen of history, with eye on the relations of cause and effect
and the unfolding issues of such flagrant violation of right and
justice, has traced the steps of a divine Nemesis, a stern Avenger,
following the guilty, age after age, the record proves to be, all the
more emphatically, a ceaseless testimony to the great fact of moral
distinctions as a world-wide and ceaseless phenomenon of human life.


==Shown in All Religions.==

=4.= The religions of the world all show the same fact. While these
present a Godward side and express the perpetual human need of union
and fellowship with the infinite divine Source of all Good, they at
the same time testify to a distinctively moral constitution and action
of human life. The sense of obligation, duty and guilt appears in the
warp and woof of religion everywhere. While with a singular breach
with reason religious rites and practices here and there have shown
a wide departure from correct moral principles, yet the religious
consciousness of the race has been almost a synonym for the action
of the moral sense. In all lands and all ages this consciousness has
carried with it, in greater or less clearness and force, a conviction
that the Power above men not themselves is a Power that makes for
righteousness, establishing and enforcing principles of duty among
men. And the various religions of mankind, especially those of
monotheistic teaching and more distinct development, present clear and
emphatic codes of moral principles and requirement. Some of them are
resolvable largely into philosophies of life, with ethical directions
for the regulation of conduct. In the Egyptian Book of the Dead, which
belongs to the age of the pyramid builders, from 2000 to 3000 B. C., we
find set forth a morality marked by surprising breadth and purity.[8]
In all the wide-spread religions of Asia, some of them emerging out
of the darkness of prehistoric times, the Akkadian and Babylonian,
Zoroastrianism, Brahmanism, Confucianism, Buddhism, Tâoism, Shintoism,
and Mohammedanism, with their countless millions of followers,
everywhere the constitution of man and social life is recognized as
laid in laws of moral obligation and order, and religious life, in
greater or less degree, is called to aspire to that which is judged to
be right and good. Ancient Druidism was strongly marked by its emphatic
moral tone. No Christian needs to be reminded with what sublime
distinctness Christianity, with its redemption economy, declares the
eternal distinction between moral good and evil, and calls men to peace
and blessedness through faith and righteousness.

Religion, it is to be remembered, is in the broadest sense a fact of
humanity. The distinguished anthropologist Quatrefages is sustained
by the fullest evidence when he asserts that man is essentially a
religious being. It appears in every tribe on earth. Moral conceptions
and sentiments, however faint and faultily applied, are a part of this
omnipresent religious mind of the race.


==Pervades Literature.==

=5.= Such moral conceptions pervade the general literature of the
world. Wherever a people has progressed in culture sufficiently to
create and preserve a literature, it is found to be many-tongued
witness to a recognized difference between right and wrong. In its
pages these discriminations appear as a never-ceasing characteristic
of human thought. They come to us out of the remotest past and from
regions untaught by the decalogue of Sinai. They illuminate, as
already implied, the sacred books of India, China, Egypt, Persia and
Babylonia, as well as the classic writings of ancient Greece and
Rome and the Saga writing of Northern Europe. They not only form the
body of the moral disquisitions of Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Cato,
Cicero, Seneca, Marcus Aurelius and many others, but color and shape
the drama and lyric poetry in which the thought and sentiment of the
race have been embalmed. To see illustrations of this we need only
read the tragedies of Sophocles, for instance Œdipus Tyrannus, lines
863-871, or Antigone, lines 449-460, or listen to the verse of Horace,
Book III, Ode 3, tracing the supremacy and triumph of a consciousness
of right over all other authority and power. With the advance of
humanity as the centuries have passed away literature is more and
more the representation of human sentiment and life under the action
and reaction of these ethical discriminations in the ever-changing
conditions of the world. Philosophy and science and fiction and
poetry and politics and jurisprudence are occupied in dealing with
the principles and questions thus raised, and our modern libraries
are largely the accumulated treasures of the thinking world on the
significance and application of these principles.


==Anthropological Confirmation.==

=6.= The ethnic and anthropological information of the present day
reports no people or tribe, even the rudest, altogether without moral
ideas and some measure of application of them to conduct. Enthusiastic
scientists, travelers and missionaries, traversing the earth, have
thoroughly established this point. Often, indeed, has the universality
here asserted been disputed. Reports were brought of tribes discovered
altogether destitute of the ethical sense. But closer inspection of
the tribal and personal life has corrected the first impression,
and evidences of the disputed fact have become indubitable. A low
and confused manifestation had been mistaken as none whatever. In
degraded and besotted conditions of human life, it is altogether
reasonable to believe that the particular discrimination in question
would appear only in the crude and uncertain forms in keeping with
the undeveloped grade of all the functions of thought and sentiment.
The sunken humanity has carried down and buried its proper and normal
manifestations almost out of sight. As soon as uplift comes to a
tribe, the powers of moral discernment and knowledge, whose action
was scarcely discoverable before, emerge in unmistakable certainty and
force. And no phenomenon that science is seeking to investigate to-day
can be more justly regarded as universally human than the fact under
consideration.


==Not Affected by Explanations.==

=7.= It needs to be distinctly fixed in mind that this great fact
is not at all affected by any offered theory of its cause and
significance. It stands independent of any particular explanation
of it, and indeed of all solutions. If, for instance, the origin of
these moral judgments should be traced back and accounted for, as is
done by Herbert Spencer, as the result of accumulated experiences of
utility, gradually organized and inherited as spontaneous approval
and disapproval, the theory still recognizes the fact of ethical
judgments while endeavoring to account for them. Or, when the older
utilitarianism seeks to explain them as resolvable into the pleasure
or satisfaction men feel toward certain forms of conduct or principles
of behavior that are found to be useful and promotive of happiness,
the fact still remains that judgments of right and wrong are actually
established and dominate the thought and life of men. The very attempt
to identify the virtues of life with its utilities, while making the
virtues only its utilities, concedes that the obligation to them is
part of the recognized reality of human life. Or, further, should a
bolder and more radical view allege that these notions of right and
wrong are mere matters of taste and prejudice, a fictitious product of
adventitious circumstances and education, without verity or validity
at bottom, the offered explanation would be simply a denial, but no
disproof of the fact concerned. For it would amount to a claim that
in the absolute sense one thing is essentially as good as another,
and would thus disregard the real affirmation as it stands in the
moral judgment of mankind. Such a claim, it has been well said, no
theorist of the present day would pretend to maintain outside of his
closet.[9] Not in any race or people has the ethical sense allowed that
essentially and at bottom all acts are equally right. This is the very
point of the great phenomenon presented. Whatever may be the final
explanation of it, somehow or other the reason, sentiment and practical
sense of mankind insist on a real difference, and look upon all denial
of the distinction as a manifest and intolerable absurdity.

The universal recognition of this distinction, revealed in every
man's consciousness, involved in the organic relations of society,
testified to everywhere in the pages of history, embodied essentially
in the religious nature and sentiments of mankind, woven into general
literature, found to-day unmistakably in the thinking, laws and customs
of all races and tribes, and acknowledged in the philosophical view
of humanity wherever man is studied, irreducible as a fact by any
account of its genesis or explanation of its significance, presents the
occasion and primary materials of ethical science. The great phenomenon
calls for investigation. We want to know the reasons for it and the
import of it.




