CHAPTER XI.

THE ETHICAL VIEW UNDER CHRISTIAN TEACHING.


These conclusions with respect to the nature and office of conscience,
the ethical distinction, its theistic implications, its transcendental
character and objective validity, its relation to personality and
freedom, the proximate and ultimate ground of right, and the different
parts of human activity to which moral quality belongs, are conclusions
reached by the scientific method and stand on the warrant of reason.
They arise from phenomena of history and life, and form, in their
essential statements, a body of scientific and philosophical knowledge
of equal certainty and authority with the most assured results of
other branches of rational investigation. Ethics, therefore, finds its
fundamental truths in the natural constitution of the world, and is
able to build these truths into a science possessed of all the rights
and force of systematized and established knowledge.


==Christianity Recognizes Ethics.==

=1.= Christianity fully recognizes these truths and all the essential
principles which ethical science formulates and certifies. It does
more. It magnifies their importance by building upon them its own
divine view of moral requirement and the way of its realization. All
that ethical science shows to be true in the moral constitution of man,
in the reality of moral law for the free regulation of his conduct,
and in respect to the source and immutable authority of that law,
abides as fundamental presuppositions in the divine superstructure
of religion and duty presented by Christianity. Redemption starts
and works upon the basal facts of human nature and man's condition,
relations, duties, responsibilities and needs. If Christianity assumes
the existence and rulership of God, a moral constitution of human life,
and the existence of conscience with its perceptions of duty and sense
of obligation; if it assumes man to be a free agent and yet bound in
the exercise of his autonomy by laws of obligation and responsibility;
if it assumes the law of right to be essentially unalterable and
irrepealable, a reality to which God himself conforms, all these are
great truths fully certified in the rational conclusions of ethical
science.


==Contributions to Ethical View.==

=2.= But Christianity contributes immensely to the ethical view. It is,
indeed, a great misconception to think that supernatural revelation
has been given simply to teach morality, or to look on Christianity
as merely a code of ethics. But though its first great object is
redemption, presenting God to our view in redeeming love and activity,
and offering deliverance from the guilt and life of sin, it necessarily
also aims to recover men to personal righteousness. Indeed, both
forgiveness and renewal look to this as the goal to which redemption is
to bring its subjects. While primarily Christianity is a religion and
redemptory, its ultimate aim is the establishment of men in obedience
to God, righteousness, and excellence. The very summit of its purpose,
the Alp that rises above every other Alp, is character and right life.
So the very law of its movement is supremely ethical. Forgiveness of
sin, justification by faith, stands as only the first step in the
application of redemption, and beyond this Christianity pre-eminently
means a life, the increasing recovery and perfection of human nature in
its ethical character and action, enthroning the principles of duty,
love, and righteousness in the conscience and the heart, and bringing
personal conduct into rhythmic harmony with eternal righteousness and
goodness.

And the science of ethics has not properly completed its view until
it has fully included the distinctive teaching of Christianity. For
beyond all question the data of this teaching have produced the purest
and loftiest moral life that the world has seen, the best product of
the moral history of mankind. Its ideal is confessedly the highest and
the best sustained. Even apart from the question of the well-proved
supernatural claims of Christianity, its ethical work lifts its moral
teachings to the most authoritative place, the supreme court, for the
decisions and formulations of the complete scientific view.

The total contribution of Christianity to morality comes along two
lines of help: 1. In the way of fuller disclosure of moral principles
and of essential duties; and 2. In the way of furnishing an efficient
dynamic for their fulfilment. The first of these two topics claims
attention in this chapter; the second must be left for the next.

The need of larger knowledge, than that furnished by simply
naturalistic ethics, for the perfection of moral life, has everywhere
been evident. The debasement of moral thought and the worse debasement
of moral life frequently found among peoples outside of the atmosphere
illuminated by Christian truth, is sad proof how crying this need
of right knowledge may become. The strife of conflicting opinions
as to the root and validity of moral principles, even among many
in Christendom who look at the subject with faces averted from
Christianity, is perpetual remembrancer of the room for more and better
information. And the perplexing phenomenon of wide diversity of moral
judgments in daily life, to which we have had occasion several times
already to refer, resulting from the different degrees of correctness
with which the relations of life are understood and interpreted,
enforces the same truth. The moral power is educable. It sees its
objects in the light, not in darkness, nor fully in dawn. It acts
best when flooded with the fullest knowledge. Men can discern duty
accurately and fully only when they comprehend all their relations to
God above them, their fellow-men around them, their destiny before
them, and the significance and moral demand of these relations. From
the high origin of their nature, "in the image of God," they may
carry some impress of the moral law from God in their hearts, in the
inner order of insight and spiritual vision, and in measure "read
God's thoughts after Him" about love and justice and truth and other
essential virtues. But this rational reading of duty from the law
of right within them and from the moral constitution about them,
is grandly helped when revelation throws its illumination on the
nature and relations of men, the meaning of life and the reach of its
responsibilities. Whatever has been the short-coming of Christianity's
professors in exemplifying its moral teaching, the history of its
work is full proof of its containing the best ethical direction and
power the earth has yet seen. In individuals and communities in which
its teachings have been worthily turned into character and life, it
presents an inspiring suggestion of what it is capable of doing for
human exaltation when its instruction is truly followed. It is the
completing factor for moral guidance, and the scientific view is false
to itself when it fails to include the teachings and the phenomena
of the Christian consciousness and life. Since Christianity has come
and given the world its highest civilizations and elevations, its
grandest progress in philosophy, science, art, literature, invention,
enterprise and prosperity, all the purest and most beautiful amenities
of life, and is still leading the best nations onward and upward, it
is surely worse than idle to think of forcing ethical science back
to a pagan or merely naturalistic standpoint. This would ignore the
greatest moral phenomenon of history and the most impressive facts in
the present condition of the world. "Christian ethics is ethics in the
highest--ethics raised to the highest power--the last and fullest moral
interpretation of the world and its history."[64]

=3.= The Christian ethical view has its special moral conceptions from
two sources. The one is primary and principal; the other secondary and
auxiliary.

==Sources of Christian View.==

(1) The principal source is the Sacred Scriptures of the Old and New
Testaments. Along with their distinctively religious purpose and
teaching, these pages of God's supernatural revelation, from first
to last, look to ethical ends, and are replete with principles,
laws, and precepts for duty and righteousness. As for a knowledge of
Christianity as a religion we must come to these writings as its own
accredited records, presenting its truths and requirements, so also for
a knowledge of its moral teachings. Whatever help may be obtainable
from other sources, say from study of the Christian consciousness or of
the effects of Christianity on personal and social life, the chief and
highest source is these Sacred Scriptures. For the best Christian life
falls short of the ideal standard of conduct there presented. It would
be unfair to study it or judge it only in the partial, fragmentary,
one-sided, imperfect illustrations of it. Every ideal thus gained must
be corrected and greatly up-raised before it can stand for the complete
divine ideal that shines out from the teachings of the Scriptures and
the life of the Christ therein revealed. The perfect image of Christian
ethics has never been fully reflected by either the inward or outward
life of the believer. The Sacred Scriptures, therefore, are the only
infallible normative authority for Christian ethics, as they are for
Christian theology.

This use of the Scriptures as the determinative authority, however,
must take account of the fact that they present an historical
and progressive revelation. As God's redemptive action advanced
historically, unfolding religious truth and grace gradually and
educationally, so the moral ideal, which Christianity in its fulness
of provision and power should exhibit, is found more and more clearly
revealed till the view is completed. This accounts for the higher
ethical view reached in the New Testament.

The Old Testament, which is the record of the earlier stages of the
Christian revelation, distinctly preparatory and prophetic, forms a
continual instruction in duty and righteousness. It grounds the moral
life essentially in the religious, but religion must walk in holiness.
Fundamental in it stands the decalogue, a summary of moral law, of
most profound and comprehensive sweep, which is still the great code
of duty for the guidance of human conduct, and so clearly beyond the
mere thinking of Moses or the people he led, as to prove its divine
origin. All the types and symbols of the Old Testament, its sacrifices
of cleansing and expiation, are impressive condemnations of sin and
calls to repentance. The ever-ringing voices of prophecy are thrilling
rebukes to wrong-doing and clarion appeals for righteousness. Its
psalms and music are but echoing praise for the divine grace that
renews the heart and restores the life to the blessedness of obedience
to the moral laws of God. The lofty ethical demands of the Hebrew
Scriptures, along with their revelation of grace, form a unique and
distinguishing feature among ancient literatures. Their ceaseless
voice is: "Keep judgment and do righteousness"; "Cease to do evil and
learn to do well"; "Offer to God the sacrifices of righteousness."
Nowhere else at that day was the moral ideal lifted so high, or with
such imperative authority. The Old Testament ethics was a fit prophecy
and preparation for the full Christian teaching. "If the ethics of the
old dispensation had not passed into the fulfilment of the new, the
Hebrew prophets and poets would still be the world's most inspiring
teachers of high ethical hopes and ideals, and the moral code of Israel
would be the school of righteousness, reverence, and law, to which the
generations should go for the loftiest instruction."[65]

The New Testament, which completes the authoritative records of
Christianity, completes also Christianity's normative statement of the
truths and principles of duty. These appear in the threefold form of
(1) Christ's recorded teaching, (2) His personal example, and (3) the
inspired interpretations of Christian duty in the apostolic writings.
The teaching of Jesus, all through the gospels, while primarily
religious and religiously spiritual, deals with the great realities of
character and conduct, and, particularly in the Sermon on the Mount,
ascends to the very heights and penetrates to the very depths of the
laws of duty. It carries those laws into a spirituality, solemnity, and
glory before unknown, and forms a representation which stands before
the moral sense of the race as the unsurpassed and the unequalled
ethical ideal. The view is carried up to the goal: "Be ye perfect, even
as your Father in heaven is perfect." This divine teaching is at the
same time reflected from the personal life of Christ. It is presented
in living form. The example is part of the teaching--an example which
is never lowered below the exalted range of the given precepts, and
which has been instructing and inspiring all the centuries since.
In the apostolic writings, under the guiding Spirit of truth, the
teaching and pattern of Christ, together with his redemptive gospel,
are applied to wide and varied ranges of practical life, the apostles
themselves being filled with an ever-increasing appreciation of their
divine import and transcendence. These inspired Scriptures, because of
their unique and supreme authority for Christianity itself, are the
fundamental and decisive standard of Christian ethics.

(2) But there is a secondary and auxiliary source for formulation
of Christian ethics--in the Christian moral consciousness. In this,
Christianity exhibits its moral principles and meaning as they enter
into the inner experience of men, where they may be studied and
estimated. Christianity is a "life," a "new life," in whose moral
consciousness its principles and forces are acting formatively for
character. Not only of "the life" that in Christ was "the light of
men,"[66] but of all the pure life that is from him, is it true: "the
life is the light of men." The ethicised Christian consciousness
reveals the principles and laws that have come into it. It is a maxim
in theology that only the regenerated and sanctified mind has a clear
interpretative insight into spiritual truth, and can form the true
theologian. The maxim holds, just as truly, with respect to moral
truth. The spiritual and moral are inseparably united, and no man
can judge with unhindered and reliable discrimination in matters
of Christian ethics whose heart is unsympathetic or averse to the
duties of the Christian life. The light shines in the darkness, but
the darkness comprehends it not. Christian ethics, therefore, in
formulating its ideas and completing its theoretical view rightly,
draws upon the Christian consciousness, as that consciousness is
scripturally determined, and interprets, not the Scriptures alone, but
also, in auxiliary relation, the ethicised life of Christian humanity.
While, therefore, it is the science of Biblical morality, it is also
of the whole moral development of Christianized life, both in personal
consciousness and in the observed historical fruitage of Scripture
doctrine.

=4.= It is necessary to look at some of the particular elements or
features of the clearer and fuller ethical view which comes from these
sources.

==Duties made More Definite.==

(1) Most of the duties naturally discerned by the conscience from the
known relations of life are brought into more distinct and definite
view by Christian revelation and experience. The natural discernment is
often unclear, uncertain, partial, and faulty. The blindness, mistakes
and misgivings of the moral sense form a large and perplexing chapter
in the story of non-Christian morality. It has often led to doubt
whether there is such a thing as a fixed, sure, immutable morality. A
remedy for this has been needed. By its immense number of specific
_precepts_ for particular relations and circumstances, revelation gives
correctness, minuteness, and fulness of application to the general
principles of duty asserted by the moral sense. In manifold cases
the conscience would be in the dark, or have only obscure or partial
view, without the instruction and guidance thus supplied. Scarcely
a situation or emergency in life can be named for which precept and
counsel have not been given. When the sun rises the eye sees not
only farther, but more minutely and with more certainty. Myriads of
objects and relations before unseen flash into view. So by the light
of the Scriptures, more of duty is known and better known. By common
consent, even among skeptics as to the Christian religion, the ethical
precepts of Christianity, in their purity and elevation, in their
quickening directness and radical thoroughness, in their explicitness
and universality, form an aggregate moral directory unapproached by the
best codes of pagan sages or human philosophies, and add a grand aid to
the moral judgments.

==Human Relations.==

(2) The human _relations_, on which duty rests, have been brought
into broader and fuller view by Christian teaching. Much of the
disability, under which morality has suffered, has always come from a
faulty understanding, if not total ignorance, of the varied relations
which are to be filled out with their exact and full measure of duty.
The idea of God and man's relation to him has often been falsely or
misleadingly conceived. The history of thought as to inter-human
relations, from the closest to the most extended, presents a sad story
of misapprehension, error, ignorance and consequent wrong. When these
great vital relations are themselves misconceived, looked at from a
false or obscuring view-point, one of the prime conditions for correct
moral judgments is absent. Positive misdirection is in play. When our
knowledge has not yet shown us clearly man's place in God's plan of the
world, or the adaptations and purposes in human nature itself; when
neither the great fact of personality nor that of human solidarity is
correctly understood, as for example, when the individual is reduced,
as has often been the case, to mere material for the state or for
possible enslavement by captors, or he is, on the other hand, looked
upon as an isolated and unrelated unit; or when the reality and meaning
of the universal brotherhood of man, under the universal fatherhood of
God, is not seen, the duties and obligations of life must necessarily
be much obscured and unperceived.

But here the Christian revelation comes in with one of its great
forms of help--a divine disclosure of our moral relations. It reveals
some otherwise undiscoverable relations, opening to view additional
obligations and responsibilities. It sets before us our solemn
relations to God, to his renewing and saving grace, as well as to
his creating and preserving love, to offered blessings, gracious
rewards, and eternal destinies. The whole horizon of life is lifted
and broadened, and the sphere of the moral activity and consequences
extends into a future life. Man becomes a child of immortality and his
home is eternity. The world and human life have a grandly changed
meaning under the gospel. Man's place in the system of things, as to
the past, present, and future is revealed in a light increased and
broadened like that on the landscape when morning rises upon night;
and in this light he sees a thousand new responsibilities on which he
is touching every moment, and which stretch out and on in illimitable
ranges. Conscience is enabled to act in view of all these new relations
as well as the irradiated old ones, and taught to hold the heart
and life, the will and activities to the moral requirements of this
enlarged and illuminated ethical domain.

==Moral Duties Divine Obligations.==

(3) Christian teaching has elevated the ethical view in closely
uniting all moral obligation with duty to God. Natural ethics, when
its implications are rationally followed up, is, indeed, theistic,
and finds the seat of moral law in God as the absolute ground of the
whole moral constitution. But from this movement, rising from the
law of right in the conscience and in the moral constitution of the
world, such ethics has yet this limitation, that duty is thought of
from the human side, and not from the standpoint of God, who in his
personal nature and will is both the source and goal of moral law. In
this mode of forming the theory God is apt to be left remote, virtue
is abstractly conceived and remains a reality too much by itself
and separated from any enforcing or helping authority. It becomes
too abstract and simply humanistic. But our view of moral good must
be lifted into closer and more living connection with God. And so,
Christianity, to transfuse the ethical sense with religious light and
motives, teaches us to look upon right and duty from the standpoint
of God. This is in accordance with the very design of Christianity as
a redemptive and saving religion, seeking to bring man into true and
practical fellowship with God. The moral discernment is to be filled
and animated by the religious spirit, so that the moral training may be
carried on and completed together with the development and consummation
of the Christian life. Thus the form of the appeal is: "Be ye holy, for
I am holy." "Be ye perfect, even as your Father in heaven is perfect."
In a high and peculiar emphasis all duty is required to be done as unto
God. "Forasmuch as ye have done it to the least of these, ye have done
it unto me." "We should so fear and love God," as not to offend against
any part of the law or fail in doing good. Through the Christian
revelation alone the ethical conception and relation of God is truly
attained, and with it a right conception of man and the highest spirit
of duty.

In thus teaching that all duties should be fulfilled as something due
to God, and under inspiration of love to Him, Christian ethics is not
to be understood to mean that rational ethical theory is mistaken when
it claims that men are to "do right because it is right." But it means
to remind us where alone the absolute right is found--only in God. And
it means that both the religious and the ethical life is to upraise and
anchor us to Him, and to eternal righteousness as it is in Him. All
duty is owed finally to God, because He is the one absolute righteous
Being to whom the whole universe owes its very existence and all its
blessings. Thus Christian ethics sets forth fully what rational thought
has often caught a glimpse of and hinted at, but wanted vision to see
clearly, viz.: that the goal of the ethical aim is to be "like God."
Its aim, as is that of religion itself, is to bring our moral life into
living fellowship with Him and His blessedness. This marked feature of
Christian teaching presents the ethical view in its highest elevation,
purification and power.

==Moral Guilt.==

(4) In harmony with this close connection of the moral with the
religious life, a further special feature of Christian ethics is a
peculiar emphasis upon the guilt of offence against the moral law.
In pagan ethics, often with no clear perception of the existence of
God, always without just conception of his character, though the moral
distinction was recognized and wrong was regarded as condemnable, yet
because the wrong was viewed as traversing only an abstract principle
or an accredited usage or order of best happiness, it evoked no strong
sense of guilt. Right was always little else than a conforming of one's
self to "nature," or "reason," or "civil authority," or conditions
of "well-being" or "enjoyment," or at best to an ideal conception of
virtue. In the ethical view which materialistic philosophies present,
though the phenomenon of conscience is acknowledged and obedience
to its direction admitted to be necessary for proper right order,
yet the condemnatory judgment on immorality is rather a judgment
of it as unwise, imprudent, and injurious than as guilty and worthy
of punishment. It is at most a non-conformity to an impersonal,
mechanically determined, ongoing nature. The whole utilitarian
conception of morality, which makes it consist essentially in following
the teachings of experience as to what is most advantageous and useful,
may hold disregard of it as a great "evil," economically viewed, but
almost annuls, if it does not completely remove, the idea of guilt, by
substituting that of loss. Even in simply rational _theistic_ ethics,
despite theistic pre-suppositions and conclusions, the view may still
deal too much with abstractions and rest too much on abstract ideas or
impersonal things. Right and wrong are, indeed, developed by natural
relations, to which men are bound to conform, but only because these
relations, by being divinely established, represent God, who in the
perfections of his nature and will, is at once the free Creator and
righteous personal Ruler of the universe. Moral law not only applies
alone to free personality, but has its source and authority in the
Absolute Personality whose holy and beneficent will has constituted the
moral relations and requirements of life. Morality pertains, not to the
relations of mere things to things, or of persons to simply impersonal
nature, but of persons to persons. Inter-human relations create and
exhibit obligations because God's plan and will speak in them, but the
full solemnity of moral obligation appears only when all inter-human
obligations are seen carried up and united in the supreme and
all-embracing obligation to God, to whom all duty is due. When these
inter-human duties are refused, they are refused to God who requires
them and has expressed that requirement to reason through the relations
themselves and through his word. Not only the religious duties, as
faith and love and gratitude and prayer, but all human duties are owed
to Him. Here all religious duties become moral obligations; and all
moral obligations become religious duties. And the guilt of wrong-doing
is heightened by the fact that it is a sin against the just, holy,
supreme authority and will of God, the absolute personal ground of the
right order and blessedness of the universe. In Him the moral authority
is identified with the rights of the Creator to whom every good in
the universe is owed. This emphasis upon the transcendent authority
and sanctity of moral law and consequent guilt of its violation is a
special feature in the Christian ethical view and necessary for the
true force and efficiency of the moral sense.

Any separation of morality from the position of something due to God
personally, obscures and weakens the ethical view. This has been
the bane not only of pagan, materialistic, atheistic, or grossly
utilitarian theories, but also of many other forms of representation.
Whenever the sense of duty is resolved into an instinct, or blind
feeling, or sympathy, or a product of custom, its true authority is
kept out of sight. The guilt of neglect of it disappears. Though
fervently regarded by many great thinkers as a sublime statement
of the moral principle, even the Kantian "categorical imperative,"
an immediate behest of the reason, saying: "Do this, or do that,"
giving no account of itself or ground for its authority, but speaking
autocratically in its own right, and as sufficient and final in its
own imperative, under the abstract rule: "Act as if the maxims of thy
action were to become by thy will the law of the universe," holds the
whole moral authority too abstractly and remote from God for complete
theory or effective power. He is not brought clearly into view or made
livingly near, but left in the background--a Being whose existence,
along with freedom and immortality, is only inferred and to be believed
because this ideal "law" requires Him for its maintenance. Sublime as
the "categorical imperative" may often have seemed, this shaping of
the theory of obligation is not suited to fill and vivify the moral
consciousness of men as does a sense of the sublimer reality of the
holy will and supreme authority of God, as present in and speaking
through that moral consciousness. But the Christian view brings us
face to face with this righteous will and authority in every moral
obligation, and teaches us to see in all the established personal
relations of life a divine call to right and duty.

==Moral Law Universal.==

(5) The Christian view makes uniquely clear the universalism of
the moral law. In natural theories the reach and identity of the
law has failed rightly to appear. The theory has formed only an
ethics for a race, a nation, a condition or caste. It has been
particularistic, limited by race lines, tribal or national boundaries,
class distinctions, or ancestral traditions. Codes of duty have
been shaped to local and exclusive conditions. So we have a national
ethics created by civil law, or a class ethics, as of free citizens
contra-distinguished from slaves, or of Brahmans as different from
low caste people. Or we have an ethics of individuals, in which the
code of duty of each is determined by his own personal "instincts,"
"feelings," swing of "sympathy," preference in "pleasure," development
of "reason," calculations of "utility," ancestral "inheritance," or a
mysterious "categorical imperative." Moral codes have been immensely
and confusingly diversified. A self-identical and common standard
does not appear, nor the clear, sure foundation of any. The moral law
is not exhibited in its universality and permanence. Its grandeur is
unseen by reason of the kaleidoscopic variations presented by the
moving fragmentary theories. Its authority is brought into doubt. The
great want has been a view of morality for man as man, authoritative
everywhere and always, co-extensive with humanity.

The defect of the theories has been twofold. 1. They have not brought
the whole race of man together in the essential sameness of a universal
humanity, each individual being endowed with the high attributes of a
personality, made in the image of God, and all bound together in one
all-inclusive brotherhood. 2. They have failed clearly to unite this
total humanity, in all its personalities, with God, whose nature and
will is the only and absolute source of the moral law which sweeps
round and through all the world. The Christian Scriptures and the
Christian consciousness supply the needed completion of view by
throwing both these truths into clear light. Christianity invests
human personality with a worth, sacredness, and responsibility never
elsewhere recognized. It is at the point of personality that each
individual is to be united in fellowship with the personal God, who,
as righteousness and love, sits upon the throne. Christianity seeks
to make so real and living the brotherhood of man, that the throb
of love and sympathy may be felt across all national lines and race
distinctions around the earth. And while it thus strengthens the
vitality and sacred force of the relations that thus bind men together,
it teaches that the moral duties to men which these relations require,
are to be done as unto God. Monotheism brings _mono-nomism_. The moral
law, which is absolute, self-identical, eternal and immutable in the
holy nature and will of God, becomes universal and irrepealable not
only for the earth but for all the moral universe.

==Condition of Fulfillment.==

(6) A special extension in the Christian ethical view is the truth that
the moral law can be truly fulfilled only in and through a spiritual
regeneration and renovation of the personal life. This is a truth
which simply rational theories fail to formulate, though they are not
without materials to justify the formulation of it. Few facts of life
and history are more conspicuous than the impotence of the ethical
perceptions and motives to get and maintain rightful rulership. Some
hindering and disabling depravity in the human condition prevents
attainment of the moral ideal. Apart from the dreadful sway of vice
and crime and cruel wrong, even with the well-disposed, full duty to
neither God nor man is completely realized. The words put by Ovid in
the mouth of Medea: "_Video meliora, proboque, detereora sequor_"
(I see and approve the better, I follow the worse), voice the moral
weakness felt even in pagan consciousness. This incompetency of the
ethical behests to accomplish the true and required life, Christianity
confirms and emphasizes; and upon its basis unfolds the necessity of a
deep, radical renewal of personal character.

In Christianity, let it be remembered, the moral law is a diviner and
deeper reality than natural notions of men make it. It looks, with
its divine eye, down into the very depths of the heart, and demands
loyal and full duty through the whole range of personal relations with
respect to both God and man. It spreads the force of moral obligation
over religious duties, joining them in indissoluble union. "The law
of the Lord is perfect," and requires this wholeness of duty and
righteousness. Hence Christianity holds a merely natural morality
always to be faulty, leaving men under the law's condemnation. Without
a divine quickening and spiritual enabling, men can never be brought to
true and full obedience and transformed into moral harmony and likeness
with God. And the proclamation, looking to this part of the redemptive
process, is: "Except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of
God." Thus it becomes a unique distinction of the Christian ethical
view, that it proposes to bring men to spiritual and moral endeavor
and victory from the starting-point of a conviction and recognition
of their own thorough incompetence for the moral task. It furnishes
a true and adequate ability where it has broken up dependence on an
insufficient one.

But this brings to us the moral task, which belongs to the next
chapter.




