CHAPTER IX.

THE GROUND OF RIGHT--CONTINUED.


The review of theories in the last chapter prepares us to apprehend the
real ground of right. All the subjective theories fail, because the
moral quality is objectively real to the percipient conscience. The
endæmonistic and utilitarian explanations are at fault, because they
attempt to deduce the moral from the unmoral and can give no account of
the unique authority which is the characteristic mark of moral law.

The full ground of right, as the essential elements of the problem have
made clearly apparent, must be regarded as twofold, embracing, first,
the proximate or immediate ground, and secondly, the ultimate ground.

==Proximate Ground Stated.==

I. The proximate ground--as becomes easily manifest if we keep our
view close to the witness of consciousness in actual experience--is in
a rational conformity of conduct to the relations which men sustain
to one another and to other beings in the divinely constituted system
of the world. These relations immediately call for fitting conduct.
They create the _ought_ of moral law. The right is found in conforming
to the requirements which they develop and impose. Duty consists in
fulfilling the demands which they involve and express to the moral
reason.

This, it will be noticed, accords with the fundamental principle
already referred to, that the conception of moral law allies itself
normally only with the theistic view of the world, and the truth that
the constituted human relations have been framed under a rational
ideal of order and welfare. These relations form a rational system
in which intelligent free activity is to actualize a divine plan of
excellence and well-being. They require conduct in accordance with
themselves and with the ends of well-being and happiness to which they
have been adapted. The human reason reads the meaning of the relations,
and the moral discernment recognizes the obligation to correspondent
sentiment and action. Moral conduct thus becomes simply the conduct
that actualizes the ideas of divine order to which the framework of
human relations has been constituted. What is right springs immediately
from the relations, as what is due in ideal moral order. The relations
themselves exhibit a moral constitution as the immediate environment
of the human moral personality. They bring the ethical requirement
which they contain to the recognizing capacity of the reason and the
obedience of the will.

It is to be noticed, further, that the term "relations" is to be
understood here in its most comprehensive sense and applicability. It
embraces all relations with respect to which the human personality
in its freedom has to determine and harmonize itself--relations
individual, social, and divine. Social relationship has often been
absurdly mistaken as the only sphere of moral obligation; and the
individual, if contemplated as alone and perfectly isolated, has
sometimes been supposed to be entirely without ethical bonds. In what
concerns himself only, he is imagined to be unbound. But this is an
unwarrantable limitation of the term. For the individual, even viewed
utterly apart from his race, yet sustains relations to the adaptations
and intentions in his own nature. As in society he owes something to
the humanity around him, even alone he would still owe something to
the humanity committed to his own keeping. He cannot absolve himself
from the bond that binds him to that--as in fact he cannot from that
which unites him to his fellow-men. Mere pleasures or enjoyments which
are apart from his essential character he may, indeed, disregard, but
not what concerns its intended excellence and honor. It has been well
said: "Robinson Crusoe did not become a non-moral being when thrown on
the desert island; for he still owed respect to his own humanity."[59]
Many a deed is wrong, not as injuring others, but as violative of the
agent's relation to the purposes lodged in his own constitution. This
is as real as are those that connect him with his fellow-men around him
or with God above him. And it is very superficial thought that finds
no relations but those that are objective. Sometimes, strangely, in
popular thinking, man's relation to God is also omitted from a place
in morality, by a relegation of it to the sphere of religion. But this
relation is the most fundamental and vital of all human relations and
most replete with moral obligations and responsibilities.

This view of the immediate ground of right is fully established by the
following additional considerations:


==Sustained by Moral Consciousness.==

=1.= It is directly sustained by the moral consciousness itself, in
constant experience. As a question of psychological metaphysics the
point must be settled in harmony with the testimony of consciousness.
Appealing to this, there can be no doubt that these relations do
develop and call for the duties which the conscience is constantly
discerning and enforcing. This is simply a fact--a fact which
speculations about the origin of conscience or the education of its
judgments, must not be allowed to obscure. It assures that actual
morality is no abstraction, but concrete conduct rightly answering
to each person's relations in real life. Beyond all question, as
thus witnessed in the universal moral consciousness, these relations
from the most general, that of man to man, down through all special
connections, as between parents and children, husband and wife,
brothers and sisters, friends and neighbors, rulers and citizens,
employer and employé, rich and poor, capable and helpless, and all the
other human interrelations in their thousands of diversified forms,
do determine and impose both general and specific duties. The duties
come into view as developed by the relations, and change as they are
modified and changed. This basing of what is right and obligatory
for men on their relations to one another, to God, and to appointed
ends, is not a mere theory, but an unquestionable reality in their
consciousness.

And this accords with the best cosmic philosophy. For this holds all
these relations as parts of a rationally designed system of world-order
for universal well-being, and the moral reason as capacitated to
discern, with more or less clearness and fulness, the moral requirement
which they involve and present for observance. We know of no morality
that exists, or can exist, in human life, apart from them. Strike them
all away, and all duties disappear. Take, as illustration, the most
generic virtue of all the virtues recognized by the ethical judgments,
that of good-will or love. The moral reason recognizes this as resting,
according to eternal fitness, in the broadest and most generic of all
relations, that of one intelligent sentient being to another. In the
inter-human connection it is based in the brotherhood of man. And this
generic good-will, thus required in ideal moral right by the generic
relation, becomes differentiated and modified in thousands of special
types and forms by the endlessly diversified particular relations of
life.


==Presuppositions in Responsibility.==

=2.= It is implied in the logical presuppositions to all moral
responsibility. Among such presuppositions, as conceded by all, are
intelligence to know, and freedom to conform to these relations. These
prerequisites are essential to the very conception of moral action and
amenability. It is the universal sense of the race that creatures that
cannot know themselves and the relations they sustain, and are without
free-will to fulfil them, are morally irresponsible and incapable of
virtue or vice. To them the moral realm becomes a blank, and the moral
judgments become impossible. And equally universal is the admission
that the moral insight is helped and responsibility increased by every
increase of light giving larger and truer knowledge of the complex and
intricate connections of human life. With every broadened and clarified
vision of these connections fresh obligations appear. "A defective
apprehension of the relations in which we stand to God and to our
fellow-men, will prevent our seeing our specific duties."[60] This fact
furnishes direct evidence that right conduct must be held as a certain
intelligent adjustment to the relations sustained.

The value of this point is magnified when we remind ourselves how
it explains and illuminates the sometimes troublesome phenomenon of
different and even conflicting moral judgments in the same case by
different persons, and the fact of progress in moral standards as
civilization and culture advance. Differing apprehension of one or
more of the many elements or factors converging, with confusing force,
into almost every situation which calls for duty, easily accounts
for most of the perplexing diversity. The relations are seen from
different angles, and interpreted in different light. And the advance
of civilizations, with their science and philosophy, brings truer and
completer views of man's place and relations. The moral ideas of the
human reason are, indeed, essentially identical in all men and all
ages, and when human relations are apprehended in the same light,
with equal clearness and fulness, the moral judgments substantially
agree. But the progress of knowledge, throwing increasing light on
these relations, leads the onward civilizations up into truer and
better application of the principles of right in life. The different
codes do not mean a change of primary moral ideas, but merely reflect
and illustrate the changed and advancing apprehension of man's true
relations to which these unchanging ideas are, and are forever to be,
applied.

Another and kindred fact is explained, adding still further
confirmation of the correctness of this theory. With perfect intentions
men fulfil objective duty only in measure. Duty is only approximately
accomplished, in varying degrees, from very faulty success to high
grades of accuracy and completeness. A correct view of the ground of
right must necessarily allow a consistent explanation of this fact.
Sometimes the fact has been looked upon as inconsistent with any
absolute dividing line between right and wrong, on one or the other
side of which every action must fall. Not all good acts are perfect
or faultless; not all evil ones are equally violations of duty. Of
right actions some measure up better than others toward all that full
duty requires. Dr. Martineau, partly in order to account for this
scope of variety in moral correctness, urges a special definition of
right and wrong: "Every action is right, which, in presence of a lower
principle, follows a higher; every action is wrong, which, in presence
of a higher principle, follows a lower."[61] By the great difference in
the rank of moral motives the reason of men's differing grades in the
ascending or descending scale of character seems to come into view.
But while the definition furnishes a rule frequently serviceable for
guidance in questions of duty, it fails to define the ground of right;
for it leaves unsettled the very point in this question, viz.: why one
principle (as a motive) _is_ morally "higher" or "lower" than another,
or why some intentions or actions are right or wrong in any degree.
And the offered explanation is unnecessary; for the unquestionable
principle of moral requirement developed in relations, and discerned
by the intuitive insight of the conscience fully explains the variety,
when we remember the various degrees of accuracy and fulness with
which these relations are understood and estimated. Every relation
calling for duty is composite and complex, the various parts being
often so connected as to come only partially or one-sidedly into view,
preventing full insight of the moral demand, or accurate adjustment of
sentiment and conduct to it. Rarely is any relation simple and alone.
Often, indeed commonly, conscience has to decide duty as a resultant
obligation out of very complicated and even antagonistic relationships.
All this is amply sufficient to explain the different degrees in which
the conduct meets duty. It is the necessary result of the impossibility
of exactly fitting the moral sentiment or act to the demands of the
moral relations. And the transparent explanation which this theory
furnishes of the fact of such degrees strongly corroborates its
scientific correctness.


==Verified in Moral Concepts.==

=3.= It is verified, further, in the character of the various virtues,
and their opposite immoralities. In their very conceptions these
imply relations. They are moulded by them, and carry the shaping thus
received. Justice, for example, in inter-human affairs, is absolute
equity between man and man--exact reciprocity. Veracity expresses
something that is due from one to another among beings whose welfare
requires them to live according to the truth of things. The duty to
speak the truth answers to the need and right of each one to know it.
Love, or good-will, has already been shown to express the feeling
which, in eternal fitness, is due from one sentient rational being
to another, in the most generic relationship. Honesty means seeking
equality of values in dealings one with another. Sincerity signifies
genuineness in the temper and way we relate ourselves to those about
us. We might run through all the precepts of the Christian decalogue
and note that every one is based on some general or special relation,
either of man to God or of men to their fellow-men. No virtue can get
away from relations. The very concept of every one is moulded by them,
and carries the shaping which they enstamp upon it as the coin does
that of the die.


==Supported by Analogy.==

=4.= It is supported also by the analogy of organic and instinctive
action. In organic action, the physically right is adaptation to
environment, in which each part and movement fills its sphere
and accomplishes its functions in the given place and relations.
In instinctive action, the force is adjusted to the position and
connections in which the animal is placed. For example, that of the
bee is made to move correspondently to its relations to the individuals
of its own kind and to the end of supporting and preserving the
species. The instinct of the beaver adjusts its house to its peculiar
surroundings; that of birds constructs their nests in distinct
adaptation to the conditions that surround them. In animals that
harvest and store their food, it suits the action to the particular
environment and changing seasons. In every case instinct fits the
activity to the given place and relations of its subject. This method
by which organic and instinctive functions are set to secure right
action in their special spheres, is exceedingly significant of the
generic principle of all right action. In the light of the analogy, the
morally right is a continuation of the same principle of harmony with
constituted relations which is seen to be omnipresent in all the lower
domain of nature extending up to human personality, but becoming moral
at this point by being subject to free will and accomplished by it. It
is to be remembered that teleologic plan and adaptation run through the
entire cosmic order, from atoms to worlds and from minutest structures
of body to the loftiest endowments of intelligent beings akin to God.
Automatic action secures accordance in the inferior ranges. The grand
distinction of the moral realm appears when, as the crowning ascent
of life is reached, the principle of ethical harmony with divinely
constituted relations is to be accepted and accomplished by the
intelligence and freedom of man and is made the moral _ought_ under
personal responsibility.


==Assumed in Common Life.==

=5.= It adds confirmation to this explanation, that it is implicitly
assumed in all the conceptions and language of common life. Unbiassed
by speculative theories the every-day thinking and speech of mankind
connect duties with men's personal place and relations--duties
modified and fixed according to the form and specialty of individual
situations. The fact of duty itself is not more certain than this
fact of the way in which spontaneous and unperverted thought grounds
it. This fixing of the world's conceptions and speech in this form
cannot be fairly interpreted as a caprice or accident, but as the true
effect of the actual reality, which stands as its cause or warrant.
And it is significant that speculative theorists who have framed for
themselves some other account, whenever momentarily off their guard
or forgetting to act as watch-dog for their theory, have been wont to
turn unconsciously into forms of expression recognizing this relational
ground for human duties.

==The Ultimate Ground.==

II. In thus finding the right grounded directly on conformity to the
relations given men in the constituted order of life, we have not yet
reached the full solution of the great problem. For these relations are
only a part of the aggregate moral constitution, and are not the last
term of moral authority. They do not stand in their own independent
right. Though they do directly create and shape the immediate duties
for which they call, they are not the ultimate reality in which moral
law has its deep foundations. So we must go back to the source and
reason of these relations. The ultimate ground can be found, only in
God himself who, in his underived eternal nature, is the absolute
ground of the whole created universe, with all its interrelations which
develop the reality of moral law.

The true conception of the divine creative action is that in it the
thought and moral character of God become transitive and appear in the
relations established and the ethical requirements which the relations
impose. The constituted connections and order of life, which involve
an ideal standard of right conduct and duty, reveal the divine mind
or intention and in it the ultimate authority. The proximate basis,
already discovered, in ideal conformity to the moral relations in which
the moral agent is placed, therefore represents God, who, as the first
cause and eternal ground of the creation with all its adaptations and
laws, is the ultimate and unchangeable ground of right and of all moral
law.

This statement of the ultimate ground means more than a resting of
right simply on the will of God. A reference of it to his will has
often stood for a claim that the moral law stands merely in the option
of God or as only a product of his choice. Many have represented it as
only an effect whose cause is an act of his will--that will originating
or making "the right" rather than observing and declaring it, and the
moral law having no basis other than such enactment of will. But this
would imply that God himself is without moral character, acting from
no norm of essential right, but simply by mere will ordaining what
should pass as right among mankind. Our fundamental ethical conception
of him, however, is that of a moral being and moral ruler. And to be
moral means to love and choose the right as right. We must keep in
mind here the relation between moral law and will, or the choices of
the will. Moral authority does not exist as will, but as right. The
great conception of the right, as witnessed to in universal conscience,
is of something that appeals to will and requires the will to bow to
its claim. Right is superior and authoritative for will, and cannot,
therefore, be simply an effect of it. The right itself is basal for
right willing, even with God himself. He wills according to it. Hence
the moral law is not to be considered a product of his will, but an
expression of his nature. In perfect freedom he wills the good because
he is good, being in his eternal nature the absolute and infinite moral
Perfection. It is a deep conviction in the moral consciousness of
mankind, that God himself is in his very nature righteous and good, a
conviction which utters itself evermore in the spontaneous exclamation:
"Shall not the judge of all the earth do right!" Out of a non-moral
ground the moral could never arise, and only in the very nature of God
himself as perfect, infinite and unchangeable righteousness, do we
reach the ultimate ground both of the constituted relations of human
life and of the sublime and inextinguishable reality of moral law for
the ordering of these relations. The profound meaning of the poet's
couplet:

        "For right is right since God is God,
        And right the day must win,"

is to identify God and right as united in the eternal foundation of
the moral system. There is thus, for the universe, what has been often
designated "an eternal and immutable morality" whose authority and
standard rest in the very Ground of the universe itself.

The conclusion thus apparent is vindicated by the very conception
of the authority which binds men ethically. Mere "might cannot make
right" or be that which has the reverence of the moral nature. Moral
sovereignty does not attach to a simple absolutism of power. The
ethical will bows to the right only. It would be a great contradiction
to think of the power to which the moral submission of the soul is due
as itself anything other than an ethical power, the morally good power,
the morally good Being.

This ultimate ground of right, thus found, makes plain why ethics,
in its full meaning and issue, is so closely allied to religion.
Religion, in its spirit and aim, means fellowship with God, accordance
of desire, will, and life with him. And ethics, even in the view of
its early student Plato, looks to the same goal, "likeness to God."
The supreme aim of Christianity is ethical, the transformation and
exaltation of human conduct and character into the excellence and
happiness of righteousness. That the moral life of man may, out of his
broken, corrupt and disabled state of sin, thus become again harmonized
with God and the divine constitution of things, redemption comes
with its supernatural powers and help for human nature, enabling and
accomplishing a realization of the ethical law in human character.




