CHAPTER XVII.

SWIFTNESS IN DUTY.


  "Life is a leaf of paper white,
  Whereon each one of us may write
  His word or two--and then comes night."
          --LOWELL.


Many good people are very slow.  They do their work well enough,
perhaps, but so leisurely that they accomplish in their brief time only
a fraction of what they might accomplish.  They lose, in aimless
loitering, whole golden hours which they ought to fill with quick
activities.  They seem to have no true appreciation of the value of
time, or of their own accountability for its precious moments.  They
live conscientiously, it may be, but they have no strong constraining
sense of duty impelling them to ever larger and fuller achievement.
They have a work to do, but there is no hurry for it; there is plenty
of time in which to do it.

It is quite safe to say that the majority of people do not get into
their life half the achievement that was possible to them when they
began to live, simply because they have never learned to work swiftly,
and under pressure of great motives.

There can be no doubt that we are required to make the most possible of
our life.  Mr. Longfellow once gave to his pupils, as a motto, this:
"Live up to the best that is in you."  To do this, we must not only
develop our talents to the utmost power and capacity of which they are
susceptible, but we must also use these talents to the accomplishment
of the largest and best results they are capable of producing.  In
order to reach this standard, we must never lose a day, nor even an
hour, and we must put into every day and every hour all that is
possible of activity and usefulness.

Dreaming through days and years, however brilliantly one may dream, can
never satisfy the demands of the responsibility which inheres
essentially in every soul that is born into the world.  Life means
duty, toil, work.  There is something divinely allotted to each hour,
and the hour one loiters remains forever an unfilled blank.  We can
ideally fulfil our mission only by living up always to the best that is
in us, and by doing every day the very most that we can do.

  "So here hath been dawning another blue day;
  Think, wilt thou let it slip useless away?
  Out of eternity this new day is born;
  Into eternity at night will return."


We turn over to our Lord for example, since his was the one life in all
the ages that reached the divine thought, and filled out the divine
pattern; and wherever we see him, we find him intent on doing the will
of his Father, not losing a moment, nor loitering at any task.  We see
him ever hastening from place to place, from ministry to ministry, from
baptism to temptation, from teaching to healing, from miracle-working
to solitary prayer.  His feet never loitered.  He lost no moments; he
seems indeed to have crowded the common work of years into a few short,
intense hours.  He is painted for us as a man continually under the
strongest pressure, with a work to do which he was eager to accomplish
in the shortest possible time.  He was always calm, never in nervous
haste, yet ever quietly moving with resistless energy on his holy
errand.

We ought to catch our Master's spirit in this celerity in the Father's
business.  Time is short and duty is large.  There is not a moment to
lose, if, in our allotted period, we would finish the work that is
given us to do.  We need to get our Lord's "straightway" into our life,
so that we shall hasten from duty to duty, without pause or idle
lingering.  We need to get into our heart a consciousness of being ever
on the Master's errands, that shall be within us a mighty compulsion,
driving us always to duty.

Naturally we are indolent, and fond of ease and self indulgence.  We
need to be carried out of and beyond ourselves.  There is no motive
strong enough to do this but love to God and to our fellow-men.
Supreme love to God makes us desire to do with alacrity everything he
commands.  Love to our fellow-men draws us to all service of sympathy
and beneficence for them, regardless of cost.  Constrained by such
motives, we shall never become laggards in duty.

Swiftness or slowness in duty is very much a matter of habit.  As one
is trained in early life, one is quite sure to continue in mature
years.  A loitering child will become a loitering man or woman.  The
habit grows, as all habits do.

  "Lose this day loitering, 'twill be the same story
  To-morrow, and the next more dilatory;
  The indecision brings its own delays,
  And days are lost, lamenting o'er lost days.

  "Are you in earnest?  Seize this very minute.
  What you can do, and think you can, begin it.
  Boldness has genius, power, magic in it.
  Only engage, and then the mind grows heated;
  Begin it, and the work will be completed."


Many people lose in the aggregate whole years of time out of their
lives for want of system.  They make no plan for their days.  They let
duties mingle in inextricable confusion.  They are always in feverish
haste.  They talk continually of being overwhelmed with work, of the
great pressure that is upon them, of being driven beyond measure.  They
always have the air of men who have scarcely time to eat or sleep.  And
there is nothing feigned in all their intense occupation.  They really
are hurried men.  Yet in the end they accomplish but little in
comparison with their great activity, because they work without order,
and always feverishly and nervously.  Swiftness in accomplishment is
always calm and quiet.  It plans well, suffering no confusion in tasks.
Hurried haste is always flurried haste, which does nothing well.
"Unhasting yet unresting" is the motto of quick and abundant
achievement.

  "'Without haste! without rest!'
    Bind the motto to thy breast;
  Bear it with thee as a spell;
    Storm or sunshine, guard it well;
  Heed not flowers that round thee bloom,
    Bear it onward to the tomb.

  "Haste not! let no thoughtless deed
    Mar for aye the spirit's speed;
  Ponder well and know the right;
    Onward then with all thy might;
  Haste not; years can ne'er atone
    For one reckless action done.

  "Rest not! life is sweeping by,
    Do and dare before you die;
  Something mighty and sublime
    Leave behind to conquer time;
  Glorious 'tis to live for aye
    When these forms have passed away.

  "Haste not! rest not! calmly wait;
    Meekly bear the storm of fate;
  Duty be thy polar guide;
    Do the right whate'er betide.
  Haste not! rest not!  Conflicts past,
    God shall crown thy work at last."


There is another phase of the lesson.  Not swiftness only, but patient
persistence through days and years, is the mark of true living.  There
are many people who can work under pressure for a little time, but who
tire of the monotony and slack in their duty by and by, failing at last
because they cannot endure unto the end.  There are people who begin
many noble things, but soon weary of them and drop them out of their
hands.  They may pass for brilliant men, men even of genius, but in the
end they have for biography only a volume of fragments of chapters, not
one of them finished.  Such men may attract a great deal of passing
attention, while the tireless plodders working beside them receive no
praise, no commendation; but in the real records of life, written in
abiding lines in God's Book, it is the latter who will shine in the
brightest splendor.  Robert Browning puts this truth in striking way in
one of his poems:--

          "Now, observe,
  Sustaining is no brilliant self-display
  Like knocking down or even setting up:
  Much bustle these necessitate; and still
  To vulgar eye, the mightier of the myth
  Is Hercules, who substitutes his own
  For Atlas' shoulder and supports the globe
  A whole day,--not the passive and obscure
  Atlas who bore, ere Hercules was born,
  And is to go on bearing that same load
  When Hercules turns ash on Oeta's top.
  'Tis the transition-stage, the tug and strain,
  That strike men: standing still is stupid-like."


So we get our lesson.  There is so much to do in the short days that we
dare not lose a moment.  Life is so laden with responsibility that to
trifle at any point is sin.  Even on the seizing of minutes eternal
issues may depend.  Of course we must take needed rest to keep our
lives in condition for duty.  But what shall we say of those strong men
and women who do almost nothing but rest?  What shall we say of those
who live only to have amusement, who dance away their nights and then
sleep away their days, and thus hurry on toward the judgment-bar, doing
nothing for God or for man?  Life is duty; every moment of it has its
own duty.  There is no malfeasance so sad and so terrible in its
penalties as that which wastes the golden years in idleness or
pleasure, and leaves duty undone.

Shall we not seek to crowd the days with most earnest living?  Shall we
not learn to redeem the time from indolence, from loitering, from
unmethodicalness, from the waste of precious moments, from
self-indulgence, from impatience of persistent toil, from all that
lessens achievement?  Shall we not learn to work swiftly for our Master?

  "You must live each day at your very best:
  The work of the world is done by few;
  God asks that a part be done by you.

  "Say oft of the years as they pass from sight,
  'This is life with its golden store:
  I shall have it once, but it comes no more.'

  "Have a purpose, and do with your utmost might:
  You will finish your work on the other side,
  When you wake in his likeness, satisfied."




