CHAPTER XII.

THE BLESSING OF FAITHFULNESS.


  "It must be done by both; God never without me,
  I never without God."
        --JOHANNES SCHEFFLER.


"Faithful servant" will be the commendation on the judgment-day of
those who have lived well on the earth.  Not great deeds will be
commended, but faithfulness.  The smallest ministries will rank with
the most conspicuous, if they are all that the weak hands could do.
Indeed, the widow's two mites were more in value than the rich men's
large coins.

  "Two mites, two drops, but all her house and land
  Fell from an earnest heart but trembling hand;
  The others' wanton wealth foamed high and brave;
  The others cast away, she only gave."


Yet faithfulness as a measure of requirement is not something that can
be reached without effort.  It does not furnish a pillow for indolence.
It is not a letting down of obligation to a low standard, to make life
easy.  It is indeed a lofty measurement.  "Thou hast been faithful" is
the highest possible commendation.

It may not be amiss to look a little at the meaning of the word as a
standard of moral requirement.  In general, it implies the doing of all
our work as well as we can.  All our work includes, of course, our
business, our trade, our household duties, all our daily task-work, as
well as our praying, our Bible-reading, and our obeying of the moral
law.  We must not make the mistake of thinking that there is no
religion in the way we do the common work of our trade or of our
household, or our work on the farm, or in the mill or store.  The
faithfulness Christ requires and commends takes in all these things.
Ofttimes, too, it would be easier to be faithful in some great trial,
requiring sublimity of courage, than in the little unpicturesque duties
of an ordinary day.  Says Phillips Brooks: "You picture to yourself the
beauty of bravery and steadfastness.  You let your imagination wander
in delight over the memory of martyrs who have died for truth.  And
then some little, wretched, disagreeable duty comes, which is your
martyrdom, the lamp of your oil; and if you will not do it, how your
oil is spilt!  How flat and thin and unilluminated your sentiment about
the martyrs runs out over your self-indulgent life!"

Lovers of the violin are familiar with the name of Stradivarius, the
old violin-maker of Cremona.  He has been dead nearly two hundred
years, and his violins now bring fabulous prices.  George Eliot, in one
of her poems, puts some noble words into the mouth of the old man.
Speaking of the masters who will play on his violins, he says:--

  "While God gives them skill,
  I give them instruments to play upon,
  God choosing me to help him."


Referring to another violin-maker, his rival, he says:--

        "But were his the best,
  He could not work for two.
  My work is mine,
  And, heresy or not, if my hand slacked,
  I should rob God--since he is fullest good--
  Leaving a blank instead of violins.
  I say, not God himself can make man's best
  Without best men to help him.
  *    *    *    *    *    *
  'Tis God gives skill,
  But not without men's hands.
  He could not make
  Antonio Stradivari's violins
  Without Antonio."


At first reading these words may indeed seem heretical and irreverent,
but they are not.  It is true, indeed, that even God cannot do our work
without us, without our skill, our faithfulness.  If we fail or do our
little duty negligently, there will be a blank or a blur where there
ought to have been something beautiful.  As another says, "The universe
is not quite perfect without my work well done."

One man is a carpenter.  God has called him to that work.  It is his
duty to build houses, and to build them well.  That is, he is required
to be a good carpenter, to do the very best work he can possibly do.
If, therefore, he does careless work, imperfect, dishonest, slurred,
slighted work, he is robbing God, leaving only bad carpentering where
he ought to have left good.  For even God himself will not build the
carpenter's houses without the carpenter.  Or, here is a mother in a
home.  Her children are about her, with their needs.  Her home requires
her skill, her taste, her refinement, her toil and care.  It is her
calling to be a good mother, and to make a true home for her household.
Her duty is to do always her very best to make her home beautiful,
bright, happy, a fit place for her children to grow up in.
Faithfulness requires that she do always such service as a mother, that
Jesus shall say of her home-making, "She hath done what she could."  To
do less than her best is to fail in fidelity.  Suppose that her hand
should slack, that she should grow negligent, would she not clearly be
robbing God?  For even God cannot make a beautiful home for her
children without her.

So we may apply the principle to all kinds of work.  The faithfulness
which God requires must reach to everything we do, to the way the child
gets its lessons and recites them, to the way the dressmaker and the
tailor sew their seams, to the way the blacksmith welds the iron, and
shoes the horse, to the way the plumber puts the pipes into the new
building and looks after the drainage, to the way the carpenter does
his work on the house, to the way the bridge-builder swings the bridge
over the stream, to the way the clerk represents the goods, and
measures or weighs them.  "Be thou faithful" is the word that rings
from heaven in every ear.  God's word for the doing of every piece of
work that any one does.  How soon it would put a stop to all
dishonesty, all fraud, all scant work, all false weights and measures,
all shams, all neglects or slightings of duty, were this lesson only
learned and practiced everywhere!

"It does not matter," people say, "whether I do my little work well or
not.  Of course I must not steal, nor lie, nor commit forgery, nor
break the Sabbath.  These are moral things.  But there is no sin in my
sewing up this seam carelessly, or in my using bad mortar in this wall,
or in my putting inferior timber in this house, or a piece of flawed
iron in this bridge."  But we need to learn that the moral law applies
everywhere, just as really to carpentry, or blacksmithing, or
tailoring, as to Sabbath-keeping.  We never can get away from this law.

Besides, it does matter, for our neighbor's sake, as well as for the
honor of God's law, how we do our work.  The bricklayer does negligent
work on the walls of the flue he is putting in, and one night, years
afterward, a spark creeps through the crevice and reaches a wooden beam
that lies there, and soon the house is in flames and perhaps precious
lives perish.  The bricklayer was unfaithful.  The foundryworker, in
casting the great iron supports for a bridge, is unwatchful for an
instant, and a bubble of air makes a flaw.  It is buried away in the
heart of the beam and escapes detection.  One day, years later, there
is a terrible disaster.  A great railroad bridge gives way beneath the
weight of an express train and hundreds of lives are lost.  In the
inquest it is testified that a slight flaw in one beam was the cause of
the awful calamity which hurled so many lives into eternity.  The
foundry workman was unfaithful.

These are but suggestions of the duty and of its importance.  No work
can be of so little moment that it matters not whether it be done
faithfully or not.  Unfaithfulness in the smallest things is
unfaithfulness, and God is grieved, and possibly sometime, somewhere,
disaster may come as the consequence of the neglect.  On the other
hand, faithfulness is pleasing to God, though it be only in the
sweeping well of a room, or the doing neatly of the smallest things in
household care.  Then faithfulness is far-reaching in its influence.
The universe is not quite complete without each one's little work well
done.

The self-culture that there is in the mere habit of faithfulness is in
itself a rich reward for all our striving.  It is a great thing to
train ourselves to do always our best, to do as nearly perfect work as
possible.  Said Michael Angelo: "Nothing makes the soul so pure, so
religious, as the endeavor to create something perfect; for God is
perfection, and whoever strives for it, strives for something that is
Godlike."  The habit, unyieldingly persisted in, of doing everything
with the most scrupulous conscientiousness, builds up in the one who so
lives a noble and beautiful character.




