CHAPTER V.

GETTING CHRIST'S TOUCH.


  "This is life--to pour out love unstinted;
    Good and evil, sunlike, blesseth he;
  Through your finite is his infinite hinted--
    Children of your Father must ye be."
          --LUCY LARCOM.


There was wonderful power in the touch of Christ when he was on the
earth.  Wherever he laid his hand, he left a blessing, and sick, sad,
and weary ones received health, comfort, and peace.  That hand,
glorified, now holds in its clasp the seven stars.  Yet there are
senses in which the blessed touch of Christ is felt yet on men's lives.
He is as really in this world to-day as he was when he walked in human
form through Judea and Galilee.  His hand is yet laid on the weary, the
suffering, the sorrowing, and, though its pressure is unfelt, its power
to bless is the same as in the ancient days.  It is laid on the sick,
when precious heavenly words of cheer and encouragement from the
Scriptures are read at their bedside, giving them the blessing of sweet
patience, and quieting their fears.  It is laid on the sorrowing, when
the consolations of divine love come to their hearts with tender
comfort, giving them strength to submit to God's will and rejoice in
the midst of trial.  It is laid on the faint and weary, when the grace
of Christ comes to them with its holy peace, hushing the wild tumult,
and giving true rest of soul.

But there is another way in which the hand of Christ is laid on human
lives.  He sends his disciples into the world to represent him.  "As
the Father hath sent me, even so send I you," is his own word.  Of
course the best and holiest Christian life can be only the dimmest,
faintest reproduction of the rich, full, blessed life of Christ.  Yet
it is in this way, through these earthen vessels, that he has ordained
to save the world, and to heal, help, comfort, lift up, and build up
men.

  "In these earthen vessels heavenly treasure
    For the enrichment of thy poor may shine;
  Thou canst fill us in our human measure
    With thy being's overflow divine."


Perhaps in thinking of what God does for the world, we are too apt to
overlook the human agents and instruments, and to think of him touching
lives directly and immediately.  A friend of ours is in sorrow, and,
going to our knees, we pray God to give him comfort.  But may it not be
that he would send the comfort through our own heart and lips?  One we
love is not doing well, is drifting away from a true life, is in danger
of being lost.  In anguish of heart we cry to God, beseeching him to
lay his hand on the imperilled life, and rescue it.  But may it not be
that ours is the hand that must be stretched out in love, and laid, in
Christ's name, on the life that is in danger?

Certain it is, at least, that each one of us who knows the love of
Christ is ordained to be as Christ to others; that is, to be the
messenger to carry to them the gift of Christ's grace and help, and to
show to them the spirit of Christ, the patience, gentleness,
thoughtfulness, love, and yearning of Christ.  We are taught to say,
"Christ liveth in me."  If this be true, Christ would love others
through us, and our touch must be to others as the very touch of Christ
himself.  Every Christian ought to be, in his human measure, a new
incarnation of the Christ, so that people shall say: "He interprets
Christ to me.  He comforts me in my sorrow as Christ himself would do
if he were to come and sit down beside me.  He is hopeful and patient
as Christ would be if he were to return and take me as his disciple."

But before we can be in the place of Christ to sorrowing, suffering,
and struggling ones, we must have the mind in us that was in him.  When
St. Paul said, "The love of Christ constraineth me," he meant that he
had the very love of Christ in him--the love that loved even the most
unlovely, that helped even the most unworthy, that was gentle and
affectionate even to the most loathsome.  We are never ready to do good
in the world, in the truest sense or in any large measure, until we
have become thus filled with the very spirit of Christ.  We may help
people in a certain way without loving them.  We may render them
services of a certain kind, benefiting them externally or temporally.
We may put material gifts into their hands, build them houses, purchase
clothing for them, carry them bread, or improve their circumstances and
condition.  We may thus do many things for them without having in our
heart any love for them, anything better than common philanthropy.  But
the highest and most real help we can give them only through loving
them.

"When I have attempted," says Emerson, "to give myself to others by
services, it proved an intellectual trick--no more.  They eat your
services like apples, and leave you out.  But love them, and they feel
you and delight in you all the time."  When we love others we can help
them in all deep and true ways.  We can put blessings into their hearts
instead of merely into their hands.  We can enter into their very
being, becoming new breath of life to them,--quickening, inspiration,
impulse.

  "What is the best a friend can be
  To any soul, to you or me?
  Not only shelter, comfort, rest--
  Inmost refreshment unexpressed;
  Not only a beloved guide
  To thread life's labyrinth at our side,
  Or with love's torch lead on before;
  Though these be much, there yet is more.

  "The best friend is an atmosphere
  Warm with all inspirations dear,
  Wherein we breathe the large, free breath
  Of life that hath no taint of death.
  Our friend is an unconscious part
  Of every true beat of our heart;
  A strength, a growth, whence we derive
  God's health, that keeps the world alive."


There is a touching and very suggestive story of a good woman in
Sweden, who opened a home for crippled and diseased children--children
for whom no one else was ready to care.  In due time she received into
her home about twenty of these unfortunate little ones.  Among them was
a boy of three years, who was a most frightful and disagreeable object.
He resembled a skeleton.  His skin was covered with hideous blotches
and sores.  He was always whining and crying.  This poor little fellow
gave the good lady more care and trouble than all the others together.
She did her best for him, and was as kind as possible--washed him, fed
him, nursed him.  But the child was so repulsive in his looks and ways,
that, try as she would, she could not bring herself to like him, and
often her disgust would show itself in her face in spite of her effort
to hide it.  She could not really love the child.

One day she was sitting on the veranda steps with this child in her
arms.  The sun was shining brightly, and the perfume of the autumn
honeysuckles, the chirping of the birds, and the buzzing of the
insects, lulled her into a sort of sleep.  Then in a half-waking,
half-dreaming state, she thought of herself as having changed places
with the child, and as lying there, only more foul, more repulsive in
her sinfulness than he was.

Over her she saw the Lord Jesus bending, looking lovingly into her
face, yet with an expression of gentle rebuke in his eye, as if he
meant to say, "If I can bear with you who are so full of sin, surely
you ought, for my sake, to love that innocent child who suffers for the
sin of his parents."

She woke up with a sudden start, and looked into the boy's face.  He
had waked, too, and was looking very earnestly into her face.  Sorry
for her past disgust, and feeling in her heart a new compassion for
him, she bent her face to his, and kissed him as tenderly as ever she
had kissed babe of her own.  With a startled look in his eyes, and a
flush on his cheek, the boy gave her back a smile so sweet that she had
never seen one like it before.  From that moment a wonderful change
came over the child.  He understood the new affection that had come
instead of dislike and loathing in the woman's heart.  That touch of
human love transformed his peevish, fretful nature into gentle quiet
and beauty.  The woman had seen a vision of herself in that blotched,
repulsive child, and of Christ's wonderful love for her in spite of her
sinfulness.  Under the inspiration of this vision she had become indeed
as Christ to the child.  The love of Christ had come into her heart,
and was pouring through her upon that poor, wretched, wronged life.

Christ loves the unlovely, the deformed, the loathsome, the leprous.
We have only to think of ourselves as we are in his sight, and then
remember that, in spite of all the moral and spiritual loathsomeness in
us, he yet loves us, does not shrink from us, lays his hand upon us to
heal us, takes us into most intimate companionship with himself.  This
Christian woman had seen a vision of herself, and of Christ loving her
still and condescending to bless and save her; and now she was ready to
be as Christ, to show the spirit of Christ, to be the pity and the love
of Christ to this poor, loathsome child lying on her knee.

She had gotten the touch of Christ by getting the love of Christ in her
heart.  And we can get it in no other way.  We must see ourselves as
Christ's servants, sent by him to be to others what he is to us.  Then
shall we be fitted to be a blessing to every life which our life
touches.  Our words then shall throb with love, and find their way to
the hearts of the weary and sorrowing.  Then there will be a
sympathetic quality in our life which shall give a strange power of
helpfulness to whatever we  do.

Says a thoughtful writer, speaking of influence: "Let a man press
nearer to Christ, and open his nature more widely to admit the energy
of Christ, and, whether he knows it or not,--it is better, perhaps, if
he does not know it,--he will certainly be growing in power for God
with men, and for men with God."  We get power for Christ only as we
become filled with the very life of Christ.

Everywhere about us there are lives, cold, and cheerless, and dull,
which by the touch of our hand, in loving warmth, in Christ's name,
would be wondrously blessed and transformed.  Some one tells of going
into a jeweller's store to look at certain gems.  Among other stones he
was shown an opal.  As it lay there, however, it appeared dull and
altogether lustreless.  Then the jeweller took it in his hand and held
it for some moments, and again showed it to his customer.  Now it
gleamed and flashed with all the glories of the rainbow.  It needed the
touch and warmth of a human hand to bring out its iridescence.  There
are human lives everywhere about us that are rich in their
possibilities of beauty and glory.  No gems or jewels are so precious;
but as we see them in their earthly condition they are dull and
lustreless, without brightness or loveliness.  Perhaps they are even
covered with stain and denied by sin.  Yet they need only the touch of
the hand of Christ to bring out the radiance, the loveliness, the
beauty of the divine image in them.  And you and I must be the hand of
Christ to these lustreless or stained lives.  Touching them with our
warm love, the sleeping splendor that is in them, hidden mayhap under
sin's marring and ruin, will yet shine out, the beginning of glory for
them.




