CHAPTER XVI.

THE ONLY ONE.


  "Before the monstrous wrong he sets him down--
  One man against a stone walled city of sin.
  *    *    *    *    *    *
  When the red dust has cleared, the lonely soldier
  Stands with strange thoughts beneath the friendly stars."
          --E. R. SILL.


There are a great many people in this world--hundreds of millions,
tables of population foot up.  Yet in a sense each one of us is the
only one.  Each individual life has relations of its own in which it
must stand alone, and into which no other life can come.
Companionships may be close, and they may give much comfort and
inspiration, but in all the inner meaning of life each individual lives
apart and alone.  No one can live your life for you.  No one but
yourself can answer your questions, meet your responsibilities, make
your decisions and choices.  Your relations with God no one but
yourself can fulfil.  No one can believe for you.  A thousand friends
may encircle you and pray for your soul, but until you lift up your own
heart in prayer no communication is established between you and God.
No one can get your sins forgiven but yourself.  No one can obey God
for you.  No other one can do your work for Christ, or render your
account at the judgment-seat.

In the realm of experience also the same is true.  Each person suffers
alone, as if there were no other being in the universe.  Friends may
stand by us in our hours of pain or sorrow, and may sympathize with us
or administer comfort or alleviation, but they enter not really into
the experiences.  In these we are alone.  No one can meet your
temptations for you, or fight your battles, or endure your trials.  The
tenderest friendship, the holiest love, cannot enter into the
solitariness in which each one of us lives apart.

  "Still in each heart of hearts a hidden deep
  Lies, never fathomed by its dearest, best."


This aloneness of life sometimes becomes very real in consciousness.
All great souls experience it as they rise out of and above the common
mass of men in their thoughts and hopes and aspirations, as the
mountains rise from the level of the vale and little hills.  All great
leaders of men ofttimes must stand alone, as they move in advance of
the ranks of their followers.  The battles of truth and of progress
have usually been fought by lonely souls.  Elijah, for example, in a
season of disheartenment and despondency, gave it as part of the
exceptional burden of his life that he was the only one in the field
for God.  It is so in all great epochs; God calls one man to stand for
him.  As Robert Browning says:--

        "In life exceptional,
  When old things terminate and new commence,
  A solitary great man's worth the world.
  God takes the business in his own hand
  At such time."


But the experience is not that only of great souls; there come times in
the lives of all who are living faithfully and worthily when they must
stand alone for God, without companionship, perhaps without sympathy or
encouragement.  Here is a young person, the only one of his family who
has confessed Christ.  He takes him as his Saviour, and then stands up
before the world and vows to be his and follow him.  He goes back to
his home.  The members of the home circle are very dear to him; but
none of them are Christians, and he must stand alone for Christ among
them.  Perhaps they oppose him in his discipleship--in varying degrees
this ofttimes is the experience.  Perhaps they are only indifferent,
making no opposition, only quietly watching his life to see if it is
consistent.  In any case, however, he must stand for Christ alone,
without the help that comes from companionship.

Or it may be in the workshop or in the school that the young Christian
must stand alone.  He returns from the Lord's Table to his week-day
duties, full of noble impulses, but finds himself the only Christian in
the place where his duty leads him.  His companions are ready to sneer,
and they point the finger of scorn at him, with irritating epithets.
Or they even persecute him in petty ways.  At least they are not
Christ's friends, and he, as follower of the Master, finds no sympathy
among them in his new life.  He must stand alone in his discipleship,
conscious all the while that unfriendly eyes are upon him.  Many a
young or older Christian finds it very hard to be the only one to stand
for Christ in the circle in which his daily work fixes his place.

This aloneness puts upon one a great responsibility.  For example, you
are the only Christian in your home.  You are the only witness Christ
has in your house, the only one through whom to reveal his love, his
grace, his holiness.  You are the only one to represent Christ in your
family, to show there the beauty of Christ, the sweetness and
gentleness of Christ, to do there the works of Christ, the things he
would do if he lived in your home.  Perhaps the salvation of all the
souls of your family depends upon your being true and faithful in your
own place.  If you falter in your loyalty, if you fail in your duty,
your loved ones may be lost and the blame will be yours; their blood
will be upon you.

In like manner, if you are the only Christian in the shop, the store,
or the office where you work, a peculiar responsibility rests upon you,
a responsibility which no other one shares with you.  You are Christ's
only witness in your place.  If you do not testify there for him, there
is no other one who will do it.  Miss Havergal tells of her experience
in the girls' school at Dusseldorf.  She went there soon after she had
become a Christian and had confessed Christ.  Her heart was very warm
with love for her Saviour and she was eager to speak for him.  To her
amazement, however, she soon learned that among the hundred girls in
the school, she was the only Christian.  Her first thought was one of
dismay--she could not confess Christ in that great company of worldly,
un-Christian companions.  Her gentle, sensitive heart shrank from a
duty so hard.  Her second thought, however, was that she could not
refrain from confessing Christ.  She was the only one Christ had there
and she must be faithful.  "This was very bracing," she writes.  "I
felt I must try to walk worthy of my calling for Christ's sake.  It
brought a new and strong desire to bear witness for my Master.  It made
me more watchful and earnest than ever before, for I knew that any slip
in word or deed would bring discredit on my Master."  She realized that
she had a mission in that school, that she was Christ's witness there,
his only witness, and that she dare not fail.

This same sense of responsibility rests upon every thoughtful Christian
who is called to be Christ's only witness in a place--in a home, in a
community, in a store, or school, or shop, or social circle.  He is
Christ's only servant there, and he dare not be unfaithful, else the
whole work of Christ in that place may fail.  He is the one light set
to shine there for his Master, and if his light be hidden, the darkness
will be unrelieved.  So there is special inspiration in this
consciousness of being the only one Christ has in a certain place.

There is a sense in which this is true also of every one of us all the
time.  We really are always the only one Christ has at the particular
place at which we stand.  There may be thousands of other lives about
us.  We may be only one of a great company, of a large congregation, of
a populous community.  Yet each one of us has a life that is alone in
its responsibility, in its danger, in its mission and duty.  There may
be a hundred others close beside me, but not one of them can take my
place, or do my duty, or fulfil my mission, or bear my responsibility.
Though every one of the other hundred do his work, and do it perfectly,
my work waits for me, and if I do not do it, it never will be done.

We can understand how that if the great prophet had failed God that day
when he was the only one God had to stand for him, the consequences
would have been most disastrous; the cause of God would have suffered
irreparably.  But are we sure that the calamity to Christ's kingdom
would be any less if one of us should fail God in our lowly place any
common day?

Stories are told of a child finding a little leak in the dike that
shuts off the sea from Holland, and stopping it with his hand till help
could come, staying there all the night, holding back the floods with
his little hand.  It was but a tiny, trickling stream that he held
back; yet if he had not done it, it would soon have become a torrent,
and before morning the sea would have swept over the land, submerging
fields, homes, and cities.  Between the sea and all this devastation
there was but a boy's hand.  Had the child failed, the floods would
have rolled in with their remorseless ruin.  We understand how
important it was that that boy should be faithful to his duty, since he
was the only one God had that night to save Holland.

But do you know that your life may not stand any day, and be all that
stands, between some great flood of moral ruin and broad, fair fields
of beauty?  Do you know that your failure in your lowly place and duty
may not let in a sea of disaster which shall sweep away human hopes and
joys and human souls?  The humblest of us dare not fail, for our one
life is all God has at the point where we stand.

This truth of personal responsibility is one of tremendous moment.  We
do not escape it by being in a crowd, one of a family, one of a
community.  No one but ourself can live our life, do our work, meet our
obligation, bear our burden.  No one but ourself can stand for us
before God to render an account of our deeds.  In the deepest, realest
sense each one of us lives alone.

There is another phase of this subject, however, which should not be
overlooked.  While we must stand alone in our place and be faithful to
our trust, our responsibility reaches only to our own duty.  Others
beside us have their part also to do, and the perfection of the whole
work depends upon their faithfulness as well as upon ours.  The best
any of us can do in this world is but a fragment.  The old prophet
thought his work had failed because Baalism was not yet entirely
destroyed.  Then he was told of three other men, who would come after
him--two kings and then another prophet, who each in turn would do his
part, when at last the destruction of the great alien idolatry would be
complete.  Elijah's faithfulness had not failed, but his achievement
was only a fragment of the whole work.

This is very suggestive and very comforting.  We are not responsible
for finishing everything we begin.  It may be our part only to begin
it; the carrying on and finishing of it may be the work of others whom
we do not know, of others perhaps not yet born.  We all enter into the
work of those who have gone before us, and others who come after us
shall in turn enter into our work.  Our duty simply is to do well and
faithfully our own little part.  If we do this we need never fret
ourselves about the part we cannot do.  That is not our work at all,
but belongs to some other worker, waiting now, perchance, in some
obscure place, who at the right time will come forward with new heart
and skilful hand, anointed by God for his task.

Mr. Sill illustrates this truth in one of his poems, where, speaking of
the young, "led on by courage and immortal hope, and with the morning
in their hearts," he says:--

  "They to the disappointed earth shall give
  The lives we meant to live,
  Beautiful, free, and strong;
  The light we almost had
  Shall make them glad;
  The words we waited long
  Shall run in music from their voice and song."


Mr. Whittier also suggests the same truth:--

  "Others shall sing the song,
  Others shall right the wrong,
  Finish what I begin,
  And all I fail of win.

  "What matter I or they,
  Mine or another's day,
  So the right word be said
  And life the sweeter made?"


So while we are alone in our responsibility we need give no thought for
anything but our own duty, our own little fragment of the Lord's work.
The things we cannot do some other one is waiting and preparing now to
do after the work has passed from our hand.  There is comfort in this
for any who fail in their efforts, and must leave tasks unfinished
which they hoped to complete.  The finishing is another's mission.




