CHAPTER II

WHEREIN WESLEY AND MARGARET GO SHOPPING, AND ELNORA’S WARDROBE IS
REPLENISHED


Wesley Sinton walked down the road half a mile and turned at the lane
leading to his home. His heart was hot and filled with indignation. He
had told Elnora he did not blame her mother, but he did. His wife met
him at the door.

“Did you see anything of Elnora?” she questioned.

“Most too much, Maggie,” he answered. “What do you say to going to
town? There’s a few things has to be got right away.”

“Where did you see her, Wesley?”

“Along the old Limberlost trail, my girl, torn to pieces sobbing. Her
courage always has been fine, but the thing she met to-day was too much
for her. We ought to have known better than to let her go that way. It
wasn’t only clothes; there were books, and entrance fees for
out-of-town people, that she didn’t know about; while there must have
been jeers, whispers, and laughing. Maggie, I feel as if I’d been a
traitor to those girls of ours. I ought to have gone in and seen about
this school business. Don’t cry, Maggie. Get me some supper, and I’ll
hitch up and see what we can do now.”

“What can we do, Wesley?

“I don’t just know. But we’ve got to do something. Kate Comstock will
be a handful, while Elnora will be two, but between us we must see that
the girl is not too hard pressed about money, and that she is dressed
so she is not ridiculous. She’s saved us the wages of a woman many a
day, can’t you make her some decent dresses?”

“Well, I’m not just what you call expert, but I could beat Kate
Comstock all to pieces. I know that skirts should be pleated to the
band instead of gathered, and full enough to sit in, and short enough
to walk in. I could try. There are patterns for sale. Let’s go right
away, Wesley.”

“Set me a bit of supper, while I hitch up.”

Margaret built a fire, made coffee, and fried ham and eggs. She set out
pie and cake and had enough for a hungry man by the time the carriage
was at the door, but she had no appetite. She dressed while Wesley ate,
put away the food while he dressed, and then they drove toward the city
through the beautiful September evening, and as they went they planned
for Elnora. The trouble was, not whether they were generous enough to
buy what she needed, but whether she would accept their purchases, and
what her mother would say.

They went to a drygoods store and when a clerk asked what they wanted
to see neither of them knew, so they stepped aside and held a whispered
consultation.

“What had we better get, Wesley?”

“Dresses,” said Wesley promptly,

“But how many dresses, and what kind?”

“Blest if I know!” exclaimed Wesley. “I thought you would manage that.
I know about some things I’m going to get.”

At that instant several high school girls came into the store and
approached them.

“There!” exclaimed Wesley breathlessly. “There, Maggie! Like them!
That’s what she needs! Buy like they have!”

Margaret stared. What did they wear? They were rapidly passing; they
seemed to have so much, and she could not decide so quickly. Before she
knew it she was among them.

“I beg your pardon, but won’t you wait one minute?” she asked.

The girls stopped with wondering faces.

“It’s your clothes,” explained Mrs. Sinton. “You look just beautiful to
me. You look exactly as I should have wanted to see my girls. They both
died of diphtheria when they were little, but they had yellow hair,
dark eyes and pink cheeks, and everybody thought they were lovely. If
they had lived, they’d been near your age now, and I’d want them to
look like you.”

There was sympathy on every girl face.

“Why thank you!” said one of them. “We are very sorry for you.”

“Of course you are,” said Margaret. “Everybody always has been. And
because I can’t ever have the joy of a mother in thinking for my girls
and buying pretty things for them, there is nothing left for me, but to
do what I can for some one who has no mother to care for her. I know a
girl, who would be just as pretty as any of you, if she had the
clothes, but her mother does not think about her, so I mother her some
myself.”

“She must be a lucky girl,” said another.

“Oh, she loves me,” said Margaret, “and I love her. I want her to look
just like you do. Please tell me about your clothes. Are these the
dresses and hats you wear to school? What kind of goods are they, and
where do you buy them?”

The girls began to laugh and cluster around Margaret. Wesley strode
down the store with his head high through pride in her, but his heart
was sore over the memory of two little faces under Brushwood sod. He
inquired his way to the shoe department.

“Why, every one of us have on gingham or linen dresses,” they said,
“and they are our school clothes.”

For a few moments there was a babel of laughing voices explaining to
the delighted Margaret that school dresses should be bright and pretty,
but simple and plain, and until cold weather they should wash.

“I’ll tell you,” said Ellen Brownlee, “my father owns this store, I
know all the clerks. I’ll take you to Miss Hartley. You tell her just
how much you want to spend, and what you want to buy, and she will know
how to get the most for your money. I’ve heard papa say she was the
best clerk in the store for people who didn’t know precisely what they
wanted.”

“That’s the very thing,” agreed Margaret. “But before you go, tell me
about your hair. Elnora’s hair is bright and wavy, but yours is silky
as hackled flax. How do you do it?”

“Elnora?” asked four girls in concert.

“Yes, Elnora is the name of the girl I want these things for.”

“Did she come to the high school to-day?” questioned one of them.

“Was she in your classes?” demanded Margaret without reply.

Four girls stood silent and thought fast. Had there been a strange girl
among them, and had she been overlooked and passed by with
indifference, because she was so very shabby? If she had appeared as
much better than they, as she had looked worse, would her reception
have been the same?

“There was a strange girl from the country in the Freshman class
to-day,” said Ellen Brownlee, “and her name was Elnora.”

“That was the girl,” said Margaret.

“Are her people so very poor?” questioned Ellen.

“No, not poor at all, come to think of it,” answered Margaret. “It’s a
peculiar case. Mrs. Comstock had a great trouble and she let it change
her whole life and make a different woman of her. She used to be
lovely; now she is forever saving and scared to death for fear they
will go to the poorhouse; but there is a big farm, covered with lots of
good timber. The taxes are high for women who can’t manage to clear and
work the land. There ought to be enough to keep two of them in good
shape all their lives, if they only knew how to do it. But no one ever
told Kate Comstock anything, and never will, for she won’t listen. All
she does is droop all day, and walk the edge of the swamp half the
night, and neglect Elnora. If you girls would make life just a little
easier for her it would be the finest thing you ever did.”

All of them promised they would.

“Now tell me about your hair,” persisted Margaret Sinton.

So they took her to a toilet counter, and she bought the proper hair
soap, also a nail file, and cold cream, for use after windy days. Then
they left her with the experienced clerk, and when at last Wesley found
her she was loaded with bundles and the light of other days was in her
beautiful eyes. Wesley also carried some packages.

“Did you get any stockings?” he whispered.

“No, I didn’t,” she said. “I was so interested in dresses and hair
ribbons and a—a hat——” she hesitated and glanced at Wesley. “Of course,
a hat!” prompted Wesley. “That I forgot all about those horrible shoes.
She’s got to have decent shoes, Wesley.”

“Sure!” said Wesley. “She’s got decent shoes. But the man said some
brown stockings ought to go with them. Take a peep, will you!”

Wesley opened a box and displayed a pair of thick-soled, beautifully
shaped brown walking shoes of low cut. Margaret cried out with
pleasure.

“But do you suppose they are the right size, Wesley? What did you get?”

“I just said for a girl of sixteen with a slender foot.”

“Well, that’s about as near as I could come. If they don’t fit when she
tries them, we will drive straight in and change them. Come on now,
let’s get home.”

All the way they discussed how they should give Elnora their purchases
and what Mrs. Comstock would say.

“I am afraid she will be awful mad,” said Margaret.

“She’ll just rip!” replied Wesley graphically. “But if she wants to
leave the raising of her girl to the neighbours, she needn’t get
fractious if they take some pride in doing a good job. From now on I
calculate Elnora shall go to school; and she shall have all the clothes
and books she needs, if I go around on the back of Kate Comstock’s land
and cut a tree, or drive off a calf to pay for them. Why I know one
tree she owns that would put Elnora in heaven for a year. Just think of
it, Margaret! It’s not fair. One-third of what is there belongs to
Elnora by law, and if Kate Comstock raises a row I’ll tell her so, and
see that the girl gets it. You go to see Kate in the morning, and I’ll
go with you. Tell her you want Elnora’s pattern, that you are going to
make her a dress, for helping us. And sort of hint at a few more
things. If Kate balks, I’ll take a hand and settle her. I’ll go to law
for Elnora’s share of that land and sell enough to educate her.”

“Why, Wesley Sinton, you’re perfectly wild.”

“I’m not! Did you ever stop to think that such cases are so frequent
there have been laws made to provide for them? I can bring it up in
court and force Kate to educate Elnora, and board and clothe her till
she’s of age, and then she can take her share.”

“Wesley, Kate would go crazy!”

“She’s crazy now. The idea of any mother living with as sweet a girl as
Elnora and letting her suffer till I find her crying like a funeral. It
makes me fighting mad. All uncalled for. Not a grain of sense in it.
I’ve offered and offered to oversee clearing her land and working her
fields. Let her sell a good tree, or a few acres. Something is going to
be done, right now. Elnora’s been fairly happy up to this, but to spoil
the school life she’s planned, is to ruin all her life. I won’t have
it! If Elnora won’t take these things, so help me, I’ll tell her what
she is worth, and loan her the money and she can pay me back when she
comes of age. I am going to have it out with Kate Comstock in the
morning. Here we are! You open up what you got while I put away the
horses, and then I’ll show you.”

When Wesley came from the barn Margaret had four pieces of crisp
gingham, a pale blue, a pink, a gray with green stripes and a rich
brown and blue plaid. On each of them lay a yard and a half of wide
ribbon to match. There were handkerchiefs and a brown leather belt. In
her hands she held a wide-brimmed tan straw hat, having a high crown
banded with velvet strips each of which fastened with a tiny gold
buckle.

“It looks kind of bare now,” she explained. “It had three quills on it
here.”

“Did you have them taken off?” asked Wesley.

“Yes, I did. The price was two and a half for the hat, and those things
were a dollar and a half apiece. I couldn’t pay that.”

“It does seem considerable,” admitted Wesley, “but will it look right
without them?”

“No, it won’t!” said Margaret. “It’s going to have quills on it. Do you
remember those beautiful peacock wing feathers that Phoebe Simms gave
me? Three of them go on just where those came off, and nobody will ever
know the difference. They match the hat to a moral, and they are just a
little longer and richer than the ones that I had taken off. I was
wondering whether I better sew them on to-night while I remember how
they set, or wait till morning.”

“Don’t risk it!” exclaimed Wesley anxiously. “Don’t you risk it! Sew
them on right now!”

“Open your bundles, while I get the thread,” said Margaret.

Wesley unwrapped the shoes. Margaret took them up and pinched the
leather and stroked them.

“My, but they are fine!” she cried.

Wesley picked up one and slowly turned it in his big hands. He glanced
at his foot and back to the shoe.

“It’s a little bit of a thing, Margaret,” he said softly. “Like as not
I’ll have to take it back. It seems as if it couldn’t fit.”

“It seems as if it didn’t dare do anything else,” said Margaret.
“That’s a happy little shoe to get the chance to carry as fine a girl
as Elnora to high school. Now what’s in the other box?”

Wesley looked at Margaret doubtfully.

“Why,” he said, “you know there’s going to be rainy days, and those
things she has now ain’t fit for anything but to drive up the cows——”

“Wesley, did you get high shoes, too?”

“Well, she ought to have them! The man said he would make them cheaper
if I took both pairs at once.”

Margaret laughed aloud. “Those will do her past Christmas,” she
exulted. “What else did you buy?”

“Well sir,” said Wesley, “I saw something to-day. You told me about
Kate getting that tin pail for Elnora to carry to high school and you
said you told her it was a shame. I guess Elnora was ashamed all right,
for to-night she stopped at the old case Duncan gave her, and took out
that pail, where it had been all day, and put a napkin inside it.
Coming home she confessed she was half starved because she hid her
dinner under a culvert, and a tramp took it. She hadn’t had a bite to
eat the whole day. But she never complained at all, she was pleased
that she hadn’t lost the napkin. So I just inquired around till I found
this, and I think it’s about the ticket.”

Wesley opened the package and laid a brown leather lunch box on the
table. “Might be a couple of books, or drawing tools or most anything
that’s neat and genteel. You see, it opens this way.”

It did open, and inside was a space for sandwiches, a little porcelain
box for cold meat or fried chicken, another for salad, a glass with a
lid which screwed on, held by a ring in a corner, for custard or jelly,
a flask for tea or milk, a beautiful little knife, fork, and spoon
fastened in holders, and a place for a napkin.

Margaret was almost crying over it.

“How I’d love to fill it!” she exclaimed.

“Do it the first time, just to show Kate Comstock what love is!” said
Wesley. “Get up early in the morning and make one of those dresses
to-morrow. Can’t you make a plain gingham dress in a day? I’ll pick a
chicken, and you fry it and fix a little custard for the cup, and do it
up brown. Go on, Maggie, you do it!”

“I never can,” said Margaret. “I am slow as the itch about sewing, and
these are not going to be plain dresses when it comes to making them.
There are going to be edgings of plain green, pink, and brown to the
bias strips, and tucks and pleats around the hips, fancy belts and
collars, and all of it takes time.”

“Then Kate Comstock’s got to help,” said Wesley. “Can the two of you
make one, and get that lunch to-morrow?”

“Easy, but she’ll never do it!”

“You see if she doesn’t!” said Wesley. “You get up and cut it out, and
soon as Elnora is gone I’ll go after Kate myself. She’ll take what I’ll
say better alone. But she’ll come, and she’ll help make the dress.
These other things are our Christmas gifts to Elnora. She’ll no doubt
need them more now than she will then, and we can give them just as
well. That’s yours, and this is mine, or whichever way you choose.”

Wesley untied a good brown umbrella and shook out the folds of a long,
brown raincoat. Margaret dropped the hat, arose and took the coat. She
tried it on, felt it, cooed over it and matched it with the umbrella.

“Did it look anything like rain to-night?” she inquired so anxiously
that Wesley laughed.

“And this last bundle?” she said, dropping back in her chair, the coat
still over her shoulders.

“I couldn’t buy this much stuff for any other woman and nothing for my
own,” said Wesley. “It’s Christmas for you, too, Margaret!” He shook
out fold after fold of soft gray satiny goods that would look lovely
against Margaret’s pink cheeks and whitening hair.

“Oh, you old darling!” she exclaimed, and fled sobbing into his arms.

But she soon dried her eyes, raked together the coals in the cooking
stove and boiled one of the dress patterns in salt water for half an
hour. Wesley held the lamp while she hung the goods on the line to dry.
Then she set the irons on the stove so they would be hot the first
thing in the morning.




