CHAPTER VI

WHEREIN MRS. COMSTOCK INDULGES IN “FRILLS,” AND BILLY REAPPEARS


It was Wesley Sinton who really wrestled with Elnora’s problem while he
drove about his business. He was not forced to ask himself what it
meant; he knew. The old Corson gang was still holding together. Elder
members who had escaped the law had been joined by a younger brother of
Jack’s, and they met in the thickest of the few remaining fast places
of the swamp to drink, gamble, and loaf. Then suddenly, there would be
a robbery in some country house where a farmer that day had sold his
wheat or corn and not paid a visit to the bank; or in some neighbouring
village.

The home of Mrs. Comstock and Elnora adjoined the swamp. Sinton’s land
lay next, and not another residence or man easy to reach in case of
trouble. Whoever wrote that note had some human kindness in his breast,
but the fact stood revealed that he feared his strength if Elnora were
delivered into his hands. Where had he been the previous night when he
heard that prayer? Was that the first time he had been in such
proximity? Sinton drove fast, for he wished to reach the swamp before
Elnora and the Bird Woman would go there.

At almost four he came to the case, and dropping on his knees studied
the ground, every sense alert. He found two or three little heel
prints. Those were made by Elnora or the Bird Woman. What Sinton wanted
to learn was whether all the remainder were the footprints of one man.
It was easily seen, they were not. There were deep, even tracks made by
fairly new shoes, and others where a well-worn heel cut deeper on the
inside of the print than at the outer edge. Undoubtedly some of
Corson’s old gang were watching the case, and the visits of the women
to it. There was no danger that any one would attack the Bird Woman.
She never went to the swamp at night, and on her trips in the daytime,
every one knew that she carried a revolver, understood how to use it,
and pursued her work in a fearless manner.

Elnora, prowling around the swamp and lured into the interior by the
flight of moths and butterflies; Elnora, without father, money, or
friends save himself, to defend her—Elnora was a different proposition.
For this to happen just when the Limberlost was bringing the very
desire of her heart to the girl, it was too bad.

Sinton was afraid for her, yet he did not want to add the burden of
fear to Katharine Comstock’s trouble, or to disturb the joy of Elnora
in her work. He stopped at the cabin and slowly went up the walk. Mrs.
Comstock was sitting on the front steps with some sewing. The work
seemed to Sinton as if she might be engaged in putting a tuck in a
petticoat. He thought of how Margaret had shortened Elnora’s dress to
the accepted length for girls of her age, and made a mental note of
Mrs. Comstock’s occupation.

She dropped her work on her lap, laid her hands on it and looked into
his face with a sneer.

“You didn’t let any grass grow under your feet,” she said.

Sinton saw her white, drawn face and comprehended.

“I went to pay a debt and see about this opening of the ditch, Kate.”

“You said you were going to prosecute me.”

“Good gracious, Kate!” cried Sinton. “Is that what you have been
thinking all day? I told you before I left yesterday that I would not
need do that. And I won’t! We can’t afford to quarrel over Elnora.
She’s all we’ve got. Now that she has proved that if you don’t do just
what I think you ought by way of clothes and schooling, she can take
care of herself, I put that out of my head. What I came to see you
about is a kind of scare I’ve had to-day. I want to ask you if you ever
see anything about the swamp that makes you think the old Corson gang
is still at work?”

“Can’t say that I do,” said Mrs. Comstock. “There’s kind of dancing
lights there sometimes, but I supposed it was just people passing along
the road with lanterns. Folks hereabout are none too fond of the swamp.
I hate it like death. I’ve never stayed here a night in my life without
Robert’s revolver, clean and loaded, under my pillow, and the shotgun,
same condition, by the bed. I can’t say that I’m afraid here at home.
I’m not. I can take care of myself. But none of the swamp for me!”

“Well, I’m glad you are not afraid, Kate, because I must tell you
something. Elnora stopped at the case this morning, and somebody had
been into it in the night.”

“Broke the lock?”

“No. Used a duplicate key. To-day I heard there was a man here last
night. I want to nose around a little.”

Sinton went to the east end of the cabin and looked up at the window.
There was no way any one could have reached it without a ladder, for
the logs were hewed and mortar filled the cracks even. Then he went to
the west end, the willow faced him as he turned the corner. He examined
the trunk carefully. There was no mistake about small particles of
black swamp muck adhering to the sides of the tree. He reached the low
branches and climbed the willow. There was earth on the large limb
crossing Elnora’s window. He stood on it, holding the branch as had
been done the night before, and looked into the room. He could see very
little, but he knew that if it had been dark outside and sufficiently
light for Elnora to study inside he could have seen vividly. He brought
his face close to the netting, and he could see the bed with its head
to the east, at its foot the table with the candles and the chair
before it, and then he knew where the man had been who had heard
Elnora’s prayer.

Mrs. Comstock had followed around the corner and stood watching him.
“Do you think some slinking hulk was up there peekin’ in at Elnora?”
she demanded indignantly.

“There is muck on the trunk, and plenty on the limb,” said Sinton.
“Hadn’t you better get a saw and let me take this branch off?”

“No, I hadn’t,” said Mrs. Comstock. “First place, Elnora’s climbed from
that window on that limb all her life, and it’s hers. Second place, no
one gets ahead of me after I’ve had warning. Any crow that perches on
that roost again will get its feathers somewhat scattered. Look along
the fence, there, and see if you can find where he came in.”

The place was easy to find as was a trail leading for some distance
west of the cabin.

“You just go home, and don’t fret yourself,” said Mrs. Comstock. “I’ll
take care of this. If you should hear the dinner bell at any time in
the night you come down. But I wouldn’t say anything to Elnora. She
better keep her mind on her studies, if she’s going to school.”

When the work was finished that night Elnora took her books and went to
her room to prepare some lessons, but every few minutes she looked
toward the swamp to see if there were lights near the case. Mrs.
Comstock raked together the coals in the cooking stove, got out the
lunch box, and sitting down she studied it grimly. At last she arose.

“Wonder how it would do to show Mag Sinton a frill or two,” she
murmured.

She went to her room, knelt before a big black-walnut chest and hunted
through its contents until she found an old-fashioned cook book. She
tended the fire as she read and presently was in action. She first
sawed an end from a fragrant, juicy, sugar-cured ham and put it to
cook. Then she set a couple of eggs boiling, and after long hesitation
began creaming butter and sugar in a crock. An hour later the odour of
the ham, mingled with some of the richest spices of “happy Araby,” in a
combination that could mean nothing save spice cake, crept up to Elnora
so strongly that she lifted her head and sniffed amazedly. She would
have given all her precious money to have gone down and thrown her arms
around her mother’s neck, but she did not dare move.

Mrs. Comstock was up early, and without a word handed Elnora the case
as she left the next morning.

“Thank you, mother,” said Elnora, and went on her way.

She walked down the road looking straight ahead until she came to the
corner, where she usually entered the swamp. She paused, glanced that
way and smiled. Then she turned and looked back. There was no one
coming in any direction. She followed the road until well around the
corner, then she stopped and sat on a grassy spot, laid her books
beside her and opened the lunch box. Last night’s odours had in a
measure prepared her for what she would see, but not quite. She
scarcely could believe her senses. Half the bread compartment was
filled with dainty sandwiches of bread and butter sprinkled with the
yolk of egg and the remainder with three large slices of the most
fragrant spice cake imaginable. The meat dish contained shaved cold
ham, of which she knew the quality, the salad was tomatoes and celery,
and the cup held preserved pear, clear as amber. There was milk in the
bottle, two tissue-wrapped cucumber pickles in the folding
drinking-cup, and a fresh napkin in the ring. No lunch was ever
daintier or more palatable; of that Elnora was perfectly sure. And her
mother had prepared it for her! “She does love me!” cried the happy
girl. “Sure as you’re born she loves me; only she hasn’t found it out
yet!”

She touched the papers daintily, and smiled at the box as if it were a
living thing. As she began closing it a breath of air swept by, lifting
the covering of the cake. It was like an invitation, and breakfast was
several hours away. Elnora picked up a piece and ate it. That cake
tasted even better than it looked. Then she tried a sandwich. How did
her mother come to think of making them that way. They never had any at
home. She slipped out the fork, sampled the salad, and one-quarter of
pear. Then she closed the box and started down the road nibbling one of
the pickles and trying to decide exactly how happy she was, but she
could find no standard high enough for a measure.

She was to go to the Bird Woman’s after school for the last load from
the case. Saturday she would take the arrow points and specimens to the
bank. That would exhaust her present supplies and give her enough money
ahead to pay for books, tuition, and clothes for at least two years.
She would work early and late gathering nuts. In October she would sell
all the ferns she could find. She must collect specimens of all tree
leaves before they fell, gather nests and cocoons later, and keep her
eyes wide open for anything the grades could use. She would see the
superintendent that night about selling specimens to the ward
buildings. She must be ahead of any one else if she wanted to furnish
these things. So she approached the bridge.

That it was occupied could be seen from a distance. As she came up she
found the small boy of yesterday awaiting her with a confident smile.

“We brought you something!” he announced without greeting. “This is
Jimmy and Belle—and we brought you a present.”

He offered a parcel wrapped in brown paper.

“Why, how lovely of you!” said Elnora. “I supposed you had forgotten me
when you ran away so fast yesterday.”

“Naw, I didn’t forget you,” said the boy. “I wouldn’t forget you, not
ever! Why, I was ist a-hurrying to take them things to Jimmy and Belle.
My they was glad!”

Elnora glanced at the children. They sat on the edge of the bridge,
obviously clad in a garment each, very dirty and unkept, a little boy
and a girl of about seven and nine. Elnora’s heart began to ache.

“Say,” said the boy. “Ain’t you going to look what we have gave you?”

“I thought it wasn’t polite to look before people,” answered Elnora.
“Of course, I will, if you would like to have me.”

Elnora opened the package. She had been presented with a quarter of a
stale loaf of baker’s bread, and a big piece of ancient bologna.

“But don’t you want this yourselves?” she asked in surprise.

“Gosh, no! I mean ist no,” said the boy. “We always have it. We got
stacks this morning. Pa’s come out of it now, and he’s so sorry he got
more ’an ever we can eat. Have you had any before?”

“No,” said Elnora, “I never did!”

The boy’s eyes brightened and the girl moved restlessly.

“We thought maybe you hadn’t,” said the boy. “First you ever have, you
like it real well; but when you don’t have anything else for a long
time, years an’ years, you git so tired.” He hitched at the string
which held his trousers and watched Elnora speculatively.

“I don’t s’pose you’d trade what you got in that box for ist old bread
and bologna now, would you? Mebby you’d like it! And I know, I ist
know, what you got would taste like heaven to Jimmy and Belle. They
never had nothing like that! Not even Belle, and she’s most ten! No,
sir-ee, they never tasted things like you got!”

It was in Elnora’s heart to be thankful for even a taste in time, as
she knelt on the bridge, opened the box and divided her lunch into
three equal parts, the smaller boy getting most of the milk. Then she
told them it was school time and she must go.

“Why don’t you put your bread and bologna in the nice box?” asked the
boy.

“Of course,” said Elnora. “I didn’t think.”

When the box was arranged to the children’s satisfaction all of them
accompanied Elnora to the corner where she turned toward the high
school.

“Billy,” said Elnora, “I would like you much better if you were
cleaner. Surely, you have water! Can’t you children get some soap and
wash yourselves? Gentlemen are never dirty. You want to be a gentleman,
don’t you?”

“Is being clean all you have to do to be a gentleman?”

“No,” said Elnora. “You must not say bad words, and you must be kind
and polite to your sister.”

“Must Belle be kind and polite to me, else she ain’t a lady?”

“Yes.”

“Then Belle’s no lady!” said Billy succinctly.

Elnora could say nothing more just then, and she bade them good-bye and
started them home.

“The poor little souls!” she mused. “I think the Almighty put them in
my way to show me real trouble. I won’t be likely to spend much time
pitying myself while I can see them.” She glanced at the lunchbox.
“What on earth do I carry this for? I never had anything that was so
strictly ornamental! One sure thing! I can’t take this stuff to the
high school. You never seem to know exactly what is going to happen to
you while you are there.”

As if to provide a way out of her difficulty a big dog arose from a
lawn, and came toward the gate wagging his tail. “If those children ate
the stuff, it can’t possibly kill him!” thought Elnora, so she offered
the bologna. The dog accepted it graciously, and being a beast of
pedigree he trotted around to a side porch and laid the bologna before
his mistress. The woman snatched it, screaming: “Come, quick! Some one
is trying to poison Pedro!” Her daughter came running from the house.
“Go see who is on the street. Hurry!” cried the excited mother.

Ellen Brownlee ran and looked. Elnora was half a block away, and no one
nearer. Ellen called loudly, and Elnora stopped. Ellen came running
toward her.

“Did you see any one give our dog something?” she cried as she
approached.

Elnora saw no escape.

“I gave it a piece of bologna myself,” she said. “It was fit to eat. It
wouldn’t hurt the dog.”

Ellen stood and looked at her. “Of course, I didn’t know it was your
dog,” explained Elnora. “I had something I wanted to throw to some dog,
and that one looked big enough to manage it.”

Ellen had arrived at her conclusions. “Pass over that lunch box,” she
demanded.

“I will not!” said Elnora.

“Then I will have you arrested for trying to poison our dog,” laughed
the girl as she took the box.

“One chunk of stale bread, one half mile of antique bologna contributed
for dog feed; the remains of cake, salad and preserves in an otherwise
empty lunch box. One ham sandwich yesterday. I think it’s lovely you
have the box. Who ate your lunch to-day?”

“Same,” confessed Elnora, “but there were three of them this time.”

“Wait, until I run back and tell mother about the dog, and get my
books.”

Elnora waited. That morning she walked down the hall and into the
auditorium beside one of the very nicest girls in Onabasha, and it was
the fourth day. But the surprise came at noon when Ellen insisted upon
Elnora lunching at the Brownlee home, and convulsed her parents and
family, and overwhelmed Elnora with a greatly magnified, but moderately
accurate history of her lunch box.

“Gee! but it’s a box, daddy!” cried the laughing girl. “It’s carved
leather and fastens with a strap that has her name on it. Inside are
trays for things all complete, and it bears evidence of having enclosed
delicious food, but Elnora never gets any. She’s carried it two days
now, and both times it has been empty before she reached school. Isn’t
that killing?”

“It is, Ellen, in more ways than one. No girl is going to eat breakfast
at six o’clock, walk three miles, and do good work without her lunch.
You can’t tell me anything about that box. I sold it last Monday night
to Wesley Sinton, one of my good country customers. He told me it was a
present for a girl who was worthy of it, and I see he was right.”

“He’s so good to me,” said Elnora. “Sometimes I look at him and wonder
if a neighbour can be so kind to one, what a real father would be like.
I envy a girl with a father unspeakably.”

“You have cause,” said Ellen Brownlee. “A father is the very dearest
person in the whole round world, except a mother, who is just a dear.”
The girl, starting to pay tribute to her father, saw that she must
include her mother, and said the thing before she remembered what Mrs.
Sinton had told the girls in the store. She stopped in dismay. Elnora’s
face paled a trifle, but she smiled bravely.

“Then I’m fortunate in having a mother,” she said.

Mr. Brownlee lingered at the table after the girls had excused
themselves and returned to school.

“There’s a girl Ellen can’t see too much of, in my opinion,” he said.
“She is every inch a lady, and not a foolish notion or action about
her. I can’t understand just what combination of circumstances produced
her in this day.”

“It has been an unusual case of repression, for one thing. She waits on
her elders and thinks before she speaks,” said Mrs. Brownlee.

“She’s mighty pretty. She looks so sound and wholesome, and she’s
neatly dressed.”

“Ellen says she was a fright the first two days. Long brown calico
dress almost touching the floor, and big, lumbering shoes. Those Sinton
people bought her clothes. Ellen was in the store, and the woman
stopped her crowd and asked them about their dresses. She said the girl
was not poor, but her mother was selfish and didn’t care for her. But
Elnora showed a bank book the next day, and declared that she paid for
the things herself, so the Sinton people must just have selected them.
There’s something peculiar about it, but nothing wrong I am sure. I’ll
encourage Ellen to ask her again.”

“I should say so, especially if she is going to keep on giving away her
lunch.”

“She lunched with the Bird Woman one day this week.”

“She did!”

“Yes, she lives out by the Limberlost. You know the Bird Woman works
there a great deal, and probably knows her that way. I think the girl
gathers specimens for her. Ellen says she knows more than the teachers
about any nature question that comes up, and she is going to lead all
of them in mathematics, and make them work in any branch.”

When Elnora entered the coat room after having had luncheon with Ellen
Brownlee there was such a difference in the atmosphere that she could
feel it.

“I am almost sorry I have these clothes,” she said to Ellen.

“In the name of sense, why?” cried the astonished girl.

“Every one is so nice to me in them, it sets me to wondering if in time
I could have made them be equally friendly in the others.”

Ellen looked at her introspectively. “I believe you could,” she
announced at last. “But it would have taken time and heartache, and
your mind would have been less free to work on your studies. No one is
happy without friends, and I just simply can’t study when I am
unhappy.”

That night the Bird Woman made the last trip to the swamp. Every
specimen she possibly could use had been purchased at a fair price, and
three additions had been made to the bank book, carrying the total a
little past two hundred dollars. There remained the Indian relics to
sell on Saturday, and Elnora had secured the order to furnish material
for nature work for the grades. Life suddenly grew very full. There was
the most excitingly interesting work for every hour, and that work was
to pay high school expenses and start the college fund. There was one
little rift in her joy. All of it would have been so much better if she
could have told her mother, and given the money into her keeping; but
the struggle to get a start had been so terrible, Elnora was afraid to
take the risk. When she reached home, she only told her mother that the
last of the things had been sold that evening.

“I think,” said Mrs. Comstock, “that we will ask Wesley to move that
box over here back of the garden for you. There you are apt to get
tolled farther into the swamp than you intend to go, and you might mire
or something. There ought to be just the same things in our woods, and
along our swampy places, as there are in the Limberlost. Can’t you hunt
your stuff here?”

“I can try,” said Elnora. “I don’t know what I can find until I do. Our
woods are undisturbed, and there is a possibility they might be even
better hunting than the swamp. But I wouldn’t have Freckles’s case
moved for the world. He might come back some day, and not like it. I’ve
tried to keep his room the best I could, and taking out the box would
make a big hole in one side of it. Store boxes don’t cost much. I will
have Uncle Wesley buy me one, and set it up wherever hunting looks the
best, early in the spring. I would feel safer at home.”

“Shall we do the work or have supper first?”

“Let’s do the work,” said Elnora. “I can’t say that I’m hungry now.
Doesn’t seem as if I ever could be hungry again with such a lunch. I am
quite sure no one carried more delicious things to eat than I.”

Mrs. Comstock was pleased. “I put in a pretty good hunk of cake. Did
you divide it with any one?”

“Why, yes, I did,” admitted Elnora.

“Who?”

This was becoming uncomfortable. “I ate the biggest piece myself,” said
Elnora, “and gave the rest to a couple of boys named Jimmy and Billy
and a girl named Belle. They said it was the very best cake they ever
tasted in all their lives.”

Mrs. Comstock sat straight. “I used to be a master hand at spice cake,”
she boasted. “But I’m a little out of practice. I must get to work
again. With the very weeds growing higher than our heads, we should
raise plenty of good stuff to eat on this land, if we can’t afford
anything else but taxes.”

Elnora laughed and hurried up stairs to change her dress. Margaret
Sinton came that night bringing a beautiful blue one in its place, and
carried away the other to launder.

“Do you mean to say those dresses are to be washed every two days?”
questioned Mrs. Comstock.

“They have to be, to look fresh,” replied Margaret. “We want our girl
sweet as a rose.”

“Well, of all things!” cried Mrs. Comstock. “Every two days! Any girl
who can’t keep a dress clean longer than that is a dirty girl. You’ll
wear the goods out and fade the colours with so much washing.”

“We’ll have a clean girl, anyway.”

“Well, if you like the job you can have it,” said Mrs. Comstock. “I
don’t mind the washing, but I’m so inconvenient with an iron.”

Elnora sat late that night working over her lessons. The next morning
she put on her blue dress and ribbon and in those she was a picture.
Mrs. Comstock caught her breath with a queer stirring around her heart,
and looked twice to be sure of what she saw. As Elnora gathered her
books her mother silently gave her the lunch box.

“Feels heavy,” said Elnora gaily. “And smelly! Like as not I’ll be
called upon to divide again.”

“Then you divide!” said Mrs. Comstock. “Eating is the one thing we
don’t have to economize on, Elnora. Spite of all I can do food goes to
waste in this soil every day. If you can give some of those city
children a taste of the real thing, why, don’t be selfish.”

Elnora went down the road thinking of the city children with whom she
probably would divide. Of course, the bridge would be occupied again.
So she stopped and opened the box.

“I don’t want to be selfish,” murmured Elnora, “but it really seems as
if I can’t give away this lunch. If mother did not put love into it,
she’s substituted something that’s likely to fool me.”

She almost felt her steps lagging as she approached the bridge. A very
hungry dog had been added to the trio of children. Elnora loved all
dogs, and as usual, this one came to her in friendliness. The children
said “Good morning!” with alacrity, and another paper parcel lay
conspicuous.

“How are you this morning?” inquired Elnora.

“All right!” cried the three, while the dog sniffed ravenously at the
lunch box, and beat a perfect tattoo with his tail.

“How did you like the bologna?” questioned Billy eagerly.

“One of the girls took me to lunch at her home yesterday,” answered
Elnora.

Dawn broke beautifully over Billy’s streaked face. He caught the
package and thrust it toward Elnora.

“Then maybe you’d like to try the bologna to-day!”

The dog leaped in glad apprehension of something, and Belle scrambled
to her feet and took a step forward. The look of famished greed in her
eyes was more than Elnora could endure. It was not that she cared for
the food so much. Good things to eat had been in abundance all her
life. She wanted with this lunch to try to absorb what she felt must be
an expression of some sort from her mother, and if it were not a
manifestation of love, she did not know what to think it. But it was
her mother who had said “be generous.” She knelt on the bridge. “Keep
back the dog!” she warned the elder boy.

She opened the box and divided the milk between Billy and the girl. She
gave each a piece of cake leaving one and a sandwich. Billy pressed
forward eagerly, bitter disappointment on his face, and the elder boy
forgot his charge.

“Aw, I thought they’d be meat!” lamented Billy.

Elnora could not endure that.

“There is!” she said gladly. “There is a little pigeon bird. I want a
teeny piece of the breast, for a sort of keepsake, just one bite, and
you can have the rest among you.”

Elnora drew the knife from its holder and cut off the wishbone. Then
she held the bird toward the girl.

“You can divide it,” she said. The dog made a bound and seizing the
squab sprang from the bridge and ran for life. The girl and boy hurried
after him. With awful eyes Billy stared and swore tempestuously. Elnora
caught him and clapped her hand over the little mouth. A delivery wagon
came tearing down the street, the horse running full speed, passed the
fleeing dog with the girl and boy in pursuit, and stopped at the
bridge. High school girls began to roll from all sides of it.

“A rescue! A rescue!” they shouted.

It was Ellen Brownlee and her crowd, and every girl of them carried a
big parcel. They took in the scene as they approached. The fleeing dog
with something in its mouth, the half-naked girl and boy chasing it
told the story. Those girls screamed with laughter as they watched the
pursuit.

“Thank goodness, I saved the wishbone!” said Elnora. “As usual, I can
prove that there was a bird.” She turned toward the box. Billy had
improved the time. He had the last piece of cake in one hand, and the
last bite of salad disappeared in one great gulp. Then the girls
shouted again.

“Let’s have a sample ourselves,” suggested one. She caught up the box
and handed out the remaining sandwich. Another girl divided it into
bites each little over an inch square, and then she lifted the cup lid
and deposited a preserved strawberry on each bite. “One, two, three,
altogether now!” she cried.

“You old mean things!” screamed Billy.

In an instant he was down in the road and handfuls of dust began to fly
among them. The girls scattered before him.

“Billy!” cried Elnora. “Billy! I’ll never give you another bite, if you
throw dust on any one!”

Then Billy dropped the dust, bored both fists into his eyes, and fled
sobbing into Elnora’s new blue skirt. She stooped to meet him and
consolation began. Those girls laughed on. They screamed and shouted
until the little bridge shook.

“To-morrow might as well be a clear day,” said Ellen, passing around
and feeding the remaining berries to the girls as they could compose
themselves enough to take them. “Billy, I admire your taste more than
your temper.”

Elnora looked up. “The little soul is nothing but skin and bones,” she
said. “I never was really hungry myself; were any of you?”

“Well, I should say so,” cried a plump, rosy girl. “I’m famished right
now. Let’s have breakfast immediate!”

“We got to refill this box first!” said Ellen Brownlee. “Who’s got the
butter?” A girl advanced with a wooden tray.

“Put it in the preserve cup, a little strawberry flavour won’t hurt it.
Next!” called Ellen.

A loaf of bread was produced and Ellen cut off a piece which filled the
sandwich box.

“Next!” A bottle of olives was unwrapped. The grocer’s boy who was
waiting opened that, and Ellen filled the salad dish.

“Next!”

A bag of macaroons was produced and the cake compartment filled.

“Next!”

“I don’t suppose this will make quite as good dog feed as a bird,”
laughed a girl holding open a bag of sliced ham while Ellen filled the
meat dish.

“Next!”

A box of candy was handed her and she stuffed every corner of the lunch
box with chocolates and nougat. Then it was closed and formally
presented to Elnora. The girls each helped themselves to candy and
olives, and gave Billy the remainder of the food. Billy took one bite
of ham, and approved. Belle and Jimmy had given up chasing the dog, and
angry and ashamed, stood waiting half a block away.

“Come back!” cried Billy. “You great big dunces, come back! They’s a
new kind of meat, and cake and candy.”

The boy delayed, but the girl joined Billy. Ellen wiped her fingers,
stepped to the cement abutment and began reciting “Horatio at the
Bridge!” substituting Elnora wherever the hero appeared in the lines.

Elnora gathered up the sacks, and gave them to Belle, telling her to
take the food home, cut and spread the bread, set things on the table,
and eat nicely.

Then Elnora was taken into the wagon with the girls, and driven on the
run to the high school. They sang a song beginning—

“Elnora, please give me a sandwich.
I’m ashamed to ask for cake!”


as they went. Elnora did not know it, but that was her initiation. She
belonged to “the crowd.” She only knew that she was happy, and vaguely
wondered what her mother and Aunt Margaret would have said about the
proceedings.




