CHAPTER XIV

WHEREIN A NEW POSITION IS TENDERED ELNORA, AND PHILIP AMMON IS SHOWN
LIMBERLOST VIOLETS


The next morning Mrs. Comstock called to Elnora, “The mail carrier
stopped at our box.”

Elnora ran down the walk and came back carrying an official letter. She
tore it open and read:

MY DEAR MISS COMSTOCK:

At the weekly meeting of the Onabasha School Board last night, it was
decided to add the position of Lecturer on Natural History to our corps
of city teachers. It will be the duty of this person to spend two hours
a week in each of the grade schools exhibiting and explaining specimens
of the most prominent objects in nature: animals, birds, insects,
flowers, vines, shrubs, bushes, and trees. These specimens and lectures
should be appropriate to the seasons and the comprehension of the
grades. This position was unanimously voted to you. I think you will
find the work delightful and much easier than the routine grind of the
other teachers. It is my advice that you accept and begin to prepare
yourself at once. Your salary will be $750 a year, and you will be
allowed $200 for expenses in procuring specimens and books. Let us know
at once if you want the position, as it is going to be difficult to
fill satisfactorily if you do not.

Very truly yours,

DAVID THOMPSON, President, Onabasha Schools.

“I hardly understand,” marvelled Mrs. Comstock.

“It is a new position. They never have had anything like it before. I
suspect it arose from the help I’ve been giving the grade teachers in
their nature work. They are trying to teach the children something, and
half the instructors don’t know a blue jay from a king-fisher, a beech
leaf from an elm, or a wasp from a hornet.”

“Well, do you?” anxiously inquired Mrs. Comstock.

“Indeed, I do!” laughed Elnora, “and several other things beside. When
Freckles bequeathed me the swamp, he gave me a bigger inheritance than
he knew. While you have thought I was wandering aimlessly, I have been
following a definite plan, studying hard, and storing up the stuff that
will earn these seven hundred and fifty dollars. Mother dear, I am
going to accept this, of course. The work will be a delight. I’d love
it most of anything in teaching. You must help me. We must find nests,
eggs, leaves, queer formations in plants and rare flowers. I must have
flower boxes made for each of the rooms and filled with wild things. I
should begin to gather specimens this very day.”

Elnora’s face was flushed and her eyes bright.

“Oh, what great work that will be!” she cried. “You must go with me so
you can see the little faces when I tell them how the goldfinch builds
its nest, and how the bees make honey.”

So Elnora and her mother went into the woods behind the cabin to study
nature.

“I think,” said Elnora, “the idea is to begin with fall things in the
fall, keeping to the seasons throughout the year.”

“What are fall things?” inquired Mrs. Comstock.

“Oh, fringed gentians, asters, ironwort, every fall flower, leaves from
every tree and vine, what makes them change colour, abandoned bird
nests, winter quarters of caterpillars and insects, what becomes of the
butterflies and grasshoppers—myriads of stuff. I shall have to be very
wise to select the things it will be most beneficial for the children
to learn.”

“Can I really help you?” Mrs. Comstock’s strong face was pathetic.

“Indeed, yes!” cried Elnora. “I never can get through it alone. There
will be an immense amount of work connected with securing and preparing
specimens.”

Mrs. Comstock lifted her head proudly and began doing business at once.
Her sharp eyes ranged from earth to heaven. She investigated
everything, asking innumerable questions. At noon Mrs. Comstock took
the specimens they had collected, and went to prepare dinner, while
Elnora followed the woods down to the Sintons’ to show her letter.

She had to explain what became of her moths, and why college would have
to be abandoned for that year, but Margaret and Wesley vowed not to
tell. Wesley waved the letter excitedly, explaining it to Margaret as
if it were a personal possession. Margaret was deeply impressed, while
Billy volunteered first aid in gathering material.

“Now anything you want in the ground, Snap can dig it out,” he said.
“Uncle Wesley and I found a hole three times as big as Snap, that he
dug at the roots of a tree.”

“We will train him to hunt pupae cases,” said Elnora.

“Are you going to the woods this afternoon?” asked Billy.

“Yes,” answered Elnora. “Dr. Ammon’s nephew from Chicago is visiting in
Onabasha. He is going to show me how men put some sort of compound on a
tree, hang a light beside it, and take moths that way. It will be
interesting to watch and learn.”

“May I come?” asked Billy.

“Of course you may come!” answered Elnora.

“Is this nephew of Dr. Ammon a young man?” inquired Margaret.

“About twenty-six, I should think,” said Elnora. “He said he had been
out of college and at work in his father’s law office three years.”

“Does he seem nice?” asked Margaret, and Wesley smiled.

“Finest kind of a person,” said Elnora. “He can teach me so much. It is
very interesting to hear him talk. He knows considerable about moths
that will be a help to me. He had a fever and he has to stay outdoors
until he grows strong again.”

“Billy, I guess you better help me this afternoon,” said Margaret.
“Maybe Elnora had rather not bother with you.”

“There’s no reason on earth why Billy should not come!” cried Elnora,
and Wesley smiled again.

“I must hurry home or I won’t be ready,” she added.

Hastening down the road she entered the cabin, her face glowing.

“I thought you never would come,” said Mrs. Comstock. “If you don’t
hurry Mr. Ammon will be here before you are dressed.”

“I forgot about him until just now,” said Elnora. “I am not going to
dress. He’s not coming to visit. We are only going to the woods for
more specimens. I can’t wear anything that requires care. The limbs
take the most dreadful liberties with hair and clothing.”

Mrs. Comstock opened her lips, looked at Elnora and closed them. In her
heart she was pleased that the girl was so interested in her work that
she had forgotten Philip Ammon’s coming. But it did seem to her that
such a pleasant young man should have been greeted by a girl in a fresh
dress. “If she isn’t disposed to primp at the coming of a man, heaven
forbid that I should be the one to start her,” thought Mrs. Comstock.

Philip came whistling down the walk between the cinnamon pinks,
pansies, and strawberries. He carried several packages, while his face
flushed with more colour than on the previous day.

“Only see what has happened to me!” cried Elnora, offering her letter.

“I’ll wager I know!” answered Philip. “Isn’t it great! Every one in
Onabasha is talking about it. At last there is something new under the
sun. All of them are pleased. They think you’ll make a big success.
This will give an incentive to work. In a few days more I’ll be myself
again, and we’ll overturn the fields and woods around here.”

He went on to congratulate Mrs. Comstock.

“Aren’t you proud of her, though?” he asked. “You should hear what
folks are saying! They say she created the necessity for the position,
and every one seems to feel that it is a necessity. Now, if she
succeeds, and she will, all of the other city schools will have such
departments, and first thing you know she will have made the whole
world a little better. Let me rest a few seconds; my feet are acting up
again. Then we will cook the moth compound and put it to cool.”

He laughed as he sat breathing shortly.

“It doesn’t seem possible that a fellow could lose his strength like
this. My knees are actually trembling, but I’ll be all right in a
minute. Uncle Doc said I could come. I told him how you took care of
me, and he said I would be safe here.”

Then he began unwrapping packages and explaining to Mrs. Comstock how
to cook the compound to attract the moths. He followed her into the
kitchen, kindled the fire, and stirred the preparation as he talked.
While the mixture cooled, he and Elnora walked through the vegetable
garden behind the cabin and strayed from there into the woods.

“What about college?” he asked. “Miss Brownlee said you were going.”

“I had hoped to,” replied Elnora, “but I had a streak of dreadful luck,
so I’ll have to wait until next year. If you won’t speak of it, I’ll
tell you.”

Philip promised, so Elnora recited the history of the Yellow Emperor.
She was so interested in doing the Emperor justice she did not notice
how many personalities went into the story. A few pertinent questions
told him the remainder. He looked at the girl in wonder. In face and
form she was as lovely as any one of her age and type he ever had seen.
Her school work far surpassed that of most girls of her age he knew.
She differed in other ways. This vast store of learning she had
gathered from field and forest was a wealth of attraction no other girl
possessed. Her frank, matter-of-fact manner was an inheritance from her
mother, but there was something more. Once, as they talked he thought
“sympathy” was the word to describe it and again “comprehension.” She
seemed to possess a large sense of brotherhood for all human and
animate creatures. She spoke to him as if she had known him all her
life. She talked to the grosbeak in exactly the same manner, as she
laid strawberries and potato bugs on the fence for his family. She did
not swerve an inch from her way when a snake slid past her, while the
squirrels came down from the trees and took corn from her fingers. She
might as well have been a boy, so lacking was she in any touch of
feminine coquetry toward him. He studied her wonderingly. As they went
along the path they reached a large slime-covered pool surrounded by
decaying stumps and logs thickly covered with water hyacinths and blue
flags. Philip stopped.

“Is that the place?” he asked.

Elnora assented. “The doctor told you?”

“Yes. It was tragic. Is that pool really bottomless?”

“So far as we ever have been able to discover.”

Philip stood looking at the water, while the long, sweet grasses,
thickly sprinkled with blue flag bloom, over which wild bees clambered,
swayed around his feet. Then he turned to the girl. She had worked
hard. The same lavender dress she had worn the previous day clung to
her in limp condition. But she was as evenly coloured and of as fine
grain as a wild rose petal, her hair was really brown, but never was
such hair touched with a redder glory, while her heavy arching brows
added a look of strength to her big gray-blue eyes.

“And you were born here?”

He had not intended to voice that thought.

“Yes,” she said, looking into his eyes. “Just in time to prevent my
mother from saving the life of my father. She came near never forgiving
me.”

“Ah, cruel!” cried Philip.

“I find much in life that is cruel, from our standpoints,” said Elnora.
“It takes the large wisdom of the Unfathomable, the philosophy of the
Almighty, to endure some of it. But there is always right somewhere,
and at last it seems to come.”

“Will it come to you?” asked Philip, who found himself deeply affected.

“It has come,” said the girl serenely. “It came a week ago. It came in
fullest measure when my mother ceased to regret that I had been born.
Now, work that I love has come—that should constitute happiness. A
little farther along is my violet bed. I want you to see it.”

As Philip Ammon followed he definitely settled upon the name of the
unusual feature of Elnora’s face. It should be called “experience.” She
had known bitter experiences early in life. Suffering had been her
familiar more than joy. He watched her earnestly, his heart deeply
moved. She led him into a swampy half-open space in the woods, stopped
and stepped aside. He uttered a cry of surprised delight.

A few decaying logs were scattered around, the grass grew in tufts long
and fine. Blue flags waved, clusters of cowslips nodded gold heads, but
the whole earth was purple with a thick blanket of violets nodding from
stems a foot in length. Elnora knelt and slipping her fingers between
the leaves and grasses to the roots, gathered a few violets and gave
them to Philip.

“Can your city greenhouses surpass them?” she asked.

He sat on a log to examine the blooms.

“They are superb!” he said. “I never saw such length of stem or such
rank leaves, while the flowers are the deepest blue, the truest violet
I ever saw growing wild. They are coloured exactly like the eyes of the
girl I am going to marry.”

Elnora handed him several others to add to those he held. “She must
have wonderful eyes,” she commented.

“No other blue eyes are quite so beautiful,” he said. “In fact, she is
altogether lovely.”

“Is it customary for a man to think the girl he is going to marry
lovely? I wonder if I should find her so.”

“You would,” said Philip. “No one ever fails to. She is tall as you,
very slender, but perfectly rounded; you know about her eyes; her hair
is black and wavy—while her complexion is clear and flushed with red.”

“Why, she must be the most beautiful girl in the whole world!” she
cried.

“No, indeed!” he said. “She is not a particle better looking in her way
than you are in yours. She is a type of dark beauty, but you are
equally as perfect. She is unusual in her combination of black hair and
violet eyes, although every one thinks them black at a little distance.
You are quite as unusual with your fair face, black brows, and brown
hair; indeed, I know many people who would prefer your bright head to
her dark one. It’s all a question of taste—and being engaged to the
girl,” he added.

“That would be likely to prejudice one,” laughed Elnora.

“Edith has a birthday soon; if these last will you let me have a box of
them to send her?”

“I will help gather and pack them for you, so they will carry nicely.
Does she hunt moths with you?”

Back went Philip Ammon’s head in a gale of laughter.

“No!” he cried. “She says they are ‘creepy.’ She would go into a spasm
if she were compelled to touch those caterpillars I saw you handling
yesterday.”

“Why would she?” marvelled Elnora. “Haven’t you told her that they are
perfectly clean, helpless, and harmless as so much animate velvet?”

“No, I have not told her. She wouldn’t care enough about caterpillars
to listen.”

“In what is she interested?”

“What interests Edith Carr? Let me think! First, I believe she takes
pride in being a little handsomer and better dressed than any girl of
her set. She is interested in having a beautiful home, fine
appointments, in being petted, praised, and the acknowledged leader of
society.

“She likes to find new things which amuse her, and to always and in all
circumstances have her own way about everything.”

“Good gracious!” cried Elnora, staring at him. “But what does she do?
How does she spend her time?”

“Spend her time!” repeated Philip. “Well, she would call that a joke.
Her days are never long enough. There is endless shopping, to find the
pretty things; regular visits to the dressmakers, calls, parties,
theatres, entertainments. She is always rushed. I never am able to be
with her half as much as I would like.”

“But I mean work,” persisted Elnora. “In what is she interested that is
useful to the world?”

“Me!” cried Philip promptly.

“I can understand that,” laughed Elnora. “What I can’t understand is
how you can be in——” She stopped in confusion, but she saw that he had
finished the sentence as she had intended. “I beg your pardon!” she
cried. “I didn’t intend to say that. But I cannot understand these
people I hear about who live only for their own amusement. Perhaps it
is very great; I’ll never have a chance to know. To me, it seems the
only pleasure in this world worth having is the joy we derive from
living for those we love, and those we can help. I hope you are not
angry with me.”

Philip sat silently looking far away, with deep thought in his eyes.

“You are angry,” faltered Elnora.

His look came back to her as she knelt before him among the flowers and
he gazed at her steadily.

“No doubt I should be,” he said, “but the fact is I am not. I cannot
understand a life purely for personal pleasure myself. But she is only
a girl, and this is her playtime. When she is a woman in her own home,
then she will be different, will she not?”

Elnora never resembled her mother so closely as when she answered that
question.

“I would have to be well acquainted with her to know, but I should hope
so. To make a real home for a tired business man is a very different
kind of work from that required to be a leader of society. It demands
different talent and education. Of course, she means to change, or she
would not have promised to make a home for you. I suspect our dope is
cool now, let’s go try for some butterflies.”

As they went along the path together Elnora talked of many things but
Philip answered absently. Evidently he was thinking of something else.
But the moth bait recalled him and he was ready for work as they made
their way back to the woods. He wanted to try the Limberlost, but
Elnora was firm about remaining on home ground. She did not tell him
that lights hung in the swamp would be a signal to call up a band of
men whose presence she dreaded. So they started, Ammon carrying the
dope, Elnora the net, Billy and Mrs. Comstock following with cyanide
boxes and lanterns.

First they tried for butterflies and captured several fine ones without
trouble. They also called swarms of ants, bees, beetles, and flies.
When it grew dusk, Mrs. Comstock and Philip went to prepare supper.
Elnora and Billy remained until the butterflies disappeared. Then they
lighted the lanterns, repainted the trees and followed the home trail.

“Do you ’spec you’ll get just a lot of moths?” asked Billy, as he
walked beside Elnora.

“I am sure I hardly know,” said the girl. “This is a new way for me.
Perhaps they will come to the lights, but few moths eat; and I have
some doubt about those which the lights attract settling on the right
trees. Maybe the smell of that dope will draw them. Between us, Billy,
I think I like my old way best. If I can find a hidden moth, slip up
and catch it unawares, or take it in full flight, it’s my captive, and
I can keep it until it dies naturally. But this way you seem to get it
under false pretences, it has no chance, and it will probably ruin its
wings struggling for freedom before morning.”

“Well, any moth ought to be proud to be taken anyway, by you,” said
Billy. “Just look what you do! You can make everybody love them. People
even quit hating caterpillars when they see you handle them and hear
you tell all about them. You must have some to show people how they
are. It’s not like killing things to see if you can, or because you
want to eat them, the way most men kill birds. I think it is right for
you to take enough for collections, to show city people, and to
illustrate the Bird Woman’s books. You go on and take them! The moths
don’t care. They’re glad to have you. They like it!”

“Billy, I see your future,” said Elnora. “We will educate you and send
you up to Mr. Ammon to make a great lawyer. You’d beat the world as a
special pleader. You actually make me feel that I am doing the moths a
kindness to take them.”

“And so you are!” cried Billy. “Why, just from what you have taught
them Uncle Wesley and Aunt Margaret never think of killing a
caterpillar until they look whether it’s the beautiful June moth kind,
or the horrid tent ones. That’s what you can do. You go straight
ahead!”

“Billy, you are a jewel!” cried Elnora, throwing her arm across his
shoulders as they came down the path.

“My, I was scared!” said Billy with a deep breath.

“Scared?” questioned Elnora.

“Yes sir-ee! Aunt Margaret scared me. May I ask you a question?”

“Of course, you may!”

“Is that man going to be your beau?”

“Billy! No! What made you think such a thing?”

“Aunt Margaret said likely he would fall in love with you, and you
wouldn’t want me around any more. Oh, but I was scared! It isn’t so, is
it?”

“Indeed, no!”

“I am your beau, ain’t I?”

“Surely you are!” said Elnora, tightening her arm.

“I do hope Aunt Kate has ginger cookies,” said Billy with a little skip
of delight.




