
    Transcriber's Note:

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
    possible, including some inconsistencies in hyphenation. Some
    changes of spelling and punctuation have been made. They are
    listed at the end of the text.

    Italic text has been marked with _underscores_.




[Illustration]




 The REAL JESUS
 of the
 FOUR GOSPELS

 _By_ J. B. ATWATER

 MINNEAPOLIS, MINN.
 1922

Copyrighted, 1921

J. B. ATWATER




THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED TO ALL THOSE WHO, IN AGES PAST, HAVE SUFFERED OR
SHED THEIR BLOOD ON ACCOUNT OF CREEDS, DOGMAS, THEOLOGIES, INQUISITIONS
OR OTHER PERVERSIONS OF THE SIMPLE, ALL-SUFFICIENT RELIGION TAUGHT BY
JESUS: LOVE THE LORD, THY GOD, WITH ALL THY HEART, AND THY NEIGHBOR AS
THYSELF.




PREFACE


The first part of this work is a collation of all that is said, and just
what is said, in each of the four Gospels, regarding the more important
incidents of Jesus' life. Every statement in the text, it is thought, is
accurate, free from personal coloring or sectarian bias, and may be
verified from the passages cited. After examining various lives of
Jesus, harmonies of the Gospels, etc., there seemed to be need of such a
work, which would furnish simply the facts, and leave the reader to form
his own conclusions.

Certain notes are appended in elucidation of or comment on the text, and
these may be taken for what they are worth. Their underlying idea is,
that the true greatness of Jesus lay in His being a human Teacher and
not a Divine Redeemer, and therefore the supernatural parts of the
Gospel story are not of vital importance.

The King James version has been used, since that has been the Bible of
English-speaking peoples up to the present century, and their
conceptions of Jesus have been formed from it, and not from the revised
version. The differences between the two versions are probably not
material to any matter herein discussed.

The second part is an attempt to point out, and comment on, the many and
wide divergences that have grown up between the preachings of Jesus and
the practices of His professed followers. Its object is not to criticise
the short-comings of Christianity, but to bring home to the people of
the United States a realization of the practical effect which these
divergences have had, and are now having, on political and economic
questions of high import to the present and future welfare of mankind.




The REAL JESUS of the FOUR GOSPELS




PART I


GENEALOGY

Mark and John give no genealogy of Jesus, except that He was the son of
Joseph and Mary (Mark III:31; VI:3; John I:45; II:1; XIX:25), and is
spoken of as the son of David (Mark X:47, 48; XI:10; John VII:42).

Matthew gives a genealogy from Abraham down to Joseph (Chap. I), and
Luke gives one from Joseph up to Adam (III:2, 23-28).[1]

These two lines of ancestry are the same from Abraham down to David.
There they diverge into two separate lines. Matthew has the next in
descent Solomon, son of David and Bathsheba, former wife of Uriah, the
Hittite (1 Chron. III:5). Luke has, in place of Solomon, his fullblood
brother Nathan (1 Chron. III:5).[2]

From this point down, there is little agreement between the two lines of
descent.

Even as to the father of Joseph, Matthew has Jacob, while Luke says his
name was Heli. They agree as to Joseph's grandfather--Matthan or
Matthat--but, as to his great grandfather, Matthew has Eleazar, while
Luke has Levi.

As to Matthew's line of descent from Solomon, most of his names will be
found in I Chron. Chap. III, although there are several differences.
Where Luke obtained his names of Nathan's descendants, does not
appear.[3]


CONCEPTION

Matthew and Luke state that Jesus was conceived of Mary, when a virgin,
by the Holy Ghost (Matt. Chap. I, Luke Chap. I).

Mark and John are silent on the subject, except as they speak of Jesus
as being the son of Joseph and Mary (Mark III:31; VI:3; John I:45; II:1;
XIX:25).

Matthew says that Joseph, after he was "espoused" to Mary and was her
"husband", but before they "came together", discovered that she was with
child and was "minded to put her away privily." But an angel of the Lord
appeared to him in a dream, and told him that his "wife" was with child
by the Holy Ghost,[4] and would bring forth a son, and that he should
call His name Jesus. Matthew adds that this was in fulfillment of an Old
Testament prophesy, "Behold, a virgin shall be with child and shall
bring forth a son, and they shall call His name Immanuel" (Isaiah
VII:14).[5]

Luke gives the name of the angel, to-wit: Gabriel,[6] but he appears to
_Mary_ instead of to _Joseph_. He also appeared _before_ Mary's
conception, instead of _after_, as in Matthew.[7] Apparently Mary, while
"espoused" to Joseph, was not yet his "wife", since she asks the angel
how she shall conceive, "seeing that I know not a man?" (Luke I:34).[8]
It would also seem that the appearance of the angel was not in a dream,
since his conversation with Mary is related as any ordinary conversation
between two natural persons.[9]


PRE-NATAL INCIDENTS

Luke gives (Chap. I) a quite lengthy account of the conception of John
the Baptist, which is very similar to the story of the conception of
Samson in the Old Testament (Judges Chap. XIII). He also tells of a
three months' visit of Mary to Elisabeth, mother of John the Baptist
and Mary's cousin (Luke I:36), and of Elisabeth's recognition of Mary as
the mother of "My Lord" (Luke I:43).[10] While Mary treated the
announcement of the angel rather indifferently (Luke I:38), she now, on
this salutation of Elisabeth, pours out a grand hymn of invocation and
thanksgiving for the blessing that has come upon her (Luke I:46-55).

The three other evangelists are silent as to these incidents and do not
mention any relationship between Jesus and John.


BIRTH AND CHILDHOOD

Mark and John furnish no information as to the life of Jesus prior to
His baptism by John.

Both Matthew and Luke agree in giving Bethlehem of Judæa as the place of
Jesus' birth. Apparently Matthew considered Bethlehem the then residence
of Joseph and Mary, for he says nothing of their presence there being
temporary, and Joseph, when he returned from Egypt, was going back to
Judæa (Bethlehem), but, on being warned of God in a dream, "he turned
aside into the parts of Galilee; and he came and dwelt in a city called
Nazareth" (Matt. II:22, 23). Luke, however, says that Joseph and Mary
came down to Bethlehem from Nazareth to be taxed (or enrolled), and,
because there was no room for them in the inn, Jesus, when born, was
laid in a manger. Matthew does not mention any manger, but, on the other
hand, the "wise men of the East" find the family in "the house," as
would be natural if Bethlehem was Joseph's residence (Matt. II:11).

Matthew alone tells the story of the visit of the wise men from the East
(Matt. II:1-2). He does not tell us the country from which they came,
nor how they learned of the approaching birth of Jesus, the usual _deus
ex machina_ of Matthew and Luke--an angel in a dream--not being used
here, although he appears in warning the wise men not to see Herod on
their return (Matt. II:12).

Matthew also relates that it was revealed to the "wise men" that Jesus
was to be "king of the Jews" (Matt. II:2). But Jesus never used this
title as applying to Himself, and, that He did use it, was one of the
"false" charges made against Him at His trial (John XVIII:33, 34, 36).

Luke also has a visit to the new born Jesus, but it is of shepherds "in
the same country," instead of strangers from the East. To these
shepherds appeared, not a star, but first one angel and then "a
multitude of the heavenly host." This gives Luke the opportunity to
introduce a beautiful hymn of greeting to the new born Babe, which is
entirely lacking in Matthew (Luke II:10-14). The shepherds did their
homage by "glorifying and praising God," instead of by gifts of gold and
frankincense and myrrh (Matt. II:11).

Matthew is the only one of the evangelists to tell of the slaying by
Herod of "all the children that were in Bethlehem and in all the coasts
thereof from two years old and under," and the flight of Joseph and Mary
to Egypt (Matt. II:16-23).[11]

Luke alone tells of the visit to the temple when Jesus was twelve years
old, and of His meeting the "doctors," "both hearing them and asking
them questions" (Luke II:46).[12]


BAPTISM OF JESUS

John's baptism of Jesus is the first event in the latter's life which
all four evangelists unite in recording. The earlier events related by
Matthew and Luke--Mark and John either do not know, or do not believe,
or do not deem worth recording.

John begins his preaching about the year A. D. 26 (Luke III:1).
Apparently Jesus was "about thirty years of age" when He was baptized
(Luke III:23). The four Gospels describe at some length, and with
substantial agreement, the preaching of John and the incidents of the
baptism (Matt. III, Mark I, Luke III, John I).

Matthew's narrative covers seventeen verses, and John recognizes Jesus,
for he says, "I have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to
me?" (Matt. III:14).

It does not appear that any one but Jesus saw the dove descending from
heaven, or heard the voice (Matt. III:16-17).

Mark's narrative is the most concise, covering eleven verses, and
omitting one or two points of John's preaching and his recognition of
Jesus, as given in Matthew (Mark I:1-11). It does not appear that John
knew or greeted Jesus in any way, or that any one but Jesus saw the dove
or heard the voice.

Luke expands the story to twenty-two verses (Luke III:1-22), adding some
points of John's preaching not given in Matthew or Mark. The baptismal
ceremony is condensed into two verses, and, as in Luke, it does not
appear that John recognized Jesus, or that any one but Jesus saw the
dove or heard the voice.

John's account covers twenty-two verses (John I:15-36), and differs
quite markedly from the other three. This Gospel adds a material point
to John's preaching not in the others (John I:15-18), and omits certain
points appearing in the others. The actual baptism itself is not
described, but John speaks of it as an event that had occurred. He did
not recognize Jesus on first meeting Him (contrary to Matthew's
version): "And I knew Him not" (John I:31, 33). But "I saw the spirit
descending from heaven like a dove and it abode upon Him" (John I:32).
And "He that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon
whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and remaining on Him, the same
is He which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost" (John I:33). On account of
this sign, therefore, he accepted Jesus as the "Lamb of God."[13]


JESUS' MISSION AS HE CONCEIVED IT DURING HIS LIFE-TIME

From this point on, the accounts of Jesus' movements in the four Gospels
are so confusing and contradictory that the only feasible plan seems to
be to follow one Gospel to its end, noting similarities or differences
in the other Gospels as they occur in the course of the narrative.

But, before starting on this, it seems necessary to grasp clearly just
what was Jesus' basic purpose in this, His life-work. Probably nine out
of ten of His followers of today would say that it was to redeem mankind
and convert the world to His teachings. Now, the evidence of the four
Gospels is directly contrary to this view. Jesus had little regard for
the Gentiles or Heathen, and no interest whatever in their conversion.
His references to them are usually derogatory and rather contemptuous
(Matt. VI:32; X:18; XVIII:17; XX:19; Mark X:33, 42, 43; Luke XXII:25),
although there are one or two exceptions, when He is upbraiding the Jews
for their unbelief (Matt. VIII:10; XI:21).

Apparently He never preached to the Gentiles, and was loath to exercise
His healing powers for their benefit. When the woman of Canaan besought
Him to cure her daughter, He at first refused on the ground that His
healing powers were reserved for the Jews. "It is not meet to take the
children's bread and cast it to _dogs_" (Matt. XV:26).

In His instructions to His apostles and disciples (Matt. X; Mark
VI:7-13; Luke IX:1-6), He does not enjoin on them to preach to the
Gentiles, but, on the contrary, expressly prohibits them from doing so.
"Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and, into any city of the
Samaritans, enter ye not" (Matt. X:5; see also Matt. X:23).

The apostles, as judges in heaven, are to have jurisdiction, not over
the Gentiles, but only over Jews. "Ye, also, shall sit upon twelve
thrones, judging the _twelve tribes of Israel_" (Matt. XIX:28).

The angel who announced Jesus' conception to Joseph said that "He shall
save _His people_ from their sins"--not the whole world or "all nations"
(Matt. I:21). So the angel who announced the conception of Jesus to Mary
said that God should give unto Him the throne of His father David, and
that He should "reign over the _house of Jacob_ forever" (Luke I:32,
33).

One of the first recorded utterances of Jesus is: "Think not that I come
to destroy the Law or the prophets. I am not come to _destroy_, but to
_fulfill_" (Matt. V:17). The converted Paul, with the over-zeal that
often marks converts, conceived that his own mission was to _destroy_
the old Jewish law, and worked most successfully towards that end,
overcoming the opposition of Peter, James, John and other intimate
associates of Jesus (Gal. Chap. II). But Jesus, in adhering to the old
Law, necessarily excluded from His scheme of redemption all Gentiles and
others who did not practice circumcision and similar obligatory rites of
the Jewish faith.

Finally, we have Jesus' own clear and positive declaration of His
understanding of His mission. "I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of
the house of Israel" (Matt. XV:24).

As against this explicit statement of His position, the two ambiguous
references to some future (apparently after His death) preaching of His
Gospel "for a witness unto all nations," or that it "must first be
published among all nations," can have no weight (Matt. XXIV:14; Mark
XIII:10).

The evidence establishes beyond a doubt that the characterization of
Jesus by Paul and others who had never heard or seen Him, as an evangel
to the Gentiles and a redeemer of mankind, was not only not authorized
by Jesus, but was explicitly repudiated by Him. His only mission, as He
conceived it, was to bring back the Jews to the true, simple worship of
the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.[14]

That Jesus failed in this mission must be admitted. At first the people
flocked in multitudes to listen to His preaching. This was due in part
to their expectation of a coming Messiah and, no doubt, in part to the
effect of John's work. But what the Jews expected was an earthly
kingdom and a ruler who would give them victory over the heathen. They
had no interest whatever in a spiritual kingdom. Their disappointment
was bitter when they found that Jesus promised them only a kingdom in
heaven. Nor were they affected by such miracles as healing the sick,
making the blind to see, the lame to walk, etc. The miracles they
demanded were those of the Old Testament, when the Lord of Hosts visited
His overwhelming wrath upon the armies of their enemies.

His neighbors of Galilee were the first to fall away from Jesus, and
apparently He felt this defection deeply (Compare Matt. IV:25 with Matt.
XIII:57, 58; Mark I:28 with VI:4, 5, 6). Even His own brothers did not
believe in Him (John VII:5).

This opposition to Him spread (Matt. XI:20; XIII:57), and gradually
deepened into active animosity, so that He was on occasions driven out
of different places, or was in danger of stoning or death (Matt.
VIII:34; Luke IV:29; John VII:I, 19, 44; VIII:59; X:39).

Finally the end came at Jerusalem, when His personal adherents had
apparently dwindled down to a few besides His apostles. Jerusalem had
always shown Him little favor, but, at this time of the Passover, it was
filled with Jews from all parts of their country. Yet, when Pilate
offered to release Him to the people, there was none to ask for His
freedom. At the very last, even all His disciples fled from Him (Matt.
XXVI:56).

Some small bands or sects of Jewish followers survived His death, but
their numbers constantly diminished, and all of them disappeared within
a few centuries after His death. From that time to this the Jews have
consistently, and practically unanimously, rejected Jesus' teachings and
His claims to be their Messiah.[15]


JESUS' FAST IN THE WILDERNESS

Matthew, Mark and Luke say that Jesus, after His baptism by John, was
"led up," or driven "of the Spirit" into the wilderness, staying there
forty days fasting and being "tempted of the devil" (Matt. IV:1-11; Mark
I:12, 13; Luke IV:1-13). Mark says that this was "immediately" after the
baptism, and condenses the event into two verses. Matthew and Luke give
in detail the temptations of the devil. Matthew and Mark mention that
Jesus was ministered to by angels. Luke adds at the end that the devil
departed from Him "for a season."[16]

John directly contradicts this story of Matthew, Mark and Luke. He gives
Jesus' movements specifically for three days after His baptism. On the
first day He calls two of His apostles, Andrew and his brother Simon
Peter (John I:35-42). On the second day He calls Philip, and here occurs
the interview with Nathaniel (John I:43-51), which appears only in this
Gospel. On the third day Jesus, instead of fasting in the wilderness,
attends a marriage feast in Cana of Galilee, and performs what John says
was His first miracle--the turning of water into wine (John II:1-11).

"After this He went down to Capernaum, He and His mother and His
brethren and His disciples; and they continued there not many days"
(John II:12). "And the Jews' Passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem" (John II:13).


THE CALLING OF THE APOSTLES

Matthew says that, after the fasting in the wilderness and after a visit
to Nazareth, Jesus "came and dwelt in Capernaum" on the coast of the Sea
of Galilee (Matt. IV:12,13). As He was walking by the sea, he found
Peter and Andrew fishing, and summoned them to follow Him (Matt.
IV:18,19,20). Going on from thence He found James and John fishing and
summoned them also (Matt. IV:21-22). Matthew does not tell us of the
circumstances of the calling of the other apostles except Matthew. After
the delivery of the Sermon on the Mount, and the performance of various
miracles, and Jesus had come into Capernaum (Matt. IX:1; IV:13),[17] as
He "passed forth from thence, He saw a man named Matthew sitting at the
receipt of custom; and He saith unto him, follow me, and he arose and
followed Him" (Matt. IX:9). Matthew speaks several times of the
"disciples" (apostles)[18] collectively, both before and after the
calling of Matthew (Matt. V:1; VIII:23,25; IX:19). The names of the
twelve are given in Chap. X:1-4.

Mark has the same account as Matthew of the calling of Peter, Andrew,
James and John, but in place of the calling of Matthew has the
following: "And as He passed by he saw _Levi_, the son of Alphaeus,
sitting at the receipt of custom, and said unto him, follow me. And he
arose and followed Him" (Mark II:14). After this Mark several times
mentions His "disciples" (Mark II:15, 16, 18, 23; III:7, 9), and later
says that He "ordained twelve that they might be with Him and that He
might send them forth to preach" (Mark III:14). Both Matthew and Mark
give James "the son of Alphaeus," as one of the apostles, but not Levi.

Luke relates that Jesus found Peter, with James and John, his
"partners," fishing by the "Sea of Gennesaret" (Galilee), and called
them and they followed Him (Luke V:1-11). He omits any mention of Andrew
and adds two new incidents, that Jesus "taught the people out of the
ship," and that Peter and the others put out their nets and they
"inclosed a great multitude of fishes; and their net broke."

A little later Jesus "saw a publican, named Levi, sitting at the receipt
of custom," and He said to him, "Follow me, and he left all, rose and
followed Him" (Luke V:27, 28).

Luke adds here the incident that Levi "made Him a great feast," at which
publicans and others sat down, and the scribes and Pharisees rebuked the
disciples, saying "Why do you eat and drink with publicans and sinners?"
(Luke V:27-32).[19]

At some uncertain time later Jesus called "unto Him His disciples, and
of them He chose twelve, whom also He named apostles" (Luke VI:13). Then
follow the names, the same as in Matthew and Mark.

John's story is somewhat variant. Jesus' baptism took place at
Bethabara, beyond Jordan, in the Decapolis, and some distance both from
Nazareth and the Sea of Galilee. Here, on the next day, Jesus meets John
and two of His disciples (John I:35, 36). One of these is Andrew, and he
brings His brother Simon Peter to Jesus. The two acknowledge Him as the
Messiah, and thereafter follow Him (John I:40-42). The following day
Jesus finds Philip and makes him one of His disciples (John I:43). There
is no further mention of any specific apostles being called by Jesus,
although there are constant references to His disciples being with Him
(John II:2, 12, 17; III:22; IV:8). There is no specific account of the
choosing of the twelve, although the Gospel mentions later that they had
been chosen (John VI:67, 70).

In the last chapter of John "Nathaniel of Cana" is mentioned apparently
as one of the twelve apostles (John XXI:2), although his name is not in
the lists of Matthew, Mark and Luke. He was probably the same Nathaniel
who appears earlier in this Gospel (John I:43-51).


THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT

The Sermon on the Mount is the first discourse by Jesus narrated by
Matthew, and is the longest connected discourse to be found in the four
Gospels. The place of its delivery is not fixed other than that "He went
up into a mountain," but it was probably some elevation of land in
Galilee, near Capernaum (Matt. IV:13). The time of its delivery is also
not fixed, although it must have been shortly after the baptism by John.
Jesus had already done some preaching in Galilee and performed some
miracles (Matt. IV:23, 24), but the delivery of the sermon ante-dates
all the specific miracles which Matthew relates. The discourse covers
three chapters (109 verses) of Matthew's text.

There is, in the four Gospels, no other connected discourse
corresponding to the Sermon on the Mount, except in Luke. In Chapter VI
he gives a discourse covering twenty-nine verses of his text, which are
substantially the same as corresponding verses of the Sermon on the
Mount. The place of the delivery of this discourse is not fixed, except
that it was on a "plain" (Luke VI:17), probably near Capernaum (Luke
VII:1). The time is not fixed, except that Luke's sermon on the plain
occurs _after_ a number of miracles and other events (Luke IV:33-44;
VI:1-19), while in Matthew's narrative the Sermon on the Mount occurs
_before_ these events (Matt. VIII and following).

Some of the verses of this discourse will be found scattered through
Mark and John, but a considerable portion of it is entirely lacking. For
instance, the "beatitudes" do not appear in either Mark or John.[20]


THE LORD'S PRAYER

In Matthew the Lord's Prayer forms a part of the Sermon on the Mount
(Matt. VI:9-13).[21]

According to Luke (Luke XI:2-4) it was given to the disciples alone, and
not to a multitude, as in Matthew. In Luke it also comes at a much later
date than the delivery of the Sermon on the Mount. One verse is slightly
different, Luke having, "and forgive us our sins; for we also forgive
every one who is indebted to us," in place of Matthew's "and forgive us
our debts as we forgive our debtors." Luke also omits the last sentence
in Matthew's version.

The Lord's Prayer is not found in Mark or John.[22]


THE FIRST MIRACLES

Matthew says, in a general way, that Jesus healed "all manner of
sickness" before the delivery of the Sermon on the Mount (Matt. IV:23,
24). But the first specific miracles which he describes occurred after
that event (Matt. VIII:1-15). The first was the leper, the second the
centurion's servant, afflicted with palsy, and the third was the mother
of Simon Peter's wife, who was "sick of a fever." Jesus saw and touched
the leper and Peter's wife's mother, but the centurion's servant was one
of the few cases where the cure was effected in the absence of the
patient and without Jesus' seeing him.

The curing of the leper is described by Mark (I:40) and by Luke (V:12).
Luke describes the healing of the centurion's servant (VII:1-10),
differing only in that the friends of the centurion came to Jesus
instead of the centurion in person, as in Matthew.

Mark and Luke both relate the curing of Peter's wife's mother (Mark
I:30; Luke IV:38).

John mentions none of these miracles, but, alone of all four
evangelists, narrates the miracle at Cana of changing water into wine
(John II:1-10), and says that this was Jesus' first miracle (John
II:11). He then describes the curing of the sick "son of a nobleman of
Capernaum" (John IV:46-53), and says that this was the second miracle
"which Jesus did when He was come out of Judæa into Galilee," viz: after
His baptism by John (John IV:54). The circumstances of this miracle are
quite similar to those of the centurion's servant described by Matthew
and Luke, the cure being effected in the absence of the patient.

Matthew next gives the miracle of the stilling of the tempest (Matt.
VIII:23-27), which is also found in Mark (IV:35-41), and in Luke
(VIII:22-25). This miracle is not found in John.

Then follows the miracle of driving the devils out of the two men of the
"country of the Gergesenes," and sending them into a herd of swine which
"ran violently down a steep place into the sea and perished in the
waters" (Matt. VIII:28-34).

Mark narrates the same miracle as occurring in the country of the
Gadarenes, except there is one man instead of two (Mark V:1-20). The
sufferings of this man, who is possessed of "an unclean spirit," are
described in some detail. The spirit, being asked for his "name," says,
"My name is Legion; for we are many." Thereupon he or they beseech Jesus
not to send them away out of the country, but: "Send us into the swine,
that we may enter into them." Jesus "gave them leave," and they entered
into the swine ("they were about two thousand") and the swine ran
violently down a steep place, and "were choked in the sea."

Luke's account (Luke VIII:26-40) follows substantially that of Mark.
There was one man in the country of the Gadarenes "which had devils a
long time." The devil or devils besought Jesus "that He would not
command them to go out into the deep," but would send them into the
swine. This Jesus does, and the swine run down a steep place and are
choked in the sea.

All three accounts agree that, after the miracle, "the whole city," or
"the whole multitude of the country of the Gadarenes round about,"
besought Jesus to depart from them. The only reason given for this
action is the statement of Luke "for they were taken with great fear"
(Luke VIII:37).

John does not mention this miracle.[23]


THE RAISING OF THE DEAD

There are three miracles of this class in the Gospels.

The first (apparently) in point of time is related by Luke (Luke
VII:11-17).[24] The day after the curing of the centurion's servant at
Capernaum (Luke VII:1), Jesus went into a city called Nain, with "many
of His disciples" and "much people" (Luke VII:11). Nain was an inland
city in the southern part of Galilee, some distance from Capernaum and
the sea of Galilee. This is the only time that this city is mentioned
in the four Gospels. As Jesus approaches the city, the dead man is
carried out, followed by his mother, a widow, and "much people of the
city" (Luke VII:12). Apparently without any solicitation, Jesus tells
the dead man to arise, "and he that was dead sat up and began to speak"
(Luke VII:13, 14, 15). The dead man and his relatives are not otherwise
identified and there is no reference to this miracle in any of the other
Gospels.

The next miracle of this class is that of Jairus' daughter.

Matthew relates that, while Jesus was at Capernaum after the miracle of
the Gadarene swine (Matt. IX:1, 10), a "certain ruler" came to Him and
said: "My daughter is even now dead; but come and lay Thy hand upon her,
and she shall live" (Matt. IX:18). In answer to this request Jesus and
His disciples go to the ruler's house, and find "the minstrels and the
people making a noise." Jesus says, "Give place, for the maid is not
dead but sleepeth. And they laughed Him to scorn. But when the people
were put forth, He went in and took her by the hand, and the maid arose"
(Matt. IX:23, 24, 25). On the way to the ruler's house occurs the
miracle of the woman with an issue of blood touching Jesus' garment and
being cured (Matt. IX:20, 21, 22).

Mark places this miracle immediately after that of the Gadarene swine,
when Jesus had passed over the sea (Galilee) unto the other side
(Capernaum), nigh unto the sea (Mark V:21). "One of the rulers of the
synagogue, Jairus by name," came to Him and told Him, "My little
daughter lieth at the point of death" (Mark V:23). Jesus takes with him
only Peter and James and John, and, on the way to the ruler's house,
word is brought that the daughter is dead (Mark V:35, 37). Jesus brings
the father, mother, Peter, James and John into the girl's room, takes
her by the hand and bids her arise. At once she arose and walked, "for
she was of the age of twelve years" (Mark V:40, 41, 42). The curing of
the woman with the issue of blood is also given, but at considerable
more length than in Matthew (Mark V:25-34).

Luke's account (Luke VIII:41-56) is substantially the same as that of
Mark. The daughter "lay a dying" when Jairus went to get Jesus, and word
of her death comes just as the miracle on the woman with an issue of
blood is performed. Jesus took the father and mother and Peter, James
and John into the house, but, apparently, excluded them from the girl's
room, when he performed the miracle. "And He put them all out, and took
her by the hand, and called, saying, Maid, arise" (Luke VIII:54).

The raising of Lazarus from his grave is told only by John (John
XI:1-46). It occurred late in Jesus' prophetic career, very shortly
before the last Passover (John XI:55; XII:1, and following). Jesus was
then at Bethabara in Decapolis (John X:40; I:28). Lazarus and his
sisters, Mary and Martha, were living in Bethany, in Judæa, quite near
Jerusalem, but some little distance from Bethabara. Jesus already knew
the family and "loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus." Lazarus
falling sick, the sisters send to Jesus saying, "Lord, behold, he whom
Thou lovest is sick" (John XI:3). Jesus does not go at once but waits
two days (John XI:6). Apparently the reason for this delay is that,
instead of healing a sick man, He may raise a dead man from the grave
"that the Son of God might be glorified thereby" (John XI:4, 11-15).
When Jesus came to Bethany, He "found that he (Lazarus) had lain in the
grave four days already" (John XI:17). Martha first, and then Mary, came
out to meet Jesus, and express their belief that, if He had been there,
Lazarus would not have died; but are in doubt as to his now being
restored to life (John XI:24, 32, 39). They then go to the grave, which
"was a cave and a stone lay upon it" (John XI:38). Jesus then "cried
with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth. And he that was dead came forth,
bound hand and foot with grave-clothes, and his face was bound about
with a napkin" (John XI:43-44).[25]


THE LOAVES AND FISHES

Matthew relates that Jesus departed hence (from Capernaum, Matt.
XIII:54) "by ship into a desert place apart" (Matt. XIV:13). This was
just after the beheading of John the Baptist by Herod (Matt. XIV:10, 11,
12). A "great multitude" followed Jesus, "and He healed their sick"
(Matt. XIV:14). At evening the disciples wished Jesus "to send the
multitude away that they may go into the villages and buy themselves
victuals" (Matt. XIV:15). But Jesus said, "Give ye them to eat." They
had but five loaves and two fishes, and Jesus took these and broke them
and the disciples distributed them to the multitude (Matt. XIV:16-19).
"And they did all eat and were filled; and they took up of the fragments
that remained twelve baskets full. And they that had eaten were about
five thousand men, besides women and children" (Matt. XIV:20, 21).

Mark, Luke and John follow very closely the narrative of Matthew, Luke
adding the detail that the "desert place" belonged to the city of
Bethsaida[26] (Mark VI:30-45; Luke IX:10-17; John VI:1-13).

A similar miracle is related by Matthew and Mark (Matt. XV:29-39; Mark
VIII:1-9) as occurring shortly after the first, on a mountain near the
sea (Galilee) in "the midst of the coasts of Decapolis" (Mark VII:31).
There were seven loaves and a "few small fishes," seven baskets full of
the broken food were left, and they that did eat "were four thousand
men, besides women and children" (Matthew), or "about four thousand"
(Mark).

Luke and John do not give this miracle.


OTHER MIRACLES

Besides those already mentioned, the following specific miracles are
found in Matthew, the details of which it is not necessary to give.
These are outside of general and indefinite statements of persons cured
of various afflictions.

(a) The curing at Capernaum of the man sick of the palsy (Matt. IX:1-7).
See Mark II:1-12, Luke V:17-26, where the sick man is let down on his
bed through the roof.

(b) The giving sight to two blind men, apparently at Capernaum (Matt.
IX:27-31).

(c) Restoring his speech to a dumb man at the same time and place (Matt.
IX:32-34).

(d) Curing of the man with the withered hand (Matt. XII:10-13). The
place of this miracle is uncertain.

(e) The case of the blind and dumb man possessed of a devil (Matt.
XII:22, 23). The circumstances of this miracle are the same as in (c).

(f) The walking on the waters (Matt. XIV:22-23) near the land of
Gennesaret (Matt. XIV:34). See Mark VI:47-52; John VI:16-21.

(g) The curing of the daughter of the Gentile woman "vexed with a devil"
(Matt. XV:22-28). The place of this miracle was "the coasts of Tyre and
Sidon" (Matt. XIV:21).

(h) The curing of the lunatic son of a "certain man" (Matt. XVII:14-18).
This occurred in some part of Galilee not specified (Matt. XVII:1, 22,
24). See also Mark IX:17-27; Luke IX:37-42.

(i) The curing of the two blind men near Jericho (Matt. XX:30-34). See
also Mark X:46-52; Luke XVIII:35-43.

(j) The blasting of the fig tree near Bethany (Matt. XXI:18-20). See
Mark XI:12-14, who explains the absence of figs on the tree--"for the
time of figs was not yet."[27]


THE INSTRUCTIONS TO THE APOSTLES

Matthew devotes an entire chapter to this subject (Matt. X). This is the
first time in Matthew's narrative that the term "Apostles" is applied to
the followers or disciples of Jesus (Matt. X:2). Up to this point he has
mentioned specifically the calling of only five of the apostles (Matt.
IV:18, 21; IX:9), although there are possible references to others
(Matt. VIII:19, 21).

The first injunction is that they shall not preach to the Gentiles or
Samaritans, but "to the lost sheep of the house of Israel" (Matt. X:5,
6).

The only instruction as to the subject-matter of their preachings is
that they shall say "the kingdom of heaven is at hand" (Matt. X:7).

They are told to "heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead,
cast out devils" (Matt. X:8).

They are to provide no money for their expenses and carry little raiment
(Matt. X:9,10).

When they enter into a city, they are to seek a worthy house and abide
therein, and, if a city will not receive and hear them, "It shall be
more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment
than for that city" (Matt. X:11-15).

The remainder of the chapter contains warnings of the trials that will
befall the apostles on their mission, admonitions against losing their
courage and promises of the rewards that will follow the faithful
performance of their work. Jesus also predicts the family dissensions
that will accompany the gradual introduction of His Gospel, and in that
connection uses the expression: "Think not that I am come to send peace
on earth; I came not to send peace, but a sword" (Matt. X:34).

The place of this statement is not fixed, nor the time, except that it
appears in the narrative after the Sermon on the Mount and the raising
of Jairus' daughter.

Mark tells how Jesus went "up into a mountain and calleth unto Him whom
he would" (Mark III:13). He then "ordained twelve, that they should be
with Him, and that He might send them forth to preach" (Mark III:14).
Then follow the names of the twelve apostles, the calling of four of
whom Mark had already related (Mark I:16-20). At a somewhat later time
he tells of the sending forth of the twelve apostles, but condenses the
instructions to them into four verses (Mark VI:7-13).

Luke tells that Jesus, "having gone out into a mountain to pray, called
unto Him His disciples, and of them He chose twelve, whom also He named
apostles" (Luke VI:13, 14). The calling of Andrew, Peter, James and
John, and of Levi (if he were one of the apostles) had already been
given (Luke V:1-10, 27, 28). The instructions to the apostles appear
later in his narrative and are condensed into three verses (Luke
IX:1-6).

Luke alone of the four evangelists tells that, at a later date, Jesus
"appointed other seventy also" to go before Him and preach (Luke X:1).
To these seventy are given instructions similar to those given to the
twelve in Matthew (Luke X:2-12).

John tells of the calling of Andrew, Peter and Philip (John I:40, 41,
43), but has no account of any special instructions given to the
apostles.[28]


THE TEMPERATE LIFE

In rebuking the obduracy of the then generation of the Jews, Jesus
illustrates His view of right living, viz: temperance in all things.

"For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He hath a
devil. The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a
man gluttonous and a wine bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners"
(Matt. XI:18, 19).

In the face of the example of asceticism set by John the Baptist, Jesus
neither fasted Himself, nor did He enjoin fasting on His disciples
(Matt. XI:18, 19; IX:14; Mark II:18; Luke V:33). While He objected to
the charge of excess, He both ate meat and drank wine in moderation, and
inculcated the same practice on His disciples. "And in the same house
remain eating and drinking such things as they give" (Luke X:7). He must
have been companionable in His every-day life, for He both entertained
in His own house (Matt. IX:10; Mark II:15), and was a welcome guest at
entertainments given in His honor. "And Levi made Him a great feast at
His own house" (Luke V:29). "And it came to pass as He went into the
house of one of the chief Pharisees to eat bread on the Sabbath day"
(Luke XIV:1). "And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of
Galilee; and the mother of Jesus was there; and both Jesus was called
and His disciples to the marriage" (John II:1, 2). "There they made Him
a supper" (John XII:2).[29]

He could sympathize with the spirit of joy and cheer appropriate to such
occasions, for when the wine failed at the wedding in Cana, He provided
a fresh supply, better than the first (John II:3-10).


THE OBSERVANCE OF THE SABBATH

On a certain Sabbath day, Jesus and His disciples were passing through
the corn fields (Matt. XII:1; Mark II:23; Luke VI:1). Luke says that it
was "the second Sabbath after the first," probably calling "the first"
the one on which Jesus preached in the synagogue at Nazareth (Luke
IV:16). The disciples, being hungry, began to pluck and eat the ears of
corn. The Pharisees object that they "do that which is not lawful to do
on the Sabbath day." Jesus cites the example of David eating the
shew-bread in the house of God, and says that if they understood the
meaning of the saying, "I will have mercy and not sacrifice," they would
not have condemned the guiltless. "And He said unto them, The Sabbath
was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath. Therefore the Son of Man
is Lord also of the Sabbath" (Mark II:27).

On another Sabbath day (Luke VI:1, 6), a man with a withered hand was in
the synagogue, and the scribes and Pharisees asked Jesus, "Is it lawful
to heal on the Sabbath days? That they might accuse him." Jesus cites
the case of a sheep falling into a pit on the Sabbath day, and says:
"Wherefore it is lawful to _do well_ on the Sabbath day." Thereupon He
restores the man's hand "whole" (Matt. XII:10-13).

In Mark and Luke, Jesus asks the question of the scribes and Pharisees
as to whether it was lawful to _do good_ on the Sabbath day. "But they
held their peace. And when He had looked round about on them with anger,
being grieved for the hardness of their hearts, He saith unto the man,
stretch forth thine hand" (Mark III:1-5; Luke VI:6-10).

Again Jesus is teaching in the synagogue on the Sabbath and cures a
woman of a "spirit of infirmity" of eighteen years' continuance. The
"ruler of the synagogue" objects "with indignation" to this healing on
the Sabbath, because "there are six days in which men ought to work."
Jesus says: "Thou hypocrite, doth not each one of you on the Sabbath
loose his ox or his ass from the stall, and lead him away to watering"
(Luke XIII:11-17).

Another similar case occurred when Jesus "went into the house of one of
the chief Pharisees to eat bread on the Sabbath," and healed a certain
man "which had the dropsy." Here He cites against the Pharisees the
illustration of an ass or an ox falling into a pit on the Sabbath day
(Luke XIV:1-6).

John records two more cases of cures being performed on the Sabbath day,
and of the Pharisees objecting to them as unlawful acts (John V:1-17;
IX:1-38. See John VII:23).[30]


THE TRANSFIGURATION

Six (or eight) days after certain preaching, Jesus "taketh Peter, James
and John" and "bringeth them up into an high mountain apart, and was
transfigured before them; and His face did shine as the sun, and His
raiment was white as the light" (Matt. XVII:1, 2). Moses and Elias then
appear and talk with Jesus (Matt. XVII:3). Peter proposes that they make
three tabernacles (Matt. XVII:4). A cloud then overshadows them and a
voice comes out of the cloud, saying, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased; hear ye Him" (Matt. XVII:5). The disciples are afraid,
fall on their faces, but Jesus touches them and tells them to arise and
be not afraid (Matt. XVII:6, 7). When they arise they see no man, except
Jesus (Matt. XVII:8). As they come down from the mountain, Jesus
charges them, "Tell the vision to no man, until the _Son of Man_ be
risen again from the dead" (Matt. XVII:9).

Mark follows closely the narrative of Matthew, and adds that the
disciples "kept that saying with themselves, questioning one with
another what the rising from the dead should mean" (Mark IX:2-10).[31]

Luke follows the accounts of Matthew and Mark, adding that the disciples
were "heavy with sleep," but saw the vision when they awoke, and "they
kept it close, and told no man in those days any of those things which
they had seen" (Luke IX:28-36).

John says nothing about this vision.


THE EVENTS PRECEDING JESUS' ARREST

About the middle of his Gospel, Matthew says, "From that time forth
began Jesus to shew unto His disciples" His future trial, death and
resurrection at Jerusalem (Matt. XVI:21). Peter, with his faith in
Jesus' earthly power, "began to rebuke" Him, saying that this should not
be done unto Him (Matt. XVI:22). But Jesus turned on him and said, "Get
thee behind me, Satan; thou art an offense unto me; for thou savorest
not the things that be of God, but those that be of men" (Matt. XVI:23.
See also Matt. XVII:22, 23).

Mark and Luke both give this incident, although Luke omits the rebuke of
Peter (Mark VIII:31-33; Luke IX:22).

In all three Gospels the incident closely follows Peter's declaration of
Jesus as "Christ, the Son of the living God" (Matt. XVI:16; Mark
VIII:29; Luke IX:20).

Again, at a later date, as Jesus is going up to Jerusalem, He predicts
to His disciples the fate that is there awaiting Him (Matt. XX:17-18;
Mark IX:31, 32; X:32; Luke XVIII:31).

Just when these communications were made to the disciples is not clear,
but the earliest of them must have been some time before the last visit
to Jerusalem, since they precede much of Jesus' teaching and many of His
parables and miracles.[32]

As the last Passover approached, Jesus "departed from Galilee and came
into the coasts of Judæa beyond Jordan" (Matt. XIX:1). He continued His
preaching as He journeyed, and finally came to Bethphage, nigh unto
Jerusalem (Matt. XXI:1). From there He sends two of His disciples to a
neighboring village, and they bring to Him an ass and her colt (Matt.
XXI:1-7). Riding on the ass (or the colt), He makes His entry into
Jerusalem. The multitude spread their garments, and branches from the
trees, in the way, crying out, "Hosanna to the son of David," and salute
Him as "Jesus, the prophet of Nazareth of Galilee" (Matt. XXI:7-11).[33]
Jesus then went into the temple, drove out those who bought and sold
therein,[34] and healed the blind and lame (Matt. XXI:12-16).

Leaving Jerusalem, Jesus goes to Bethany (Matt. XXI:17) to the house of
Simon the leper (Matt. XXVI:6). On the following day He returns to
Jerusalem, and on the way occurs the blasting of the fig tree (Matt.
XXI:18-23). It would seem that Jesus must have spent some time in
Bethany, preaching in the day time in Jerusalem, since there follow four
and a half chapters of preaching and parables, which were delivered
before the Passover (Matt. XXI:23-46; XXII; XXIII; XXIV; XXV).[35]

While Jesus was at Simon's house in Bethany, sitting at meat, a woman
(who, it seems, was Lazarus' sister Mary; see John XI:2) came in with an
alabaster box of very precious ointment and poured on His head. The
disciples object to this as a useless waste, but Jesus rebukes them and
commends the woman for her act (Matt. XXVI:6-13).

Mark follows closely Matthew's narrative to this point, except that
Jesus rides into Jerusalem on a colt, "whereon man never sat" (Mark
XI:2; Luke XIX:30), and except that the cleansing the temple of the
money changers is omitted (Mark XI:11).

Luke adds to the accounts of Matthew and Mark the encounter with
Zacchaeus, and Jesus' entertainment by him (Luke XIX:1-7). According to
him, it was "the whole multitude of the disciples" who greeted Jesus on
His entry into Jerusalem (Luke XIX:37). Luke omits the anointing of
Jesus by Mary.

John omits the cleansing of the temple, which he had already given at a
much earlier date (John II:13-17), and says that Mary anointed the feet
of Jesus and wiped them with her hair, instead of pouring the ointment
over His head (John XII:3-8).


THE LAST SUPPER

As the feast of unleavened bread of the Passover approaches, Jesus sends
Peter and John (Luke XXII:8) into Jerusalem to secure a room, in which
He and His disciples may eat, or "kill", the Passover (Matt.
XXVI:17-19). The room is secured, the Passover made ready, and "when the
evening was come, He sat down with the twelve" (Matt. XXVI:20).[36]

While they were eating, Jesus tells the twelve that one of them shall
betray Him, and indicates, in a rather veiled way, that Judas is the
one. They all ask, "Master, is it I?" and He says to Judas, "Thou hast
said" (Matt. XXVI:20-25).

Jesus then blesses the bread and the wine, and gives them to eat and
drink and says: "I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine,
until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom"
(Matt. XXVI:26-29).

After singing a hymn, they go to the Mount of Olives, and Jesus warns
them of the approaching calamity. "All ye shall be offended because of
me this night." The apostles, and especially Peter, affirm that they
would die rather than deny Him. Jesus says to Peter: "Verily I say unto
thee, that this night, before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice"
(Matt. XXVI:30-35).

Jesus with the disciples then goes "unto a place called Gethsemane." He
takes Peter and James and John a little farther and says to them, "My
soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death." He goes apart from them
and prays, "O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me;
nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou wilt." He returns to find the
disciples sleeping. He repeats the prayer twice, and then says to them,
"Behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the
hands of sinners" (Matt. XXVI:36-45).

In Mark the two disciples are sent into the city to meet a man "bearing
a pitcher of water." They are to follow him into whatsoever house he
shall go in, and there secure the guest chamber. This was done, "and
they made ready the Passover" (Mark XIV:12-16).

While they are eating, Jesus tells them that one of them shall betray
Him--"one of the twelve, that dippeth with me in the dish," but does not
specify which one it is. The other incidents of the evening follow (Mark
XIV:17-42) as in Matthew.

Luke recounts the passing of the bread and wine, and the saying of Jesus
that one of the twelve should betray Him, without specifying which one
(Luke XXII:22).

He then relates a new incident (that is, at this feast), a strife among
the apostles as to which should be greatest. Jesus rebukes them, telling
them not to imitate the Gentiles, but that he that is chief should be as
he that serveth (Luke XXII: 24-30).[37]

The prediction of Peter thrice denying his master takes a little
different form. Instead of saying to the apostles, "All ye shall be
offended because of me this night," Jesus addresses Himself to Peter
alone. Evidently, having some doubt of his constancy, He says: "Simon,
Simon, behold, Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as
wheat. But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not." Peter then
asserts, "Lord, I am ready to go with Thee, both into prison and to
death." Jesus then predicts that Peter will deny Him thrice before the
cock crows (Luke XXII:31-34).

There follows a passage very difficult to understand, in view of the
fact that a short time later Jesus rebukes one of His followers for
cutting off the ear of the high priest's servant. He reminds His
apostles of the time when He sent them forth without purse or scrip, and
they lacked for nothing. He then tells them that now they should take
both purse and scrip, "and he that hath no sword, let him sell his
garment and buy one." "And they said, Lord, behold, here are two swords.
And He said unto them, It is enough" (Luke XXII:35-38).

The visit to the Mount of Olives and the prayer offered there is
described more briefly than in Matthew or Mark. There is no mention of
the garden of Gethsemane, but Luke adds that an angel from heaven
appeared, "strengthening Him" (Luke XXII:39-46).

John's version of the Last Supper is quite different from that of the
other three evangelists. He omits any description of the selection of
the place for the feast. He places the supper before the Passover,
apparently correctly, instead of its being the celebration of the
Passover, as in the other three Gospels (John XIII:1). He omits any
mention of the blessing and passing of the bread and wine. He alone of
the evangelists relates that, after the supper, Jesus took a basin of
water and a towel, and washed the apostles' feet, impressing on them a
lesson in humility (John XIII:4-17). Jesus says to the apostles that one
of them shall betray Him. Peter and John ask Him, "Who is it?" Jesus
answers, "It is the one to whom I shall give a sop." He then gives the
sop to Judas, and says, "What thou doest, do quickly." Judas goes away
at once, although none of the apostles (unless Peter and John)
understand that He is accused (John XIII:18-30). After his departure,
John has Jesus delivering a long discourse, covering four chapters and
part of another, none of which appears at this time in the other three
Gospels. After this is finished, Jesus goes with His disciples over "the
brook Cedron," into a garden, but there is no mention of the praying
there, which appears in the other Gospels (John XVIII:1).


THE BETRAYAL

On Tuesday or Wednesday of this Passover week the "chief priests and the
scribes and the elders of the people" came together unto the palace of
Caiaphas, the high priest, and determined on Jesus' death (Matt.
XXVI:3). Judas Iscariot then comes to them and promises to deliver Jesus
to them in consideration of thirty pieces of silver (Matt. XXVI:14-16).
Previous to this last visit to Jerusalem, Jesus had predicted His death
and betrayal, but without indicating that His betrayer would be one of
the apostles (Matt. XVI:21; XX:18-19). At the last supper Jesus
indicates Judas as His betrayer, but somewhat equivocally, since the
other apostles, if they had understood he was the traitor, would
undoubtedly have cast him out of their society. So far as appears, he
continued to take part in the supper (Matt. XXVI:21-25). Just after
Jesus had finished His prayer in the garden, Judas comes with a great
multitude of the chief priest's servants, carrying swords and staves. In
accordance with a pre-arranged plan, Judas kisses Jesus, and thereupon
the servants of the priests lay hands on Him and take Him (Matt.
XXVI:47-50). One of those with Jesus draws his sword and strikes off the
ear of one of the high priest's servants. Jesus rebukes him, saying,
"For all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword" (Matt.
XXVI:51-54). "Then all the disciples forsook Him and fled" (Matt.
XXVI:56). But Peter followed "Him afar off unto the high priest's
palace, and went in, and sat with the servants to see the end" (Matt.
XXVI:58). Then follows the fulfillment of Jesus' saying that Peter
should deny Him thrice before the crowing of the cock (Matt.
XXVI:69-75).

Judas, when he saw that Jesus was condemned, brought the thirty pieces
of silver to the chief priest in the temple, saying, "I have sinned in
that I have betrayed the innocent blood." The chief priests tell him,
"What is that to us? See thou to that." Thereupon Judas cast down the
money in the temple, went away and hanged himself (Matt. XXVII:3-6).

Mark tells of the conspiracy of the chief priests and scribes, and that
Judas went to them and offered to betray Jesus. "They were glad and
promised to give him money" (Mark XIV:1, 2, 10, 11). Before this, Jesus
had predicted His approaching death to the apostles, but had said
nothing of any betrayal (Mark IX:31; X:33). At the last supper Jesus
says that one of the twelve shall betray Him, but does not identify in
any way which one it is (Mark XIV:18-21). Mark then relates, as in
Matthew, the kissing of Jesus by Judas (Mark XIV:43-45), the cutting off
the ear of the high priest's servant (Mark XIV:47), the desertion of
Jesus by all the apostles (Mark XIV:50), Peter's following Him afar off
to the palace of the high priest (Mark XIV:54), and denying Him thrice
before the cock should crow twice (Mark XIV:66-72). What subsequently
happened to Judas, Mark does not state.[38]

According to Luke, the chief priests and scribes had formed their
conspiracy to kill Jesus at a somewhat earlier date than in the other
Gospels (Luke XX:19). They watched and sent forth spies to listen to His
words and obtain material for their charges (Luke XX:20). Jesus had
already predicted His suffering and death at Jerusalem, but did not
mention His betrayal (Luke XVIII:31-33). But the apostles "understood
none of these things; and this saying was hid from them, neither knew
they the things which were spoken" (Luke XVIII:34).

As the priests and scribes are planning the time of killing Jesus (Luke
XXII:2), "then entered Satan into Judas," and he went to Jesus' enemies
and offered to betray Him (Luke XXII:3, 4). "And they were glad and
covenanted to give him money" (Luke XXII:5). At the supper Jesus says
that one of those at the table shall betray Him, but does not indicate
which one (Luke XXII: 21-23). At the Mount of Olives Judas came at the
head of a multitude and "drew near unto Jesus to kiss Him. But Jesus
said unto him, Judas, betrayest thou the _Son of Man_ with a kiss?"
(Luke XXII:47-48). Jesus then heals the servant, whose ear was cut off
(Luke XXII:50, 51). Peter followed Him to the house of the high priest,
and denied Him thrice before the cock crew (Luke XXII:54-62). Nothing is
said about Judas' subsequent fate.

According to John, Jesus knew from the beginning "who should betray Him"
and at an early date told the apostles, "Have not I chosen you twelve,
and one of you is a devil?" (John VI:64, 70).

At or before the last supper the devil put it into Judas' heart to
betray his Master (John XIII:2, 27). Jesus tells the apostles that one
of them shall betray Him (John XIII:21). Peter and John desire to know
which one of them He means, and Jesus tells John that it is the one to
whom He shall give a sop. He then dips a sop and gives it to Judas, with
the remark, "What thou doest, do quickly" (John XIII:22-27). "Now, no
man at the table knew for what intent He spoke this unto him" (John
XIII:28). John alone says that Judas immediately went out into the night
(John XIII:30).

After Jesus had finished His discourse at the supper, and gone into the
garden, Judas appears with a band of men and officers from the chief
priests and Pharisees (John XVIII:1-3). Jesus then "went forth and said
unto them, Whom seek ye? They answered Him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus
saith unto them, I am he. And Judas, also which betrayed Him, stood with
them" (John XVIII:4, 5). Simon Peter then cuts off the right ear of
Malchus, a servant of the high priest, and Jesus rebukes him (John
XVIII:10, 11). Peter and another disciple, who was known to the high
priest, follow Jesus to the palace, and there Peter makes his denial
three times before the cock crows (John XVIII:15, 16, 17, 18, 25-27).

The subsequent fate of Judas is not related.[39]


THE TRIAL

Immediately after His arrest, Jesus is taken away to "Caiaphas the high
priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled" (Matt.
XXVI:57).[40]

The council seek "false witnesses" against Jesus and at first have some
difficulty in finding any. "At the last came two false witnesses, and
said: This fellow said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to
build it in three days" (Matt. XXVI:59, 60, 61). Interrogated as to this
charge, "Jesus held His peace" (Matt. XXVI:62, 63). The high priest then
adjures Him to tell them whether He is "the Christ, the Son of God"
(Matt. XXVI:63). "Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast said: nevertheless I
say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the _Son of Man_ sitting on the
right hand of power and coming in the clouds of heaven" (Matt. XXVI:64).
The high priest accepts this as a confession of blasphemy, and, on
appeal to the council, they say, "He is guilty of death" (Matt. XXVI:65,
66). They then indulge their spite against Jesus by spitting in His face
and striking Him with their hands (Matt. XXVI:67, 68).[41]

In the morning (Friday) the chief priests bind Jesus and bring Him to
Pontius Pilate, the Roman "governor" or procurator (Matt. XXVII:1, 2).
Pilate asks Him, "Art Thou the King of the Jews? And Jesus said unto
him, Thou sayest" (Matt. XXVII:11).[42] He persists in maintaining His
position of silence or non-negation against all the accusations of the
chief priests, "insomuch that the governor marvelled greatly" (Matt.
XXVII:12-14). Pilate's wife, having been warned in a dream, sends word
to him, "Have thou nothing to do with that just man" (Matt. XXVII:19).
It being a custom of the feast of the Passover that the governor should
release one prisoner to the people, and Pilate, knowing that the chief
priests had delivered Jesus to him out of "envy," asks the multitude
whom he shall release unto them, Barabbas or Jesus (Matt. XXVII:15, 16,
17, 20, 21). The multitude demands the release of Barabbas, and, on
Pilate's asking them what he shall do with Jesus, "they all say unto
him, Let Him be crucified" (Matt. XXVII:22). "And the Governor said,
Why, what evil hath He done? But they cried out the more, saying, Let
Him be crucified" (Matt. XXVII:23). Pilate then washed his hands before
the multitude, "saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person;
see ye to it. Then answered all the people and said, His blood be on us,
and on our children" (Matt. XXVII:24, 25). Thereupon Pilate released
Barabbas, and after he had scourged Jesus, delivered Him to be crucified
(Matt. XXVII:26).

In Mark the charges before the Sanhedrim are the same as in Matthew with
some slight verbal changes (Mark XIV:53-66). To the question, "Art Thou
the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?" Jesus answers directly, "I am."

The proceedings before Pilate are substantially the same as in Matthew
(Mark XV:1-15).

According to Luke, the session of the Sanhedrim was held "as soon as it
was day," instead of in the night, immediately after Jesus' arrest (Luke
XXII:66). The only charge here is, "Art Thou the Christ?" Jesus, after a
few words, recognizing the futility of any defense, says, "Ye say that I
am" (Luke XXII:66-71).

Luke's account of the proceedings before Pilate is more detailed than,
and somewhat different from, that of Matthew and Mark. The charge is
maliciously distorted so as to offend the political susceptibilities of
the Romans. "We found this fellow perverting the nation, and forbidding
to give tribute to Cæsar, saying that He Himself is Christ, a King"
(Luke XXIII:2). Pilate, after questioning Jesus, says at once, "I find
no fault in this Man" (Luke XXIII:4). This makes the chief priests the
more fierce, and they press again their charges, mentioning that
Jesus comes from Galilee (Luke XXIII:5). Galilee being in Herod's
jurisdiction, and Herod being then in Jerusalem, Pilate sends Jesus to
him, probably hoping thus to rid himself of the whole trouble (Luke
XXIII:6, 7).[43] Herod questions Jesus, who answers him nothing, and
then with his men of war mocks Jesus, arrays Him "in a gorgeous robe,"
and sends Him back to Pilate (Luke XXIII:8-11). Pilate then calls
together the "chief priests and the rulers and the people," and tells
them that both he and Herod have examined Jesus, and lo, "nothing worthy
of death is done unto Him" (proved against Him) (Luke XXIII:13-15). "I
will, therefore, chastise Him and release Him" (Luke XXIII:16). "And
they cried out all at once, saying, Away with this Man, and release unto
us Barabbas" (Luke XXIII:18). Twice more Pilate urges that Jesus be
released, but they insist that He be crucified. Pilate finally yields
and "gave sentence that it should be as they required" (Luke
XXIII:20-24).

Neither Mark nor Luke nor John mentions that Pilate publicly washed his
hands of responsibility for Jesus' sentence.

John's account of the trial is very indefinite. Jesus was first taken to
Annas,[44] the father-in-law of Caiaphas, the high priest, and Annas
sent Him bound unto Caiaphas (John XVIII:13, 14). There was probably a
session of the Sanhedrim, though this is not clear, and it was probably
at the house of the high priest (John XVIII:15). No specific charges
against Jesus are mentioned, but the high priest asked Him "of His
disciples, and of His doctrine" (John XVIII:19). Jesus replies that He
has spoken openly, and said nothing in secret, and that the priest
should ask those who had heard Him (John XVIII:19, 20, 21, 23). No
formal condemnation of Jesus is related, nor is it said who was present
except the high priest.

Then "they" bring Jesus to Pilate "unto the hall of judgment," but "they
cannot enter in, because it would defile them for the eating of the
Passover that night (John XVIII:28). Pilate then comes out to them and
asks what accusation they have against Jesus (John XVIII:29). They evade
the issue by saying, "If He were not a malefactor, we would not have
delivered Him up to thee" (John XVIII:30). Pilate very aptly tells them
to take Him and judge Him according to their Law, but they reply, "It is
not lawful for us to put any man to death" (John XVIII:31). Pilate
thereupon goes back to the judgment hall, and, after an examination of
Jesus, comes out and says, "I find in Him no fault at all" (John
XVIII:33-38). He then suggests that, according to custom, he release
Jesus unto them. "Then cried they all again, saying, Not this Man, but
Barabbas" (John XVIII:39, 40).

Upon this Pilate has Jesus scourged, a crown of thorns put on His head,
and a purple robe about Him, and has the soldiers hail Him as King of
the Jews (John XIX:1-3). He once more brings Jesus before the people and
states that he finds no fault in Him.[45] The Jews still insist that by
their law He ought to die, "because He made Himself the Son of God"
(John XIX:4-7). Pilate goes back into the judgment hall, and talks
further with Jesus, evidently hoping to find some way out of his dilemma
(John XIX:8-11). "And from thenceforth Pilate sought to release Him; but
the Jews cried out, saying, If thou let this Man go, thou art not
Cæsar's friend" (John XIX:12). Pilate makes one more effort to save
Jesus, but, failing, delivers Him over to be crucified (John XIX:13-16).


THE CRUCIFIXION

The soldiers, taking Jesus, at first mocked Him, putting on Him a
scarlet robe and a crown of thorns, spitting on Him and smiting Him
(Matt. XXVII:27-30). They then put His own raiment on Him, and took Him
to the place of Crucifixion, on the way impressing a "man of Cyrene,
Simon by name," to carry His cross (Matt. XXVII:31, 32). When they
reached Golgotha, they gave Him vinegar to drink, mixed with gall, but,
on tasting it, Jesus refused to drink (Matt. XXVII:33, 34). They then
crucified Him with two thieves, one on each hand, and parted His
raiment, casting lots (Matt. XXVII:35, 38). Over His head they set up
"His accusation written: This is Jesus, the King of the Jews" (Matt.
XXVII:37). The passers-by and the chief priests and the two thieves
mocked and reviled Him on account of His prophecies and His failure to
save Himself (Matt. XXVII:39-44). The Crucifixion was apparently at the
sixth hour, and darkness was over the land until the ninth hour (Matt.
XXVII:45). Jesus then cried out in a loud voice, "Eli, Eli, lama
sabachthani" (Matt. XXVII:46). Some of them who stood there thought that
He called for Elias; one of them took a sponge filled with vinegar and
gave it to Him to drink (Matt. XXVII:47, 48). "Jesus, when He had cried
again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost" (Matt. XXVII:50). Then
was the veil of the temple rent in twain, and "the earth did quake and
the rocks rent" (Matt. XXVII:51). Graves were opened, and bodies of the
saints which slept arose, "and came out of the graves after His
resurrection," and appeared to many in the "holy city" (Matt. XXVII:52,
53). When the centurion and the soldiers saw these things done, "they
feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God" (Matt. XXVII:54).
There were many women from Galilee, "beholding afar off," including Mary
Magdalene, Mary, Jesus' aunt, and also the mother of the apostles James
and John (Matt. XXVII:55, 56). "When the even was come" Joseph, a rich
man of Arimathæa, takes Jesus' body, Pilate, at his request having
delivered it to him, wraps it "in a clean linen cloth," and lays it in
his own new tomb, "hewn out in the rock." He rolls a great stone to the
door of the sepulchre and departs (Matt. XXVII:57-60). On the following
day the chief priests come to Pilate and tell him of Jesus' prophecy,
that after three days He would arise again. They express their fears
that the disciples may steal the body and claim that He was risen from
the dead. Pilate gives them a watch, and "they went, and made the
sepulchre sure, sealing the stone and setting a watch" (Matt.
XVII:62-66).[46]

Mark follows closely the narrative of Matthew, except he says that they
offered Jesus wine mingled with myrrh to drink,[47] instead of vinegar
and gall (Mark XV:23). Mark omits the supernatural happenings at the
death of Jesus, except that the veil of the temple was rent in twain
(Mark XV:38).

He also omits any account of the sealing of the sepulchre, or the
setting of a watch over it (Mark XV:46, 47).

Luke omits the ill-treatment of Jesus by the soldiers before starting on
their march (Luke XXIII:25, 26). "And there followed Him a great company
of people, and of women, which also bewailed and lamented Him (Luke
XXIII:27). Jesus delivers a short address to the women, which does not
appear in the other Gospels (Luke XXIII:28-31). They bring Him to
Calvary and crucify Him and the two "malefactors" (Luke XXIII:33). "Then
said Jesus, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do" (Luke
XXIII:34). The superscription over Him was written in letters of Greek,
Latin and Hebrew (Luke XXIII:38). Luke alone relates that, when one of
the "malefactors" railed at Jesus, the other rebuked Him, and asked
Jesus to remember him, when He should come into His kingdom; Jesus says
to him: "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise" (Luke XXIII:39-43).
The sun was darkened and the "veil of the temple was rent in the midst"
(Luke XXIII:44, 45). The centurion acknowledges Jesus to be a righteous
man, and "all the people that came together to that sight" smote their
breasts (Luke XXIII:47, 48), "and all His acquaintance and the women
that followed Him from Galilee stood afar off, beholding these things"
(Luke XIII:49). Joseph of Arimathæa obtains Jesus' body from Pilate, and
lays it in a new sepulchre, hewn in stone (Luke XXIII:50-53), "and the
women also, which came with Him from Galilee, followed after and beheld
the sepulchre, and how His body was laid. And they returned and prepared
spices and ointments" (Luke XXIII:55, 56). No mention is made of any
guard over the sepulchre.

John does not mention the ill-treatment of Jesus by the soldiers, nor
any Simon of Cyrene. According to him, Jesus Himself carried His cross
(John XIX:17).[48]

The title on the cross, written in Greek, Latin and Hebrew, was "Jesus
of Nazareth, the King of the Jews."[49] The chief priests objected to
Pilate about this (probably considering it an insult to their nation),
but Pilate refused to change it (John XIX:19-22).

John says that Jesus' mother, His aunt, Mary Magdalene and the disciple
"whom He loved," stood by the cross. Jesus recommends His mother to this
disciple's care, and "from that hour that disciple took her unto his own
home" (John XIX:25-27).[50]

The vinegar was then given Jesus to drink, and, at the request of the
Jews, the soldiers broke the legs of the two who were crucified with
Jesus, but "they brake not His legs," because He was dead already. One
of the soldiers pierced His side with a spear, "came there out blood and
water" (John XIX:28-37).[51]

John does not mention any supernatural occurrences at the time of Jesus'
death, Joseph of Arimathæa obtains Jesus' body "secretly" from Pilate,
and, with the aid of Nicodemus, wound the body in linen with spices--"A
mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound weight"--"as the
manner of the Jews is to bury" (John XIX:38-40). "Now, in the place
where He was crucified there was a garden; and in the garden a new
sepulchre, wherein was never man yet laid. There laid they Jesus
therefore because of the Jews' preparation day; for the sepulchre was
nigh at hand" (John XIX:41, 42). No mention is made of the attendance of
the women, or of any guard being placed about the sepulchre.


THE RESURRECTION

About dawn on Sunday morning, the two Marys came to the sepulchre (Matt.
XXVIII:1). The soldiers set to watch the tomb are there also (Matt.
XXVIII:4). There is a "great earthquake, for the angel of the Lord
descended from heaven, and came, and rolled back the stone from the
door, and sat upon it" (Matt. XXVIII:2). "His countenance was like
lightning, and his raiment white as snow" (Matt. XXVIII:3). The angel
tells the women that Jesus is risen, and bids them go quickly and tell
His disciples that He is risen from the dead; "and, behold, He goeth
before you into _Galilee_; there shall ye see Him" (Matt. XXVIII:6, 7).
As the women were on their way to tell this to the disciples, "Jesus met
them, saying, All hail. And they came and held Him by the feet, and
worshipped Him" (Matt. XXVIII:9). Jesus says to them to be not afraid,
and to tell His brethren that He will meet them in _Galilee_ (Matt.
XXVIII:10). Some of the watch go into the city and tell the chief
priests what has happened (Matt. XXVIII:11). The chief priests give the
soldiers "large money" to say, "His disciples came by night and stole
Him away while we slept" (Matt. XXVIII:12, 13). The soldiers did as they
were taught, and "this saying is commonly reported among the Jews until
this day" (Matt. XXVIII:15). "Then the eleven disciples went away into
Galilee, into a mountain where Jesus had appointed them. And when they
saw Him, they worshipped Him, but some doubted" (Matt. XXVIII:16, 17).
Jesus then tells them to teach and baptize "all nations" (Matt.
XXVIII:10).[52]

According to Mark, the two Marys and Salome come to the tomb early
Sunday morning "at the rising of the sun" (Mark XVI:1). There was no
watch there, and the stone was rolled away from the door of the
sepulchre (Mark XVI:2, 3). They go into the sepulchre and find there a
"young man, sitting on the right side, clothed in a long, white garment"
(Mark XVI:5). The young man says to them that Jesus is risen, and that
they should go and tell the disciples and Peter: "He goeth before you
into _Galilee_," where they should see Him (Mark XVI:6, 7). The women
fled quickly from the tomb, "neither said they anything to any man; for
they were afraid" (Mark XVI:8). Then, at some time and place not
specified, Jesus appears to Mary Magdalene (Mark XVI:9). She tells of
this appearance to "them that had been with Him, as they mourned and
wept," but they believeth not (Mark XVI:10, 11). "After that He appeared
in another form unto two of them, as they walked, and went into the
country. And they went and told it unto the residue: Neither believed
they then" (Mark XVI:12, 13). Afterward, at a time and place not
specified, Jesus appears to the eleven "as they sat at meat," and
upbraided them for their unbelief and hardness of heart in not
believing the accounts of His previous appearances to Mary and the two
disciples (Mark. XVI:14). He then delivers a short exhortation to go
into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature, telling of
the signs that should follow belief, and the punishment that should
follow unbelief (Mark XVI:15, 18). "So then, after the Lord had spoken
unto them, He was received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of
God" (Mark XVI:19).[53]

Luke relates that the two Marys, Joanna and "other women" went to the
tomb on Sunday, "very early in the morning" (Luke XXIV:1, 10). There is
no watch and the stone is rolled away (Luke XXIV:2). They enter the
sepulchre, find the body of Jesus gone, and, as they stand there "much
perplexed," "behold, two men stood by them in shining garments" (Luke
XXIV:3, 4). They were afraid, but the two men tell them that Jesus is
risen, as He had predicted, and as they now remember (Luke XXIV:5, 6, 7,
8). The women then return and tell "all these things unto the eleven and
to all the rest," but "their words seem to them as idle tales, and they
believed them not" (Luke XXIV:9, 11). Peter then goes to the sepulchre,
finds the linen clothes "laid by themselves," but apparently sees
nothing of the two men (Luke XXIV:12).

On the same day Cleopas[54] and another disciple go to a village called
Emmaus, about three score furlongs from Jerusalem (Luke XXIV:13, 18).

As they are proceeding on their way, Jesus, in the guise of a stranger,
joins them. Quite a long conversation follows, the disciples telling
Jesus the things that had happened to Him, and He expounding the
Scriptures to them. It is evening when they reach the village, and Jesus
"made as though He would go further." But the two disciples induce Him
to tarry with them (Luke XXIV:15-29), "and it came to pass as He sat at
meat with them, He took bread, and blessed it, and brake, and gave to
them. And their eyes were opened and they knew Him; and He vanished out
of their sight" (Luke XXIV:30, 31).

The two return to Jerusalem and, finding the eleven there, say to them,
"The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to _Simon_" (Luke XXIV:32,
33, 34). They then tell the disciples what happened to them on the way
(Luke XXIV:35). "As they thus spoke, Jesus Himself stood in the midst of
them" (Luke XXIV:36). The disciples are terrified, and "supposed that
they had seen a spirit" (Luke XXIV:37). Jesus then tells them to see and
handle His hands and feet, and prove that He is real flesh and bones and
not a spirit. But "they yet believed not for joy, and wondered." To
finally convince them He eats before them a piece of broiled fish and
some honeycomb (Luke XXIV:38-43). He then delivers a short discourse to
them, telling that these things have happened to Him that the Law and
the prophets might be fulfilled (Luke XXIV:44-49). They then went out to
Bethany and He blessed them, and "while He blessed, He was parted from
them and carried up into heaven" (Luke XXIV:50, 51).

John says that Mary Magdalene came along to the sepulchre and found the
stone rolled away (John XX:1). She then summons Peter and John, who
enter and find the grave clothes lying around, but no body. They then
"went away again unto their own home." It is added, "For as yet they
knew not the Scripture, that He must rise again from the dead" (John
XX:2-10). Mary remains weeping, and, looking again into the sepulchre,
sees two angels in white there (John XX:11, 12). They ask her, "Why
weepest thou?" and she says, "Because they have taken away my Lord and I
know not where they have laid Him" (John XX:13). She then turns and sees
Jesus standing, but supposes Him to be the gardener. She asks Him to
tell her where they have laid Jesus, "and I will take Him away," she
says (John XX:14, 15). Jesus then calls her by name, and she apparently
recognizes Him and calls Him Master (John XX:16). Jesus then tells her,
"Go unto my brethren and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your
Father, and to my God and your God" (John XX:17). Mary then reports
these things to the disciples, but John does not say whether they
believed her, or, as Mark and Luke say, they disbelieved her (John
XX:18). On this same Sunday evening, when the eleven, except Thomas, are
together secretly for fear of the Jews, Jesus came to them and showed
them His hands and side. Then follows a short discourse from Jesus to
His disciples (John XX:20-23). When Thomas hears of this appearance, he
expresses his disbelief, unless he can put his fingers into the print of
the nails, and thrust his hand into His side (John XX:24, 25). Eight
days later Jesus appears again to His disciples, when Thomas is present,
and tells the latter to make his verifications. Thomas says unto Him,
"My Lord and my God." Jesus then commends those who "have not seen, and
yet have believed" (John XX:26-29).

John's Gospel apparently at one time ended at this point (John XX:30,
31), but Chapter XXI was subsequently added. Here there is related a
third appearance of Jesus, this time to six of the apostles and
Nathaniel of Cana (John XXI:1, 2). This occurred at the sea of Tiberias,
and there was a miraculous draught of fishes (see Luke V:4, 5, 6), and a
hint of Peter walking on the water (see Matt. XIV:28-31). At first the
disciples "knew not that it was Jesus," and, even after John tells Peter
that it is the Lord, they seem to be under some restraint, "and none of
the disciples durst ask Him, Who art thou, knowing that it was the
Lord" (John XXI:3-12). After they had dined, there ensued some
conversation between Jesus and Peter, and later with John, out of which
came the saying that the latter should not die (John XXI:15-23).

In neither of these appearances is there any account of Jesus ascending
up into heaven, or of His instructing the disciples to preach His Gospel
to all nations.[55]




