CHAPTER XIX.


An illustration of the difficulty of generalizing when speaking of
matters on the spirit-side just now occurs to me.

Suppose that you as a mortal were permitted to witness a combat between
a soul on its way upward and a foul spirit seeking to gain control. The
spirit may be able to take on any form it pleases, and approaches in the
guise of a friend. But the soul receives a warning touch and speaks out
sharply: "Stand; keep your distance. Who are you? and what do you want?"
With every smooth and crafty method of tone and word the spirit seeks to
convince that he is what he claims to be, a friend, and entitled to
approach. The soul, with its senses sharpened by fear, uses every
effort to discern the character of the stranger, weighs and analyzes
instantly every expression of the wily foe, and before the answer is
completed, decides positively and prepares to strike. The spirit
perceives the motion and shifts his footing in time to escape the
blow--a thought-impulse, weighted to kill. Does the spirit respond in
anger? Oh, no; his object is not to injure, but to gain control, so he
remonstrates, with pretended grief, that one whom he loves should so
mistake him. But the soul is not to be deceived, and gathers up its
strength for another blow. The spirit pours out a perfect stream of
flattering words, intended to lull his intended victim into a momentary
lack of vigilance, and ventures a little nearer, hoping to touch the
aura and disappear from view, only to become manifest as an invisible
power within the soul, an active agent in undermining its powers until
the opportunity shall present to seize the very throne itself and revel
in the possessions of its victim.

But the soul is cautious, and in virtue strong, and so, conscious of
invisible protection, suddenly fixes the demon with his eye, and before
he can escape launches at him a bolt that leaves him helpless and
writhing, dead as a spirit can be. "I killed him," says the exulting
soul, as it passes on its way.

You would be apt to say, "He did not kill him at all; he only disabled
him."

Now, while it is true that what I have described corresponds in
appearance to what we should here call disablement merely, its full
meaning cannot be understood without entering the consciousness of the
spirit who was struck down.

To such a one activity, or the ability to act, constitutes life;
inactivity, or the inability to act, constitutes death, not death as we
know it, but a living death, in which the fierce vibrations of a life
that knows no end, being confined as though by a broken wheel in its
carriage,--being confined, I say, to the gaseous envelope, the
propulsion of which has absorbed half its fire, soon heats the envelope
to a torturing degree.

Illustrating in another way, the evil spirit, being disabled from
continuing his customary activity, is forced to reflect, to look back
over his course, and face the evils he has done. Horrors take hold of
him. The most poignant dread of being overtaken by those whom he has
despoiled of all that made life dear, until in despair they have
committed suicide, and started out to find their tormentor, takes hold
of the miserable wreck, who has not even the consolation of looking
forward to some certain end to his sufferings, because neither time nor
the last sleep are known in the region of the dead.

Is this experience, do you think, any less to be dreaded by a selfish
spirit than is death by a mortal who is consciously not ready? It is
therefore properly called death in the language of the spirit, made up,
as that language is, of ideas only.

But in calling it death on the earth-plane we are using a word that has
a much different meaning here.

When we say, "The man is dead," a funeral, or at least a burial is
suggested. Not so there.

In this we have an example of the difficulty of conveying information in
regard to the conditions of the Beyond, without using words that are
liable to be misunderstood.

Only those who have attained to the ability to converse in the light,
eye to eye, without words, are entirely free from these obstructions to
mental intercourse.




CHAPTER XX.


Astronomy teaches us that our earth, together with the other members of
the solar system, is traveling through space, at the rate of eight miles
per second, around a distant center, in an orbit requiring many
thousands of years to complete.

We learn from this that we are constantly changing our place in the
universe, and are entering new etherean fields, not only every year, but
every day and hour. Since we are unconscious of this motion, it may seem
to have no vital relation to us, yet, by a knowledge of the fact, we may
gain an insight into the wonderful resources of this great machine for
recording events.

Every thought and feeling of which we are conscious makes its mark, not
only upon our bodies, both the outer and the inner, but also upon the
ether through which we are passing. I am alluding not to the words in
which we clothe or perhaps conceal our thoughts or feelings when
communicating with one another, but to the thought-current itself at the
point of origin.

This would be the same in the minds of all men of equal intelligence,
without regard to nationality; and those beings who are able to read the
marks left by these currents would find them written in unmistakable
characters, and of a size proportionate to our rate of travel, on the
fair ethereal page.

In one respect we are at an enormous disadvantage in our relations,
conscious or unconscious, with the denizens of the Beyond.

Our thought-motions compared with theirs are like an ox-team to a
locomotive. It is a fact, and there is no use in quarreling with it. On
the other hand, through our association with matter we are able, without
permanent injury, to bear oppressions of the spirit which would be death
itself to them; and those among them who would take delight in insulting
us are deterred from doing so by our insensibility to the stinging
thought-current. We ourselves would not insult a post for being one.

These oppressions of spirit, or depressions, as we blindly call them,
are a part of the system by and through which we are made to manifest
what manner of person we are; and our blindness as to the real meaning
of the life we have come into possession of, our persistent mistaking it
for an end, instead of a means to an end, brings it to pass that the
tests we undergo as to our fitness for this or that position in the
real though hidden life that awaits us all, are real and genuine tests,
which they could not be, to their full extent, if we clearly understood
at the time just what was being done. Every thoughtful man and woman
looking back over life can discern how this or that decision has been a
turning-point leading on to unexpected success or paving the way to
disaster or defeat. When the test is complete, some inkling of its
meaning often dawns upon us, and we resolve to be on guard next time,
and then perhaps we start off on some rainbow chase, only to discover
that we are the prey of delusion once more. Then, perhaps, we get angry
and curse the whole machine as the product of some stupid blunderer,
thereby avoiding the confession of any mental obliquity on our own part.

Not all of the delusions of mortality are of a kind that lead to such a
result. Some have been imposed upon us by our risen brothers of the
other sphere, and have held sway over our minds, as they did over our
fathers' minds, and over their fathers' before them, none of us living
long enough on the mortal side, or obtaining sufficiently clear
independent light, to enable us to become free. The shaking off of the
fetters of this mental bondage is a special characteristic of our own
day; and those who have listened to the torrents of eloquence poured
from the lips of the young mediums upon this subject, know that this
work, the necessity for which, as I have indicated, is largely due to
other-world intelligences, is now being forwarded from the same quarter
with tremendous power. Verily, there must have been a revolution in the
heavens, or this would not be. And such, indeed, is the case. The
tremendous power of an organized hierarchy under the controlling
influence of a single mind so prominently in evidence here, is without
a counterpart on the other side to-day, although the sins against
humanity which have been charged against the priesthood of past ages
should more properly be laid at the door of their invisible inspirers,
then in the height of that power which is no longer theirs. To-day the
enemies of racial progress are to be sought for on earth, where the
intoxicating dreams of power without responsibility have found lodgment
and worked their corrupting influence in the minds of not a few of our
brothers, who seem to forget that they are still members of the race
they are seeking to enslave, and that their responsibility for misusing
the power entrusted to them will be accounted all the greater in
consequence.




