CHAPTER V.


Is there any common ground on which science and religion meet? There is.
They meet in modern Spiritualism.

But because modern Spiritualism consists of a body of facts and theories
on the one hand, and a countless number of soul-stirring experiences on
the other, it follows that it takes a great many different people to
fairly represent modern Spiritualism.

Some have devoted themselves to it exclusively on the religious side,
others as exclusively on the scientific side. According to the bent of
their nature, and with an equal degree of courage, the earnest, devoted
students of science, on the one hand, and those of religion, on the
other, are approaching from opposite poles this forbidden ground.

Disregarding the warnings of the older religious teachers, that evil,
and only evil, haunts the grewsome place, one wing of the army of
truth-seekers is making the discovery that if all the manifestations of
modern spiritualism are to be attributed to one source, and that an evil
one, then never was a house so divided against itself before. They are
prepared to show that some of its most astonishing phenomena begin and
end in good to all who witness them, and they declare that only a
culpable misuse of the powers of the mind would lead to any other
inference than that these good results come originally from good
sources, and are therefore worthy of that reverence which of right
belongs to the good, wherever it appears.

The other wing of the army of truth-seekers also contains its heroes.
Have you not told us, they say to the great scientists who have laid
down the principles on which investigations of all kinds should be
conducted, that science claims the world for its field, and especially
the world of phenomena?

Why, then, do so many of our captains and colonels, who should represent
the thought of the higher officers, so persistently endeavor to prevent
us from obtaining for ourselves the store of facts upon which, we are
told, the theories of spiritualism are based?

Is it possible for us to have intelligent opinions even, to say nothing
of carefully-drawn conclusions on this matter, without following the
usual course, so strenuously insisted on in all other branches of
scientific research, that of personally observing the phenomena for
ourselves? And so when they get no answer to this, or no answer which
satisfies those who love the truth for its own sake, they proceed,
these scientific explorers, and with caution enter the unknown country,
avoiding, as far as possible, that portion which they recognize as
especially occupied by the other division of truth-seekers before
described.

And they find no lack of material upon which to exercise the keenest
faculties of their minds, while their interest becomes so great that
they are soon ready to exclaim, Why was I kept away from here so long?

All indications, say they, favor the idea that in this direction rather
than in any other is to be sought the solution of that profoundest of
mysteries, the problem of life, and, with faces aglow with interest,
they pursue their explorations, always ready, however, to declare that
they have not changed their course, they are still in the pursuit of
science and have not the slightest idea of joining hands with
religionists on any pretext whatever.

All of which goes to show that the realm of the occult may be
conveniently divided into two grand divisions, one of which may be
called occult science, and the other occult religion; and that part of
both which has been recently brought to view is the domain known as
modern Spiritualism, where, as I have said, science and religion meet. I
wish it could be said that scientists, as such, and religious teachers,
as such, have also not only met, but shaken hands across the narrow line
which still divides them even here, on this which I have called a common
ground.

But it is to be feared that there is all too little thought of any
possible terms of peace between the opposing forces.

Let us hope that out from the cloudy mysteries of the debatable land
itself may come the gleam of a star whose brightness shall illumine all
who lift their eyes, and whose pure, sweet influence shall change foes
to friends, as heart shall answer heart beneath its shining.




CHAPTER VI.


There are many, however, who have an invincible repugnance to this
method of research, and I would here say for the benefit of such, that
while I am on friendly terms with spiritualists generally, I am not
indebted to them for what I have to give. My observations of the
phenomena of spiritualism, although wide and varied, have all been made
since I came to know, independently, that there are intelligences above
man, and that there is a world distinctly different from this, where
they have their home.

Spiritualistic phenomena, as observed through mediums, have, in a
general way, confirmed what I knew in regard to the other world, but I
find many of the prevalent ideas which are supposably based on these
phenomena to be erroneous in the extreme. For instance, it is taught as
a doctrine that there is no death, and those who teach it point
triumphantly to the demonstrations of the survival of those whose mortal
part has been laid in the grave, not realizing that in so doing they
prove themselves to be still in bondage to the old error, that death and
annihilation are one and the same, and that consequently whoever has
escaped the one, must necessarily have escaped the other.

To prove that a man who has severed his connection with the mortal state
has not suffered annihilation, proves nothing whatever as to his
acquaintance with death.

Even the passing from one world to the other, which is commonly
associated with death, is not the same thing, for many possess the
power of so passing while still tenants of the clay.

If death, then, is not annihilation, nor the mere passing from one kind
of life into another, what is it? It is the severing of the magnetic
bonds which unite the body of the individual to the body of the race as
a whole.

We do not often consider what an important element in our lives are
these magnetic currents which link us to our fellows.

Silent and invisible as they are, they hold us with a tremendous power.
What our friends, our neighbors, our relatives think us capable of
doing, that we can do with comparative ease; but anything out of the
common, calling for the exercise of ability which they do not suppose us
to possess--how nearly impossible it is for us to do it, however
conscious we may be of the inherent power!

As a part of the race we are bound to it by magnetic currents so long as
our mortal life continues, and the cutting off of these currents by
death may be to our consciousness the greatest misfortune or the
greatest happiness we have ever known.

Now I am not preaching, I am simply stating that which I know to be
true. I know it in the same way that I know anything wherein experience
shuts out even the shadow of a doubt.

To speak of the misfortune of death: suppose you were a clock which for
twenty-five years had been a part of the world's life, keeping good time
and always on duty. Then suppose you were suddenly laid away in the dark
and dusty attic of a warehouse until some estate should be settled that
would require an indefinite number of years.

The comparison is not perfect. The clock is not only mostly automatic,
as we are, but entirely so. That in our nature which is essentially
free is not even touched by death, but the bodily activities and
associations may be our only field of action, and these are cut off
absolutely, while memory recalls every event of the life that is
finished, and especially every decision which has had the slightest
influence upon our destiny. The positive element in us which has found
constant vent in physical action is rendered helpless by the complete
paralysis of all the motor nerves. We cannot even think, for this
requires some movement of the brain. A consciousness of being left
behind while the world travels on, a feeling that this experience had
not been foreseen in the least, nor in any way provided against, spite
of warnings which now seem to echo and re-echo through the
darkness--these are what is left us in place of the sunlight, the
breezes of evening, the voices of children, the light of the stars.

But death may be release, it may be happiness, it may be ecstasy beyond
the power of words to tell. We may have cast the long look ahead in
time. We may have decided that since bodily life is limited at best, it
shall not be first in our regards: its appetites, its demands, shall not
take precedence above those calls which find their answer in the depths
of being, calls to rise out of the mire of reckless self-indulgence, and
clothe ourselves in the garb of a true manhood and womanhood, taking for
our model those who count not their life dear unto them, but reach out
for eternal values.

The pathway is not wide, and they who pursue it may find themselves at
close of life (I am not speaking especially of old age) almost alone.
The energies of the spirit have grown by constant exercise, and the
soul has grown strong, imparting its vibrations to the body, which has
so responded that, one after another, the magnetic links which have held
it to the slower progress of the race have snapped asunder. We are far
ahead, and the spirit longs for purer air than it can find on earth. We
have anticipated all the pains of death. We have endured them in our
struggle for the mastery of ourselves. Death now but sets the seal upon
our victory, gives us the freedom we have earned, ushers us into the
society for which we have prepared ourselves, crowns us heirs of
immortality.

Now, whether death shall be this happiness or that misery, in either
case it will be remembered as a great fact of consciousness, the
greatest ever known, and the doctrine that there is no death will never
be able to find lodgment in the minds of those who have experienced it.




