CHAPTER III.


Mathematicians have frequently discussed the possibility of what is
called a fourth dimension.

They have shown by clear reasoning that if we could suppose a person to
be acquainted only with objects of two dimensions, that is, plane
surfaces, the possibility of a third would be as difficult to comprehend
as now are the speculations on a possible fourth. For instance, it would
be as mysterious an operation to transfer anything from one point to
another without moving it along the surface that lay between, as is now
the manipulation of solid objects, like the passage of matter through
matter, by the masters of occult science.

This fine example of reasoning from the known to the unknown may be
compared to Leverrier's researches in one respect, and that the most
important one, namely, that the looked-for fact in all verity awaits
discovery, and that the scientist who shall first boldly declare that
the objective world about us, which seems to occupy and does occupy all
of space that we can reach by ordinary means of thought, is merely a
veil which hides a world just as real, and having just as real relations
to us, as the first is supposed to monopolize, and which, in its
essential nature, is independent of space, and its concomitant,
time,--whoever, I say, shall first boldly declare this, will fairly win
a crown of laurel.

When I say that this world has real relations to us, I do not mean us as
mere aggregations of matter in a highly organized form; I mean us, the
creatures of hope and fear, of joy and depression, gay at heart or
careworn with responsibility; us to whom friendship, love, and purity
are realities and not mere names, and who cherish the firm belief that
loyalty to our ideals and devotion to truth are immortal in their
nature, and that it may be possible that we ourselves may yet become as
impassive to the assaults of time.

Shall I say us, also, the creatures of doubt and despair, whose sky is
hopelessly clouded, and to whom anything resembling happiness has become
only a memory? The world of which I speak has the same direct relations
to us all.

The idea is a common one that this invisible world is to be sought, if
at all, among the imponderable gases, that if it have objectivity, as it
is supposed it must have, the nature of it will resemble these forms of
matter; and that by traveling out in thought, so to speak, along this
line, we shall presently arrive at a sufficiently accurate concept of
what these invisible realities are like.

It is this delusion, that the unseen is by so much the unreal, instead
of the contrary, that I hope to do something to destroy.

Let me give an example of occult power of a scientific sort, as
exercised by free spirits.

One wishes to speak to a friend. What does he do? He simply speaks the
name of that friend in his mind. Immediately, and without further effort
on his part, there appears before his mental vision a clear outline
representation of the form of that friend, ready to answer with perfect
distinctness any question that may be asked of him. It is telephone
communication without apparatus, and with the appearance of the friend.
Were the two in close sympathy, perhaps engaged in the same kind of
spiritual labor, so that the question would be of a kind not unexpected,
the rapidity of action common to spirits would make it possible to ask
the question and receive the answer in an infinitesimal fraction of a
second.

I have called this occult power of a scientific sort. By this I mean to
indicate, what is sometimes forgotten, that The Beyond has its science
as well as religion, and that it is only because its science has been a
sealed book so long and the corruption of revealed religion has been so
great, that, as a result, the acceptance of occult science itself as
truth is called, by some, _religion_, although removed from it as by
infinity. It is true, however, that the devotee to occult science who
shall persistently declare its genuineness in the face of opposition,
scorn, or even persecution, is on the road to illumination, and he may
himself become a gateway between physical life and death, through which
may pass and repass the message, the tone, or even the phantom form
which testifies of a world beyond the grave. To such a one, his belief
becomes a sure and certain knowledge of a scientific fact, as verified
by sympathetic experience times without number; and the time is not far
distant when these attainments will receive the same recognition, as
belonging to the domain of reality, as those of physical science now
do.




CHAPTER IV.


Science, as such, is a knowledge of physical facts. Religion, as such,
is an apprehension of spiritual truths.

The work of the scientist is to separate facts from delusions, and then
to arrange and classify his knowledge. The work of the religionist is to
separate truth from error, to make it effectual in practice, and give it
to the world.

In their essence, science and religion are neither enemies nor friends.
They are not necessarily associates, but their respective domains are
included in the domain of thought, and thought is an attribute of the
ego. The ego in us, then, is in touch with both religion and science:
with science, primarily, through this material body, which, surcharged
with vital magnetism, moves at its will; and with religion through that
inner conscious self which so avoids expression through matter, that it
may remain contentedly under lock for more than half a lifetime, and
which, even when released, may need a special impulse to induce it to
express itself in words.

The religious nature in man is, in fact, so hidden that it seems at
times impossible to draw it out in any manifestation whatever, which
fact causes many to deny its existence altogether; and there is to-day a
widely prevalent doctrine, world-wide I might say among scholars, that
all the facts observable which could possibly be grouped under the head
of religion may readily be distributed among mere physical phenomena on
the one hand, and scientific or intellectual on the other.

The skepticism in regard to the verbal authority of the sacred writings
is intimately associated with the same doctrine, as is shown by the way
the errors and the truth of the Bible are made to seem one, and the
whole is rejected as error.

It is taught, in effect, that all which goes by the name of religion is
unworthy the serious attention of the thoughtful, that it had its origin
in the barbarous stage of our development as a race, and ought to be
laid aside as a garment outgrown. The days of this particular form of
unbelief are numbered.

Why? Because it is to be demonstrated that religion is something more
than moonlight vaporings of the credulous, something other than the
simple faith of children; that religion is not only a spiritual reality,
but that it has a body of its own.

In order that the meaning of this statement may not be mistaken, let it
be remembered that some of the most powerful forms of matter,
electricity, for example, are entirely invisible.

Therefore, when I say that religion has a body of its own, it is not
necessary to go delving for anything. That body itself may be
undiscoverable by any sense save feeling. Have you ever been in the
presence of a man who could fairly be said to _embody_ religion? Of
those who manifest its spirit so pure and unselfish, there are
comparatively few in the world, but of those who, to that spirit, add a
full manly or womanly strength, the number is brought so low that
multitudes of people may perhaps never have come in contact with any.
Such as these bear about with them a consciousness of power so great as
to utterly destroy every kind of fear save one, the fear of doing wrong.
The name of Savonarola will occur to many of my readers.

It ought not to be necessary to add that I am using the word religion in
a different sense from that attaching to it in such a phrase as the
World's Parliament of Religions.

If I should say, There are many sciences, yet science is one, I should
expect to be fairly well understood.

I would make the parallel declaration, There are many religions, but
religion is one.




