CHAPTER III

THE CODES OF THE MORALISTS


7. THE MORALISTS.--If, from the codes, or the more or less vague bodies
of opinion, which have characterized different communities, we turn to
the moralists, we find similar food for thought.

But who are the moralists? Can we put into one class those who preach a
short-sighted selfishness or a calculating egoism and those who urge upon
us the law of love? Those who recommend a contempt of mankind, and those
who inculcate a reverence for humanity? Those who incline to leave us to
our own devices, telling us to listen to conscience, and those who draw
up for us elaborate sets of rules to guide conduct? The histories of
ethics are rather tolerant in herding together sheep and goats. And not
without reason. Those whom they include have been in a sense the
spokesmen of their fellows. Their words have found an echo in the souls
of many. They are concerned with a rule of life, and their rule of life,
such as it is, rests upon some principle which has impressed men as being
not wholly unreasonable.

In taking a glance at what they have to offer us, I shall not go far
afield, and shall exercise a brevity compatible with the purpose of mere
illustration. To the moralists of ancient Greece, and, to a lesser
degree, to those of the Roman Empire, to the Christian teachers who
succeeded to their heritage in the centuries which followed, and to the
more or less independent thinkers who made their appearance after the
Reformation, we can trace our ethical pedigree. For our purpose we need
seek no wider field. Here we may find sufficiently notable contrasts of
opinion to disturb the dogmatic slumber of even an inert mind. The most
cursory glance makes us inclined to accept with some reserve Stephen's
claim that "the difference between different systems is chiefly in the
details and special application of generally admitted principles."

8. EPICUREAN AND STOIC.--Thus, Aristippus of Cyrene advised men to grasp
the pleasure of the moment rather than to await the more uncertain
pleasure of the future; but he also counselled, for prudential reasons,
the avoidance of a conflict with the laws. Such advice takes cognizance
of the self-love of the individual, and is not self-love reasonable?
Nevertheless, such advice might be given by a discouraged criminal of a
reflective turn of mind, on his release from prison, to a comrade not yet
chastened by incarceration. Epicurus praises temperance and fortitude,
but only as measures of prudence. He praises justice, but only in so far
as it enables us to escape harm, and frees us from that dread of
discovery that haunts the steps of the evil-doer. His more specific
maxims, do not fall in love with a woman, become the father of a family,
or, generally, go into politics, smack strongly of the rule of life
recommended to Feuillet's hero, Monsieur de Camors, by his worldly-wise
and cynical father.

Contrast with these men the Stoics, whose rule of life was to follow
Nature, and to eschew the pursuit of pleasure. Man's nature, said
Epictetus, is social; wrongdoing is antisocial; affection is natural.
[Footnote: _Discourses_, Book I, chapter xxiii--a clever answer to
Epicurus.] Said Marcus Aurelius, it is characteristic of the rational
soul for a man to love his neighbor. The cautious bachelor imbued with
Epicurean principles would find strange and disconcerting the Stoic
position touching citizenship: "My nature is rational and social; and my
city and country, so far as I am Antoninus, is Rome, but so far as I am
a man, it is the world. The things then which are useful to these cities
are alone useful to me." [Footnote: _Thoughts_, Book VI, 44;
translated by GEORGE LONG.]

9. PLATO; ARISTOTLE; THE CHURCH.--No more famous classification of the
virtues--those qualities of character which it is desirable for a man to
have, and which determine his doing what it is desirable that he should
do--has ever been drawn up than that offered us by Plato: Wisdom,
Courage, Temperance and Justice. [Footnote: For PLATO's account of the
virtues see the _Republic_, Book IV, and the _Laws_, Book I.]
It is interesting to lay beside it the longer list drawn up by Aristotle,
and to compare both with that which commended itself to the mind of the
mediaeval churchman.

With Aristotle, the virtues are made to include: [Footnote:
_Ethics_; I refer the reader to the admirable exposition and
criticism by SIDGWICK, _History of Ethics_, London, 1896, chapter
ii, Sec 10-12; compare ZELLER, _Aristotle and the Earlier
Peripatetics_, English translation London, 1897, Volume II, chapter
xii.]

  Wisdom
  High-mindedness
  Justice
  Ambition
  Courage
  Gentleness
  Temperance
  Friendliness
  Liberality
  Truthfulness
  Magnificence
  Decorous Wit

and it is suggested that, although scarcely a virtue, a sense of shame is
becoming in youth.

We find the Christian teachers especially recommending: [Footnote: See
SIDGWICK'S sympathetic account of the Churchman's view of the virtues,
_loc_. _cit_., chapter iii.]

  Obedience
  Patience
  Benevolence
  Purity
  Humility
  Alienation from the "World"
  Alienation from the "Flesh"

and their lists of the "deadly sins" they select from the following:

  Pride
  Arrogance
  Anger
  Gluttony
  Unchastity
  Envy
  Vain-Glory
  Gloominess
  Languid Indifference.

Could there be a more striking contrast than that between the mediaeval
code and those of the great Greek thinkers? Plato recommended as virtues
certain general characteristics of character much admired by the Greek of
his day. Aristotle accepted them and added to them. He has painted much
more in detail the gifts and graces of a well-born and well-situated
Greek gentleman as he conceived him. The personage would cut a sorry
figure in the role of a mediaeval saint; the mediaeval saint would wear a
tarnished halo if endowed with the Aristotelian virtues.

The one ideal, the Greek, breathes an air of self-assertion; the other
one of self-abnegation. Benevolence, Purity, Humility and Unworldliness
are not to be found in the former; Justice, Courage and Veracity appear
to be missing in the latter. Wisdom, insight, has given place to the
Obedience appropriate to a man clearly conscious of a Law, not man-made,
to which man feels himself to be subject.

Indeed, the discrepancy between the ideals is such that Aristotle's
virtuously high-minded man would have been conceived by the mediaeval
churchman to be living in deadly sin, as the very embodiment of pride and
arrogance. We find him portrayed as neither seeking nor avoiding danger,
for there are few things about which he cares; as ashamed to accept
favors, since that implies inferiority; as sluggish and indifferent
except when stimulated by some great honor to be gained or some great
work to be performed; as frank, for this is characteristic of the man who
despises others; as admiring little, for nothing is great to him. His
pride prevents him from harboring resentment, from seeking praise, and
from praising others. This Nietzschean hero would attract attention upon
any stage: "The step of the high-minded man is slow, his voice deep, and
his language stately, for he who feels anxiety about few things is not
apt to be in a hurry; and he who thinks highly of nothing is not
vehement." [Footnote: _Ethics_, Book IV, chapter in, 19, translation
by R. W. BROWNE, London, 1865.]

To be sure, virtues not on a given list may be found in, or read into,
some of the writings of the man who presents it. It would be absurd to
maintain that the mediaeval churchman had no regard for justice, courage
and veracity, as he would define them, or that Plato and Aristotle were
wholly deaf to the claims of benevolence. Nevertheless, the variations in
the emphasis laid on this virtue or on that, or in the conception of what
constitutes this virtue or that, may yield ideals of character and of
conduct which bear but a slight family resemblance. Imagine St. Francis
of Assisi lowering his voice, slowing his step, and cultivating "high-
mindedness," or striving to make himself a pattern of decorous wit.

10. LATER LISTS OF THE VIRTUES.--The codes proposed by the moralists of a
later time are numerous and widely scattering. It is impossible to do
justice to them in any brief compass. A very few instances, selected from
among those most familiar to English readers, must suffice to indicate
the diversity of their nature.

Hobbes [Footnote: _Leviathan_, chapter xv.], deeply concerned to
discover some _modus vivendi_ which should put a check upon strife
between man and his fellow-man, and save us from a life "solitary, poor,
nasty, brutish and short," recommends among other virtues:

  Justice
  Equity
  Requital of benefits
  Sociability
  A moderate degree of forgiveness
  The avoidance of pride and arrogance.

Locke [Footnote: _Essay_, Book IV, chapter iii, Sec. 18; _Of Civil
Government_, Book II, chapter ii.], who believes that moral principles
must be intuitively evident to one who contemplates the nature of God and
the relations of men to Him and to each other, thinks it worth while to
set down such random maxims as:

  No government allows absolute liberty.
  Where there is no property there is no injustice.
  All men are originally equal.
  Men ought not to harm one another.
  Parents have a right to control their children.

Hume, [Footnote: An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals, Sec 6,
Part I] whose two classes of virtues comprise the qualities immediately
agreeable or useful to ourselves and those immediately agreeable or
useful to others, offers us an extended list. He puts into the first
class:

  Discretion
  Caution
  Enterprise
  Industry
  Frugality
  Economy
  Good Sense, etc.
  Temperance
  Sobriety
  Patience
  Perseverance
  Considerateness
  Secrecy
  Order, etc.

In the second class he includes:

  Benevolence
  Justice
  Veracity
  Fidelity
  Politeness
  Wit
  Modesty
  Cleanliness.

Manifestly, the lists may be indefinitely prolonged. Why not add to the
first class the pachydermatous indifference to rebuffs which is of such
service to the social climber, and, to the second, taste in dress and the
habit of not repeating stories?

Thomas Reid lays stress upon the deliverances of the individual
conscience, when consulted in a quiet hour. Nevertheless he proposes five
fundamental maxims: [Footnote: _On the Active Powers of Man_, Essay
V, chapter i.]

  We ought to exercise a rational self-love, and prefer a greater to a
    lesser good.
  We should follow nature, as revealed in the constitution of man.
  We should exercise benevolence.
  Right and wrong are the same for all in the same circumstances.
  We should venerate and obey God.

With such writers we may contrast the Utilitarians and the adherents of
the doctrine of Self-realization, [Footnote: These will be discussed
below, chapters xxv and xxvi.] who lay little stress upon lists of
virtues or duties, but aim, respectively, at the greatest happiness of
the greatest number, and at the harmonious development of the faculties
of man, regarding as virtues such qualities of character as make for the
attainment, in the long run, of the one or the other of these ends.

11. THE STRETCHING OF MORAL CONCEPTS.--The instances given suffice to
show that the moralists speak with a variety of tongues. The code of one
age is apt to seem strange and foreign to the men of another. Even where
there is apparent agreement, a closer scrutiny often reveals that it has
been attained by a process of stretching conceptions. Take for example
the so-called "cardinal" virtues [Footnote: From _cardo_, a hinge.
These virtues were supposed to be fundamental. The name given to them was
first used by AMBROSE in the fourth century A.D. See SIDGWICK, _History
of Ethics_, chap, ii, p. 44.] dwelt upon by Plato. The Stoics, who
made use of his list, changed its spirit. Cicero stretches justice so as
to make it cover a watery benevolence. St. Augustine finds the cardinal
virtues to be different aspects of Love to God. The great scholastic
philosopher of the thirteenth century, St. Thomas, places in the first
rank the Christian graces of Faith, Hope and Charity, but still finds it
convenient to use the Platonic scheme in ordering a list of the self-
regarding virtues taken from Aristotle. Thus may the pillars of a pagan
temple be utilized as structural units in, or embellishments of, a
Christian church.

Our own age reveals the same tendency. Thomas Hill Green, the Oxford
professor, follows Plato. But with him we find wisdom stretched to cover
artistic creation; we see that courage and temperance have taken on new
faces; and justice appears to be able to gather under its wings both
benevolence and veracity. [Footnote: _Prolegomena to Ethics_, Book
III, chapter iii, and Book IV, chapter v.] A still wider divergence from
the original understanding of the cardinal virtues is that of Dewey, who
conceives of them as "traits essential to all morality." He treats, under
temperance, of purity and reverence; he makes courage synonymous with
persistent vigor; he extends justice so as to include love and sympathy;
he transforms wisdom into conscientiousness. [Footnote: DEWEY AND TUFTS,
_Ethics_, pp. 404-423.]

This variation in the content of moral concepts may be illustrated from
any quarter in the field of ethics. Cicero's circumspect "benevolence"
advances the doctrine that "whatever one can give without suffering loss
should be given even to an entire stranger." Among such obligations he
reckons: to prohibit no one from drinking at a stream of running water;
to permit anyone who wishes to light fire from fire; to give faithful
advice to one who is in doubt; which things, as he naively remarks, "are
useful to the receiver and do no harm to the giver." [Footnote: De
Officiis, Book I, chapter xvi.]

Compare with this the admonition to love one's neighbor as oneself;
Sidgwick's "self-evident" proposition that "I ought not to prefer my own
lesser good to the greater good of another;" [Footnote: The Methods of
Ethics, Book III, chapter xiii, Sec 3.] Bentham's utilitarian formula,
"everybody to count for one, and nobody for more than one." The
admonition, "be benevolent," may mean many things.

12. THE REFLECTIVE MIND AND THE MORAL CODES.--Even the cursory glance we
have given above to the moral codes of different communities and those
proposed by individual moralists must suffice to bring any thoughtful man
to the consciousness that they differ widely among themselves, and that
the differences can scarcely be dismissed as insignificant. A little
reflection will suffice to convince him, furthermore, that to treat all
other codes as if they were mere pathological variations from his own is
indefensibly dogmatic.

On the other hand, the differences between codes should not be unduly
emphasized. The core of identity is there, and, although in its bald
abstractness it is not enough to live by, it is vastly significant,
nevertheless. If there were not some congruity in the materials, they
would never be brought together as the subject of one science. Unless
"good," "right," "obligation," "approval," etc., or the rudimentary
conceptions which foreshadow them in the mind of the most primitive human
beings, had a core of identity which could be traced in societies the
most diverse, there would be no significance in speaking of the
enlightened morality of one people and the degraded and undeveloped
morality of another. There could be no history of the development of the
moral ideas. Collections of disparate and disconnected facts do not
constitute a science, nor are they the proper subject of a history.

As a matter of fact, we all do speak of degraded moral conceptions, of a
perverted conscience, of a lofty morality, of a fine sense of duty; we do
not hesitate to compare, i. e., to treat as similar and yet dissimilar,
the customs, laws and ethical maxims of different ages and of different
races. This means that we have in our minds some standard, perhaps
consciously formulated, perhaps dimly apprehended, according to which we
rate them. The unreflective man is in danger of taking as this standard
his own actual code, such as it is; of accepting, together with such
elements of reason as it may contain, the whole mass of his inherited or
acquired prejudices; the more reflective man will strive to be more
rationally critical.




