CHAPTER XXXI

THE MORAL LAW AND MORAL IDEALS


143. DUTIES AND VIRTUES.--We saw, at the very beginning of this volume
[Footnote: Chapter i, Sec 2.] that a single moral law, so abstractly stated
as to cover the whole sphere of conduct, must be something so vague and
indeterminate as to be practically useless as a guide to action. The
admonition, "do right," does not mean anything in particular to the man
who is not already well instructed as to what, in detail, constitutes
right action. Nor do we make ourselves more intelligible, when we say to
him "be good."

It seems to mean something more when we say "act justly" or "be just";
"speak the truth," or "be truthful." And the more we particularize, the
more we help the individual confronted with concrete problems--the only
problems with which life actually confronts us.

This is as it should be. Duties and virtues are expressions of the
Rational Social Will, and that will is a mere abstraction except as it is
incorporated, with a wealth of detail, in human societies. It would be
hard for the small boy to classify, under any ten commandments, the
innumerable company of the "don'ts" which he hears from his mother during
the course of a week. He can leave such work to the moralist. But he is
receiving an education in the moral law, as an expression of the social
will, through the whole seven days.

If we wish, we can emphasize the _moral law_, and dwell upon the
_duties_ of man. On the other hand, we may lay stress upon the
_virtues_, and point to _ideals_. The Greek made much of the
virtues; the Christian moralist had more to say of man's duties. In the
end, there need be little discrepancy in the results. I make the same
recommendation, whether I say to a man, Speak the truth! or whether I say
to him, Be truthful!

It may be claimed that shades of difference make themselves apparent,
where one emphasizes the law and another points to an ideal. Perhaps they
do, in most minds. It certainly sounds more conceited to say: "I am
trying to be virtuous," than to say: "I am trying to do my duty." On the
other hand, the admonition, "Be truthful," appears to leave one a little
latitude. We take the truthful man, so to speak, in the lump. If he has a
strong bias toward truth-speaking, and is felt to be reliable, on the
whole, it is not certain that we should rob him of his title on the
ground of one or two lapses for which weighty reasons could be urged. The
admonition: "Speak the truth!" seems more uncompromising; and yet he who
prefers this legal form may maintain that it is a general admonition
addressed to men of sense who are supposed to be able to exercise reason.

144. THE NEGATIVE ASPECT OF THE MORAL LAW.--Why does the Moral Law, on
the surface at least, appear to be so largely negative? As we look back
upon our early youth, our days appear to be punctuated with punishments.
When we attain to years of discretion, this is not the case, with most of
us, at least.

But when we turn to the law, in our own society or in others, we find
prohibitions and penalties everywhere. Of rewards little is said. Is the
social will meant to be chiefly inhibitory? Is it a check to the action
of the individual?

(1) The negative aspect of the moral law is, to a considerable degree, an
illusion. The social will takes us up into itself and forms us. In our
early youth we are acutely conscious of the process. A vast number of the
things a boy wants to do are things that do not suit the social will at
all. He wants to break windows; he wants to fight other boys; he wants to
be idle; his delight is in adventures not normally within the reach of,
or suited to the taste of, the citizens of an ordered state. It is little
wonder that the boy regards the moral law as a nuisance and the state as
a suitable refuge for those suffering from senile decay.

There are individuals who scarcely get beyond this stage. They remain,
even in their later years, at war with the state. From time to time, we
seize them and incarcerate them. That the law _forbids_ and
_punishes_, they never forget. It is chiefly for such that the
criminal law exists. They are in the state, but they are not of it. They
have small share in the heritage of the civilized man.

For most of us there comes a time when most prohibitions are little
thought of. It has been maintained, that the law is negative partly for
the reason that positive duties are too numerous to be formulated. But
how numerous are the things that ought not to be done which normal men
never think of doing! At this moment, I could swallow a pen, taste the
ink in the ink-well, throw my papers from the window, hurl the porcelain
jar on the chimney-piece at the cat next door, swing on the chandelier. I
am conscious of no constraint in not doing these things. Why? I have
become to some degree adjusted to the type which the social will strives
to produce.

(2) And, having become so far adjusted, I recognize that the social will
is distributing rewards most lavishly. The whole organism of society is
its instrument. Work is found for me, and I am paid for it. If I am
industrious and dependable, I am recompensed. If I am truthful, I am
believed, which is no little convenience. If I am energetic and
persevering, I may grow rich or be elected to office. If I am courteous,
I am liked and am treated with courtesy.

Every day I am paid, in the ordinary course of things, according to my
deserts. Why should society work out an extraordinary system of rewards
for those whom it is already rewarding automatically?

In some cases, recourse is had to extraordinary rewards. We give prizes
to children in the schools; we give medals to soldiers for distinguished
service; we confer honorary degrees upon men for a variety of reasons. In
monarchical countries and in their colonies, the man who earns an
extraordinary reward may even pass it on, in the shape of a title, to his
descendants, as though it were original sin. But the giving of
extraordinary rewards to all ordinary, normal persons would be too much.

The man who markedly offends against the moral law is not an ordinary,
normal person. He is not adjusted to the social will. It is natural that
he should attract especial attention. Thus the "Thou shalt not!" is given
prominence. To this I might add, that punishments are cheaper and easier
than extraordinary rewards. Pains are sharper than pleasures, and are
easily inflicted.

(3) It is worthy of remark that, with the evolution of morality, it tends
to become positive. The enlightened moral man recognizes, not merely the
actual social will, but also the Rational Social Will. He may feel it his
duty to do much more than society formally demands of him.

145. HOW CAN ONE KNOW THE MORAL LAW?--This question has already been
answered in chapters preceding. Every man has three counsellors: (1) The
"objective" morality of his community--custom, law, and public opinion,
which certainly deserve to be taken very seriously; (2) his moral
intuitions, which may be of the finest; and (3) his reason, which
prevents him from making decisions without reflection.

Can a man who listens to these three counsellors be sure that he is right
in a given decision? The sooner a man learns that he is not infallible
and impeccable, the better it will be for him, for his neighbor, and for
the world at large.




