CHAPTER XXXV

INTERNATIONAL ETHICS


159. WHAT IS MEANT BY THE TERM.--I am almost tempted to avoid the
discussion of this thorny subject by simply referring the reader to what
has been said already on "The Spread of the Community," and developed in
the chapters on "The Rational Social Will" and "The Individual and the
Social Will." [Footnote: See Sec 75 and chapters xxi-xxii.]

He who confines himself to generalities avoids many difficulties and can
assure himself of the approval of many. Who, condemns justice and
humanity in the abstract? Who can wax eloquent in his condemnation of
freedom? Who finds the Christian Church on his side, when he advocates
rapacity and the oppression of the helpless, without entering into
details?

On the other hand, who wishes to view his country with a cold
impartiality, and to place its interests exactly on a par with the
interests of other lands? Who, save the Chinaman himself, thinks it as
important that a Chinaman should have enough to eat as that an American
or an Englishman should? Was not the turpitude, that excluded the
Chinaman from Australia, traced to the two deadly sins of undue diligence
and sobriety? [Footnote: Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th edition, article,
"Australia."] As for freedom, men of certain nations regard it as the
highest virtue to be willing to die for it--their own freedom, be it
understood,--while they regard the same desire for freedom on the part of
their colonists as a moral obliquity to be extirpated, root and branch.

That the historian and the sociologist should find much to say touching
the relation of nations to each other and to subject peoples goes without
saying. But the cynic may maintain with some plausibility that the
moralist's chapter on International Ethics must be as void of content as
the traditional chapter on "Snakes in Ireland." In this the cynic is
wrong, as usual; but it is instructive to listen to him, if only that we
may intelligently refute him.

It is not always easy for an individual to determine just what he owes to
his family, to his neighbors, or to his country. Is it surprising that it
should be difficult for men to determine just what one country, or what
one race, owes to another? This is the subject of international ethics.
He who treads upon this ground should walk gingerly, and not feel too
sure of himself. But there is no reason why the moralist should not put
upon paper such reflections as occur to him. He cannot say anything more
devoid of reason than much that is said by others.

The great Grotius, in writing on international law, in the seventeenth
century, drew his illustrations chiefly from Greeks and Romans long dead.
He had much more recent material ready to hand. But he well knew that he,
who would induce another to give him calm and dispassionate attention,
must not begin by treading on the toes of his listener. I shall strive to
profit by his example. It is best to say only what each man can apply to
his neighbor. We are all sensitive in this field.

160. OUR METHOD OF APPROACH TO THE SUBJECT--We have seen (Sec 80) that
rational elements are to be found even in the irrational will, if one
will look below the surface.

Is it rational for the mother to place before all else the interests of
the hairless, toothless and, apparently, mindless little creature that
she clasps to her breast? The very existence of society depends upon her
having the feeling that prompts her to do it. Is it rational to favor
one's neighbor, to be proud of one's native town, which may be a poor
sort of a town? Is it rational to be patriotic, even when one's state is
not much of a state?

We have seen that the Rational Social Will incorporates itself in
societies very gradually, and that it draws into its service lesser
groups of many descriptions. He who detaches himself from these lesser
groups is not a man. He is the mere outline of a man--the "featherless
biped" of the philosopher. It is not of such that a state can be made.

It is the duty of the state to prevent a man from shrinking into being
the mere member of some lesser group, but it is not its duty to
obliterate what is human in him. And the Rational Social Will must see to
it that he does not, on the other hand, forget, in a blind and irrational
patriotism, that he is a human being with a capacity for human
sympathies--sympathies extending far beyond the limits of any state.
Except when they are under the influence of strong passion, I think we
may say that men in civilized states, at least, have already shown
themselves amenable to the influence of the Rational Social Will in this
direction. It must be confessed that that influence has, as yet, been
limited.

The approach to the subject of international ethics must lie in the
recognition that men are set in families, in neighborhoods, in towns or
cities, in states; and are yet human beings with a capacity for
respecting and loving those who belong to none of these particular
organizations. My advice to the man who wishes to abuse his fellow-man is
to do it quickly, and before he is acquainted with him. If he gets to
know him well, he will probably find something lovable in him, and he
will lose the pleasure of being malicious.

161. SOME PROBLEMS OF INTERNATIONAL ETHICS.--The man who reads history
finds, sometimes, things to inspire him; and sometimes, things that are
depressing. He sees that the family must expand into the clan, that the
clan must come into contact with others, that the state must rise, and
that some interrelation of states is an inevitable necessity. He sees
that man's increase in insight, in diligence, in enterprise, must make
him reach out and trade with his fellow-man.

He sees also conquest, with the subjugation of peoples; he sees trade
extended by force, and under the smoke of cannon; he sees a peaceful
economic penetration, which ends in protectorates and annexations, in
defiance of the will of those who do not want to be either protected or
annexed.

What is rational is real, and what is real is rational, said Hegel.
[Footnote: _The Philosophy of Right_, Preface, and see Sec Sec 351 and
347.] He further maintained that civilized nations may treat as
barbarians peoples who are behind them in the "essential elements of the
state"; and also that, in a given epoch, a given nation is dominant, and
"other existing nations are void of right."

Hegel has long been dead, and is turned to dust. He always was as dry as
dust, even when he was alive, but he was a great man. But the famous
Englishman, Sir Thomas More, wrote more engagingly; and does he not tell
us, in his "Utopia," that any nation's holding unused a piece of ground
needed for the nourishment of other people is a just cause of war?

Such doctrines should be most comforting to us Americans. They appear to
teach us that we are, at present, the chosen people; that the rights of
other peoples are as the rights of the Hivites, the Hittites, and all the
rest; that we are justified in taking what we please, for who is there to
withstand us?

Yet ethical Americans shake their heads over such philosophies, and some
of them even speak slightingly of philosophers. This, in spite of the
fact that great men seldom talk pure nonsense, except when carried away
by excitement, as all men may be, at times. If what they say sounds to us
wholly unmeaning, it is probable that we have not fully understood the
voice that speaks within them. What can be said in their defense? and
what can be said in, at least, partial defence of the actual historical
procedure of the nations? They have not been wholly composed of
criminals, and they must possess at least the rudiments of a moral sense.

(1) We have seen that the state maintains its right as against those who
belong to it by controlling, not by destroying, the lesser groups which
exist within the state. Such a control appears to be demanded by the
Rational Social Will, but it often frustrates the will of the individual.

(2) We have seen that the spread of the community is inevitable, and
that, in the interests of rationality, it is desirable.

(3) We have seen that, even in the family, all the members are not
equally free agents. The small boy is not consulted touching the amount
of his punishment, nor can he dictate where it shall be laid on. And the
state does not give to all the individuals in it equal political rights,
nor guarantee to them an equal share of influence. This is desirable, on
the whole, in the interests of the whole, but grave abuses may easily
come into being.

(4) We have seen that the greater whole guarantees to individuals rights,
and assigns to them duties. In so far as it is rational, it cannot do
this arbitrarily. To have recourse to metaphysical abstractions is
futile. Shall we say, without hedging, that a man has a right to the
fruits of his labor, or that first occupation gives a right to the soil?
Then, shall the man who is too weak to work be refused a right to the
ownership of a coat? Or must the discoverer of a continent prove a real
occupancy, by performing the ridiculous task of the abnormal center of
the mythical mathematical infinite circle, by being everywhere at the
same time?

(5) We have seen that the human community, taking the words in a broad
sense, will spread, and already has spread, beyond the limits of several
nationalities. It is in the interest of human society that it should do
so. It is rational, in the sense of the word everywhere used in this
book. But the nations continue to exist, and they often cultivate
selfishly national interests. So do families cultivate selfishly family
interests. So does the egoist selfishly dig about and fertilize the
number One.

(6) It requires little acuteness to see that some communities of men are
miserable exponents of the social will. They are deplorably governed.
Read Slatin's fascinating book, "Fire and Sword in the Soudan,"--it is
better than any novel,--and ask yourself what becomes of the social will
or of rationality of any sort under the rule of a Mahdi. Is it not the
duty of the nations to combine and to relieve suffering humanity?

(7) There are theorists who maintain that, in the nature of things, the
soil belongs to nobody. We find, in the actual state of things, it
usually belongs to somebody, unless it is so poor that it is not worth
owning at all. But it may belong to somebody who can make little more use
of it than an infant can of a gold watch. A handful of Indians, wandering
over a great tract of country in which they chase game in the intervals
of time during which they chase and scalp one another, may have an
immemorial, although unrecorded, title to the land.

Shall they be permitted to keep back settlers from more or less civilized
and densely populated countries? Settlers eager to cultivate the land and
to make it support many, where before it supported few, and supported
those few miserably?

And shall the natural resources of great regions of the earth be
permitted to lie fallow merely because the actual inhabitants are too
ignorant and too indolent to want to produce anything and to trade? He
who finds his happiness in idleness, bananas, and black wives who can be
beaten with impunity, has little interest in international traffic, with
such blessings as it is supposed to bring.

The world is filling up. The losses due to war and pestilence, said no
less an authority than Darwin, are soon made up. There is something
terrifying in what the very modern science of geography has to tell us
about the rapidity with which the remaining part of the earth's surface,
available for the nourishment of man, is being exhausted. What problems
will face the Rational Social Will in the none too distant future?

162. THE OTHER SIDE OF THE SHIELD.--We have seen that something can be
said for the philosopher. The Rational Social Will does not appear to
give carte blanche to the man who wishes to remain ignorant, idle, cut
off from the family of the nations, the possessor of great tracts of land
which he will not develop, the cruel oppressor of such as he finds within
his power. It tends to deal with him, wherever it finds him, as an
enlightened nation treats the idle, the vicious and the irresponsible
within its own borders.

Undoubtedly civilization has made some advance in the course of the
centuries. When the world is at peace, the stranger is not normally an
outlaw. I have sojourned in the cities of many of the nations of Europe
and have made excursions into Africa and Asia. Nowhere have I been
compelled to ask for the protection of an American consul. It has been
recognized that I had rights, although an American. And the ability to
sign my name has procured me a supply of money.

Notwithstanding all this, it is depressing to read of the dealings of the
nations with each other, and with backward peoples--who have been well
defined as peoples who possess gold-mines, but no efficient navy. Is it
not generally taken for granted that it is the duty of more powerful and
more enlightened nations to take the backward nations in hand, to exploit
their resources, and, incidentally, to exploit _them_?

Not that international law has not counted for something. To be sure
Hegel reduced it to the level of "a good intention," [Footnote: _The
Philosophy of Right_, Sec Sec 330-333.] but it has counted for something.
Descartes and Spinoza could, with impunity, be heretics in little
Holland. Switzerland has for centuries been the refuge of the oppressed.
But we cannot forget that our highest authority, Captain Mahan, declared,
in 1889, that certain rights of neutrals were "forever secured,"
[Footnote: _The Influence of Sea Power upon History_, Boston, 1908,
chapter ii, p. 84.] and he has since stood revealed as a false prophet, a
mere man making a guess. International law is a capital thing--when it is
not put under a strain, and when no nation is too powerful.

The depressing thing is that rapacity and oppression become glorified,
when the cloak of patriotism is thrown over their shoulders. I drew my
illustrations in the last section from wild Indians and from African
savages. But there are nations in all stages of their development. How
"backward" must a nation be to give us the right to rule over it by
force? No people were more ingenious than the ancient Romans in finding
plausible reasons for the wars which it pleased them to wage. This has
never been a lost art. Men's enemies are, like the absent, always in the
wrong; and those are apt to become enemies, in whose defeat some
substantial advantage is to be looked for.

163. THE SOLUTION.--The very title seems a presumption. Who may dogmatize
in matters so involved? I make no pretentions to giving a clear vision of
"yonder shining light," but I venture to hint at the general direction in
which one is to seek the little wicket gate.

The only ethical solution of our problem appears to lie in the frank
recognition of the fact that the groups of men, called nations, may be as
brutal egoists as are individual persons, and in the earnest attempt to
avoid the baleful influence of such egoism.

Man _is_ his brother's keeper. But that does not give him the right
to keep his brother in chains, nor to use him for selfish ends. This is
as true of nations as it is of individuals, of families, of religious
orders, or of unions, whether of employers or of employees.

It is certainly true of nations. It is only as having a place in, and as
being an instrument of, the great organism of humanity aimed at by the
Rational Social Will, that the individual, the family, the tribe, the
nation, have any ethical justification for being at all. Sometimes it is
very profitable for the individual, or for some group of human beings, to
disallow this obligation to be moral. We treat the individual as a
robber; why not admit that there are robber nations?

I feel like reiterating that it is a great thing to be young; to live in
that Golden Age in which one still believes what one sees in print, and
still is moved by the honeyed words of statesmen. When one is old, and
has enjoyed some breadth of culture, one has read the newspapers of many
lands, and has met a certain number of statesmen, usually with a start of
surprise.

It is borne in upon one--a matter touched upon in the last chapter--that
it appears to be generally accepted that the state and its
representatives may adopt a peculiar variety of ethics. Certainly
statesmen feel justified in doing for their country what they, as
gentlemen, would never dream of doing for themselves. They talk of
justice, when they would scoff at such justice within the borders of
their own states; they talk of humanity, and they have in mind the
economic advantage of their own peoples; they speak of protection and
Christianization, when they mean economic exploitation or strategic
superiority. As for truth, the less said about that subject the better.

I know of only one way in which the determination of a nation to aid in
the general realization of the Rational Social Will can be tested. Does
it, in dealing with other nations, civilized or backward, propose what is
palpably to its own advantage, or is it evidently disinterested? It is
thus that we judge a man, when we wish to fix his ethical status; it is
thus that the Rational Social Will judges a nation. The language in which
the proposals are made is a matter of no moment. It may fairly be called
professional slang, and can quickly be acquired, even by men of mediocre
intelligence, in any diplomatic circle.

164. THE NECESSITY FOR CAUTION.--Shall a man, then, eschew patriotism,
and become a citizen of the world, as though he were a Stoic philosopher?
By no means. As well eschew the family or the neighborhood. But let him
not, in his patriotism, forget that he is a man. Here, as everywhere, he
is called upon to exercise judgment. This is a burden which he can never
throw off. He must pay the penalty of being a rational human being. As an
instrument of the Rational Social Will the state must be kept up. It is
his duty to see that it is done. His cat has an easier task; she may
sleep her life away in peace.

We hear much of the brotherhood of man and of artificial barriers. The
barriers are not all artificial, and they cannot be swept away with a
gesture.

Races and peoples are formed upon the model of their own immemorial past.
They have their institutions, their traditions, their loyalties, their
standards of living. What is tolerable to one man is wholly intolerable
to another. To compel men to live together in intimacy, when centuries of
training have made them antipathetic, is sheer cruelty.

Men may be brothers, but there are big brothers and little brothers. I do
not refer to physical bulk. I refer to the development of intelligence,
to the degree and kind of culture, which has been attained. There are
little brothers still at the stage of development at which it is natural
for human beings to drool. Shall we have them sit up to the table and
serve them with the complete dinner, enlivening it with intellectual
conversation?

Between incontinently doing this, and relegating the little brothers to a
nursery where they will be treated with cruelty and starved in our
interests, some persons seem to think there is no middle course. In their
enthusiasm for humanity, they forget that the brotherhood of man may be
made as ridiculous as the eight-hour day. Between eight hours of the
creative work of a Milton and eight hours of the dawdling done by a lazy
housemaid, there is no relation save that both may be measured by a
clock.

These enthusiasts forget much. Men are not alike; they do not want to be
alike; they do not want to live together in close intimacy, when they
have little in common; they reverence different things; as a rule, they
would rather be somewhat unhappy after their own fashion, than be happy
under compulsion, after the fashion of someone else.

We have, thus, on the one hand, the enthusiasts who would at once sound
the trump and announce the millenium, feeding the lion and the sucking
calf out of the same dish and on the same meat. We have, on the other,
those who are eager to take on their shoulders the white man's burden--to
enclose in a coop, as if they were chickens, the greater part of the
human race, allaying the discontent of the imprisoned by pointing out to
them that, although their freedom of movement is limited, they are
growing fat, and that they should show their gratitude by laying eggs.

Surely, there must be some middle course. Patience and caution are
virtues. Surely, it is possible to accept the existing organism of
society, to love one's country, and yet to strive to respect the freedom
of others. It is not easy for a true patriot to do this, but it seems to
be what the Rational Social Will demands of him.

The moralist who reads history carefully is not wholly discouraged. He
may look forward to some time, in the more or less distant future, when
there may be a union of the nations in the interests of all men; when the
gross egoism of the hypertrophied patriot may be curbed; when the
mellifluous language of the statesman may mean more than did the pious
letter which Nero wrote to the Roman Senate, after he had murdered his
mother.




