CHAPTER XXXIII

THE ETHICS OF THE INDIVIDUAL


151. WHAT IS MEANT BY THE TERM?--Men collected into groups and organized
in various ways we call states, and we treat a state as a unit. We look
upon it as having rights and as owing duties both to individuals and to
other states. There are individuals whom we are apt to regard as
representatives of the state; as instruments, rather than as men--
executive officers, legislators, official interpreters of its laws,
whether good or bad. For states and their representatives we often have
especial moral standards, differing more or less from those by which we
judge human beings merely as human beings. It is with the morality of the
latter that I am here concerned.

To be sure, all human beings are to be found in states, or in that
rudimentary social something which foreshadows the state. To talk of the
morality of the isolated individual is nonsense. Morality is the
expression of the social will; and if we think of even Robinson Crusoe as
a good man, it means that we apply to him social standards. Had he not
been moralized, he would have killed and eaten Friday, when the latter
made his appearance.

We must, then, take the individual as we find him in the state, but it is
convenient to consider his morality separately from the ethics of the
state, its institutions and its instruments.

152. THE VIRTUES OF THE INDIVIDUAL.--What moral traits have we a right to
look for in the individual man? What sort of a man is it his duty to be?

Evidently, men's duties must vary somewhat according to the type of the
society to which they belong, and to their definite place in that
society. Still, certain general desirable traits of character unavoidably
suggest themselves. To attempt a complete list seems futile, but the most
salient have been dwelt upon by the moralists of many schools, and for
centuries past.

Does it not appear self-evident that a man should be law-abiding, honest,
industrious, truthful, and capable of unselfishness? Should he not have a
regard for his health and efficiency? Should he not aim to develop his
capacities, and in so far to diminish the dead mass of ignorance and bad
taste which weighs down society?

Of marital fidelity, with all that that implies--personal purity, the
good of one's children, a fine sense of loyalty--it is scarcely necessary
to speak. No man, betrothed or married, can be sure that he will not meet
tomorrow some woman whom the unprejudiced would judge to be more
attractive than the one to whom he has bound himself. Shall he remain
unprejudiced--a floating mine, ready to explode at any accidental
contact? Away with him! He has, in the eyes of the scientific moralist,
"too much ego in his cosmos." Those babble of "affinities" who know
little, and care less, about the long and arduous ascent up which mankind
has toiled, in the effort to attain to civilization.

And what shall we say of such things as religious duties, of
cheerfulness, of good manners, of personal cleanliness? Of religious
duties I shall speak elsewhere. [Footnote: Chapter xxxvi.] As to
cheerfulness and good manners, it is only necessary to reflect upon the
baleful influence exercised upon the young--who have here my entire
sympathy--by a bilious and depressing piety, or by those who are rudely
and superciliously moral.

Cleanliness deserves some special attention, on account of the fact that
it has perplexed even thoughtful scholars to discover why society has
come to regard it as a duty at all. [Footnote: The chapter on cleanliness
by Epictetus is a homily, and not a philosophic argument. See,
_Discourses_, Book IV, chapter xi.] That, if society does regard
cleanliness as important, it should be the duty of the individual to keep
himself and his house clean presents no problem. He has no right to make
himself gratuitously offensive, and gratuitously offensive he will be, if
he is a dirty fellow. But why does anyone object to his being a dirty
fellow? The prejudice in favor of cleanliness does not appear to be
universal--witness the Eskimo and various other peoples.

We have learned that the social will has its foundation in the
fundamental impulses and instincts of man. An admirable scholar has
suggested that the ultimate root of the regard for cleanliness which more
or less characterizes civilized societies may be traced to some such
primitive and inexplicable impulse to cleanliness as we observe, for
example, in the cat. [Footnote: WESTERMARCK, _Origin and Development of
the Moral Ideas_, chapter xxxix.] It must be admitted that it is far
more marked in the cat than in the human being. A kitten is much more
fastidious than is a baby, and a grown cat would tolerate no powder or
rouge.

But, assuming that such an instinct exists, even in weak measure, it
might easily develop with the development of society. And, as man is a
rational being, capable of discovering a connection between cleanliness
and hygiene, the duty of cleanliness would acquire a new authority. Dirt
becomes no longer merely distasteful; it is recognized as a danger.

153. CONVENTIONAL MORALITY.--There are virtues--taking the traits of
character indicated by the names broadly and loosely, and making
allowance for all sorts of variations within wide limits--which appear to
be recognized as such very generally. Bishop Butler regarded justice,
veracity and regard to common good as valued in all societies. Certainly
they have served as expressions of the social will in many societies,
ancient and modern, primitive and highly civilized.

We have seen that the forms under which they appear are not independent
of the degree and kind of the development of the society we may happen to
be contemplating. [Footnote: See chapter ii.] And we have realized that
man is born into a world of ready-made duties which are literally forced
upon his attention. He finds himself a member of a family, somebody's
neighbor, a resident in a town or village, allotted to a social class, an
employer or an employee, a citizen of a state. Justice, veracity and a
regard for common good appear to have their value in all these relations;
but the manner of their interpretation is not independent of the
relations, and the relations with their appropriate demands are
relatively independent of the individual will. One cannot ignore these
demands and fall back, independently, upon metaphysical theory.
Aristotle's claim that a man cannot be unjust to his own child, because
the child is a part of himself, and a man cannot be unjust to himself,
[Footnote: _Ethics_, Book V, chapter vi, Sec 7.] excites our
curiosity. It does not elicit our approval.

It is because the vast majority of our duties are so unequivocally thrust
upon us that I have been able to touch so lightly, in the last section,
upon the duties of the individual. Why dilate upon what everybody knows?
Is it not enough to set him thinking about it?

And, in helping him to think, the reference to the virtue of cleanliness
has its value. Cleanliness is prized by those who know little of hygiene.
If a society cannot be happy without cleanliness, for whatever reason, is
it not the duty of the individual to be clean? But _how_ clean
should he be?

There are virtues--I use the word here broadly to cover approved habits--
which seem to have a very direct reference to chronology and geography.
They are _conventional virtues_; they suit a given society, and
satisfy its actual social will. A Vermont housekeeper in an _igloo_
would be an intolerable nuisance. Imagine an unbroken succession of New
England house-cleanings with the inhabitants of the house sitting in
despair in the snow outside.

Those who live north of the Alps are sometimes criticized for dipping
Zwieback into their tea. Those who live south of the Alps eat macaroni in
ways revolting to other nations. A very pretty Frenchwoman, devouring
snails after the approved fashion of the locality, has driven me out of
an excellent restaurant. And the world opens its eyes in wonder when it
sees the well-bred Anglo-Saxon dispose of his asparagus.

There is a little-recognized virtue called toleration. St. Ambrose was a
wise man when he advised St. Augustine to do, when in Rome, as the Romans
do. Of course, he did not mean this to apply to robbery or to murder. He
was giving an involuntary recognition to the doctrine that there are
conventional virtues, worthy of our notice, as well as virtues of heavier
caliber and wider range.




