CHAPTER XXII

THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SOCIAL WILL


87. MAN'S MULTIPLE ALLEGIANCE.--We have seen that each man has his place
in a social order. This order is the expression and the embodiment of the
social will, which accepts him, protects him, gives him a share in the
goods the community has so far attained, recognizes his individual will
in that it accords to him rights, and prescribes his course of conduct,
that is, defines his duties or obligations.

The social will is authoritative; it issues commands and enforces
obedience. With its commands the individual may be in sympathy or he may
not. But upon obedience the social will insists, and it compasses its
ends by the bestowal of rewards or the infliction of punishment. The
moral law to which man thus finds himself subject is something not wholly
foreign to the nature of the individual. It has come into being as an
expression of the nature of man. That nature the individual shares with
his fellows.

Obedience to the social will would be a relatively simple matter were
that will always unequivocally and unmistakably expressed, and did all
the members of a community feel the pressure of the social will in the
same manner and to the same degree. But the whole matter is indefinitely
complicated by what may be called man's multiple allegiance.

Organized societies do not consist of undifferentiated units. They are
not mere aggregates, both are highly complex in their internal
constitution. A conscientious man may feel that he owes duties to
himself, to his immediate family, to his kindred, to his neighborhood, to
his social class, to his political party, to his church, to his country,
to its allies, to humanity. The social will does not bring its pressure
to bear upon the man who holds one place in the social order just as it
does upon him who holds another.

Nor are the injunctions laid upon a man always in harmony. The demands of
family may seem to conflict with those of neighborhood or of profession;
duties to the church may seem to conflict with duties to the state;
patriotism may appear to be more or less in conflict with an interest in
humanity taken broadly. That the individual should often approach in
doubt and hesitation the decision as to what it is, on the whole, his
duty to do, is not surprising. Nor is it surprising that individuals the
most conscientious should find it impossible to be at one on the subject
of rights and duties. Two men may agree perfectly that it is right to "do
good," and be quite unable to agree just what good it is right to do now,
or with whom one should make a beginning.

88. THE APPEAL TO REASON.--Were there no appeal save to the social will
as it happens to make its pressure felt upon this person or that, in this
situation or that, there could be no issue to dispute. Dispute would be
useless and sheer dogmatism would prevail. But there is such an appeal
and men do make it, where they are in any degree enlightened. It is the
appeal to Reason.

He who says: "I have especial rights, just because I am Smith, and so has
my father, because he is my father," has no ground of argument with
Jones, who says: "I have especial rights because I am Jones, and so has
my father, because he is my father." Upon such a basis, or lack of basis,
all discussion becomes fatuous. But if Smith and Jones agree that duties
to self should only within limits be recognized, and that duties to
family have their place upon the larger background of the will of the
state, they may, at least, begin to talk.

The multiple allegiance of the individual does not mean that a man is
subject to a multitude of independent masters whose several claims have
no relation to one another. An appeal may be made from lower to higher.

We have seen that, in the organization of a given society, the social
will may be imperfectly expressed. It may come about that the place in
the social order assigned to a man cramps and pains him, or forces him to
exertions which seem intolerable. He may passively accept it, or he may
set himself in opposition to the social will as it is, appealing to a
better social will. The fact that an individual finds himself out of
harmony with given aspects of the social will characteristic of his age
and country is no proof that he desires to set himself up in opposition
to the social will in general.

In a given instance, he may be, from the standpoint of existing law, a
criminal. Yet he may reverence the law above his fellows. His aberrations
need not be arbitrary wanderings, prompted by selfish impulses. He may
leave the beaten track because he does not approve of it, which is a very
different thing from disliking it. Some will judge him to be a pestilent
fellow; some will rate him as a reformer, a prophet, perhaps a martyr.
Neither judgment is of the least value so long as it reflects merely the
tastes or prejudices of the individual. Each must justify itself before
the bar of reason, if it would have a respectful hearing. A reason must
be given for conservatism and a reason must be given for reform.

89. THE ETHICS OF REASON AND THE VARYING MORAL CODES.--Several
advantages may be claimed for the ethical doctrine I have been
advocating:

(1) It gives a relative justification to the varying moral codes of
communities of men in the past and in the present. A code may, even when
imperfect from some higher point of view, fit well a community at a given
stage of its development. It may be a man's duty to obey its injunctions,
even where they are not seen to be the wisest possible. One reason for
bowing to custom is that it _is_ custom; one reason for obeying laws
is that they _are_ laws. They embody the permanence and stability of
the social will, and have a _prima facie_ claim to our reverence.

(2) In recognizing the social will as something deeper and broader than
the will of the individual, as having its roots in the remote past and as
reaching into the distant future, it admits the futility of devising
utopian schemes which would bless humanity in defiance of the actual
expressions of the social will revealed in the development of human
societies. The whim of the individual cannot well be substituted for the
settled purpose of the community--a purpose ripened by generations of
experience, and adjusted to what is possible under existing conditions.

(3) On the other hand, it distinguishes between lower and higher ethical
codes, or codes lower or higher in certain of their aspects. It sets a
standard of comparison; it recognizes progress towards a goal.

(4) And, in all this, it does not appear to decide _arbitrarily_
either what is the goal of man's moral efforts or what means must be
adopted to attain to it. It rests upon a study of man; man as he has
been, man as he is, in all the manifold relations in which he stands to
his environment, physical and social.

There are other ethical theories in the field, of course. Some of them
are advocated by men of original genius and of no little learning. Some
deserve more attention than others, but all should have a hearing, at
least. A close scrutiny will often reveal that advocates of different
theories are by no means so far apart as a hasty reading of their works
would suggest. Writers the most diverse may assist one to a comprehension
of one's own theory. Its implications may be developed, objections to it
may be suggested, its strong points may stand revealed. By no means the
least important part of a work on ethics is its treatment of the schools
of the moralists. If it be written with any degree of fairness, it may
contain what will serve the reader with an antidote to erroneous opinions
on the part of the writer. To a study of the most important schools of
the moralists I shall now turn.




