CHAPTER XXXIV

THE ETHICS OF THE STATE


154. THE AIM OF THE STATE.--He who has resolved to devote but a single
chapter to the Ethics of the State must deliberately sacrifice nine-
tenths, at least, of the material--some of it very good material, and
some of it most curious and interesting--which has heaped itself together
on his hands in the course of his reading and thinking. I have resolved
to write only the one chapter. The State is the background of the
individual, the scaffold which supports his moral life. Without it, he
may be a being; but he is scarcely recognizable as a _human_ being.
It has made the individual what he is, and it is the medium in which he
can give expression to the nature which he now possesses.

Plato maintains that the object of the constitution of the state is the
happiness of the whole, not of any part. [Footnote: _Republic_, II.
It must be borne in mind that both Plato and Aristotle had the Greek
prejudice touching citizenship. Their "citizenship" was enjoyed by a
strictly limited class.] Aristotle, in his "Politics," maintains that it
is the aim of the state to enable men to live well. Sidgwick defines
politics as "the theory of what ought to be (in human affairs) as far as
this depends on the common action of societies of men." [Footnote: _The
Methods of Ethics_, chapter ii.] We may agree with all three, and yet
leave ourselves much latitude in determining the nature of the
organization of, and the limits properly to be set to the activities of,
the State as such. Shall the State only strive to repress grave
disorders? or shall it take a paternal interest in its citizens, making
them virtuous and happy in spite of themselves?

155. ITS ORIGIN AND AUTHORITY.--In Parts III to VI we have seen how and
upon what basis the State has grown up. It is an organism, something that
lives and grows. It is not a machine, deliberately put together at a
definite time by some man or some group of men. The "social contract"
fanatic may have read history, but he has not understood it. Of
psychology he has no comprehension at all.

Herodotus, at some of whose stories we smile, was a wiser man. He writes:
"It appears certain to me, by a great variety of proofs, that Cambyses
was raving mad; he would not else have set himself to make a mock of holy
rites and long-established usages. For, if one were to offer men to
choose out of all the customs in the world such as seemed to them the
best, they would examine the whole number, and end by preferring their
own; so convinced are they that their own usages far surpass those of all
others." [Footnote: _The History of Herodotus_, Book III, chapter
xxxviii, translated by GEORGE RAWLINSON, London, 1910.]

This may be something of an over-statement, for men in one state have
shown themselves to be, within limits, capable of learning from men in
another. But only within limits. Those things which give a state
stability--and without stability we are tossed upon the waves of mere
anarchy--have their roots in the remote past. Strip a man of his past,
and he is little better than an idiot; strip men within the State of
their corporate institutions and ideals, of their loyalties and emotional
leanings, and we have on our hands a mob of savages, something much below
the tribe proper, knit into unity of purpose by custom and tribal law.

The State has its origin in man as a creature desiring and willing, and
at the same time endowed with reason. Its authority is the authority of
reason. Not reason in the abstract, with no ground to stand upon, and no
material for its exercise; but reason as incorporate in institutions and
social usages; reason which takes cognizance of the nature of man, and
recognizes what man has already succeeded in doing.

Where shall we look for a limit to the authority of the State? Surely,
only in the Reason which makes it possible for the State to be. The State
must not defeat its own object.

156. FORMS OF ORGANIZATION.--The special science of politics enters in
detail into the forms of organization of the State. The ethical
philosopher must content himself with certain general reflections.
Everyone knows that States have been organized in divers ways; and that
their citizens, under much the same form of political organization, have
been here happy and contented, and there in a state of ferment. The form
of government counts for something; but its suitability to the population
governed, and the degree of enlightenment and discipline characteristic
of the population, count for much more. It is not every shoe that fits
every foot, and there are feet that are little at home in shoes of any
description.

Monarchies of many sorts, aristocracies, oligarchies, democracies, even
communisms, have been tried; and all, save the last, have managed to hold
their own with some degree of success.

It is easy to bring objections against each form of government, just as
it is easy to say something specious in its favor.

Are the eldest sons of a few families peculiarly fitted by nature to be
governors of the State? Look at history, and wake up to common sense. Of
the divine right of kings I shall not speak, for the adherents of the
doctrine are in our day relegated to museums of antiquities. And have the
members of aristocracies been carefully bred with a view to their
intellectual and moral superiority, as we breed fine varieties of horses
and dogs? Have those who have had their share in oligarchies been
peculiarly wise and peculiarly devoted to the common good? The communist
makes two fatal mistakes. He shuts his eyes to history, and he overlooks
the fact that there is such a thing as human nature.

There remains democracy. Of this, Herodotus, already quoted as a man of
sense, has his opinion. He makes a shrewd Persian, in a political crisis,
thus address his fellow-conspirators:

"There is nothing so void of understanding, nothing so full of
wantonness, as the unwieldy rabble. It were folly not to be borne, for
men, while seeking to escape the wantonness of a tyrant, to give
themselves up to the wantonness of a rude unbridled mob. The tyrant, in
all his doings, at least knows what he is about, but a mob is altogether
devoid of knowledge; for how should there be any knowledge in a rabble,
untaught, and with no natural sense of what is right and fit? It rushes
wildly into state affairs with all the fury of a stream swollen in the
winter, and confuses everything. Let the enemies of the Persians be ruled
by democracies; but let us choose out from the citizens a certain number
of the worthiest, and put the government into their hands." [Footnote:
_Op. cit._ Book III, chapter lxxxi.]

To be sure, we, who belong to a modern, enlightened democracy, would
resent being called "a rude unbridled mob," and being likened to the
populace of ancient Persia. But those of us who reflect recognize the
dangers that lurk in the "psychology of the crowd"; and we are all aware
that, after a popular vote, it is quite possible to discover that few,
except a handful of office-holders, have gotten anything that they really
want. Democracy is not a panacea for all political evils, and there are
democracies of many kinds.

Still, when all is said, it seems as though the Rational Social Will, the
ultimate arbiter of every moral State, should give its authority to a
democratic form of government, rather than to another form. Every
individual will has a _prima facie_ claim to recognition.

But the Rational Social Will can never forget that human nature is in
process of development, and that each nation, at a given time, is a
historical phenomenon. The Rational Social Will is too enlightened to
drape an infant in the raiment appropriate to a college graduate. It is
only an intemperate enthusiasm that is capable of that.

157. THE LAWS OF THE STATE.--The State allots to individuals, and to the
lesser groups of human beings, of which it is composed, _rights_,
and it prescribes to them _duties_. Upon its activities in this
sphere I can touch only by way of illustration, and for the sake of
making clear the nature of the functions of the State.

(1) To whom shall the State grant a share in the formulation and
execution of its laws? Once, in communities very enlightened, in their
own peculiar way, women, children, slaves, mechanics, petty traders, and
hired servants were deemed quite unfit to be entrusted with such
responsibilities. [Footnote: See ARISTOTLE'S _Politics_.]

With us, the position of woman has changed. Slavery, in a technical
sense, has been abolished. The mechanic and the petty trader are much in
evidence at "primaries." Hired servants are by some accused of being
tyrants. Children, and defectives who are grossly and palpably defective,
we bar from elections, and we also reject some criminals.

The times have changed, and our notions of the right of the individual to
an active share in the State have changed with them. The expression of
the social will has undergone modification, and I think we can say that
it is, on the whole, modification in the right direction.

To be sure, the court of last resort is the _Rational_ Social Will.
What is best for the State, and, hence, for those who compose it? What is
practicable in the actual condition in which a given state finds itself
at a given time? It seems too easy a solution of our problems to seek
dogmatic answers to our questionings by having recourse to the "natural
light," that ready oracle of the philosopher, Descartes.

(2) There are certain classes of rights which civilized states generally
guarantee to their citizens with varying degrees of success. They make it
the duty of their citizens to respect these rights in others.

(a) The laws protect life and limb. Much progress has been made in this
respect in the last centuries past. I own no coat of mail; and, when I
walk abroad, I neither carry a sword nor surround myself with armed
retainers.

(b) They protect private property. To be sure, the "promoter" may prey
upon my simplicity; and the state itself does not recognize that I have
any absolute right to my property, any more than it recognizes that I
have an absolute right to my life.

It may send me into the trenches. It may take from me what it will in the
form of taxes. It may even forbid me to increase my income by using my
property in ways which will make me insupportable to my neighbors. But it
will not allow my neighbor, who is stronger than I, to take possession of
my house without form of law. It will even allow me to dispose of my
property by will, after my death.

I suggest that those, to whom this right appears to be rooted in the very
nature of things, and not to be a creation of the State, called into
being at the behest of the social will in a certain stage of its
development, should read and re-read what Sir Henry Maine has to say
about testamentary succession, in his wonderful little book on "Ancient
Law." [Footnote: See chapters vi and vii.]

The State has not always treated a man as an individual, directly and
personally responsible to the state. It has treated him as a member of a
family or some other group; a being endowed, by virtue of his position,
with certain rights, and burdened with certain duties. A being who, when
he drops out of being, is automatically replaced by someone else who is
clothed upon with both his rights and his responsibilities.

Our conceptions have changed. The lesser groups within the State have to
some degree lost their cohesion, and the bond between the individual, as
such, and the state has been correspondingly strengthened. But many
traces of the old conception make themselves apparent. The law compels me
to provide for my wife and children; and, if I die intestate, the law by
no means assumes that my property is left without a claimant.

Have we been moving in the right direction, as judged by the standard of
the Rational Social Will? We think so. But it is well to bear in mind
what Herodotus said about the madness of Cambyses, and the prejudice men
have in favor of their own customs. No state is a mere aggregate of
unrelated individuals. Men are set in families, and the State seems to be
composed of groups within groups. How far the State should recognize the
will of the individual, as over against the claims of the lesser groups
to which he may belong, is a nice question for the Rational Social Will
to settle.

(c) The law must regulate marriage and divorce. Matters so vital to the
interests of society cannot be left at the mercy of the egoistic whims of
the individual. But to what law shall we have recourse? It seems highly
irrational to have forty-eight independent authorities upon this subject
within the limits of a single nation. And, if we turn the matter over to
the churches, we discover that we have committed it to the care of one
hundred and eighty, or more, sects. Add to this, that a state of any sort
cannot be set upon its feet without some difficulty, while any
enterprising man or woman can call a sect into existence any day. There
is a new adherent for sectarian eccentricities born every minute. Surely,
here is a field for the activities of the Rational Social Will.

(d) To paternalism of some sort the modern State, as law-giver, seems
hopelessly pledged. If we ignore this we are simply closing our eyes. The
State seems to be justified in educating its citizens, in protecting
children and women against exploitation, in protecting the working
classes, in stamping out infectious diseases. We are not even allowed to
expectorate when and where we will, a privilege enjoyed by the merest
savage.

(e) In one respect the paternalism of our own State has lagged behind
that of certain others. We do little to secure to a man a decent privacy,
or to safeguard his personal dignity. The newspaper reporter is allowed
to rage unchecked, to unearth scandals in private families, and to cause
great pain by printing the names of individuals.

I have known, in Europe, a man, after a difference of opinion touching
the ventilation of a railway carriage, to break a window with his elbow
and to apply to his fellow-passenger an offensive epithet. The court made
him pay a dollar and a half for breaking the window and six dollars for
giving himself the pleasure of being insulting.

Which was the greater offense? Herodotus would expect this question to be
answered in accordance with the prejudices of the person giving the
answer.

158. THE RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE STATE.--The State evidently has rights
over its citizens, and may enforce these rights through the infliction of
punishment. It as evidently has duties. A given state may not be
answerable to any actual given power. Our own State is in such a position
at the present time--there is no other state strong enough to call it to
account.

But this does not free it from duties. No state is anything more than a
brute force, except as it incorporates, in some measure, the Rational
Social Will. And states that fall far short, as judged by this standard,
may overstep their rights and ignore their duties, whether they are
dealing with individuals or with other states.

In punishing, the State should punish rationally. [Footnote: See chapter
xxxii, Sec 148.] And it should not demand of its subjects what will degrade
them as moral beings. "We all recognize," said a pure and candid soul,
"that a rightful sovereign may command his subjects to do what is wrong,
and that it is then their duty to disobey him." [Footnote: Sidgwick,
_Methods of Ethics_, III, vi.]

But how discover what demands are just? It is the whole argument of this
volume that no man should venture an opinion upon this subject without
having come to some appreciation of what is meant by the Rational Social
Will. Man, his instincts, the degree of his intelligence and self-
control, the history of the development of human societies, cannot be
ignored. It is the weakness of good men, endowed with a high degree of
speculative intelligence, to construct Utopias, and to tabulate the
"rights of man," or, as Bentham well expressed it, to make lists of
"anarchical fallacies." [Footnote: See _Works_, Bowring's Edition,
Volume II.] Thus, some may, with Plato and Aristotle, advocate
infanticide. The Greek city-state was a crowded little affair, and in
danger of over-population. Some may propose radical measures to increase
the population. To France and Argentina, in our day, such an increase
appears highly desirable. May any and every method be embraced which
seems adapted to avert a given evil or to attain to a desired end? It is
instructive to note that Francis Galton, the father of "eugenics,"
proposed to leave morals out of the question as "involving too many
hopeless difficulties." [Footnote: Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th edition,
article, "Sociology."] But do men live well who leave morals out of the
question?

The man who falls back upon intuition alone, in his advocacy of the
abolition of capital punishment, may be expected to maintain next that a
state, in going to war, should stop short at the point where the lives of
its citizens are put in jeopardy. Why kill a good man, when it is wrong
to kill a bad one?

It must be admitted that the State and its representatives enjoy some
rights and duties not accorded to individuals. The State may condemn men
to death or to imprisonment; it may take over property; it may make
itself a compulsory arbiter between individuals. On the other hand, its
representatives are not always as free as are private persons. The
individual, if he is a generous soul, may freely forego some of his
advantages and may seek only a fair fight with an opponent. It is
doubtful whether the duty the State owes to its citizens permits of
chivalry. Certainly strong states do not hesitate to attack weak ones;
nor do many hesitate to combine against one, on the score of fair play.
And a private man may temper justice with mercy in ways forbidden to a
judge.




