CHAPTER XVIII

EXPRESSIONS OF THE SOCIAL WILL


66. CUSTOM.--We have seen above that even the forms of political and
social organization may justly be regarded as an expression of the social
will. Such forms are the result of past choices, and their acceptance in
the present is evidence of present choice.

Between the organization of a society and its customs proper we may
distinguish by comparing the former to structure and the latter to
function in the case of any organism. But we must bear in mind that,
here, structure has been built up by, and is in process of modification
by, the same forces that exhibit themselves in function. It would not be
wholly out of place to describe a people as having the custom of being
ruled by hereditary chiefs, of choosing their monarchs, or of governing
themselves through elected representatives. Forms of organization are
handed down to successive generations by the same social tradition that
transmits customs of every description.

Customs are public habits which are, on the whole, approved by a
community. They are ways of acting which are regarded as normal and
proper. Where the authority of custom is evoked, pressure is brought to
bear upon the individual to adjust himself to the will of the community.

A community, like an individual, may have habits which it does not
approve. Such may be tolerated, although disapproved; or active efforts
may be made to set them aside. Some habits may be regarded with
comparative indifference, although professedly held in condemnation. The
individual, in following such habits, may claim that they are not
unequivocally condemned by the community, and he is not conscious of the
weight of displeasure which visits the violation of the will of the
community when unequivocally expressed.

In simple and primitive societies custom prescribes to the individual his
course of life in the minutest detail. It possesses the authority of the
dictator. In societies upon a higher level it may leave to him some
discretion in deciding upon the details of his daily life, while still
exercising a paramount control over the general trend of his actions.

Thus the will of the community, expressed in custom, determines what the
members of the community _ought_ to do, and it takes measures to
enforce obedience to its decisions. Is it surprising that the names which
have been given to the science which treats of man's rights and duties,
_morals, ethics_ (_mores, ethica, Sitten_), should reflect this
truth? It would be an inadequate statement to maintain that the science
of morals is no more than a systematic exposition of the customary in
human societies. It is not an inadequate statement to assert that, in
many societies, custom has, in fact, furnished the ultimate and complete
standard of obligation, and that in all societies it is of enormous
significance in moulding men's notions of right and wrong.

67. THE GROUND FOR THE AUTHORITY OF CUSTOM.--Habits are as essential to a
society as they are to an individual human being. Without them, society
could not live. In any social state--and no man can live except in a
social state--there must be cooperation. How can there be cooperation if
there are no social habits upon which men may count in their dealings
with one another?

Try to conceive all the tacit mutual conventions, the unconscious
adaptations to custom, which guide our daily lives, suspended for twenty-
four hours. When should one rise in the morning? How should one dress?
What and how should one eat? Of business there could be no question, nor
could there be cooperation in pleasures. Public order there could not be,
for there would be no public worthy of the name. Protection of life and
limb would be the creature of accident. Between civility and insult there
would be no recognizable distinction. In short, men could not behave
either well or ill, for there would be no rule to follow or to violate,
nothing to expect, and, hence, no ground for disappointment.

In such a chaotic condition no society of men has ever lived. No actual
state of anarchy has ever been complete, nor could it be, and endure. A
"reign of terror" is a reign of law in comparison with such a dissolution
of all the bonds which knit man to man. When we pass from one community
to another, we find one set of public habits exchanged for another. Some
sets impress us as better, some as worse. But there is no set which is
not better than none. It makes it possible for men to live, if not to
live well.

Customs are, then, a necessity. It is equally necessary that they should,
in general, have binding force for the individual. But there are customs
good and bad. The individual may fall into habits which he, upon
reflection, concludes to be injurious to him, and which others see
clearly to be injurious. A community sufficiently enlightened to
criticize itself at all, may come to disapprove some of its customs and
may endeavor to abolish them.

This means that a new act of the social will may set itself in opposition
to the social will already crystallized into custom. In a given instance,
and where there are differences of opinion, it may be a nice question
whether the new or the old should be regarded as the authoritative
expression of the social will.

68. THE ORIGIN AND THE PERSISTENCE OF CUSTOMS.--From the fact that
customs are, in general, to be regarded as expressions of the social
will, it might be assumed that their purposive character and social
utility should be a sufficient explanation of their coming into being.
But the matter is not so simple. A man may fall into habits which are no
indication of what he regards as useful to him. Such habits have not been
formed independently of his will, and yet they may appear to be
purposeless, or even detrimental. Who wishes to have the inveterate habit
of cracking the joints of his fingers or of biting his finger-nails? What
purpose do such habits serve?

Although the social utility of customs, taken generally, is easily
apparent, yet there are many customs which seem inexplicable upon such a
principle. Why, for example, should the king of a primitive community be
prohibited from sleeping lying down? or why should it be forbidden that
he gaze upon the sea? [Footnote: _Encyclopedia Britannica_, Eleventh
edition, article "Taboo."] The origin of such customs is hidden in
obscurity. That their adoption was not without its reason, we may assume.
That the reason was a reasonable one cannot be maintained. It seems
probable, however, that it at some time seemed reasonable to some one.
The persistence of habit, social as well as individual, would account for
the perpetuation of the custom long after the occasion which gave rise to
it had been forgotten.

69. LAW.--Between custom and law, taken generally, it is by no means easy
to draw a sharp distinction, although, in some instances, the
distinction, may be clearly marked. In primitive communities, laws
reduced to writing, and administered by persons deliberately chosen for
that end, may be wholly lacking; and yet who would say that such
communities do not live under the reign of law in a broad sense of the
term? A course of life is prescribed to the individual; failure to come
up to the standard meets with punishment.

Nevertheless, as social life rises in the scale and as communities become
developed, custom and law become differentiated. The latter stands out
upon the background of the former as something more sharply defined.
Penalties and the method of their infliction are more exactly fixed. Not
all violations of what is customary are taken up into the legal code as
punishable offences, although they meet with that indefinite measure of
punishment entailed by social disapproval.

Those public habits which it seems to a community it is of especial
importance to preserve and enforce come to be embodied in laws. The
selection is a matter of more or less deliberate choice, and is an
expression of will. The choice is not, normally, an arbitrary one. The
laws of a people are, unless accident has intervened, the outcome and
expression of its corporate life. For their ultimate authority they rest
upon the acquiescence of the social will. Laws contrary to deep-seated
and widely accepted custom are not apt to be regarded as of binding
force. They are felt to be tyrannous, and are obeyed, if at all,
unwillingly, and because of pressure from without.

In a later chapter [Footnote: Chapter XX.] I shall dwell upon the fact
that the accidental may play a very significant role in law. In given
instances the laws of a community may be, not the outcome of its will in
any sense, but something imposed upon it. Such laws cannot but be felt to
be oppressive and a restriction of freedom.

Laws, like customs, may cease to have a significance, and they may be
modified or allowed to fall into desuetude. There is, however, much
conservatism, as all who are familiar with legal usage know. And laws may
fail of their purpose. They may aim to diminish crime, and their
undiscriminating severity may foster crime. So may the individual select
an end, fall into error in his choice of means, and, as a result of
experience, resolve to substitute for such means others which are better
adapted to carry out his purpose.

70. PUBLIC OPINION.--Public opinion is manifestly a force broader and
more vague than established custom, and still broader than law. Public
opinion may approve or condemn what no law touches, and it makes its
influence felt beyond the sphere of what is customary.

Where customs and laws come to be imperfect expressions of the social
will, they may stand condemned by public opinion. In such a case their
authority is undermined and violations of them are condoned. Where public
opinion is strongly against a law; the law becomes ineffective. The
conservatism of law is such that a law may be allowed to stand unchanged,
and yet may fail to be carried into effect. Juries may refuse to convict,
or the unpalatable infliction of punishment may be avoided by granting to
the judge a wide discretion in pronouncing sentence.

The gradual development of a strong public sentiment may lead to the
passage of new laws, not based upon previously established customs, but
deliberately framed with a view to the public weal. Old customs may be
modified and new customs may be introduced. That the recommendations of
public opinion extend beyond the sphere of the customary is manifest. It
is not the custom of most men to leave any large part of their estate to
public charity. Except in the case of the very rich, the failure to do so
is not, as a rule, expressly condemned. Yet such bequests are approved,
the testators are praised, and the attitude of public opinion has no
small influence upon the conduct of individuals. Again, extreme self-
sacrifice is not customary; it is exceptional; and yet shining examples
of unselfishness excite a warm sympathy. The expression of this sympathy
is not without its influence.

Public opinion is more palpably an expression of the actual social will
than are custom and law. We have seen that the last two may represent, in
given instances, rather the inherited will of the past than the living
will of the present. But when we call public opinion an expression of the
social will we cannot mean that it necessarily reflects the sentiment of
all the members of a given community.

In primitive communities custom may be a public habit which embraces all,
or nearly all, individuals. Public opinion may scarcely have a separate
existence. In communities more developed, some individuals may disapprove
and refuse to follow many customs which are characteristic of the society
to which they belong. Laws are not approved by all, and, in progressive
states, there is usually some agitation which has as its object the
repeal of old laws or the passage of new ones. In communities where there
is independence of thought, public opinion is usually divided.

Furthermore, the communities to which civilized men belong are not
homogeneous aggregations of units. There is the public opinion which
obtains within single groups within the state. The adherents of a
religious sect may have notions peculiar to themselves of the conduct
proper to the individual, and such notions may extend far beyond what is
actually prescribed by the tenets of the sect. The several trades and
professions, the social classes, neighborhoods, even lesser voluntary
associations of men, such as clubs, may be pervaded by a public sentiment
which varies with each group. When we speak of public opinion generally
we have in mind something broader, a resultant. But the public sentiment
of the lesser groups cannot be ignored. The individual feels himself
especially influenced by the opinions of those most nearly associated
with him.

Under the head of public opinion it is convenient to speak of the
opinions of moral teachers who have influenced the race. Such a thinker
may enunciate truths far in advance of the opinions of his fellows. His
teachings are not, hence, fairly representative of the social will as it
reveals itself in his time. But the sentiments of the more enlightened
never are completely in accord with those of the mass of their fellows.
They are not mere aberrations from the social will; they are its
forerunners. The moralist and the religious teacher initiate new choices,
which may become the choices of large bodies of men. From them proceed
influences which have their issue in new expressions of the social will,
characterizing whole societies, and giving birth to new customs, new
laws, and a new form of public opinion. One can scarcely imagine what
China would be without her Confucius; or the Arabic world, with Mahomet
abstracted.




