CHAPTER XIX

THE SHARERS IN THE SOCIAL WILL


71. THE COMMUNITY.--It is difficult to state with absolute exactness what
constitutes a community.

We may define it as a group of human beings associated in a common life,
depending upon and cooperating with each other. This definition will
apply, to be sure, to lesser groups within a tribe or state; and even to
a collection of tribes or states in so far as such enter into alliances
and cooperate to their mutual advantage. As, however, the bond of union
is, in the former case, subordinate to the higher authority of a larger
group (for the family is subject to the tribe or state); and as, in the
latter case, the bond of union is a relatively loose one, and evidently
subordinate to that which binds the citizens of individual states, the
community proper may be regarded as that group which is characterized by
a relatively great degree of inner coherence and by relative external
independence.

The type of such communities is, among the more primitive peoples, the
tribe, and among the more developed, the state. The authority of such
groups over their own members is, theoretically, paramount, although it
may be suspended or abolished by the exertion of force from without.

Such a community may be said to be inspired by a social will expressed in
its customs, its laws and the public opinion prevalent in it. Its members
may be said to be sharers in the social will of the community. Their
participation in it is marked by their being endowed with rights and
charged with duties.

It has not been characteristic of communities generally that all who find
their place in them should be like sharers in the social will. The
distinction has been made between the citizen, who enjoys the fullest
rights and may, perhaps, directly take part in the government of the
state, and those who, while _in_ the state, are not _of_ it, as
they do not enjoy citizenship. Where slavery, in any of its forms, has
prevailed, the distinction between those who are significant factors in
determining the social will, and those who have not this prerogative, has
been very marked. Social classes have often enjoyed, even before the law,
privileges of great moment. Women have, as a rule, not been treated as
citizens, and have been refused a share in the government of the
community. Children are cared for and are protected, but political rights
are denied them. Their status before the law is a peculiar one. The
mentally defective, both in primitive communities and in developed ones,
stand in a relation to the community peculiar to themselves. They are not
excluded from it; they are accorded rights; but they are assigned in the
community a place of their own. Wherever we look, we find inequality. The
sharers in the social will do not share equally, nor do they share in the
same way. This is true of communities of every description, but the
differences are more marked in some than in others.

72. THE COMMUNITY AND THE DEAD.--It is not merely of the living human
beings which compose a community that the social will takes cognizance.
Other wills are made participants in the body of rights and duties
peculiar to the community.

In many communities the dead are still counted among its members. They
are conceived as affecting its welfare, and as demanding services from
the living. Duties towards the dead are a well-recognized division of the
sum of a man's obligations in communities the most diverse in their
character. In some, they occupy a very prominent place; in no community
are they wholly overlooked. A striking illustration of the recognition by
the social will of the rights of the dead is to be found in the whole
modern law of testamentary succession. The will expressed by a man while
he is alive is given effect as though he were still in the flesh and
insisted upon the fulfillment of his desire. It appears to work as a
permanent factor in the community life, making its influence felt for
generations. Witness its influence in charitable foundations, in the law
of entail, and the like.

73. THE COMMUNITY AND THE SUPERNATURAL.--Nor is it merely in recognizing
the wills of the dead that the social will extends its sphere beyond the
community of living human beings. To primitive man, and to man far from
primitive, his social environment has not seemed to be limited to the
living and the dead who have, or who have had, an undeniable and
unequivocal place in the community.

The part played in the life of man by supernatural beings of various
orders has been a most significant one. Demons and gods, spirits of a
lower or of a higher order, have occupied his mind and have influenced
his actions. Such beings have been conceived to be, sometimes, malevolent
and needing to be placated, sometimes, benevolent and fit objects of
gratitude. Their wills man has regarded as forces to be taken into
account, a something to which the individual and the community must
adjust themselves.

Man's relation, or supposed relation, to such beings has been a source of
classes of duties upon which great stress has been laid. The influence of
this admission of supernatural beings into the circle of those directly
concerned in the community life has found its expression in the
organization of the state, in custom, in law, in public opinion. We know
little of a community when we overlook this factor.

Between magic and religion it is not easy to draw a sharp line,
especially when we view religion in the lower stages of its development.
In both we have to do with what may be called the supernatural. Magic has
been defined as the employment of mechanical means to attain the desired
end. In religion, when it so far develops that its specific character
seems clearly revealed, we have left the sphere of the mechanical.

The distinction between the mechanical and the spiritual is familiar to
us in our dealings with our fellow-men. In such dealings we may employ
physical force. On the other hand, we may appeal to their intelligence
and their emotions, and thus influence their action. In so far as we do
not make such an appeal, we deal with our fellows, not as though they
belonged to our social environment, but to our physical.

At the lowest stages of his development, man does not distinguish clearly
between persons and things. This means that he cannot distinguish clearly
between his material environment and his social. But the distinction
becomes gradually clearer, and it is, in the end, a marked one. Religion
becomes differentiated from magic. To confound religion, in its higher
developments, with magic is an inexcusable confusion.

74. RELIGION AND THE COMMUNITY.--The denotation of the term religion is a
broad one, and there will probably always be dispute as to the justice of
its extension to this or to that particular form of faith. But it seems
clear that it is typical of religion to extend what may not unjustly be
called the social environment of man.

Will is recognized other than the wills of the human beings constituting
the community. To the part played by such wills a very great prominence
may be given.

States may be theocratic, as among the ancient Hebrews; or church and
state may share the dominion, or struggle between themselves for the
supremacy, as in Europe in the Middle Ages; or the state may be
theoretically supreme in authority and yet maintain and lend authority to
a church. Even where church and state are, in theory, quite divorced--a
modern conception--the church with its ordinances and prescriptions, its
sacred days, its ceremonial, its educational institutions, remains a very
significant factor in the social environment of man. Religious duties
have at all times and in all sorts of societies been regarded as
constituting an important aspect of conduct. They color strongly the
_mores_ of the community. Whole codes of morals may be referred to
the teachings of certain religious leaders. They claim their authority on
religious grounds.

The great significance of the role played by religion in the sphere of
morals is impressed upon one who glances over the works of those writers
who have approached the subject of ethics from the side of anthropology
or sociology. A review of the facts has even tempted one of the most
learned to seek the origin of morals almost wholly in religion.
[Footnote: WUNDT, _Ethics_, Vol. I. "The Facts of the Moral Life";
see chapters ii and iii. English Translation, London, 1897.]

That religion should play an important part in giving birth to or
modifying moral codes is not surprising. Man adjusts himself to his
social environment as he conceives it. If the community of wills which he
recognizes includes the wills of supernatural beings, it is natural that
the social will which finds its expression in the organization of the
state, in custom, in law and in public opinion, should be modified by
such inclusion.

Nor is it surprising that the supernatural element should, at times,
dwarf and render insignificant the other elements which enter into the
social will. It may seem to man the all-important factor in his life.

Within the human community some individuals count for much more than do
others. There are those who scarcely seem to have any voice in
contributing to the character and direction of the social will. Others
are influential; and, in extreme cases, the wills of the few, or even
that of a single individual, may be the source of law for the many. If
men come to the conclusion that the weal and woe of the community are
dependent upon the will of the gods, or of God, they will unavoidably
give frank recognition to that will above others, and such recognition
will dictate conduct. The gods of Epicurus, leading a lazy existence in
the interstellar spaces, indifferent to man and in no wise affecting his
life, could scarcely become the objects of a cult. But the God of the
Mahometan, of the Jew, or of the Christian, is a ruler to be feared,
loved, obeyed. His will is law, and is determinative of conduct.

75. THE SPREAD OF THE COMMUNITY.--So far I have been speaking of the
community properly so called, of the single group of human beings living
its corporate life. But such groups do not normally remain in isolation.
As the isolation of the group diminishes, as contacts between it and
others become more numerous and more important, the necessity of
conventions controlling the relations of groups becomes more pressing.

This implies the development of a broader social will, inclusive of the
social wills of the several communities. This social will may be very
feeble, and the bond between men belonging to different communities may
be a weak one; or it may be vigorous, and furnish an intimate bond. The
savage, to whom those beyond the pale of his tribe or small confederation
are mere strangers, and probably enemies, stands at the lower limit of
the scale; the trader, to whom the stranger is co-partner in a mutually
profitable transaction, stands higher; the Stoic philosopher,
cosmopolitan in thought and feeling, rating the claims of kindred and
country as less significant than the bonds which unite all men in virtue
of their common humanity, marks the other extreme. The spread of the
social will grows marked as man rises in the scale of civilization.
Barriers are broken down and limits are transcended.

This broader social will, like the narrower, reveals itself in the
organization of society. We find confederations of tribes or states;
alliances temporary or relatively permanent. And the broader social will
modifies customs, gives birth to systems of law, and encourages the
development of an inclusive humanitarian sentiment.

It does not necessarily obliterate old distinctions. The family,
neighborhood, kindred, have their claims even under the most firmly
organized of states; but those claims are limited and controlled. Even
so, the broader social will may come to regard states as answerable for
their decisions. International law remains to the present day what has
aptly been called a pious wish. But public opinion prepares the way for
law; and all states, whatever be their real aims, now attempt to justify
their actions by an appeal to the more or less nebulous tribunal of
international public opinion. In this they recognize its claim to act as
arbiter. Within the jurisdiction of a state, the motto, "my family, right
or wrong," would not be a maxim approved in a court of justice.
International law is made a mock of by the frank enunciation of the
maxim, "my country, right or wrong." Hence, such frankness is, in
international relations, not encouraged.

The more or less skillfully made appeal to the moral sense of mankind--to
the broader social will as public opinion--implies a certain recognition
of its authority, or, at least, of its influence. Whether this is a
definite step toward the granting of a real authority to the broader
social will, an authority which will curb impartially the selfishness of
individual states, it remains for the future to decide.




