CHAPTER XXIX

KANT, HEGEL AND NIETZSCHE


136. KANT.---It is impossible, in any brief compass, to treat of the many
individual moralists, some of them men of genius and well worthy of our
study, who offer us ethical systems characterized by differences of more
or less importance. When we refer a man to this or that school and do no
more, we say comparatively little about him, as has become evident in the
preceding chapters. As we have seen, it has been necessary to class
together those who differ rather widely in many of their opinions. Here,
I shall devote a few pages to three men only, partly because of their
prominence, and partly because it is instructive to call attention to the
contrast between them in their fundamental positions. I shall begin with
Kant.

Kant held that the human reason issues "categorial imperatives," that is
to say, unconditional commands to act in certain ways. The motive for
moral action must not be the desire for pleasure, but solely the desire
to do right.

He makes his fundamental rule abstract and formal: "So act that you could
wish your maxim to be universal law." As no man could wish to be himself
neglected when in distress, this law compels him to be benevolent, and a
new form of the fundamental rule is developed: "Treat humanity, in
yourself or any other, as an end always, and never as a means." [Footnote:
_Fundamental Principles of the Metaphysic of Morals_, Sec 2.]

Now Kant, although he maintains that it is not a man's duty to seek his
own happiness--a thing which natural inclination would prompt him to do--
by no means overlooks happiness altogether. He thinks that virtue and
happiness together constitute the whole and perfect good desired by
rational beings. The attainment of this good must be the supreme end of a
will morally determined. [Footnote: _Dialectic of the Pure Practical
Reason_, chapter ii.] We are morally bound to strive to be virtuous
ourselves and to make others happy.

Still, each man's happiness means much to him; and Kant, convinced that
virtue _ought_ to be rewarded with happiness, holds that our world
is a moral world, where God will reward the virtuous. If we do not assume
such a world, he claims, moral laws are reduced to idle dreams.
[Footnote: Ibid.]

Such utterances as the last may well lead the utilitarian to question
whether Kant was quite whole-hearted in his doctrine of the unconditional
commands of the practical reason of man. They appear to be not
independent of all consideration of human happiness.

I shall not ask whether Kant was consistent. Great men, like lesser men,
seldom are. But, in order that the contrast between his doctrine and
those of the two writers whom I shall next discuss may be brought out
clearly, I shall ask that the following points be kept well in mind:

(1) Kant was an out-and-out intuitionist. He goes directly to the
practical reason of man for an enunciation of the moral law.

(2) Moral rules of lesser generality, such as those touching benevolence,
justice and veracity, he traces to the practical reason, making them
independent of all considerations of expediency. Thus he defends the body
of moral truth accepted by so many of his fellow-moralists.

(3) His "practical reason" speaks directly to the individual. Kant looked
within, not without. We may call him an ethical individualist. Socrates,
when on trial for his life, listened for the voice of the divinity within
him. He needed no other.

137. HEGEL.--In strongest contrast to the individualism of Kant stands
the doctrine of Hegel. To the latter, duty consists in the realization of
the free reasonable will--but this will is identical in all individuals,
[Footnote: _The Philosophy of Right_, Sec 209] and its realization
reveals itself in the customs, laws and institutions of the state. From
this point of view the individual is an accidental thing; the ethical
order revealed in society is permanent, and has absolute authority. It is
true, however, that it is not something foreign to the individual; he is
conscious of it as his own being. In duty he finds his liberation.
[Footnote: _Ibid_., Sec Sec 145-149]

But what is a man's duty? "What a man ought to do," says Hegel,
[Footnote: _Ibid_., Sec 150] "what duties he should fulfill in order
to be virtuous, is in an ethical community easy to say--the man has only
to do what is presented, expressed and recognized in the established
relations in which he finds himself."

In other words, he ought to do just what his community prescribes! This
seems, taken quite literally, a startling doctrine.

It would be a wrong to Hegel to take him quite literally, for he
elsewhere [Footnote: _Ibid_., Introduction.] makes it plain that he
by no means approves of all the laws and customs that have obtained in
various societies. Still, he exalts the law of the state and regards any
opposition to it on the authority of private conviction as "stupendous
presumption." [Footnote: Op. _cit_., Sec 138.] This is a serious
rebuke to the reformer. The individual must, according to Hegel, look for
the moral law outside of himself--of himself as an individual, at least.
He must find it in the State.

138. NIETZSCHE.--Again a startling contrast: after Hegel, Nietzsche--the
voice of one crying in the wilderness, exquisitely, passionately, but
scarcely with articulate scientific utterance. A prophet of revolt and
emancipation; a cave-dweller, who would flee organized society and the
refinements of civilization; the rabid individualist, to whom the
community is the "herd," and common notions of right and wrong are
absurdities to be visited with scorn and denunciation. He makes a strong
appeal to young men, even after the years during which the carrying of
one's own latch-key is a source of elation. He appeals also to those
perennially young persons who never attain to the stature which befits
those who are to take a responsible share in the organized efforts of
communities of men.

With Nietzsche the man, his suffering life, and the melancholy eclipse of
his brilliant intellect, ethics as science is little concerned. In
Nietzsche the marvellous literary artist it can have no interest. These
things are the affair of literature and biography.

Here we are concerned only with his contribution to ethics. Just what
that has been it is more difficult to determine than would be the case in
a writer more systematic and scientific. But he makes it very clear that
he repudiates the morals which have been accepted heretofore by moralists
and communities of men generally.

He confesses himself an "immoralist." He despises man as he is, and hails
the "Superman," a creature inspired by the "will to have power" and free
from all moral prejudices, including that of sympathy with the weak and
the helpless.

"Full is the world of the superfluous," he sings in his famous dithyramb,
[Footnote: _Thus Spake Zarathustra, I, xi_. It is a pity to read
NIETZSCHE in any translation. His diction is exquisite. But those who can
only read him in English may be referred to the translations of his works
edited by LEVY. New York, 1911.] "marred is life by the many-too-
many."... "Many too many are born; for the superfluous ones was the State
devised."..."There, where the State ceaseth--there only commenceth the
man who is not superfluous."

Man, says Nietzsche, should regard himself as a "bridge" over which he
can pass to something higher. [Footnote: _Ibid._, Prologue, and I,
IV, XI, _et passim_.] Upon the fact that the Superman may have the
same reason for regarding himself as a "bridge" as the most commonplace
of mortals, and may begin anew with loathing and self-contempt, he does
not dwell. Yet, as long as progress is possible, man may always be
regarded as a "bridge." The reader of Nietzsche is tempted to believe
that hatred and contempt must always be the predominant emotions in the
mind of the "superior" man. Darwin, who knew much more about man and
nature than did our passionate poet, was still able to regard man as "the
crown and glory of the universe." Not so, Nietzsche.

Those who have read little in ethics are inclined to attribute to
Nietzsche a greater measure of originality than he can reasonably claim.
More than two milleniums before him, Plato conceived an ideal Republic in
which moral laws, as commonly accepted, were to be set aside. Marriage
was to be done away with; births were to be scientifically regulated;
children were to be taken from their mothers; sickly infants were to be
destroyed. In Sparta the committee of the elders did not permit the
promptings of sympathy and the cries of wounded maternal love to
influence the decision touching the life or death of the new-born.

Here was an attempt at bridge-building, but it was conceived as a
scientific matter, to be taken in hand by the State, and for the good of
the State. But Nietzsche would destroy the State. His Superman appears as
individualistic as a "rogue" elephant, a few passages to the contrary
notwithstanding. Are we to regard him as a mere lawless egoist, or as
something more? We are left in the dark. [Footnote: See the volume,
_Beyond Good and Evil,_ "What is Noble?" Sec 265.] But we note that
Nietzsche disagrees with most moralists, in that he refuses to regard
Caesar Borgia as a morbid growth. [Footnote: _Ibid., The Natural
History of Morals,_ Sec 197. DOSTOIEVSKY'S genius has portrayed for us
an admirable Superman in the person of the Russian convict Orloff. See
his _House of the Dead_, chapter v.]

The Superman has always been with us, in somewhat varying types. From
Alexander the Great to Napoleon, and before and after, he adorns the
pages of history. Attila, among others, may enter his claim to
consideration. It remains for the serious student of ethics to estimate
scientifically his value as an ethical ideal, and to judge how far this
type of character may profitably be taken as a pattern. Nietzsche stands
at the farthest possible remove from Hegel. Does he, as an individualist,
stand within hail of Kant? It scarcely seems so. When we examine Kant's
"practical reason," in other words, the moral law as it revealed itself
to Kant, we find that it had taken up into itself the moral development
of the ages preceding. Kant's practical reason, his conscience, to speak
plain English, was not the practical reason of, for example, Aristotle.
The latter could speak of a slave as an "animated tool," and could
believe there were men intended by nature for slavery. Kant could not. In
theory an individualist, the Sage of Konigsberg stands, in reality, not
far from Hegel. He does not break with the past. But Nietzsche is revolt
incarnate.


