PART VIII

THE ETHICS OF THE SOCIAL WILL


CHAPTER XXX

ASPECTS OF THE ETHICS OF REASON


139. THE DOCTRINE SUPPORTED BY THE OTHER SCHOOLS.--- I urge the more
confidently the Ethics of Reason, or the Ethics of the Rational Social
Will, because there is so little in it that is really new. It only makes
articulate what we all know already, and strives to get rid of certain
exaggerations into which many men who reason, and who reason well, have
unwittingly fallen.

The fundamentals of the doctrine have been exhibited in Parts V and VI of
this volume, and the exaggerations alluded to have been treated in Part
VII. Hence, I may speak very briefly in indicating how the Ethics of
Reason finds a many-sided support in schools which appear, on the
surface, to be in the opposition.

It is evident, to begin with, that the Ethics of the Social Will cannot
dispense with Moral Intuitions, but must regard them as indispensable;
as, indeed, the very foundation of the moral life. That the individual
may, and if he is properly equipped for the task, ought, to examine
critically his own moral intuitions and those of the community in which
he finds himself, and should, with becoming modesty and hesitation, now
and then suggest an innovation, means no more than that he and the
community are not dead, but are living, and that progress is a
possibility, at least.

As for the Egoist, unless he is an absurd extremist, we must admit that
he says much that is worth listening to. Was not Bentham quite right in
maintaining that if all A's interests were committed to B, and all B's to
A, the world would get on very badly? A charity that begins at the planet
Mars would arrive nowhere. The Ethics of Reason has room for a very
careful consideration of the interests of the self. But it may object to
the position that the moral mathematician may regard as the only
important number the number One.

With the Utilitarian our doctrine need have, as we have seen, no quarrel.
Did not that learned, enlightened, and most fair-minded of utilitarians,
Sidgwick, ultimately resolve the happiness which men seek into anything
which may be the object of the mind in willing? Did not a critical
utilitarianism resolve itself into the doctrine of the Rational Social
Will? Why take less critical utilitarians as the only exponents of the
school? Besides, is there any reason why the social will should be blind
to the fact that men generally do desire to gain pleasure and to avoid
pain? It is only the exaggeration of this truth that we need to combat.

To Nature, properly understood, we can enter no objection. Who objects to
Perfection as a "counsel of perfection?" Can the Social Will object to a
man's striving to Realize his Capacities--under proper control, and with
a regard to others? The Pessimist is an unhealthy creature, and the
Social Will represents normal and healthy humanity. Here we have
disparity. But to Evolution our doctrine offers no opposition. It is only
by a process of development that the Actual Social Will has come to be
what it is; and the Rational Social Will looks to a further development
under the guidance of reason.

The fact is that thoughtful men belonging to different schools tend to
introduce into their statement of their doctrines modifying clauses; and
in the end we find them not as far apart as they seemed at the beginning.
The tendency is, I think, in the direction of the recognition of the
Rational Social Will. This doctrine belongs to nobody in particular; it
is the. common property of us all. It contains little that is startling.

140. ITS METHOD OF APPROACH TO PROBLEMS.---He who looks to the Rational
Social Will for guidance is given a compass which may be of no small
service to him. For example:

(1) He will see that moral phenomena are not to be isolated. He will
accept the historic order of society and judge man and his emotions and
actions in the light of it. He will never feel tempted to say, with
Bentham, that the pleasure which has its roots in malice, envy, cruelty,
"taken by itself, is good." [Footnote: _Principles of Morals and
Legislation,_ chapter x, Sec 10, note.]

He will simply say, it is pleasure. That it is, of course; but he will
maintain that nothing "taken by itself" is either good or bad, from the
moralist's point of view. The cruel man may will to see suffering, and
may enjoy it. The moral man may hold that the cruel man, his act of will,
and his pleasure, should all be snuffed out, in the interest of humanity,
as an unmitigated evil.

(2) The advocate of the Rational Social Will recognizes, as do many
adherents of other schools, that the social will, as expressed at any
given time, is only relatively rational; that men must live in their own
day and generation, although they can, to some degree, reach beyond them;
and that some differences of opinion as to the relative values of
virtues, and the goodness of characters, are to be expected.

(3) Furthermore, he is in a position to explain how a man may be
"subjectively" right and yet "objectively" wrong. The man's character may
be such that it is, on the whole, to be approved by the Rational Social
Will. He may be animated by the desire to adjust himself to that will.
And yet, the accident of ignorance, the accident of prejudice not
recognized by himself as such, may lead him to do what he thinks right
and what those more enlightened recognize to be wrong.

141. ITS SOLUTION OF CERTAIN DIFFICULTIES.--Perhaps it would be better
for me to give this section a heading more nearly like the last. I aim
only to give the reader a point of view from which he can approach the
problem of a solution.

Take the problem which has come up before in the form of the distribution
of pleasures. [Footnote: See Sec 109.] He who dwells, not so much upon
pleasure, as upon the satisfaction of desire and will, must state it
differently, but the problem is much the same. What degree of recognition
should be given to the will of each individual, or to the separate
volitions and desires in the life of the individual? Should everybody
count for one? Should every desire or group of desires receive
recognition? Is no distinction to be made in the intensity of desires?
And how many individuals shall we include in our reckoning?

Light seems to be shed upon this complicated problem or set of problems
when we hold clearly before ourselves what the task of reason is in
regulating the life of man individually and collectively. Its function is
to bring order out of chaos and strife; to substitute harmony and
planfulness for accident; to introduce long views in the place of
momentary impulses; to prevent the barter of permanent good for a mess of
pottage.

Reason must accept the impulses and instincts of man as it finds them,
and do what it can with them. It cannot ignore them. Slowly,
civilizations, to some degree rational, have come into being. In so far
as they are rational, they are justified. Keeping all this in view we may
say, tentatively:

(a) The principle, "everybody to count for one, and nobody for more than
one," must be interpreted as an expression of the conviction that no will
should be _needlessly_ sacrificed.

Reason is bodiless, except as incorporated in human societies, and these
must have their historic development. Can we do away with the special
claims of family, of neighborhood, of the state? They have their place in
the historic rational order. But the whispered "everybody to count for
one" may help us to realize that such special claims cannot take the
place of all others.

(b) Shall a deliberate attempt be made to enlarge the circle of those who
are to share in the social will, not merely by diminishing the number of
deaths, but by promoting the number of births? States have attempted it
often enough. I can only say that, if this be attempted, it should not be
attempted in ways that ignore the historical development of society, with
its social and moral traditions.

(c) Why not justify our attitude toward the brutes by maintaining that
they have, theoretically, rights to recognition, in so far as such
recognition does not interfere with the rights of man in the rational
social order? The brutes outnumber us, to be sure. We are in a hopeless
minority. But were this minority sacrificed, there would be no rational
social order at all--no right, no wrong; nothing but the clash of wills
or impulses which reason now strives to harmonize as it can. [Footnote:
See chapter xxi]

(d) When we turn to the problem of the distribution of satisfactions in
the life of the individual, we find ready to hand a variety of unwise
saws--"A short life and a merry one," and the like.

How should the individual choose his satisfactions? Merely from the
standpoint of the individual? What is _desirable_? Not _desired_,
by this man or by that, but _desirable, reasonable_?

It is an open secret that the house of mirth lacks every convenience
demanded of a permanent residence, and that those who breathlessly pursue
pleasure are seldom pleased. Nor do men, when they stop to think, want
their lives to be very short.

And, in any case, this question of the distribution of satisfactions in
the life of the individual does not concern the individual alone. Is the
man who wants a short life and a merry one an "undesirable" from the
standpoint of the Rational Social Will? Then he should be suppressed. The
manner of distribution of even his own personal satisfactions is not his
affair exclusively. Every ordered society has its notions touching the
type of man which suits its ends.

(e) But shall we, in making up our minds about the "satisfaction on the
whole" which busies the rational individual or the rational community,
take no account at all of the intensity of pleasures and of pains, the
eagerness with which some things are desired and the feebleness of the
impulsion toward others? May not the intense thrill of a moment more than
counterbalance "four lukewarm hours?" Are we not, if we take such things
into consideration, back again face to face with something very like the
calculus of pleasures--that bugbear of the egoist and of the utilitarian?

It would be foolish to maintain that man, either individually or
collectively, places all desires upon the same level. No man of sense
holds that every desire should count as one. On the other hand, no man of
sense pretends to have any accurate unit of measurement by which he can
make unerring estimates of desirability.

Fortunately, he is not compelled to fall back upon such a unit. Even if
he was born yesterday, the race was not. He is born into a system of
values expressed in social organization and social institutions. It is
the resultant of innumerable expressions of preference on the part of
innumerable men. It is a general guide to what, on the whole, man wants.

It is, then, foolish for him to raise such questions as, whether it is
not better to aim at intense happiness on the part of the few, to the
utter ignoring of the mass of mankind. Such questions the Rational Social
Will has already answered in the negative.

142. THE CULTIVATION OF OUR CAPACITIES.--Finally, we may approach the
question whether it is reasonable to awake dormant desires, to call into
being new needs; which, satisfied, may be recognized as a good, but
which, unsatisfied, may result in unhappiness. [Footnote: Compare chapter
xxi, Sec 86.]

A little cup may be filled with what leaves a big one half empty. It is
easy to find grounds upon which to congratulate the "average" man. All
the world caters to him--ready-made clothing is measured to fit his
figure, and it is sold cheap; the average restaurant consults his taste
and his pocket; the average woman just suits him as a help-mate; he is
much at home with his neighbors, most of whom diverge little from the
average. Why strive to rise above the average--and fall into a divine
discontent?

May one not say much the same of a community? Why should it strive to
attain to new conquests, to awaken in its members new wants and strain to
satisfy them? Does it seem self-evident that it is reasonable, in
general, to multiply desires with no guarantee of their satisfaction?

I know no way of approaching the solution of this problem save from the
standpoint of the Rational Social Will. We are confronted with the
general problem of the desirability of civilization, with all that that
implies. The life of man in some rather primitive societies has seemed in
certain respects rather idyllic. The eating of the fruit of the tree, and
the consequent opening of the eyes, has, time and again, seemed to result
in disaster.

But was the idyllic life not an accidental thing, due to a fortuitous
combination of circumstances, rather than to man's intelligent control of
a larger environment? Civilization of some sort seems inevitable. Have we
any other guarantee that we can make it, in the long run, rational, than
a many-sided development of man's capacities? And must we not exercise a
broad faith in the value of enlightenment, increase of knowledge,
farsightedness, the cultivation of complex emotions, even at the risk of
some waste of effort and some suffering to certain individuals?

Perhaps this is as good a place as any to say a word about the
significance of the terms "higher" and "lower," when used in a moral
sense. We have seen that John Stuart Mill made much of the distinction in
his utilitarianism. Bentham appears to sin against the enlightened moral
judgment in holding that, quantities of pleasure being the same, "push-
pin is as good as poetry."

When we realize that the worth of things may be determined from the
standpoint of the Rational Social Will, we can easily understand that
some occupations and their accompanying pleasures should be rated higher
than others, however satisfactory the latter may seem to certain
individuals. It is not unreasonable to rate the pleasure of scientific
discovery as higher than the pleasure of swallowing an oyster; and that,
without following Bentham in falling back upon a quantitative standard,
or following Mill in maintaining that pleasures, as pleasures, differ in
kind. [Footnote: See chapter xxv, Sec 107.]




