CHAPTER XXI

THE RATIONAL SOCIAL WILL


82. REASONABLE ENDS.--We have seen in the chapter on "Rationality and
Will," that we cannot consider a man rational unless his choices are
harmonized and converge upon some comprehensive end. It has been hinted,
furthermore, that not all comprehensive ends can be described as
reasonable or rational.

A child may be consistently disobedient to its parents, and, given
parents of a certain kind, it may find its life highly satisfactory. A
man may consistently be a bad neighbor, and may harbor the conviction
that, on the whole, he gains by it. A miser may be consistent; he may
come to joy in denying himself luxuries and even comforts, repaid in the
consciousness of an increasing store. The philosophical egoist may reason
with admirable consistency, and may habitually act in accordance with his
convictions, leading, for him, a very endurable life.

All these may be intelligent, even acutely intelligent, and may reason
clearly and well. Nevertheless, men generally refuse to consider their
behavior reasonable. There are ends which we regard as rational, and
others which we condemn as irrational.

It is not enough, hence, that a man's volitions should be intelligently
harmonized and unified. His will must be adjusted to ends which
themselves can be judged rational.

And in deciding whether the ends he chooses are rational or not, we
proceed just as we do in judging the rationality of his individual
choices. If the latter are made in the light of information, if their
significance is realized, if they converge upon some comprehensive end
and do not merely clash and defeat one another, we have seen that they
are made under the guidance of reason or intelligence. The individual
volitions are congruous with the permanent set of the man's will. They
are judged by their background, by their harmony with the "pattern" which
is revealed in the man's volitional life.

Even so, each such volitional pattern, the harmonized and unified will of
the individual as directed upon some comprehensive end, is judged to be
rational or not according as it does or does not accord with the ends
pursued by the social will. Individuals, whose wills are thoroughly
unified and harmonized by the dominant influence of given chosen ends,
may be thoroughly out of harmony with the chosen ends of the larger
organism of which they are a part. They may be out of harmony with each
other. Considered alone, each may display an internal order and unity.
Taken together they may be seen to be in open strife.

We have found the social will to be something relatively permanent and
moving with more or less consistency toward certain comprehensive ends.
That the ends chosen by given individuals may be very much out of harmony
with these is palpable. The deliberate idler, the whole-hearted epicure,
the habitually untruthful man, the miser, the cold egoist--these and such
as these are condemned in enlightened communities. Their lives do not
help to further, but serve to frustrate, the ends approved by the social
will. In so far they may be regarded as consistently irrational.

83. AN OBJECTION ANSWERED.--Consistently irrational! it may be exclaimed;
how can that be? is not a far-sighted consistency the very mark of
rational choice?

The difficulty is only an apparent one. Many forms of consistency may
indicate a certain degree of rationality, and yet too slight a degree to
win approval. There is such a thing as a narrow consistency. He who
devotes his life to the purpose of revenge, may live consistently, but he
loses much. A bitter and angry life is not a desirable thing, even from
the standpoint of the individual.

But why should we limit ourselves to the standpoint of the individual, in
judging of the rationality of ends? There are those to whom it appears
self-evident that this should be done; those to whom it does not seem
reasonable for a man to do anything by which he, on the whole, loses;
those who deny the reasonableness of self-sacrifice in any form. This
doctrine will be examined later. [Footnote: See Sec 102 and 128.]

Here it is enough to point out that men do not actually limit the notion
of rationality in this way. In every, even moderately, rational life some
desires must be suppressed. All desires cannot be satisfied. Why should
it not be regarded as rational and reasonable that, to attain the
comprehensive ends of the social will, certain ends consistently chosen
by certain kinds of individuals should deliberately be denied?

As a matter of fact, men generally do so regard it. They employ the terms
rational and irrational, reasonable and unreasonable, to indicate the
harmony or lack of harmony between the individual and the social will. We
call the man unreasonable who insists upon having his own way regardless
of his fellows; and this, even in instances in which his fellows cannot
punish him for his selfish attitude.

It is not a matter of accident that this should be so. The analogy
between the relation of separate volitions to the dominant ends which
control action on the part of the individual, and the relation of the
ultimate choices of individuals to the ends pursued by the social will,
is a close one. In the well-ordered mind the clash of conflicting desires
is reduced to a minimum. In a well-ordered community the conflict of
individual wills is also reduced to a minimum. In each case, we are
concerned with the work of reason, and judgments as to rationality and
irrationality are equally in place.

84. REASONABLE SOCIAL ENDS.--The will of the individual, when affirmed to
be rational or irrational, is, therefore, referred to the background of
the social will. But the social will is more or less different in
different communities, and in the one community at different stages of
its development. Is there any measure of the degree of rationality of the
social will itself? is there any standard to which its different
expressions may be referred?

We may criticise a community as we criticise an individual man even when
he is taken as abstracted from his social setting. The man's choices may
be blind, conflicting, wayward, and ill-adapted to serve his interests
taken as a whole. In the last chapter we saw that a community may
resemble such a man. It may be ignorant, superstitious, short-sighted,
and in conflict with itself. The social will as actually revealed may be
an imperfect and inconsistent thing. Here enlightenment and inner
harmonization are called for, to set the social will free.

But even where the will of a community is something more definite and
consistent than this, it may be condemned by the moral judgment of the
enlightened. An appeal may be made from the will of the community in the
narrower sense to that of the larger community. The limits of nation,
race and religion may be transcended, and we may appeal to humanity as
such, refusing to recognize the will of any lesser unit as really
ultimate. He who occupies the one standpoint is apt to speak of defending
his legitimate rights, or of extending to subject races the blessings of
civilization. He who takes his stand upon the other may talk of lust of
dominion, or desire for economic advantage. The one may use the term
righteous indignation; the other, the word anger. The moral judgment
passed upon an act depends upon the concept under which men manage to
bring it. What is approved by the tribal ethics may be abhorrent to the
ethics of humanity.

But the larger social will, so far as it has gotten itself expressed at
all, seems to remain something vague and indefinite. It is appealed to as
rational; but how indicate clearly the end which it sets before itself
and the obligations which it lays upon mankind?

The difficulty of describing in detail the ultimate ends of the real
social will has led some writers to speak in terms of exaggerated
vagueness. The mere idea in a man "of something, he knows not what, which
he may and should become" can give little guidance to action; nor can one
aim with much confidence at a goal of which "we can only speak or think
in negatives." [Footnote: _Prolegomena to Ethics_, Sec Sec 192, 172,
180. But GREEN is not always so indefinite. He is on the right track. He
reverences the social will and the historical development of the social
order.]

But it is not necessary to speak in this way. We may form some conception
of the real, rational social will, without being compelled to know all
that man is capable of becoming and without being able to forecast the
details of his environment in the distant future.

We may attain to our conception by determining clearly the nature of the
aims man sets before himself in proportion to his growing rationality. We
can see in what direction man moves as he develops and becomes
enlightened. From this standpoint, the aims of the rational social will
appear to be as follows:

(1) The harmonious satisfaction of the impulses and desires of man.

(2) Such an unfolding of his powers as will increase their range and
variety, broaden man's horizon, and give him an increased control over
erratic impulses.

(3) The bringing about of a social state in which the will of each
individual within a community counts for something, and not merely the
will of a chosen few.

(4) The broadening of the conception of what constitutes a community, so
that ever increasing numbers are regarded as having claims that must be
recognized.

(5) The taking into consideration of the whole of life; the whole life of
individuals and of communities, so that the insistent present shall not
be given undue weight, as against the future.

85. THE ETHICS OF REASON.--The doctrine of the Rational Social Will might
very properly be called the Ethics of Reason. It is not to be confounded
with the so-called "tribal" or "group" ethics. To be sure, it has to do
with man as a social being; but this is characteristic of ethical systems
generally. Man is a social being; he is one essentially, and not
accidentally. That he should be a member of a tribe, or of any lesser
group than the whole body of sentient and reasonable beings, may not
unjustly be regarded as an historical accident, as a function of his
position in the scale of development.

In judging the doctrine of the rational social will, bear in mind the
following:

(1) It rests upon the basis of the impulsive and volitional nature of
man.

(2) It recognizes reason in the individual, and declares that only so far
as he is rational is he the proper subject of ethics at all. Erratic and
uncontrolled impulse knows no moral law.

(3) It sees reason in the customs, laws and public opinion of the tribe
or the state, while recognizing a higher tribunal before the bar of which
all these are summoned.

(4) It appeals to the reason of the race--the reason appropriate to the
race as enlightened and freed from the shackles of local prejudice and
restricted sympathy.

(5) It recognizes that man can give expression to his nature, can satisfy
his desires and exercise his reason, only as aided by his physical and
social environment. It emphasizes the necessity of a certain reverence
for the actual historical development of human societies, with their
institutions. Such institutions are the embodiment of reason--not pure
reason, but reason struggling to get itself expressed as it can. He who
would legislate for man independently of such institutions has left the
solid earth and man far behind. He is suspended in the void.

86. THE DEVELOPMENT OF CIVILIZATION.--Civilizations differ; some are more
material, laying stress upon man's conquest of his material environment.
Others exhibit a greater appreciation of idealistic elements, the pursuit
of knowledge for its own sake, the cultivation of the fine arts, the
development of humanitarian sentiment. For civilization in general it is
not necessary to advance an argument. But there are elements in many
civilizations which the thoughtful man may feel called upon to defend.

Civilization, taken generally, scarcely needs a labored justification
because it is only in a civilization of some kind or other that we can
look for a guarantee of the broad social will, for the reign of reason.
Undeveloped man is at the mercy of nature; he is the sport of history.
Where developed man can raise his voice, man possessed of power and
capable of taking broad views of things, the rule of reason may be set
up. A deliberate attempt may be made to recognize many wills, harmonize
discords. Order may be brought out of chaos, and the limits of the realm
within the borders of which order reigns may be indefinitely extended.

Such is the general ethical justification for the rise of a civilization.
It is an expression of, and an instrument for the realization of, the
broader social will. That a given civilization may be imperfect in both
respects has been made clear in the last chapter. In the light of the
general justification for civilization many questions may be raised
touching this or that element in civilizations as we observe them.

Thus, it may be pointed out that as man progresses in civilization he
calls into being a multitude of new wants, many of which may have to
remain unsatisfied. [Footnote: Compare chapter xxx, Sec 142.] It may be
asserted that literature, art and science are, in fact, cherished as
though they were ends in themselves, and not means called into existence
to serve the interests of man. Absorbing as it may be to him, how can the
philologist prove that his science is useful to humanity either present
or prospective? How shall the astronomer, who may frankly admit that he
cannot conceive that nine tenths of the work with which he occupies
himself can ever be of any actual use to anyone, justify himself in
devoting his life to it? Shall a curiosity, which seems to lead nowhere,
be satisfied? And if so, on what ground?

Moreover, every civilization recognizes that some wills are to be given a
more unequivocal recognition than others. Inequality is the rule. A man
does not put his own children upon a level with those of his neighbor.
Even in the most democratic of states men do not stand upon the same
level. In dealing with our own fellows we do not employ the same weights
and measures as in dealing with foreigners. Who loses his appetite for
his breakfast when he reads that there have been inundations in China or
that an African tribe has come under the "protection" of a race of
another color? The white man has added to his burden--the burden of
economic advantage present or prospective--and we find it as it should
be. Finally, when we bring within our horizon the "interests" of humbler
sentient creatures, we see that they are unhesitatingly subordinated to
our own. Some attention is paid to them in civilized communities. They
are recognized, not merely by custom and public opinion, but, to some
degree, even by law. Men are punished for treating certain animals in
certain ways. But why? Have the animals rights? There is no topic within
the sphere of morals upon which moralists speak with more wavering and
uncertain accents. [Footnote: See chapter XXX, Sec 141.]

I know of no way in which such problems as the above can be approached
other than by the appeal to reason, as reason has been understood in the
pages preceding. The reign of reason implies the recognition of all
wills, _so far as such a recognition is within the bounds of
possibility_. The escape from chaos lies in the evolution of the
enlightened social will. Man must be raised in the scale, in order that
he may have control; control over himself, over other men, over the
brutes. And he cannot rise except through the historical evolution of a
social order. This implies the development of the capacities latent in
man.

To decide that any of his capacities shall be allowed to remain dormant
may threaten future development. To cut off certain arts and sciences as
not palpably serving the interests of man is a dangerous thing. To ignore
the actual history of man's efforts to become a rational being, and to
place, hence, all wills upon the one level, is to frustrate the desired
end. It is not thus that the reign of reason can be established.




