CHAPTER XXXII

THE MORAL CONCEPTS


146. GOOD AND BAD; RIGHT AND WRONG.--As a rule, men reflect little
touching the moral terms which are on their lips every day. It is well
worth while to take some of them up and to turn them over for
examination.

We may use the terms "good" and "bad," "right" and "wrong," in a very
broad sense. A "good" trick may be a contemptible action; the "right" way
to crack a bank-safe may be the means to the successful commission of a
crime. Evidently, the words, thus used, are not employed in a moral
sense.

When we pass judgments from the moral point of view, we concern ourselves
with men and with their actions, and measure them by the standard of the
social will. Men and actions are "good," when they can meet the test.
Actions are "right" or "wrong," when they are in accordance with the
dictates of the moral law, or are at variance with them. That an act may
be both right and wrong, when viewed from different standpoints, even on
moral ground, we have seen in Chapter XXX. A man may mean to do right,
and may, through ignorance or error, be guilty of an act that we condemn.
To the intelligent, confusions are here unnecessary. But the history of
ethics is full of confusions in just this field.

147. DUTY AND OBLIGATION.--Verbal usage sometimes justifies the use of
one of these words, and sometimes that of the other. We say: I did my
duty; we do not say: I did my obligation. But this is a mere matter of
verbal expression, and we are really concerned with two names for the
same thing.

(1) There has been much dispute as to whether the sense of duty or moral
obligation can or cannot be analyzed. It has been declared unanalyzable
and unique. Some think this a point of much importance which imparts a
peculiar sacredness to the sense of duty.

There appears no reason why this position should be taken. No one has
been able to analyze into its ultimate sensational elements the peculiar
feeling one has when one is tickled. But this does not make the feeling
sacred or awe-inspiring. The authority of the sense of duty must be
looked for in another direction--and authority it has.

(2) I have spoken of the "sense" of duty. We all recognize that, when we
are faced with a duty, a feeling is normally present. But the whole
argument of this volume has maintained that man is not to be treated only
as the subject of emotions. He is a rational being. In some persons
feeling is very prominent; in others it is less so. It is quite
conceivable that, in a given case, a man capable of reflection should
recognize that he is confronted with a duty, and yet that he should feel
no impulse to perform it. Did no one ever feel any such impulse, the
whole system of duties, the whole rational order of society itself, would
dissolve and disappear.

Fortunately, the normal man does feel an impulse to perform duties
recognized as such. And in the case of those exceptional persons who do
not, society strives to supply surrogates, extraordinary impulses based
upon a system of rewards and punishments. This is a mere supplement, and
could never keep alive a society from which the sense of duty had
disappeared.

Duty _is_ sacred. It is the very foundation of every rational
society. It does not greatly concern ethics whether the impulse, which
makes itself felt in men who want to do their duty, can or cannot be
analyzed. But it is all-important that they should feel the impulse.

(3) Can a man do more than his duty? Is it the duty of everyone to be,
not merely a good, average, honest, faithful, law-abiding citizen, but to
go far beyond this and be conspicuously a saint?

It should be remembered that we are concerned with the connotation
properly to be given to a word in common use.

A certain amount of goodness the social will appears to demand of men
rather peremptorily. Its demands seem to vary somewhat with the
exigencies of the times--for example, in peace and in war. It does not
make the same demands of all men. From those to whom much has been given--
wealth, education, social or political influence,--much is required.
From certain persons it appears to be glad to get anything. If they keep
out of the police-court, it is agreeably surprised.

I have no desire to dissuade anyone from the arduous pursuit of
sainthood; but I submit that the word "duty," as sanctioned by usage,
implies but a limited demand, and takes cognizance of character and
environment. He who comes up to this moderate standard is not condemned;
but he is free to go farther and to become as great a saint as he
pleases. In which case, we admire him. Those who, in the past, have
spoken of "counsels of perfection," have drawn upon a profound knowledge
of human nature and of human societies.

148. REWARD AND PUNISHMENT.--We saw in the last chapter (Sec 144) that it
is something of a criticism upon man and upon societies of men that
extraordinary rewards have to be given and that punishments must be
inflicted.

More attention has been paid to punishments than to rewards, and the
question touching the proper aim of punishment in a civilized state has
received much discussion. The study of the history of the infliction of
punishment is suggestive, but it does not shed a clear light. The social
will has not always been a rational social will, and some of its
decisions may be placed among the curiosities of literature. Still, they
may serve the purpose of the traditional "terrible example."

Should we, in punishing, aim at the prevention of crime? Are punishments
to be "deterrent"? Under this head we must consider, not merely the
criminal himself, but also those who are in more or less danger of
becoming criminals, though they have, as yet, committed no known crime.

Should the aim of punishment be the reformation of the criminal?

Should we punish merely that "justice" be done? He who steals and eats
fruit is visited with punishment, in the course of nature, if the fruit
is unripe. But he suffers equally if he eats his own fruit, under like
conditions. This seems a blind punishment. Should we visit pain upon him
for the theft, merely because it is a theft, and without looking abroad
for any other reason?

Light appears to be thrown upon these problems when we reflect that
punishment is an instrument, employed by the Rational Social Will, in
pursuance of its ends.

(1) It is desirable that men should be deterred from committing crime. If
this cannot be done save by the infliction of punishment, then let men be
punished. But be it remembered that punishment is a regrettable
necessity, and that the occasions for the infliction of penalties may
greatly be diminished by the amelioration of the organism of society.
There is the born criminal, as there is the born inmate of an asylum for
the insane. But there is also the manufactured criminal; the product of
the slum, the victim of ignorance, the prey of the walking-delegate, the
sufferer from over-work and undernourishment, the inhabitant of the
filthy and overcrowded tenement, the man robbed of his self-respect, who
has no share in the sweetness and light of civilization. A society that
first manufactures criminals and then expends great sums in punishing
them is, in so far, not rational.

(2) It is desirable that the criminal should be reformed and returned to
society as a normal man. But this is not the one and only aim of the
social will. The whole flock should not be sacrificed to the one black
sheep, as some sentimental persons appear to believe. There is room here
for the exercise of judgment and of some cool calculation.

(3) As for the demand that a given pain shall be inflicted for a given
wrong done, irrespective of any gain to anybody, and irrespective of
consequences,--it appears to carry one back to ancient and primitive law.

Undoubtedly many punishments have been inflicted in the past to satisfy
the sense of resentment. [Footnote: It may be objected that we are not
concerned here with resentment but with the satisfaction of "justice."
Men's notions of the "justice" of punishments have been touched upon in
chapter ii, Sec 4. Plato suggests, in his Laws, that the slave who steals a
bunch of grapes should receive a blow for every grape in the bunch. This
has an agreeably mathematical flavor of exactitude. But what shall be
done to the man who steals half of a ham or a third of a watermelon?]
Undoubtedly the same is true of the present. Can anything be said in
favor of this impulse? It plays no small part in the life of humanity.

We feel that a bad man _ought_ to be punished. We harbor a certain
resentment against him. The resentment of the individual for personal
injuries we recognize to be wrong. It is not impartial, and it is apt to
be excessive and unreasoning. Public order demands that it be refused
expression.

But is the--we must admit, somewhat more disinterested--resentment of the
community a rational thing? Have men, collectively, no whims, no
prejudices? When a trial is deferred, and public indignation has cooled
off, how do the chances of the prisoner compare with those he enjoyed
just after the commission of the crime? And yet something may be said for
public resentment. It has a certain driving-power. It may be questioned
whether either our desire to deter men from crime, or our benevolent
interest in the criminal, would be quite sufficient to enforce law, if
all sense of resentment against the law-breaker were lacking. Its
usefulness as an instrument of the social will appears to give it a
certain justification. But it also suggests that even public resentment
should not be given free rein.

Before leaving the subject of reward and punishment, it may be well to
say a word touching our use of the terms _credit_ and _discredit_, _merit_
and _demerit_.

We do not give a man credit for an action, we do not think of him as
meritorious, merely because he has done right. Who thinks of praising the
young mother for feeding and washing her first-born? Who shakes the hand
of the Sunday-school teacher and congratulates him upon having stolen
nothing for a week? But the waif from the gutter who wanders through a
department-store and resolutely takes nothing, emerging exhausted with
the struggle, we slap upon the back and call a little man.

Our notions of credit and merit are bound up with our notions of
extraordinary rewards. The creditable action, the meritorious man, have a
certain claim upon us, if only the claim of special recognition. Any man
who makes a notable step forward deserves credit, whatever his actual
position upon the moral scale. He who only "marks time" upon a relatively
high level may be a good man, but we do not give him credit for the act
normally to be expected of him. The recognition of merit is a part of the
machinery of moralization.

149. VIRTUES AND VICES.--One swallow, said Aristotle, does not make a
spring, nor does one happy day make a happy life. Elsewhere he draws our
attention to the fact that one good action does not constitute a virtue.

We may define the virtues as those relatively permanent qualities of
character which it is desirable, from the moral point of view, that a man
should have. The vices are the corresponding defects. I shall not attempt
to draw up a list of the virtues. For a variety of lists, exhibiting
curious and interesting diversities, I refer the reader back to Chapter
III, Sec Sec 9-11.

The Rational Social Will aims to build up a social order which shall do
justice to the fundamental impulses and desires of man, a social and
rational creature. The stones which it must build into its edifice are
human beings. If the human beings are mere lumps of soft clay, incapable
of holding their shape or of bearing any weight, the walls cannot rise.
And a human being may be satisfactory in one respect, and far from
satisfactory in another. No one of us is wholly ignorant of the qualities
desirable in our building-material. Custom, law and public opinion are
there to indicate what qualities have, in fact, proved, on the whole, not
detrimental. Our intuitions help us in forming a judgment. Rational
reflection is of service.

But one thing is very evident. Nowhere is it made clearer than in the
study of the virtues and vices, that the moralist cannot consider the
phenomena, with which he occupies himself, in a state of isolation.

Is courage a virtue? Is, then, the man who is willing to take the risk of
breaking a bank, or holding up a stage-coach, in so far virtuous? Is
perseverance a virtue? Is, then, the woman, who holds out to the bitter
end in her desire to have the last word, in so far virtuous? Is justice a
virtue? Then why not be virtuous in demanding the pound of flesh, if it
is the law--as it once was?

Certain qualities of character have been recognized as, _on the
whole_, and _generally_, serviceable to the social will. But a
man is not a quality of character, and qualities of character are
sometimes gathered into strange bundles. It is of men that the state is
composed; of thinking, feeling men. We cannot isolate qualities of
character, and assess their value in their isolation.

150. CONSCIENCE.--We are all forced to recognize that conscience has its
dual aspect. It is characterized by _feeling_; and the feeling is
seldom blind, or, at least, wholly blind; conscience implies a
_judgment_ that something is right or wrong.

(1) The feeling is, to be sure, very often in the foreground. Those who
say, "My conscience tells me that this is wrong," often mean little more
than, "I feel that it is wrong."

But the word "feeling" is an ambiguous one. It is used to cover all sorts
of intuitive judgments as well as mere emotions. The man who takes the
time to reflect upon his feeling of the rightness or wrongness of an
action can often discover some, perhaps rather vague, reason for his
feeling proper.

(2) In other words, he may come upon an intuitive judgment. And the
thoughtful man who talks about his conscience is rarely satisfied with a
blind intuition; he wants to be sure he is right, and he thinks the whole
matter over.

(3) The feeling and the judgment are not necessarily in accord. The
feeling may lag behind an enlightened judgment. On the other hand, the
feeling of repugnance to acting in certain ways may be a justifiable
protest against a bit of intellectual sophistry.

(4) So much ought to be admitted by everyone who holds that conscience
may be blunted or may be enlightened. Consciences vary indefinitely. Some
we set down as hopelessly below the average; others we reverence as
refined and enlightened. The social worker makes it his aim to "awaken"
conscience, to cultivate it, to bring it up to a high standard. No
practical moralist regards the conscience of the individual as something
which must simply be left to itself and treated as sacred, no matter what
its character.

(5) The above sufficiently explains some of the puzzles which confront
the man who reverences conscience and yet studies the consciences of his
fellow-men. He finds that the individual conscience is not an infallible
guide-post pointing to right action; that it is not a perfect time-
keeper, in complete accord with the watches of other men.

"It's a turrible thing to have killed the wrong man," said the
conscience-stricken illicit distiller in his mountain fastness. "I never
seen good come o' goodness yet; him as strikes first is my fancy," said
the dying pirate in "Treasure Island." Augustine, passing over much worse
offences, exhausts himself in agonies of remorse over a boyish prank.
[Footnote: See chapter xx, Sec 78.] Seneca draws up a list of the most
horrifying crimes, and decides that ingratitude exceeds them all in
enormity. [Footnote: _On Benefits_, i, 10.]

(6) It appears to be quite evident that consciences ought to be
standardized, and that the standard should be made a high one. The true
standard is the one set by the Rational Social Will. It is as much a duty
to have a good conscience as it is to obey the conscience one has.




