Part II.




The Golden Graveyard.


Mother Middleton was an awful woman, an ‘old hand’ (transported convict)
some said. The prefix ‘mother’ in Australia mostly means ‘old hag’,
and is applied in that sense. In early boyhood we understood, from
old diggers, that Mother Middleton--in common with most other ‘old
hands’--had been sent out for ‘knocking a donkey off a hen-roost.’ We
had never seen a donkey. She drank like a fish and swore like a trooper
when the spirit moved her; she went on periodical sprees, and swore on
most occasions. There was a fearsome yarn, which impressed us greatly
as boys, to the effect that once, in her best (or worst) days, she had
pulled a mounted policeman off his horse, and half-killed him with a
heavy pick-handle, which she used for poking down clothes in her boiler.
She said that he had insulted her.

She could still knock down a tree and cut a load of firewood with any
Bushman; she was square and muscular, with arms like a navvy’s; she had
often worked shifts, below and on top, with her husband, when he’d be
putting down a prospecting shaft without a mate, as he often had to
do--because of her mainly. Old diggers said that it was lovely to see
how she’d spin up a heavy green-hide bucket full of clay and ‘tailings’,
and land and empty it with a twist of her wrist. Most men were afraid of
her, and few diggers’ wives were strong-minded enough to seek a second
row with Mother Middleton. Her voice could be heard right across Golden
Gully and Specimen Flat, whether raised in argument or in friendly
greeting. She came to the old Pipeclay diggings with the ‘rough crowd’
(mostly Irish), and when the old and new Pipeclays were worked out, she
went with the rush to Gulgong (about the last of the great alluvial or
‘poor-man’s’ goldfields) and came back to Pipeclay when the Log Paddock
goldfield ‘broke out’, adjacent to the old fields, and so helped prove
the truth of the old digger’s saying, that no matter how thoroughly
ground has been worked, there is always room for a new Ballarat.

Jimmy Middleton died at Log Paddock, and was buried, about the last,
in the little old cemetery--appertaining to the old farming town on the
river, about four miles away--which adjoined the district racecourse, in
the Bush, on the far edge of Specimen Flat. She conducted the funeral.
Some said she made the coffin, and there were alleged jokes to the
effect that her tongue had provided the corpse; but this, I think, was
unfair and cruel, for she loved Jimmy Middleton in her awful way, and
was, for all I ever heard to the contrary, a good wife to him. She then
lived in a hut in Log Paddock, on a little money in the bank, and did
sewing and washing for single diggers.

I remember hearing her one morning in neighbourly conversation, carried
on across the gully, with a selector, Peter Olsen, who was hopelessly
slaving to farm a dusty patch in the scrub.

‘Why don’t you chuck up that dust-hole and go up country and settle on
good land, Peter Olsen? You’re only slaving your stomach out here.’ (She
didn’t say stomach.)

*Peter Olsen* (mild-whiskered little man, afraid of his wife). ‘But then
you know my wife is so delicate, Mrs Middleton. I wouldn’t like to take
her out in the Bush.’

*Mrs Middleton*. ‘Delicate, be damned! she’s only shamming!’ (at her
loudest.) ‘Why don’t you kick her off the bed and the book out of her
hand, and make her go to work? She’s as delicate as I am. Are you a man,
Peter Olsen, or a----?’

This for the edification of the wife and of all within half a mile.

Long Paddock was ‘petering’. There were a few claims still being worked
down at the lowest end, where big, red-and-white waste-heaps of clay and
gravel, rising above the blue-grey gum-bushes, advertised deep sinking;
and little, yellow, clay-stained streams, running towards the creek over
the drought-parched surface, told of trouble with the water below--time
lost in baling and extra expense in timbering. And diggers came up with
their flannels and moleskins yellow and heavy, and dripping with wet
‘mullock’.

Most of the diggers had gone to other fields, but there were a few
prospecting, in parties and singly, out on the flats and amongst the
ridges round Pipeclay. Sinking holes in search of a new Ballarat.

Dave Regan--lanky, easy-going Bush native; Jim Bently--a bit of a ‘Flash
Jack’; and Andy Page--a character like what ‘Kit’ (in the ‘Old Curiosity
Shop’) might have been after a voyage to Australia and some Colonial
experience. These three were mates from habit and not necessity, for
it was all shallow sinking where they worked. They were poking down
pot-holes in the scrub in the vicinity of the racecourse, where the
sinking was from ten to fifteen feet.

Dave had theories--‘ideers’ or ‘notions’ he called them; Jim Bently laid
claim to none--he ran by sight, not scent, like a kangaroo-dog. Andy
Page--by the way, great admirer and faithful retainer of Dave Regan--was
simple and trusting, but, on critical occasions, he was apt to be
obstinately, uncomfortably, exasperatingly truthful, honest, and he had
reverence for higher things.

Dave thought hard all one quiet drowsy Sunday afternoon, and next
morning he, as head of the party, started to sink a hole as close to the
cemetery fence as he dared. It was a nice quiet spot in the thick scrub,
about three panels along the fence from the farthest corner post
from the road. They bottomed here at nine feet, and found encouraging
indications. They ‘drove’ (tunnelled) inwards at right angles to the
fence, and at a point immediately beneath it they were ‘making tucker’;
a few feet farther and they were making wages. The old alluvial bottom
sloped gently that way. The bottom here, by the way, was shelving,
brownish, rotten rock.

Just inside the cemetery fence, and at right angles to Dave’s drive,
lay the shell containing all that was left of the late fiercely lamented
James Middleton, with older graves close at each end. A grave
was supposed to be six feet deep, and local gravediggers had been
conscientious. The old alluvial bottom sloped from nine to fifteen feet
here.

Dave worked the ground all round from the bottom of his shaft,
timbering--i.e., putting in a sapling prop--here and there where he
worked wide; but the ‘payable dirt’ ran in under the cemetery, and in no
other direction.

Dave, Jim, and Andy held a consultation in camp over their pipes
after tea, as a result of which Andy next morning rolled up his swag,
sorrowfully but firmly shook hands with Dave and Jim, and started to
tramp Out-Back to look for work on a sheep-station.

This was Dave’s theory--drawn from a little experience and many long
yarns with old diggers:--

He had bottomed on a slope to an old original water-course, covered with
clay and gravel from the hills by centuries of rains to the depth of
from nine or ten to twenty feet; he had bottomed on a gutter running
into the bed of the old buried creek, and carrying patches and streaks
of ‘wash’ or gold-bearing dirt. If he went on he might strike it rich
at any stroke of his pick; he might strike the rich ‘lead’ which was
supposed to exist round there. (There was always supposed to be a rich
lead round there somewhere. ‘There’s gold in them ridges yet--if a man
can only git at it,’ says the toothless old relic of the Roaring Days.)

Dave might strike a ledge, ‘pocket’, or ‘pot-hole’ holding wash rich
with gold. He had prospected on the opposite side of the cemetery, found
no gold, and the bottom sloping upwards towards the graveyard. He had
prospected at the back of the cemetery, found a few ‘colours’, and the
bottom sloping downwards towards the point under the cemetery towards
which all indications were now leading him. He had sunk shafts across
the road opposite the cemetery frontage and found the sinking twenty
feet and not a colour of gold. Probably the whole of the ground under
the cemetery was rich--maybe the richest in the district. The old
gravediggers had not been gold-diggers--besides, the graves, being six
feet, would, none of them, have touched the alluvial bottom. There
was nothing strange in the fact that none of the crowd of experienced
diggers who rushed the district had thought of the cemetery and
racecourse. Old brick chimneys and houses, the clay for the bricks of
which had been taken from sites of subsequent goldfields, had been put
through the crushing-mill in subsequent years and had yielded ‘payable
gold’. Fossicking Chinamen were said to have been the first to detect a
case of this kind.

Dave reckoned to strike the ‘lead’, or a shelf or ledge with a good
streak of wash lying along it, at a point about forty feet within the
cemetery. But a theory in alluvial gold-mining was much like a theory
in gambling, in some respects. The theory might be right enough, but old
volcanic disturbances--‘the shrinkage of the earth’s surface,’ and that
sort of old thing--upset everything. You might follow good gold along
a ledge, just under the grass, till it suddenly broke off and the
continuation might be a hundred feet or so under your nose.

Had the ‘ground’ in the cemetery been ‘open’ Dave would have gone to the
point under which he expected the gold to lie, sunk a shaft there, and
worked the ground. It would have been the quickest and easiest way--it
would have saved the labour and the time lost in dragging heavy buckets
of dirt along a low lengthy drive to the shaft outside the fence. But
it was very doubtful if the Government could have been moved to open
the cemetery even on the strongest evidence of the existence of a rich
goldfield under it, and backed by the influence of a number of diggers
and their backers--which last was what Dave wished for least of all. He
wanted, above all things, to keep the thing shady. Then, again, the old
clannish local spirit of the old farming town, rooted in years way back
of the goldfields, would have been too strong for the Government, or
even a rush of wild diggers.

‘We’ll work this thing on the strict Q.T.,’ said Dave.

He and Jim had a consultation by the camp fire outside their tent. Jim
grumbled, in conclusion,--

‘Well, then, best go under Jimmy Middleton. It’s the shortest and
straightest, and Jimmy’s the freshest, anyway.’

Then there was another trouble. How were they to account for the size of
the waste-heap of clay on the surface which would be the result of such
an extraordinary length of drive or tunnel for shallow sinkings? Dave
had an idea of carrying some of the dirt away by night and putting it
down a deserted shaft close by; but that would double the labour, and
might lead to detection sooner than anything else. There were boys
‘possum-hunting on those flats every night. Then Dave got an idea.

There was supposed to exist--and it has since been proved--another, a
second gold-bearing alluvial bottom on that field, and several had tried
for it. One, the town watchmaker, had sunk all his money in ‘duffers’,
trying for the second bottom. It was supposed to exist at a depth
of from eighty to a hundred feet--on solid rock, I suppose. This
watchmaker, an Italian, would put men on to sink, and superintend in
person, and whenever he came to a little ‘colour’-showing shelf, or
false bottom, thirty or forty feet down--he’d go rooting round and spoil
the shaft, and then start to sink another. It was extraordinary that
he hadn’t the sense to sink straight down, thoroughly test the second
bottom, and if he found no gold there, to fill the shaft up to the other
bottoms, or build platforms at the proper level and then explore them.
He was living in a lunatic asylum the last time I heard of him. And the
last time I heard from that field, they were boring the ground like a
sieve, with the latest machinery, to find the best place to put down a
deep shaft, and finding gold from the second bottom on the bore. But I’m
right off the line again.

‘Old Pinter’, Ballarat digger--his theory on second and other bottoms
ran as follows:--

‘Ye see, THIS here grass surface--this here surface with trees an’ grass
on it, that we’re livin’ on, has got nothin’ to do with us. This here
bottom in the shaller sinkin’s that we’re workin’ on is the slope to the
bed of the NEW crick that was on the surface about the time that men was
missin’ links. The false bottoms, thirty or forty feet down, kin be said
to have been on the surface about the time that men was monkeys. The
SECON’ bottom--eighty or a hundred feet down--was on the surface about
the time when men was frogs. Now----’

But it’s with the missing-link surface we have to do, and had the
friends of the local departed known what Dave and Jim were up to they
would have regarded them as something lower than missing-links.

‘We’ll give out we’re tryin’ for the second bottom,’ said Dave Regan.
‘We’ll have to rig a fan for air, anyhow, and you don’t want air in
shallow sinkings.’

‘And some one will come poking round, and look down the hole and see the
bottom,’ said Jim Bently.

‘We must keep ‘em away,’ said Dave. ‘Tar the bottom, or cover it with
tarred canvas, to make it black. Then they won’t see it. There’s not
many diggers left, and the rest are going; they’re chucking up the
claims in Log Paddock. Besides, I could get drunk and pick rows with the
rest and they wouldn’t come near me. The farmers ain’t in love with
us diggers, so they won’t bother us. No man has a right to come poking
round another man’s claim: it ain’t ettykit--I’ll root up that old
ettykit and stand to it--it’s rather worn out now, but that’s no matter.
We’ll shift the tent down near the claim and see that no one comes
nosing round on Sunday. They’ll think we’re only some more second-bottom
lunatics, like Francea [the mining watchmaker]. We’re going to get our
fortune out from under that old graveyard, Jim. You leave it all to me
till you’re born again with brains.’

Dave’s schemes were always elaborate, and that was why they so often
came to the ground. He logged up his windlass platform a little higher,
bent about eighty feet of rope to the bole of the windlass, which was a
new one, and thereafter, whenever a suspicious-looking party (that is
to say, a digger) hove in sight, Dave would let down about forty feet of
rope and then wind, with simulated exertion, until the slack was taken
up and the rope lifted the bucket from the shallow bottom.

‘It would look better to have a whip-pole and a horse, but we can’t
afford them just yet,’ said Dave.

But I’m a little behind. They drove straight in under the cemetery,
finding good wash all the way. The edge of Jimmy Middleton’s box
appeared in the top corner of the ‘face’ (the working end) of the drive.
They went under the butt-end of the grave. They shoved up the end of the
shell with a prop, to prevent the possibility of an accident which might
disturb the mound above; they puddled--i.e., rammed--stiff clay up round
the edges to keep the loose earth from dribbling down; and having given
the bottom of the coffin a good coat of tar, they got over, or rather
under, an unpleasant matter.

Jim Bently smoked and burnt paper during his shift below, and grumbled a
good deal. ‘Blowed if I ever thought I’d be rooting for gold down among
the blanky dead men,’ he said. But the dirt panned out better every
dish they washed, and Dave worked the ‘wash’ out right and left as they
drove.

But, one fine morning, who should come along but the very last man
whom Dave wished to see round there--‘Old Pinter’ (James Poynton),
Californian and Victorian digger of the old school. He’d been
prospecting down the creek, carried his pick over his shoulder--threaded
through the eye in the heft of his big-bladed, short-handled shovel that
hung behind--and his gold-dish under his arm.

I mightn’t get a chance again to explain what a gold-dish and what
gold-washing is. A gold washing-dish is a flat dish--nearer the shape
of a bedroom bath-tub than anything else I have seen in England, or the
dish we used for setting milk--I don’t know whether the same is used
here: the gold-dish measures, say, eighteen inches across the top. You
get it full of wash dirt, squat down at a convenient place at the edge
of the water-hole, where there is a rest for the dish in the water just
below its own depth. You sink the dish and let the clay and gravel soak
a while, then you work and rub it up with your hands, and as the clay
dissolves, dish it off as muddy water or mullock. You are careful to
wash the pebbles in case there is any gold sticking to them. And so till
all the muddy or clayey matter is gone, and there is nothing but clean
gravel in the bottom of the dish. You work this off carefully, turning
the dish about this way and that and swishing the water round in it. It
requires some practice. The gold keeps to the bottom of the dish, by
its own weight. At last there is only a little half-moon of sand or fine
gravel in the bottom lower edge of the dish--you work the dish slanting
from you. Presently the gold, if there was any in the dirt, appears in
‘colours’, grains, or little nuggets along the base of the half-moon of
sand. The more gold there is in the dirt, or the coarser the gold is,
the sooner it appears. A practised digger can work off the last speck of
gravel, without losing a ‘colour’, by just working the water round and
off in the dish. Also a careful digger could throw a handful of gold
in a tub of dirt, and, washing it off in dishfuls, recover practically
every colour.

The gold-washing ‘cradle’ is a box, shaped something like a boot, and
the size of a travelling trunk, with rockers on, like a baby’s cradle,
and a stick up behind for a handle; on top, where you’ll put your foot
into the boot, is a tray with a perforated iron bottom; the clay and
gravel is thrown on the tray, water thrown on it, and the cradle rocked
smartly. The finer gravel and the mullock goes through and down over a
sloping board covered with blanket, and with ledges on it to catch the
gold. The dish was mostly used for prospecting; large quantities of wash
dirt was put through the horse-power ‘puddling-machine’, which there
isn’t room to describe here.

‘’Ello, Dave!’ said Pinter, after looking with mild surprise at the size
of Dave’s waste-heap. ‘Tryin’ for the second bottom?’

‘Yes,’ said Dave, guttural.

Pinter dropped his tools with a clatter at the foot of the waste-heap
and scratched under his ear like an old cockatoo, which bird he
resembled. Then he went to the windlass, and resting his hands on his
knees, he peered down, while Dave stood by helpless and hopeless.

Pinter straightened himself, blinking like an owl, and looked carelessly
over the graveyard.

‘Tryin’ for a secon’ bottom,’ he reflected absently. ‘Eh, Dave?’

Dave only stood and looked black.

Pinter tilted back his head and scratched the roots of his
chin-feathers, which stuck out all round like a dirty, ragged fan held
horizontally.

‘Kullers is safe,’ reflected Pinter.

‘All right?’ snapped Dave. ‘I suppose we must let him into it.’

‘Kullers’ was a big American buck nigger, and had been Pinter’s mate for
some time--Pinter was a man of odd mates; and what Pinter meant was that
Kullers was safe to hold his tongue.

Next morning Pinter and his coloured mate appeared on the ground early,
Pinter with some tools and the nigger with a windlass-bole on his
shoulders. Pinter chose a spot about three panels or thirty feet along
the other fence, the back fence of the cemetery, and started his hole.
He lost no time for the sake of appearances, he sunk his shaft and
started to drive straight for the point under the cemetery for which
Dave was making; he gave out that he had bottomed on good ‘indications’
running in the other direction, and would work the ground outside the
fence. Meanwhile Dave rigged a fan--partly for the sake of appearances,
but mainly because his and Jim’s lively imaginations made the air in the
drive worse than it really was. A ‘fan’ is a thing like a paddle-wheel
rigged in a box, about the size of a cradle, and something the shape of
a shoe, but rounded over the top. There is a small grooved wheel on the
axle of the fan outside, and an endless line, like a clothes-line, is
carried over this wheel and a groove in the edge of a high light wooden
driving-wheel rigged between two uprights in the rear and with a handle
to turn. That’s how the thing is driven. A wind-chute, like an endless
pillow-slip, made of calico, with the mouth tacked over the open toe of
the fan-box, and the end taken down the shaft and along the drive--this
carries the fresh air into the workings.

Dave was working the ground on each side as he went, when one morning
a thought struck him that should have struck him the day Pinter went to
work. He felt mad that it hadn’t struck him sooner.

Pinter and Kullers had also shifted their tent down into a nice quiet
place in the Bush close handy; so, early next Sunday morning, while
Pinter and Kullers were asleep, Dave posted Jim Bently to watch their
tent, and whistle an alarm if they stirred, and then dropped down into
Pinter’s hole and saw at a glance what he was up to.

After that Dave lost no time: he drove straight on, encouraged by the
thuds of Pinter’s and Kullers’ picks drawing nearer. They would strike
his tunnel at right angles. Both parties worked long hours, only
knocking off to fry a bit of steak in the pan, boil the billy, and throw
themselves dressed on their bunks to get a few hours’ sleep. Pinter had
practical experience and a line clear of graves, and he made good time.
The two parties now found it more comfortable to be not on speaking
terms. Individually they grew furtive, and began to feel criminal
like--at least Dave and Jim did. They’d start if a horse stumbled
through the Bush, and expected to see a mounted policeman ride up at
any moment and hear him ask questions. They had driven about thirty-five
feet when, one Saturday afternoon, the strain became too great, and Dave
and Jim got drunk. The spree lasted over Sunday, and on Monday morning
they felt too shaky to come to work and had more drink. On Monday
afternoon, Kullers, whose shift it was below, stuck his pick through the
face of his drive into the wall of Dave’s, about four feet from the end
of it: the clay flaked away, leaving a hole as big as a wash-hand basin.
They knocked off for the day and decided to let the other party take the
offensive.

Tuesday morning Dave and Jim came to work, still feeling shaky. Jim
went below, crawled along the drive, lit his candle, and stuck it in the
spiked iron socket and the spike in the wall of the drive, quite close
to the hole, without noticing either the hole or the increased freshness
in the air. He started picking away at the ‘face’ and scraping the clay
back from under his feet, and didn’t hear Kullers come to work. Kullers
came in softly and decided to try a bit of cheerful bluff. He stuck his
great round black face through the hole, the whites of his eyes rolling
horribly in the candle-light, and said, with a deep guffaw--

‘’Ullo! you dar’?’

No bandicoot ever went into his hole with the dogs after him quicker
than Jim came out of his. He scrambled up the shaft by the foot-holes,
and sat on the edge of the waste-heap, looking very pale.

‘What’s the matter?’ asked Dave. ‘Have you seen a ghost?’

‘I’ve seen the--the devil!’ gasped Jim. ‘I’m--I’m done with this here
ghoul business.’

The parties got on speaking terms again. Dave was very warm, but Jim’s
language was worse. Pinter scratched his chin-feathers reflectively till
the other party cooled. There was no appealing to the Commissioner for
goldfields; they were outside all law, whether of the goldfields or
otherwise--so they did the only thing possible and sensible, they joined
forces and became ‘Poynton, Regan, & Party’. They agreed to work the
ground from the separate shafts, and decided to go ahead, irrespective
of appearances, and get as much dirt out and cradled as possible before
the inevitable exposure came along. They found plenty of ‘payable dirt’,
and soon the drive ended in a cluster of roomy chambers. They timbered
up many coffins of various ages, burnt tarred canvas and brown
paper, and kept the fan going. Outside they paid the storekeeper with
difficulty and talked of hard times.

But one fine sunny morning, after about a week of partnership, they got
a bad scare. Jim and Kullers were below, getting out dirt for all they
were worth, and Pinter and Dave at their windlasses, when who should
march down from the cemetery gate but Mother Middleton herself. She was
a hard woman to look at. She still wore the old-fashioned crinoline and
her hair in a greasy net; and on this as on most other sober occasions,
she wore the expression of a rough Irish navvy who has just enough drink
to make him nasty and is looking out for an excuse for a row. She had
a stride like a grenadier. A digger had once measured her step by her
footprints in the mud where she had stepped across a gutter: it measured
three feet from toe to heel.

She marched to the grave of Jimmy Middleton, laid a dingy bunch of
flowers thereon, with the gesture of an angry man banging his fist down
on the table, turned on her heel, and marched out. The diggers were dirt
beneath her feet. Presently they heard her drive on in her spring-cart
on her way into town, and they drew breaths of relief.

It was afternoon. Dave and Pinter were feeling tired, and were just
deciding to knock off work for that day when they heard a scuffling in
the direction of the different shafts, and both Jim and Kullers dropped
down and bundled in in a great hurry. Jim chuckled in a silly way, as if
there was something funny, and Kullers guffawed in sympathy.

‘What’s up now?’ demanded Dave apprehensively.

‘Mother Middleton,’ said Jim; ‘she’s blind mad drunk, and she’s got a
bottle in one hand and a new pitchfork in the other, that she’s bringing
out for some one.’

‘How the hell did she drop to it?’ exclaimed Pinter.

‘Dunno,’ said Jim. ‘Anyway she’s coming for us. Listen to her!’

They didn’t have to listen hard. The language which came down the
shaft--they weren’t sure which one--and along the drives was enough to
scare up the dead and make them take to the Bush.

‘Why didn’t you fools make off into the Bush and give us a chance,
instead of giving her a lead here?’ asked Dave.

Jim and Kullers began to wish they had done so.

Mrs Middleton began to throw stones down the shaft--it was Pinter’s--and
they, even the oldest and most anxious, began to grin in spite of
themselves, for they knew she couldn’t hurt them from the surface, and
that, though she had been a working digger herself, she couldn’t fill
both shafts before the fumes of liquor overtook her.

‘I wonder which shaf’ she’ll come down,’ asked Kullers in a tone
befitting the place and occasion.

‘You’d better go and watch your shaft, Pinter,’ said Dave, ‘and Jim and
I’ll watch mine.’

‘I--I won’t,’ said Pinter hurriedly. ‘I’m--I’m a modest man.’

Then they heard a clang in the direction of Pinter’s shaft.

‘She’s thrown her bottle down,’ said Dave.

Jim crawled along the drive a piece, urged by curiosity, and returned
hurriedly.

‘She’s broke the pitchfork off short, to use in the drive, and I believe
she’s coming down.’

‘Her crinoline’ll handicap her,’ said Pinter vacantly, ‘that’s a
comfort.’

‘She’s took it off!’ said Dave excitedly; and peering along Pinter’s
drive, they saw first an elastic-sided boot, then a red-striped
stocking, then a section of scarlet petticoat.

‘Lemme out!’ roared Pinter, lurching forward and making a swimming
motion with his hands in the direction of Dave’s drive. Kullers
was already gone, and Jim well on the way. Dave, lanky and awkward,
scrambled up the shaft last. Mrs Middleton made good time, considering
she had the darkness to face and didn’t know the workings, and when Dave
reached the top he had a tear in the leg of his moleskins, and the blood
ran from a nasty scratch. But he didn’t wait to argue over the price of
a new pair of trousers. He made off through the Bush in the direction of
an encouraging whistle thrown back by Jim.

‘She’s too drunk to get her story listened to to-night,’ said Dave. ‘But
to-morrow she’ll bring the neighbourhood down on us.’

‘And she’s enough, without the neighbourhood,’ reflected Pinter.

Some time after dark they returned cautiously, reconnoitred their camp,
and after hiding in a hollow log such things as they couldn’t carry,
they rolled up their tents like the Arabs, and silently stole away.




The Chinaman’s Ghost.


‘Simple as striking matches,’ said Dave Regan, Bushman; ‘but it gave me
the biggest scare I ever had--except, perhaps, the time I stumbled in
the dark into a six-feet digger’s hole, which might have been eighty
feet deep for all I knew when I was falling. (There was an eighty-feet
shaft left open close by.)

‘It was the night of the day after the Queen’s birthday. I was sinking a
shaft with Jim Bently and Andy Page on the old Redclay goldfield, and
we camped in a tent on the creek. Jim and me went to some races that was
held at Peter Anderson’s pub., about four miles across the ridges, on
Queen’s birthday. Andy was a quiet sort of chap, a teetotaller, and
we’d disgusted him the last time he was out for a holiday with us, so he
stayed at home and washed and mended his clothes, and read an arithmetic
book. (He used to keep the accounts, and it took him most of his spare
time.)

‘Jim and me had a pretty high time. We all got pretty tight after the
races, and I wanted to fight Jim, or Jim wanted to fight me--I don’t
remember which. We were old chums, and we nearly always wanted to fight
each other when we got a bit on, and we’d fight if we weren’t stopped. I
remember once Jim got maudlin drunk and begged and prayed of me to fight
him, as if he was praying for his life. Tom Tarrant, the coach-driver,
used to say that Jim and me must be related, else we wouldn’t hate each
other so much when we were tight and truthful.

‘Anyway, this day, Jim got the sulks, and caught his horse and went home
early in the evening. My dog went home with him too; I must have been
carrying on pretty bad to disgust the dog.

‘Next evening I got disgusted with myself, and started to walk home. I’d
lost my hat, so Peter Anderson lent me an old one of his, that he’d worn
on Ballarat he said: it was a hard, straw, flat, broad-brimmed affair,
and fitted my headache pretty tight. Peter gave me a small flask of
whisky to help me home. I had to go across some flats and up a long dark
gully called Murderer’s Gully, and over a gap called Dead Man’s Gap,
and down the ridge and gullies to Redclay Creek. The lonely flats
were covered with blue-grey gum bush, and looked ghostly enough in the
moonlight, and I was pretty shaky, but I had a pull at the flask and a
mouthful of water at a creek and felt right enough. I began to whistle,
and then to sing: I never used to sing unless I thought I was a couple
of miles out of earshot of any one.

‘Murderer’s Gully was deep and pretty dark most times, and of course it
was haunted. Women and children wouldn’t go through it after dark; and
even me, when I’d grown up, I’d hold my back pretty holler, and whistle,
and walk quick going along there at night-time. We’re all afraid of
ghosts, but we won’t let on.

‘Some one had skinned a dead calf during the day and left it on the
track, and it gave me a jump, I promise you. It looked like two corpses
laid out naked. I finished the whisky and started up over the gap. All
of a sudden a great ‘old man’ kangaroo went across the track with a
thud-thud, and up the siding, and that startled me. Then the naked,
white glistening trunk of a stringy-bark tree, where some one had
stripped off a sheet of bark, started out from a bend in the track in a
shaft of moonlight, and that gave me a jerk. I was pretty shaky before
I started. There was a Chinaman’s grave close by the track on the top
of the gap. An old chow had lived in a hut there for many years, and
fossicked on the old diggings, and one day he was found dead in the
hut, and the Government gave some one a pound to bury him. When I was a
nipper we reckoned that his ghost haunted the gap, and cursed in Chinese
because the bones hadn’t been sent home to China. It was a lonely,
ghostly place enough.

‘It had been a smotheringly hot day and very close coming across the
flats and up the gully--not a breath of air; but now as I got higher I
saw signs of the thunderstorm we’d expected all day, and felt the breath
of a warm breeze on my face. When I got into the top of the gap the
first thing I saw was something white amongst the dark bushes over the
spot where the Chinaman’s grave was, and I stood staring at it with
both eyes. It moved out of the shadow presently, and I saw that it was
a white bullock, and I felt relieved. I’d hardly felt relieved when, all
at once, there came a “pat-pat-pat” of running feet close behind me!
I jumped round quick, but there was nothing there, and while I stood
staring all ways for Sunday, there came a “pat-pat”, then a pause, and
then “pat-pat-pat-pat” behind me again: it was like some one dodging and
running off that time. I started to walk down the track pretty fast,
but hadn’t gone a dozen yards when “pat-pat-pat”, it was close behind me
again. I jerked my eyes over my shoulder but kept my legs going. There
was nothing behind, but I fancied I saw something slip into the Bush to
the right. It must have been the moonlight on the moving boughs; there
was a good breeze blowing now. I got down to a more level track, and
was making across a spur to the main road, when “pat-pat!” “pat-pat-pat,
pat-pat-pat!” it was after me again. Then I began to run--and it began
to run too! “pat-pat-pat” after me all the time. I hadn’t time to look
round. Over the spur and down the siding and across the flat to the road
I went as fast as I could split my legs apart. I had a scared idea that
I was getting a touch of the “jim-jams”, and that frightened me more
than any outside ghost could have done. I stumbled a few times, and
saved myself, but, just before I reached the road, I fell slithering
on to my hands on the grass and gravel. I thought I’d broken both
my wrists. I stayed for a moment on my hands and knees, quaking and
listening, squinting round like a great gohana; I couldn’t hear nor
see anything. I picked myself up, and had hardly got on one end, when
“pat-pat!” it was after me again. I must have run a mile and a half
altogether that night. It was still about three-quarters of a mile to
the camp, and I ran till my heart beat in my head and my lungs choked up
in my throat. I saw our tent-fire and took off my hat to run faster. The
footsteps stopped, then something about the hat touched my fingers, and
I stared at it--and the thing dawned on me. I hadn’t noticed at Peter
Anderson’s--my head was too swimmy to notice anything. It was an old hat
of the style that the first diggers used to wear, with a couple of loose
ribbon ends, three or four inches long, from the band behind. As long
as I walked quietly through the gully, and there was no wind, the tails
didn’t flap, but when I got up into the breeze, they flapped or were
still according to how the wind lifted them or pressed them down flat
on the brim. And when I ran they tapped all the time; and the hat being
tight on my head, the tapping of the ribbon ends against the straw
sounded loud of course.

‘I sat down on a log for a while to get some of my wind back and cool
down, and then I went to the camp as quietly as I could, and had a long
drink of water.

‘“You seem to be a bit winded, Dave,” said Jim Bently, “and mighty
thirsty. Did the Chinaman’s ghost chase you?”

‘I told him not to talk rot, and went into the tent, and lay down on my
bunk, and had a good rest.’




The Loaded Dog.


Dave Regan, Jim Bently, and Andy Page were sinking a shaft at Stony
Creek in search of a rich gold quartz reef which was supposed to exist
in the vicinity. There is always a rich reef supposed to exist in the
vicinity; the only questions are whether it is ten feet or hundreds
beneath the surface, and in which direction. They had struck some
pretty solid rock, also water which kept them baling. They used the
old-fashioned blasting-powder and time-fuse. They’d make a sausage or
cartridge of blasting-powder in a skin of strong calico or canvas, the
mouth sewn and bound round the end of the fuse; they’d dip the cartridge
in melted tallow to make it water-tight, get the drill-hole as dry as
possible, drop in the cartridge with some dry dust, and wad and ram with
stiff clay and broken brick. Then they’d light the fuse and get out of
the hole and wait. The result was usually an ugly pot-hole in the bottom
of the shaft and half a barrow-load of broken rock.

There was plenty of fish in the creek, fresh-water bream, cod, cat-fish,
and tailers. The party were fond of fish, and Andy and Dave of fishing.
Andy would fish for three hours at a stretch if encouraged by a ‘nibble’
or a ‘bite’ now and then--say once in twenty minutes. The butcher was
always willing to give meat in exchange for fish when they caught more
than they could eat; but now it was winter, and these fish wouldn’t
bite. However, the creek was low, just a chain of muddy water-holes,
from the hole with a few bucketfuls in it to the sizable pool with an
average depth of six or seven feet, and they could get fish by baling
out the smaller holes or muddying up the water in the larger ones
till the fish rose to the surface. There was the cat-fish, with spikes
growing out of the sides of its head, and if you got pricked you’d know
it, as Dave said. Andy took off his boots, tucked up his trousers, and
went into a hole one day to stir up the mud with his feet, and he knew
it. Dave scooped one out with his hand and got pricked, and he knew it
too; his arm swelled, and the pain throbbed up into his shoulder, and
down into his stomach too, he said, like a toothache he had once, and
kept him awake for two nights--only the toothache pain had a ‘burred
edge’, Dave said.

Dave got an idea.

‘Why not blow the fish up in the big water-hole with a cartridge?’ he
said. ‘I’ll try it.’

He thought the thing out and Andy Page worked it out. Andy usually put
Dave’s theories into practice if they were practicable, or bore the
blame for the failure and the chaffing of his mates if they weren’t.

He made a cartridge about three times the size of those they used in the
rock. Jim Bently said it was big enough to blow the bottom out of the
river. The inner skin was of stout calico; Andy stuck the end of a
six-foot piece of fuse well down in the powder and bound the mouth of
the bag firmly to it with whipcord. The idea was to sink the cartridge
in the water with the open end of the fuse attached to a float on
the surface, ready for lighting. Andy dipped the cartridge in melted
bees’-wax to make it water-tight. ‘We’ll have to leave it some time
before we light it,’ said Dave, ‘to give the fish time to get over their
scare when we put it in, and come nosing round again; so we’ll want it
well water-tight.’

Round the cartridge Andy, at Dave’s suggestion, bound a strip of sail
canvas--that they used for making water-bags--to increase the force of
the explosion, and round that he pasted layers of stiff brown paper--on
the plan of the sort of fireworks we called ‘gun-crackers’. He let the
paper dry in the sun, then he sewed a covering of two thicknesses
of canvas over it, and bound the thing from end to end with stout
fishing-line. Dave’s schemes were elaborate, and he often worked his
inventions out to nothing. The cartridge was rigid and solid enough
now--a formidable bomb; but Andy and Dave wanted to be sure. Andy sewed
on another layer of canvas, dipped the cartridge in melted tallow,
twisted a length of fencing-wire round it as an afterthought, dipped it
in tallow again, and stood it carefully against a tent-peg, where he’d
know where to find it, and wound the fuse loosely round it. Then he
went to the camp-fire to try some potatoes which were boiling in their
jackets in a billy, and to see about frying some chops for dinner. Dave
and Jim were at work in the claim that morning.

They had a big black young retriever dog--or rather an overgrown pup, a
big, foolish, four-footed mate, who was always slobbering round them
and lashing their legs with his heavy tail that swung round like a
stock-whip. Most of his head was usually a red, idiotic, slobbering grin
of appreciation of his own silliness. He seemed to take life, the world,
his two-legged mates, and his own instinct as a huge joke. He’d retrieve
anything: he carted back most of the camp rubbish that Andy threw
away. They had a cat that died in hot weather, and Andy threw it a good
distance away in the scrub; and early one morning the dog found the cat,
after it had been dead a week or so, and carried it back to camp,
and laid it just inside the tent-flaps, where it could best make
its presence known when the mates should rise and begin to sniff
suspiciously in the sickly smothering atmosphere of the summer sunrise.
He used to retrieve them when they went in swimming; he’d jump in after
them, and take their hands in his mouth, and try to swim out with them,
and scratch their naked bodies with his paws. They loved him for his
good-heartedness and his foolishness, but when they wished to enjoy a
swim they had to tie him up in camp.

He watched Andy with great interest all the morning making the
cartridge, and hindered him considerably, trying to help; but about noon
he went off to the claim to see how Dave and Jim were getting on, and to
come home to dinner with them. Andy saw them coming, and put a panful of
mutton-chops on the fire. Andy was cook to-day; Dave and Jim stood with
their backs to the fire, as Bushmen do in all weathers, waiting till
dinner should be ready. The retriever went nosing round after something
he seemed to have missed.

Andy’s brain still worked on the cartridge; his eye was caught by the
glare of an empty kerosene-tin lying in the bushes, and it struck him
that it wouldn’t be a bad idea to sink the cartridge packed with clay,
sand, or stones in the tin, to increase the force of the explosion. He
may have been all out, from a scientific point of view, but the notion
looked all right to him. Jim Bently, by the way, wasn’t interested in
their ‘damned silliness’. Andy noticed an empty treacle-tin--the
sort with the little tin neck or spout soldered on to the top for the
convenience of pouring out the treacle--and it struck him that this
would have made the best kind of cartridge-case: he would only have had
to pour in the powder, stick the fuse in through the neck, and cork and
seal it with bees’-wax. He was turning to suggest this to Dave, when
Dave glanced over his shoulder to see how the chops were doing--and
bolted. He explained afterwards that he thought he heard the pan
spluttering extra, and looked to see if the chops were burning. Jim
Bently looked behind and bolted after Dave. Andy stood stock-still,
staring after them.

‘Run, Andy! run!’ they shouted back at him. ‘Run!!! Look behind you, you
fool!’ Andy turned slowly and looked, and there, close behind him, was
the retriever with the cartridge in his mouth--wedged into his broadest
and silliest grin. And that wasn’t all. The dog had come round the fire
to Andy, and the loose end of the fuse had trailed and waggled over the
burning sticks into the blaze; Andy had slit and nicked the firing end
of the fuse well, and now it was hissing and spitting properly.

Andy’s legs started with a jolt; his legs started before his brain did,
and he made after Dave and Jim. And the dog followed Andy.

Dave and Jim were good runners--Jim the best--for a short distance; Andy
was slow and heavy, but he had the strength and the wind and could last.
The dog leapt and capered round him, delighted as a dog could be to find
his mates, as he thought, on for a frolic. Dave and Jim kept shouting
back, ‘Don’t foller us! don’t foller us, you coloured fool!’ but Andy
kept on, no matter how they dodged. They could never explain, any
more than the dog, why they followed each other, but so they ran, Dave
keeping in Jim’s track in all its turnings, Andy after Dave, and the
dog circling round Andy--the live fuse swishing in all directions and
hissing and spluttering and stinking. Jim yelling to Dave not to follow
him, Dave shouting to Andy to go in another direction--to ‘spread out’,
and Andy roaring at the dog to go home. Then Andy’s brain began to work,
stimulated by the crisis: he tried to get a running kick at the dog, but
the dog dodged; he snatched up sticks and stones and threw them at the
dog and ran on again. The retriever saw that he’d made a mistake about
Andy, and left him and bounded after Dave. Dave, who had the presence of
mind to think that the fuse’s time wasn’t up yet, made a dive and a grab
for the dog, caught him by the tail, and as he swung round snatched
the cartridge out of his mouth and flung it as far as he could: the dog
immediately bounded after it and retrieved it. Dave roared and cursed at
the dog, who seeing that Dave was offended, left him and went after Jim,
who was well ahead. Jim swung to a sapling and went up it like a native
bear; it was a young sapling, and Jim couldn’t safely get more than ten
or twelve feet from the ground. The dog laid the cartridge, as carefully
as if it was a kitten, at the foot of the sapling, and capered and
leaped and whooped joyously round under Jim. The big pup reckoned that
this was part of the lark--he was all right now--it was Jim who was out
for a spree. The fuse sounded as if it were going a mile a minute. Jim
tried to climb higher and the sapling bent and cracked. Jim fell on his
feet and ran. The dog swooped on the cartridge and followed. It all took
but a very few moments. Jim ran to a digger’s hole, about ten feet deep,
and dropped down into it--landing on soft mud--and was safe. The dog
grinned sardonically down on him, over the edge, for a moment, as if he
thought it would be a good lark to drop the cartridge down on Jim.

‘Go away, Tommy,’ said Jim feebly, ‘go away.’

The dog bounded off after Dave, who was the only one in sight now; Andy
had dropped behind a log, where he lay flat on his face, having suddenly
remembered a picture of the Russo-Turkish war with a circle of
Turks lying flat on their faces (as if they were ashamed) round a
newly-arrived shell.

There was a small hotel or shanty on the creek, on the main road, not
far from the claim. Dave was desperate, the time flew much faster in
his stimulated imagination than it did in reality, so he made for the
shanty. There were several casual Bushmen on the verandah and in the
bar; Dave rushed into the bar, banging the door to behind him. ‘My dog!’
he gasped, in reply to the astonished stare of the publican, ‘the blanky
retriever--he’s got a live cartridge in his mouth----’

The retriever, finding the front door shut against him, had bounded
round and in by the back way, and now stood smiling in the doorway
leading from the passage, the cartridge still in his mouth and the fuse
spluttering. They burst out of that bar. Tommy bounded first after one
and then after another, for, being a young dog, he tried to make friends
with everybody.

The Bushmen ran round corners, and some shut themselves in the stable.
There was a new weather-board and corrugated-iron kitchen and wash-house
on piles in the back-yard, with some women washing clothes inside.
Dave and the publican bundled in there and shut the door--the publican
cursing Dave and calling him a crimson fool, in hurried tones, and
wanting to know what the hell he came here for.

The retriever went in under the kitchen, amongst the piles, but, luckily
for those inside, there was a vicious yellow mongrel cattle-dog sulking
and nursing his nastiness under there--a sneaking, fighting, thieving
canine, whom neighbours had tried for years to shoot or poison. Tommy
saw his danger--he’d had experience from this dog--and started out and
across the yard, still sticking to the cartridge. Half-way across
the yard the yellow dog caught him and nipped him. Tommy dropped the
cartridge, gave one terrified yell, and took to the Bush. The yellow dog
followed him to the fence and then ran back to see what he had dropped.

Nearly a dozen other dogs came from round all the corners and under the
buildings--spidery, thievish, cold-blooded kangaroo-dogs, mongrel sheep-
and cattle-dogs, vicious black and yellow dogs--that slip after you in
the dark, nip your heels, and vanish without explaining--and yapping,
yelping small fry. They kept at a respectable distance round the nasty
yellow dog, for it was dangerous to go near him when he thought he had
found something which might be good for a dog to eat. He sniffed at the
cartridge twice, and was just taking a third cautious sniff when----

It was very good blasting powder--a new brand that Dave had recently got
up from Sydney; and the cartridge had been excellently well made. Andy
was very patient and painstaking in all he did, and nearly as handy as
the average sailor with needles, twine, canvas, and rope.

Bushmen say that that kitchen jumped off its piles and on again. When
the smoke and dust cleared away, the remains of the nasty yellow dog
were lying against the paling fence of the yard looking as if he had
been kicked into a fire by a horse and afterwards rolled in the dust
under a barrow, and finally thrown against the fence from a distance.
Several saddle-horses, which had been ‘hanging-up’ round the verandah,
were galloping wildly down the road in clouds of dust, with broken
bridle-reins flying; and from a circle round the outskirts, from every
point of the compass in the scrub, came the yelping of dogs. Two of them
went home, to the place where they were born, thirty miles away, and
reached it the same night and stayed there; it was not till towards
evening that the rest came back cautiously to make inquiries. One was
trying to walk on two legs, and most of ‘em looked more or less singed;
and a little, singed, stumpy-tailed dog, who had been in the habit of
hopping the back half of him along on one leg, had reason to be glad
that he’d saved up the other leg all those years, for he needed it
now. There was one old one-eyed cattle-dog round that shanty for years
afterwards, who couldn’t stand the smell of a gun being cleaned. He it
was who had taken an interest, only second to that of the yellow dog, in
the cartridge. Bushmen said that it was amusing to slip up on his blind
side and stick a dirty ramrod under his nose: he wouldn’t wait to bring
his solitary eye to bear--he’d take to the Bush and stay out all night.

For half an hour or so after the explosion there were several Bushmen
round behind the stable who crouched, doubled up, against the wall, or
rolled gently on the dust, trying to laugh without shrieking. There
were two white women in hysterics at the house, and a half-caste rushing
aimlessly round with a dipper of cold water. The publican was holding
his wife tight and begging her between her squawks, to ‘hold up for my
sake, Mary, or I’ll lam the life out of ye.’

Dave decided to apologise later on, ‘when things had settled a bit,’ and
went back to camp. And the dog that had done it all, ‘Tommy’, the great,
idiotic mongrel retriever, came slobbering round Dave and lashing his
legs with his tail, and trotted home after him, smiling his broadest,
longest, and reddest smile of amiability, and apparently satisfied for
one afternoon with the fun he’d had.

Andy chained the dog up securely, and cooked some more chops, while Dave
went to help Jim out of the hole.

And most of this is why, for years afterwards, lanky, easy-going
Bushmen, riding lazily past Dave’s camp, would cry, in a lazy drawl and
with just a hint of the nasal twang--

‘’El-lo, Da-a-ve! How’s the fishin’ getting on, Da-a-ve?’




Poisonous Jimmy Gets Left.




I. Dave Regan’s Yarn.


‘When we got tired of digging about Mudgee-Budgee, and getting no gold,’
said Dave Regan, Bushman, ‘me and my mate, Jim Bently, decided to take a
turn at droving; so we went with Bob Baker, the drover, overland with a
big mob of cattle, way up into Northern Queensland.

‘We couldn’t get a job on the home track, and we spent most of our
money, like a pair of fools, at a pub. at a town way up over the border,
where they had a flash barmaid from Brisbane. We sold our pack-horses
and pack-saddles, and rode out of that town with our swags on our
riding-horses in front of us. We had another spree at another place, and
by the time we got near New South Wales we were pretty well stumped.

‘Just the other side of Mulgatown, near the border, we came on a big mob
of cattle in a paddock, and a party of drovers camped on the creek. They
had brought the cattle down from the north and were going no farther
with them; their boss had ridden on into Mulgatown to get the cheques to
pay them off, and they were waiting for him.

‘“And Poisonous Jimmy is waiting for us,” said one of them.

‘Poisonous Jimmy kept a shanty a piece along the road from their camp
towards Mulgatown. He was called “Poisonous Jimmy” perhaps on account
of his liquor, or perhaps because he had a job of poisoning dingoes on a
station in the Bogan scrubs at one time. He was a sharp publican. He had
a girl, and they said that whenever a shearing-shed cut-out on his side
and he saw the shearers coming along the road, he’d say to the girl,
“Run and get your best frock on, Mary! Here’s the shearers comin’.” And
if a chequeman wouldn’t drink he’d try to get him into his bar and shout
for him till he was too drunk to keep his hands out of his pockets.

‘“But he won’t get us,” said another of the drovers. “I’m going to ride
straight into Mulgatown and send my money home by the post as soon as I
get it.”

‘“You’ve always said that, Jack,” said the first drover.

‘We yarned a while, and had some tea, and then me and Jim got on our
horses and rode on. We were burned to bricks and ragged and dusty and
parched up enough, and so were our horses. We only had a few shillings
to carry us four or five hundred miles home, but it was mighty hot and
dusty, and we felt that we must have a drink at the shanty. This was
west of the sixpenny-line at that time--all drinks were a shilling along
here.

‘Just before we reached the shanty I got an idea.

‘“We’ll plant our swags in the scrub,” I said to Jim.

‘“What for?” said Jim.

‘“Never mind--you’ll see,” I said.

‘So we unstrapped our swags and hid them in the mulga scrub by the
side of the road; then we rode on to the shanty, got down, and hung our
horses to the verandah posts.

‘“Poisonous” came out at once, with a smile on him that would have made
anybody home-sick.

‘He was a short nuggety man, and could use his hands, they said; he
looked as if he’d be a nasty, vicious, cool customer in a fight--he
wasn’t the sort of man you’d care to try and swindle a second time.
He had a monkey shave when he shaved, but now it was all frill and
stubble--like a bush fence round a stubble-field. He had a broken nose,
and a cunning, sharp, suspicious eye that squinted, and a cold stony eye
that seemed fixed. If you didn’t know him well you might talk to him for
five minutes, looking at him in the cold stony eye, and then discover
that it was the sharp cunning little eye that was watching you all the
time. It was awful embarrassing. It must have made him awkward to deal
with in a fight.

‘“Good day, mates,” he said.

‘“Good day,” we said.

‘“It’s hot.”

‘“It’s hot.”

‘We went into the bar, and Poisonous got behind the counter.

‘“What are you going to have?” he asked, rubbing up his glasses with a
rag.

‘We had two long-beers.

‘“Never mind that,” said Poisonous, seeing me put my hand in my pocket;
“it’s my shout. I don’t suppose your boss is back yet? I saw him go in
to Mulgatown this morning.”

‘“No, he ain’t back,” I said; “I wish he was. We’re getting tired of
waiting for him. We’ll give him another hour, and then some of us will
have to ride in to see whether he’s got on the boose, and get hold of
him if he has.”

‘“I suppose you’re waiting for your cheques?” he said, turning to fix
some bottles on the shelf.

‘“Yes,” I said, “we are;” and I winked at Jim, and Jim winked back as
solemn as an owl.

‘Poisonous asked us all about the trip, and how long we’d been on the
track, and what sort of a boss we had, dropping the questions offhand
now an’ then, as for the sake of conversation. We could see that he
was trying to get at the size of our supposed cheques, so we answered
accordingly.

‘“Have another drink,” he said, and he filled the pewters up again.
“It’s up to me,” and he set to work boring out the glasses with his rag,
as if he was short-handed and the bar was crowded with customers, and
screwing up his face into what I suppose he considered an innocent or
unconscious expression. The girl began to sidle in and out with a smart
frock and a see-you-after-dark smirk on.

‘“Have you had dinner?” she asked. We could have done with a good meal,
but it was too risky--the drovers’ boss might come along while we were
at dinner and get into conversation with Poisonous. So we said we’d had
dinner.

‘Poisonous filled our pewters again in an offhand way.

‘“I wish the boss would come,” said Jim with a yawn. “I want to get into
Mulgatown to-night, and I want to get some shirts and things before I go
in. I ain’t got a decent rag to me back. I don’t suppose there’s ten bob
amongst the lot of us.”

‘There was a general store back on the creek, near the drovers’ camp.

‘“Oh, go to the store and get what you want,” said Poisonous, taking a
sovereign from the till and tossing it on to the counter. “You can fix
it up with me when your boss comes. Bring your mates along.”

‘“Thank you,” said Jim, taking up the sovereign carelessly and dropping
it into his pocket.

‘“Well, Jim,” I said, “suppose we get back to camp and see how the chaps
are getting on?”

‘“All right,” said Jim.

‘“Tell them to come down and get a drink,” said Poisonous; “or, wait,
you can take some beer along to them if you like,” and he gave us half
a gallon of beer in a billy-can. He knew what the first drink meant with
Bushmen back from a long dry trip.

‘We got on our horses, I holding the billy very carefully, and rode back
to where our swags were.

‘“I say,” said Jim, when we’d strapped the swags to the saddles,
“suppose we take the beer back to those chaps: it’s meant for them, and
it’s only a fair thing, anyway--we’ve got as much as we can hold till we
get into Mulgatown.”

‘“It might get them into a row,” I said, “and they seem decent chaps.
Let’s hang the billy on a twig, and that old swagman that’s coming along
will think there’s angels in the Bush.”

‘“Oh! what’s a row?” said Jim. “They can take care of themselves;
they’ll have the beer anyway and a lark with Poisonous when they take
the can back and it comes to explanations. I’ll ride back to them.”

‘So Jim rode back to the drovers’ camp with the beer, and when he came
back to me he said that the drovers seemed surprised, but they drank
good luck to him.

‘We rode round through the mulga behind the shanty and came out on the
road again on the Mulgatown side: we only stayed at Mulgatown to buy
some tucker and tobacco, then we pushed on and camped for the night
about seven miles on the safe side of the town.’




II. Told by One of the Other Drovers.


‘Talkin’ o’ Poisonous Jimmy, I can tell you a yarn about him. We’d
brought a mob of cattle down for a squatter the other side of Mulgatown.
We camped about seven miles the other side of the town, waitin’ for the
station hands to come and take charge of the stock, while the boss rode
on into town to draw our money. Some of us was goin’ back, though in
the end we all went into Mulgatown and had a boose up with the boss. But
while we was waitin’ there come along two fellers that had been drovin’
up north. They yarned a while, an’ then went on to Poisonous Jimmy’s
place, an’ in about an hour one on ‘em come ridin’ back with a can of
beer that he said Poisonous had sent for us. We all knew Jimmy’s little
games--the beer was a bait to get us on the drunk at his place; but we
drunk the beer, and reckoned to have a lark with him afterwards. When
the boss come back, an’ the station hands to take the bullocks, we
started into Mulgatown. We stopped outside Poisonous’s place an’ handed
the can to the girl that was grinnin’ on the verandah. Poisonous come
out with a grin on him like a parson with a broken nose.

‘“Good day, boys!” he says.

‘“Good day, Poisonous,” we says.

‘“It’s hot,” he says.

‘“It’s blanky hot,” I says.

‘He seemed to expect us to get down. “Where are you off to?” he says.

‘“Mulgatown,” I says. “It will be cooler there,” and we sung out,
“So-long, Poisonous!” and rode on.

‘He stood starin’ for a minute; then he started shoutin’, “Hi! hi
there!” after us, but we took no notice, an’ rode on. When we looked
back last he was runnin’ into the scrub with a bridle in his hand.

‘We jogged along easily till we got within a mile of Mulgatown, when
we heard somebody gallopin’ after us, an’ lookin’ back we saw it was
Poisonous.

‘He was too mad and too winded to speak at first, so he rode along with
us a bit gasping: then he burst out.

‘“Where’s them other two carnal blanks?” he shouted.

‘“What other two?” I asked. “We’re all here. What’s the matter with you
anyway?”

‘“All here!” he yelled. “You’re a lurid liar! What the flamin’ sheol do
you mean by swiggin’ my beer an’ flingin’ the coloured can in me face?
without as much as thank yer! D’yer think I’m a flamin’----!”

‘Oh, but Poisonous Jimmy was wild.

‘“Well, we’ll pay for your dirty beer,” says one of the chaps, puttin’
his hand in his pocket. “We didn’t want yer slush. It tasted as if it
had been used before.”

‘“Pay for it!” yelled Jimmy. “I’ll----well take it out of one of yer
bleedin’ hides!”

‘We stopped at once, and I got down an’ obliged Jimmy for a few rounds.
He was a nasty customer to fight; he could use his hands, and was cool
as a cucumber as soon as he took his coat off: besides, he had one
squirmy little business eye, and a big wall-eye, an’, even if you knowed
him well, you couldn’t help watchin’ the stony eye--it was no good
watchin’ his eyes, you had to watch his hands, and he might have
managed me if the boss hadn’t stopped the fight. The boss was a big,
quiet-voiced man, that didn’t swear.

‘“Now, look here, Myles,” said the boss (Jimmy’s name was Myles)--“Now,
look here, Myles,” sez the boss, “what’s all this about?”

‘“What’s all this about?” says Jimmy, gettin’ excited agen. “Why, two
fellers that belonged to your party come along to my place an’ put up
half-a-dozen drinks, an’ borrered a sovereign, an’ got a can o’ beer on
the strength of their cheques. They sez they was waitin’ for you--an’ I
want my crimson money out o’ some one!”

‘“What was they like?” asks the boss.

‘“Like?” shouted Poisonous, swearin’ all the time. “One was a blanky
long, sandy, sawny feller, and the other was a short, slim feller with
black hair. Your blanky men knows all about them because they had the
blanky billy o’ beer.”

‘“Now, what’s this all about, you chaps?” sez the boss to us.

‘So we told him as much as we knowed about them two fellers.

‘I’ve heard men swear that could swear in a rough shearin’-shed, but I
never heard a man swear like Poisonous Jimmy when he saw how he’d been
left. It was enough to split stumps. He said he wanted to see those
fellers, just once, before he died.

‘He rode with us into Mulgatown, got mad drunk, an’ started out along
the road with a tomahawk after the long sandy feller and the slim dark
feller; but two mounted police went after him an’ fetched him back. He
said he only wanted justice; he said he only wanted to stun them two
fellers till he could give ‘em in charge.

‘They fined him ten bob.’




The Ghostly Door.

Told by one of Dave’s mates.



Dave and I were tramping on a lonely Bush track in New Zealand, making
for a sawmill where we expected to get work, and we were caught in one
of those three-days’ gales, with rain and hail in it and cold enough to
cut off a man’s legs. Camping out was not to be thought of, so we
just tramped on in silence, with the stinging pain coming between our
shoulder-blades--from cold, weariness, and the weight of our swags--and
our boots, full of water, going splosh, splosh, splosh along the
track. We were settled to it--to drag on like wet, weary, muddy working
bullocks till we came to somewhere--when, just before darkness settled
down, we saw the loom of a humpy of some sort on the slope of a
tussock hill, back from the road, and we made for it, without holding a
consultation.

It was a two-roomed hut built of waste timber from a sawmill, and was
either a deserted settler’s home or a hut attached to an abandoned
sawmill round there somewhere. The windows were boarded up. We dumped
our swags under the little verandah and banged at the door, to make
sure; then Dave pulled a couple of boards off a window and looked in:
there was light enough to see that the place was empty. Dave pulled
off some more boards, put his arm in through a broken pane, clicked the
catch back, and then pushed up the window and got in. I handed in the
swags to him. The room was very draughty; the wind came in through
the broken window and the cracks between the slabs, so we tried the
partitioned-off room--the bedroom--and that was better. It had been
lined with chaff-bags, and there were two stretchers left by some
timber-getters or other Bush contractors who’d camped there last; and
there were a box and a couple of three-legged stools.

We carried the remnant of the wood-heap inside, made a fire, and put
the billy on. We unrolled our swags and spread the blankets on the
stretchers; and then we stripped and hung our clothes about the fire
to dry. There was plenty in our tucker-bags, so we had a good feed. I
hadn’t shaved for days, and Dave had a coarse red beard with a twist in
it like an ill-used fibre brush--a beard that got redder the longer it
grew; he had a hooked nose, and his hair stood straight up (I never saw
a man so easy-going about the expression and so scared about the head),
and he was very tall, with long, thin, hairy legs. We must have looked a
weird pair as we sat there, naked, on the low three-legged stools, with
the billy and the tucker on the box between us, and ate our bread and
meat with clasp-knives.

‘I shouldn’t wonder,’ says Dave, ‘but this is the “whare” * where the
murder was that we heard about along the road. I suppose if any one was
to come along now and look in he’d get scared.’ Then after a while he
looked down at the flooring-boards close to my feet, and scratched
his ear, and said, ‘That looks very much like a blood-stain under your
stool, doesn’t it, Jim?’

     * ‘Whare’, ‘whorrie’, Maori name for house.

I shifted my feet and presently moved the stool farther away from the
fire--it was too hot.

I wouldn’t have liked to camp there by myself, but I don’t think Dave
would have minded--he’d knocked round too much in the Australian Bush to
mind anything much, or to be surprised at anything; besides, he was more
than half murdered once by a man who said afterwards that he’d mistook
him for some one else: he must have been a very short-sighted murderer.

Presently we put tobacco, matches, and bits of candle we had, on the two
stools by the heads of our bunks, turned in, and filled up and smoked
comfortably, dropping in a lazy word now and again about nothing in
particular. Once I happened to look across at Dave, and saw him sitting
up a bit and watching the door. The door opened very slowly, wide, and
a black cat walked in, looked first at me, then at Dave, and walked out
again; and the door closed behind it.

Dave scratched his ear. ‘That’s rum,’ he said. ‘I could have sworn I
fastened that door. They must have left the cat behind.’

‘It looks like it,’ I said. ‘Neither of us has been on the boose
lately.’

He got out of bed and up on his long hairy spindle-shanks.

The door had the ordinary, common black oblong lock with a brass knob.
Dave tried the latch and found it fast; he turned the knob, opened the
door, and called, ‘Puss--puss--puss!’ but the cat wouldn’t come. He shut
the door, tried the knob to see that the catch had caught, and got into
bed again.

He’d scarcely settled down when the door opened slowly, the black cat
walked in, stared hard at Dave, and suddenly turned and darted out as
the door closed smartly.

I looked at Dave and he looked at me--hard; then he scratched the back
of his head. I never saw a man look so puzzled in the face and scared
about the head.

He got out of bed very cautiously, took a stick of firewood in his hand,
sneaked up to the door, and snatched it open. There was no one there.
Dave took the candle and went into the next room, but couldn’t see the
cat. He came back and sat down by the fire and meowed, and presently
the cat answered him and came in from somewhere--she’d been outside
the window, I suppose; he kept on meowing and she sidled up and rubbed
against his hairy shin. Dave could generally bring a cat that way.
He had a weakness for cats. I’d seen him kick a dog, and hammer a
horse--brutally, I thought--but I never saw him hurt a cat or let any
one else do it. Dave was good to cats: if a cat had a family where Dave
was round, he’d see her all right and comfortable, and only drown a fair
surplus. He said once to me, ‘I can understand a man kicking a dog, or
hammering a horse when it plays up, but I can’t understand a man hurting
a cat.’

He gave this cat something to eat. Then he went and held the light close
to the lock of the door, but could see nothing wrong with it. He found a
key on the mantel-shelf and locked the door. He got into bed again, and
the cat jumped up and curled down at the foot and started her old drum
going, like shot in a sieve. Dave bent down and patted her, to tell her
he’d meant no harm when he stretched out his legs, and then he settled
down again.

We had some books of the ‘Deadwood Dick’ school. Dave was reading ‘The
Grisly Ghost of the Haunted Gulch’, and I had ‘The Dismembered Hand’,
or ‘The Disembowelled Corpse’, or some such names. They were first-class
preparation for a ghost.

I was reading away, and getting drowsy, when I noticed a movement and
saw Dave’s frightened head rising, with the terrified shadow of it on
the wall. He was staring at the door, over his book, with both eyes.
And that door was opening again--slowly--and Dave had locked it! I never
felt anything so creepy: the foot of my bunk was behind the door, and
I drew up my feet as it came open; it opened wide, and stood so. We
waited, for five minutes it seemed, hearing each other breathe, watching
for the door to close; then Dave got out, very gingerly, and up on one
end, and went to the door like a cat on wet bricks.

‘You shot the bolt OUTSIDE the catch,’ I said, as he caught hold of the
door--like one grabs a craw-fish.

‘I’ll swear I didn’t,’ said Dave. But he’d already turned the key a
couple of times, so he couldn’t be sure. He shut and locked the door
again. ‘Now, get out and see for yourself,’ he said.

I got out, and tried the door a couple of times and found it all right.
Then we both tried, and agreed that it was locked.

I got back into bed, and Dave was about half in when a thought struck
him. He got the heaviest piece of firewood and stood it against the
door.

‘What are you doing that for?’ I asked.

‘If there’s a broken-down burglar camped round here, and trying any of
his funny business, we’ll hear him if he tries to come in while we’re
asleep,’ says Dave. Then he got back into bed. We composed our nerves
with the ‘Haunted Gulch’ and ‘The Disembowelled Corpse’, and after a
while I heard Dave snore, and was just dropping off when the stick fell
from the door against my big toe and then to the ground with tremendous
clatter. I snatched up my feet and sat up with a jerk, and so did
Dave--the cat went over the partition. That door opened, only a little
way this time, paused, and shut suddenly. Dave got out, grabbed a stick,
skipped to the door, and clutched at the knob as if it were a nettle,
and the door wouldn’t come!--it was fast and locked! Then Dave’s face
began to look as frightened as his hair. He lit his candle at the fire,
and asked me to come with him; he unlocked the door and we went into the
other room, Dave shading his candle very carefully and feeling his way
slow with his feet. The room was empty; we tried the outer door and
found it locked.

‘It muster gone by the winder,’ whispered Dave. I noticed that he said
‘it’ instead of ‘he’. I saw that he himself was shook up, and it only
needed that to scare me bad.

We went back to the bedroom, had a drink of cold tea, and lit our pipes.
Then Dave took the waterproof cover off his bunk, spread it on the
floor, laid his blankets on top of it, his spare clothes, &c., on top of
them, and started to roll up his swag.

‘What are you going to do, Dave?’ I asked.

‘I’m going to take the track,’ says Dave, ‘and camp somewhere farther
on. You can stay here, if you like, and come on in the morning.’

I started to roll up my swag at once. We dressed and fastened on the
tucker-bags, took up the billies, and got outside without making any
noise. We held our backs pretty hollow till we got down on to the road.

‘That comes of camping in a deserted house,’ said Dave, when we were
safe on the track. No Australian Bushman cares to camp in an abandoned
homestead, or even near it--probably because a deserted home looks
ghostlier in the Australian Bush than anywhere else in the world.

It was blowing hard, but not raining so much.

We went on along the track for a couple of miles and camped on the
sheltered side of a round tussock hill, in a hole where there had been a
landslip. We used all our candle-ends to get a fire alight, but once we
got it started we knocked the wet bark off ‘manuka’ sticks and logs and
piled them on, and soon had a roaring fire. When the ground got a little
drier we rigged a bit of shelter from the showers with some sticks and
the oil-cloth swag-covers; then we made some coffee and got through the
night pretty comfortably. In the morning Dave said, ‘I’m going back to
that house.’

‘What for?’ I said.

‘I’m going to find out what’s the matter with that crimson door. If I
don’t I’ll never be able to sleep easy within a mile of a door so long
as I live.’

So we went back. It was still blowing. The thing was simple enough by
daylight--after a little watching and experimenting. The house was built
of odds and ends and badly fitted. It ‘gave’ in the wind in almost any
direction--not much, not more than an inch or so, but just enough to
throw the door-frame out of plumb and out of square in such a way as to
bring the latch and bolt of the lock clear of the catch (the door-frame
was of scraps joined). Then the door swung open according to the hang of
it; and when the gust was over the house gave back, and the door swung
to--the frame easing just a little in another direction. I suppose
it would take Edison to invent a thing like that, that came about by
accident. The different strengths and directions of the gusts of wind
must have accounted for the variations of the door’s movements--and
maybe the draught of our big fire had helped.

Dave scratched his head a good bit.

‘I never lived in a house yet,’ he said, as we came away--‘I never lived
in a house yet without there was something wrong with it. Gimme a good
tent.’




A Wild Irishman.


About seven years ago I drifted from Out-Back in Australia to
Wellington, the capital of New Zealand, and up country to a little town
called Pahiatua, which meaneth the ‘home of the gods’, and is situated
in the Wairarappa (rippling or sparkling water) district. They have a
pretty little legend to the effect that the name of the district was not
originally suggested by its rivers, streams, and lakes, but by the
tears alleged to have been noticed, by a dusky squire, in the eyes of
a warrior chief who was looking his first, or last--I don’t remember
which--upon the scene. He was the discoverer, I suppose, now I come to
think of it, else the place would have been already named. Maybe the
scene reminded the old cannibal of the home of his childhood.

Pahiatua was not the home of my god; and it rained for five weeks.
While waiting for a remittance, from an Australian newspaper--which, I
anxiously hoped, would arrive in time for enough of it to be left (after
paying board) to take me away somewhere--I spent many hours in the
little shop of a shoemaker who had been a digger; and he told me yarns
of the old days on the West Coast of Middle Island. And, ever and anon,
he returned to one, a hard-case from the West Coast, called ‘The Flour
of Wheat’, and his cousin, and his mate, Dinny Murphy, dead. And ever
and again the shoemaker (he was large, humorous, and good-natured) made
me promise that, when I dropped across an old West Coast digger--no
matter who or what he was, or whether he was drunk or sober--I’d ask him
if he knew the ‘Flour of Wheat’, and hear what he had to say.

I make no attempt to give any one shade of the Irish brogue--it can’t be
done in writing.


‘There’s the little red Irishman,’ said the shoemaker, who was Irish
himself, ‘who always wants to fight when he has a glass in him; and
there’s the big sarcastic dark Irishman who makes more trouble and
fights at a spree than half-a-dozen little red ones put together;
and there’s the cheerful easy-going Irishman. Now the Flour was a
combination of all three and several other sorts. He was known from the
first amongst the boys at Th’ Canary as the Flour o’ Wheat, but no one
knew exactly why. Some said that the right name was the F-l-o-w-e-r, not
F-l-o-u-r, and that he was called that because there was no flower on
wheat. The name might have been a compliment paid to the man’s character
by some one who understood and appreciated it--or appreciated it without
understanding it. Or it might have come of some chance saying of the
Flour himself, or his mates--or an accident with bags of flour. He might
have worked in a mill. But we’ve had enough of that. It’s the man--not
the name. He was just a big, dark, blue-eyed Irish digger. He worked
hard, drank hard, fought hard--and didn’t swear. No man had ever heard
him swear (except once); all things were ‘lovely’ with him. He was
always lucky. He got gold and threw it away.

‘The Flour was sent out to Australia (by his friends) in connection with
some trouble in Ireland in eighteen-something. The date doesn’t matter:
there was mostly trouble in Ireland in those days; and nobody, that
knew the man, could have the slightest doubt that he helped the
trouble--provided he was there at the time. I heard all this from a man
who knew him in Australia. The relatives that he was sent out to were
soon very anxious to see the end of him. He was as wild as they made
them in Ireland. When he had a few drinks, he’d walk restlessly to and
fro outside the shanty, swinging his right arm across in front of him
with elbow bent and hand closed, as if he had a head in chancery, and
muttering, as though in explanation to himself--

‘“Oi must be walkin’ or foightin’!--Oi must be walkin’ or foightin’!--Oi
must be walkin’ or foightin’!”

‘They say that he wanted to eat his Australian relatives before he was
done; and the story goes that one night, while he was on the spree, they
put their belongings into a cart and took to the Bush.

‘There’s no floury record for several years; then the Flour turned up on
the west coast of New Zealand and was never very far from a pub. kept
by a cousin (that he had tracked, unearthed, or discovered somehow) at a
place called “Th’ Canary”. I remember the first time I saw the Flour.

‘I was on a bit of a spree myself, at Th’ Canary, and one evening I was
standing outside Brady’s (the Flour’s cousin’s place) with Tom Lyons and
Dinny Murphy, when I saw a big man coming across the flat with a swag on
his back.

‘“B’ God, there’s the Flour o’ Wheat comin’ this minute,” says Dinny
Murphy to Tom, “an’ no one else.”

‘“B’ God, ye’re right!” says Tom.

‘There were a lot of new chums in the big room at the back, drinking and
dancing and singing, and Tom says to Dinny--

‘“Dinny, I’ll bet you a quid an’ the Flour’ll run against some of those
new chums before he’s an hour on the spot.”

‘But Dinny wouldn’t take him up. He knew the Flour.

‘“Good day, Tom! Good day, Dinny!”

‘“Good day to you, Flour!”

‘I was introduced.

‘“Well, boys, come along,” says the Flour.

‘And so we went inside with him. The Flour had a few drinks, and then
he went into the back-room where the new chums were. One of them was
dancing a jig, and so the Flour stood up in front of him and commenced
to dance too. And presently the new chum made a step that didn’t please
the Flour, so he hit him between the eyes, and knocked him down--fair
an’ flat on his back.

‘“Take that,” he says. “Take that, me lovely whipper-snapper, an’ lay
there! You can’t dance. How dare ye stand up in front of me face to
dance when ye can’t dance?”

‘He shouted, and drank, and gambled, and danced, and sang, and fought
the new chums all night, and in the morning he said--

‘“Well, boys, we had a grand time last night. Come and have a drink with
me.”

‘And of course they went in and had a drink with him.

     *****

‘Next morning the Flour was walking along the street, when he met a
drunken, disreputable old hag, known among the boys as the “Nipper”.

‘“Good MORNING, me lovely Flour o’ Wheat!” says she.

‘“Good MORNING, me lovely Nipper!” says the Flour.

‘And with that she outs with a bottle she had in her dress, and smashed
him across the face with it. Broke the bottle to smithereens!

‘A policeman saw her do it, and took her up; and they had the Flour as a
witness, whether he liked it or not. And a lovely sight he looked, with
his face all done up in bloody bandages, and only one damaged eye and a
corner of his mouth on duty.

‘“It’s nothing at all, your Honour,” he said to the S.M.; “only a
pin-scratch--it’s nothing at all. Let it pass. I had no right to speak
to the lovely woman at all.”

‘But they didn’t let it pass,--they fined her a quid.

‘And the Flour paid the fine.

‘But, alas for human nature! It was pretty much the same even in those
days, and amongst those men, as it is now. A man couldn’t do a woman
a good turn without the dirty-minded blackguards taking it for granted
there was something between them. It was a great joke amongst the boys
who knew the Flour, and who also knew the Nipper; but as it was carried
too far in some quarters, it got to be no joke to the Flour--nor to
those who laughed too loud or grinned too long.

     *****

‘The Flour’s cousin thought he was a sharp man. The Flour got “stiff”.
He hadn’t any money, and his credit had run out, so he went and got
a blank summons from one of the police he knew. He pretended that he
wanted to frighten a man who owed him some money. Then he filled it up
and took it to his cousin.

‘“What d’ye think of that?” he says, handing the summons across the bar.
“What d’ye think of me lovely Dinny Murphy now?”

‘“Why, what’s this all about?”

‘“That’s what I want to know. I borrowed a five-pound-note off of him a
fortnight ago when I was drunk, an’ now he sends me that.”

‘“Well, I never would have dream’d that of Dinny,” says the cousin,
scratching his head and blinking. “What’s come over him at all?”

‘“That’s what I want to know.”

‘“What have you been doing to the man?”

‘“Divil a thing that I’m aware of.”

‘The cousin rubbed his chin-tuft between his forefinger and thumb.

‘“Well, what am I to do about it?” asked the Flour impatiently.

‘“Do? Pay the man, of course?”

‘“How can I pay the lovely man when I haven’t got the price of a drink
about me?”

‘The cousin scratched his chin.

‘“Well--here, I’ll lend you a five-pound-note for a month or two. Go and
pay the man, and get back to work.”

‘And the Flour went and found Dinny Murphy, and the pair of them had a
howling spree together up at Brady’s, the opposition pub. And the cousin
said he thought all the time he was being had.

    .   .   .   .   .

‘He was nasty sometimes, when he was about half drunk. For instance,
he’d come on the ground when the Orewell sports were in full swing and
walk round, soliloquising just loud enough for you to hear; and just
when a big event was coming off he’d pass within earshot of some
committee men--who had been bursting themselves for weeks to work the
thing up and make it a success--saying to himself--

‘“Where’s the Orewell sports that I hear so much about? I don’t see
them! Can any one direct me to the Orewell sports?”

‘Or he’d pass a raffle, lottery, lucky-bag, or golden-barrel business of
some sort,--

‘“No gamblin’ for the Flour. I don’t believe in their little shwindles.
It ought to be shtopped. Leadin’ young people ashtray.”

‘Or he’d pass an Englishman he didn’t like,--

‘“Look at Jinneral Roberts! He’s a man! He’s an Irishman! England has
to come to Ireland for its Jinnerals! Luk at Jinneral Roberts in the
marshes of Candyhar!”

     *****

‘They always had sports at Orewell Creek on New Year’s Day--except
once--and old Duncan was always there,--never missed it till the day he
died. He was a digger, a humorous and good-hearted “hard-case”. They all
knew “old Duncan”.

‘But one New Year’s Eve he didn’t turn up, and was missed at once.
“Where’s old Duncan? Any one seen old Duncan?” “Oh, he’ll turn up
alright.” They inquired, and argued, and waited, but Duncan didn’t come.

‘Duncan was working at Duffers. The boys inquired of fellows who came
from Duffers, but they hadn’t seen him for two days. They had fully
expected to find him at the creek. He wasn’t at Aliaura nor Notown. They
inquired of men who came from Nelson Creek, but Duncan wasn’t there.

‘“There’s something happened to the lovely man,” said the Flour of Wheat
at last. “Some of us had better see about it.”

‘Pretty soon this was the general opinion, and so a party started out
over the hills to Duffers before daylight in the morning, headed by the
Flour.


‘The door of Duncan’s “whare” was closed--BUT NOT PADLOCKED. The Flour
noticed this, gave his head a jerk, opened the door, and went in. The
hut was tidied up and swept out--even the fireplace. Duncan had “lifted
the boxes” and “cleaned up”, and his little bag of gold stood on a
shelf by his side--all ready for his spree. On the table lay a clean
neckerchief folded ready to tie on. The blankets had been folded neatly
and laid on the bunk, and on them was stretched Old Duncan, with his
arms lying crossed on his chest, and one foot--with a boot on--resting
on the ground. He had his “clean things” on, and was dressed except for
one boot, the necktie, and his hat. Heart disease.

‘“Take your hats off and come in quietly, lads,” said the Flour. “Here’s
the lovely man lying dead in his bunk.”

‘There were no sports at Orewell that New Year. Some one said that the
crowd from Nelson Creek might object to the sports being postponed on
old Duncan’s account, but the Flour said he’d see to that.

‘One or two did object, but the Flour reasoned with them and there were
no sports.

‘And the Flour used to say, afterwards, “Ah, but it was a grand time we
had at the funeral when Duncan died at Duffers.”

    .   .   .   .   .

‘The Flour of Wheat carried his mate, Dinny Murphy, all the way in from
Th’ Canary to the hospital on his back. Dinny was very bad--the man was
dying of the dysentery or something. The Flour laid him down on a spare
bunk in the reception-room, and hailed the staff.

‘“Inside there--come out!”

‘The doctor and some of the hospital people came to see what was the
matter. The doctor was a heavy swell, with a big cigar, held up in front
of him between two fat, soft, yellow-white fingers, and a dandy little
pair of gold-rimmed eye-glasses nipped onto his nose with a spring.

‘“There’s me lovely mate lying there dying of the dysentry,” says the
Flour, “and you’ve got to fix him up and bring him round.”

‘Then he shook his fist in the doctor’s face and said--

‘“If you let that lovely man die--look out!”

‘The doctor was startled. He backed off at first; then he took a puff at
his cigar, stepped forward, had a careless look at Dinny, and gave some
order to the attendants. The Flour went to the door, turned half round
as he went out, and shook his fist at them again, and said--

‘“If you let that lovely man die--mind!”

‘In about twenty minutes he came back, wheeling a case of whisky in a
barrow. He carried the case inside, and dumped it down on the floor.

‘“There,” he said, “pour that into the lovely man.”

‘Then he shook his fist at such members of the staff as were visible,
and said--

‘“If you let that lovely man die--look out!”

‘They were used to hard-cases, and didn’t take much notice of him, but
he had the hospital in an awful mess; he was there all hours of the day
and night; he would go down town, have a few drinks and a fight maybe,
and then he’d say, “Ah, well, I’ll have to go up and see how me lovely
mate’s getting on.”

‘And every time he’d go up he’d shake his fist at the hospital in
general and threaten to murder ‘em all if they let Dinny Murphy die.

‘Well, Dinny Murphy died one night. The next morning the Flour met the
doctor in the street, and hauled off and hit him between the eyes, and
knocked him down before he had time to see who it was.

‘“Stay there, ye little whipper-snapper,” said the Flour of Wheat; “you
let that lovely man die!”

‘The police happened to be out of town that day, and while they were
waiting for them the Flour got a coffin and carried it up to the
hospital, and stood it on end by the doorway.

‘“I’ve come for me lovely mate!” he said to the scared staff--or as much
of it as he baled up and couldn’t escape him. “Hand him over. He’s going
back to be buried with his friends at Th’ Canary. Now, don’t be sneaking
round and sidling off, you there; you needn’t be frightened; I’ve
settled with the doctor.”

‘But they called in a man who had some influence with the Flour, and
between them--and with the assistance of the prettiest nurse on the
premises--they persuaded him to wait. Dinny wasn’t ready yet; there were
papers to sign; it wouldn’t be decent to the dead; he had to be
prayed over; he had to be washed and shaved, and fixed up decent and
comfortable. Anyway, they’d have him ready in an hour, or take the
consequences.

‘The Flour objected on the ground that all this could be done equally as
well and better by the boys at Th’ Canary. “However,” he said, “I’ll
be round in an hour, and if you haven’t got me lovely mate ready--look
out!” Then he shook his fist sternly at them once more and said--

‘“I know yer dirty tricks and dodges, and if there’s e’er a pin-scratch
on me mate’s body--look out! If there’s a pairin’ of Dinny’s toe-nail
missin’--look out!”

‘Then he went out--taking the coffin with him.

‘And when the police came to his lodgings to arrest him, they found the
coffin on the floor by the side of the bed, and the Flour lying in it on
his back, with his arms folded peacefully on his bosom. He was as
dead drunk as any man could get to be and still be alive. They knocked
air-holes in the coffin-lid, screwed it on, and carried the coffin, the
Flour, and all to the local lock-up. They laid their burden down on the
bare, cold floor of the prison-cell, and then went out, locked the door,
and departed several ways to put the “boys” up to it. And about midnight
the “boys” gathered round with a supply of liquor, and waited, and
somewhere along in the small hours there was a howl, as of a strong
Irishman in Purgatory, and presently the voice of the Flour was heard to
plead in changed and awful tones--

‘“Pray for me soul, boys--pray for me soul! Let bygones be bygones
between us, boys, and pray for me lovely soul! The lovely Flour’s in
Purgatory!”

‘Then silence for a while; and then a sound like a dray-wheel passing
over a packing-case.... That was the only time on record that the Flour
was heard to swear. And he swore then.

‘They didn’t pray for him--they gave him a month. And, when he came
out, he went half-way across the road to meet the doctor, and he--to his
credit, perhaps--came the other half. They had a drink together, and
the Flour presented the doctor with a fine specimen of coarse gold for a
pin.

‘“It was the will o’ God, after all, doctor,” said the Flour. “It was
the will o’ God. Let bygones be bygones between us; gimme your hand,
doctor.... Good-bye.”

‘Then he left for Th’ Canary.’




The Babies in the Bush.


    ‘Oh, tell her a tale of the fairies bright--
       That only the Bushmen know--
    Who guide the feet of the lost aright,
    Or carry them up through the starry night,
       Where the Bush-lost babies go.’


He was one of those men who seldom smile. There are many in the
Australian Bush, where drift wrecks and failures of all stations and
professions (and of none), and from all the world. Or, if they do smile,
the smile is either mechanical or bitter as a rule--cynical. They seldom
talk. The sort of men who, as bosses, are set down by the majority--and
without reason or evidence--as being proud, hard, and selfish,--‘too
mean to live, and too big for their boots.’

But when the Boss did smile his expression was very, very gentle, and
very sad. I have seen him smile down on a little child who persisted in
sitting on his knee and prattling to him, in spite of his silence and
gloom. He was tall and gaunt, with haggard grey eyes--haunted grey eyes
sometimes--and hair and beard thick and strong, but grey. He was not
above forty-five. He was of the type of men who die in harness, with
their hair thick and strong, but grey or white when it should be brown.
The opposite type, I fancy, would be the soft, dark-haired, blue-eyed
men who grow bald sooner than they grow grey, and fat and contented, and
die respectably in their beds.

His name was Head--Walter Head. He was a boss drover on the overland
routes. I engaged with him at a place north of the Queensland border to
travel down to Bathurst, on the Great Western Line in New South Wales,
with something over a thousand head of store bullocks for the Sydney
market. I am an Australian Bushman (with city experience)--a rover, of
course, and a ne’er-do-well, I suppose. I was born with brains and a
thin skin--worse luck! It was in the days before I was married, and I
went by the name of ‘Jack Ellis’ this trip,--not because the police
were after me, but because I used to tell yarns about a man named Jack
Ellis--and so the chaps nicknamed me.

The Boss spoke little to the men: he’d sit at tucker or with his pipe
by the camp-fire nearly as silently as he rode his night-watch round the
big, restless, weird-looking mob of bullocks camped on the dusky
starlit plain. I believe that from the first he spoke oftener and more
confidentially to me than to any other of the droving party. There was a
something of sympathy between us--I can’t explain what it was. It seemed
as though it were an understood thing between us that we understood each
other. He sometimes said things to me which would have needed a deal of
explanation--so I thought--had he said them to any other of the party.
He’d often, after brooding a long while, start a sentence, and break off
with ‘You know, Jack.’ And somehow I understood, without being able to
explain why. We had never met before I engaged with him for this trip.
His men respected him, but he was not a popular boss: he was too gloomy,
and never drank a glass nor ‘shouted’ on the trip: he was reckoned a
‘mean boss’, and rather a nigger-driver.

He was full of Adam Lindsay Gordon, the English-Australian poet who
shot himself, and so was I. I lost an old copy of Gordon’s poems on the
route, and the Boss overheard me inquiring about it; later on he asked
me if I liked Gordon. We got to it rather sheepishly at first, but
by-and-by we’d quote Gordon freely in turn when we were alone in camp.
‘Those are grand lines about Burke and Wills, the explorers, aren’t
they, Jack?’ he’d say, after chewing his cud, or rather the stem of his
briar, for a long while without a word. (He had his pipe in his mouth as
often as any of us, but somehow I fancied he didn’t enjoy it: an empty
pipe or a stick would have suited him just as well, it seemed to me.)
‘Those are great lines,’ he’d say--

    ‘“In Collins Street standeth a statue tall--
         A statue tall on a pillar of stone--
      Telling its story to great and small
       Of the dust reclaimed from the sand-waste lone.

         *****

    Weary and wasted, worn and wan,
       Feeble and faint, and languid and low,
    He lay on the desert a dying man,
       Who has gone, my friends, where we all must go.”

     That’s a grand thing, Jack.  How does it go?--
    “With a pistol clenched in his failing hand,
       And the film of death o’er his fading eyes,
     He saw the sun go down on the sand,”’--

    The Boss would straighten up with a sigh that might have been half a yawn--
    ‘“And he slept and never saw it rise,”’
    --speaking with a sort of quiet force all the time.
    Then maybe he’d stand with his back to the fire roasting his dusty leggings,
    with his hands behind his back and looking out over the dusky plain.

    ‘“What mattered the sand or the whit’ning chalk,
       The blighted herbage or blackened log,
    The crooked beak of the eagle-hawk,
       Or the hot red tongue of the native dog?”

They don’t matter much, do they, Jack?’

‘Damned if I think they do, Boss!’ I’d say.

    ‘“The couch was rugged, those sextons rude,
       But, in spite of a leaden shroud, we know
    That the bravest and fairest are earth-worms’ food
       Where once they have gone where we all must go.”’

Once he repeated the poem containing the lines--

    ‘“Love, when we wandered here together,
    Hand in hand through the sparkling weather--
    God surely loved us a little then.”

Beautiful lines those, Jack.

    “Then skies were fairer and shores were firmer,
       And the blue sea over the white sand rolled--
     Babble and prattle, and prattle and murmur’--

How does it go, Jack?’ He stood up and turned his face to the light, but
not before I had a glimpse of it. I think that the saddest eyes on earth
are mostly women’s eyes, but I’ve seen few so sad as the Boss’s were
just then.

It seemed strange that he, a Bushman, preferred Gordon’s sea poems to
his horsey and bushy rhymes; but so he did. I fancy his favourite poem
was that one of Gordon’s with the lines--

    ‘I would that with sleepy soft embraces
       The sea would fold me, would find me rest
    In the luminous depths of its secret places,
       Where the wealth of God’s marvels is manifest!’

He usually spoke quietly, in a tone as though death were in camp; but
after we’d been on Gordon’s poetry for a while he’d end it abruptly
with, ‘Well, it’s time to turn in,’ or, ‘It’s time to turn out,’ or he’d
give me an order in connection with the cattle. He had been a well-to-do
squatter on the Lachlan river-side, in New South Wales, and had been
ruined by the drought, they said. One night in camp, and after smoking
in silence for nearly an hour, he asked--

‘Do you know Fisher, Jack--the man that owns these bullocks?’

‘I’ve heard of him,’ I said. Fisher was a big squatter, with stations
both in New South Wales and in Queensland.

‘Well, he came to my station on the Lachlan years ago without a penny in
his pocket, or decent rag to his back, or a crust in his tucker-bag, and
I gave him a job. He’s my boss now. Ah, well! it’s the way of Australia,
you know, Jack.’

The Boss had one man who went on every droving trip with him; he
was ‘bred’ on the Boss’s station, they said, and had been with him
practically all his life. His name was ‘Andy’. I forget his other name,
if he really had one. Andy had charge of the ‘droving-plant’ (a tilted
two-horse waggonette, in which we carried the rations and horse-feed),
and he did the cooking and kept accounts. The Boss had no head for
figures. Andy might have been twenty-five or thirty-five, or anything in
between. His hair stuck up like a well-made brush all round, and his big
grey eyes also had an inquiring expression. His weakness was girls, or
he theirs, I don’t know which (half-castes not barred). He was, I think,
the most innocent, good-natured, and open-hearted scamp I ever met.
Towards the middle of the trip Andy spoke to me one night alone in camp
about the Boss.

‘The Boss seems to have taken to you, Jack, all right.’

‘Think so?’ I said. I thought I smelt jealousy and detected a sneer.

‘I’m sure of it. It’s very seldom HE takes to any one.’

I said nothing.

Then after a while Andy said suddenly--

‘Look here, Jack, I’m glad of it. I’d like to see him make a chum of
some one, if only for one trip. And don’t you make any mistake about the
Boss. He’s a white man. There’s precious few that know him--precious few
now; but I do, and it’ll do him a lot of good to have some one to yarn
with.’ And Andy said no more on the subject for that trip.

The long, hot, dusty miles dragged by across the blazing plains--big
clearings rather--and through the sweltering hot scrubs, and we reached
Bathurst at last; and then the hot dusty days and weeks and months that
we’d left behind us to the Great North-West seemed as nothing,--as I
suppose life will seem when we come to the end of it.

The bullocks were going by rail from Bathurst to Sydney. We were all one
long afternoon getting them into the trucks, and when we’d finished the
boss said to me--

‘Look here, Jack, you’re going on to Sydney, aren’t you?’

‘Yes; I’m going down to have a fly round.’

‘Well, why not wait and go down with Andy in the morning? He’s going
down in charge of the cattle. The cattle-train starts about daylight. It
won’t be so comfortable as the passenger; but you’ll save your fare, and
you can give Andy a hand with the cattle. You’ve only got to have a
look at ‘em every other station, and poke up any that fall down in the
trucks. You and Andy are mates, aren’t you?’

I said it would just suit me. Somehow I fancied that the Boss seemed
anxious to have my company for one more evening, and, to tell the truth,
I felt really sorry to part with him. I’d had to work as hard as any
of the other chaps; but I liked him, and I believed he liked me. He’d
struck me as a man who’d been quietened down by some heavy trouble, and
I felt sorry for him without knowing what the trouble was.

‘Come and have a drink, Boss,’ I said. The agent had paid us off during
the day.

He turned into a hotel with me.

‘I don’t drink, Jack,’ he said; ‘but I’ll take a glass with you.’

‘I didn’t know you were a teetotaller, Boss,’ I said. I had not been
surprised at his keeping so strictly from the drink on the trip; but now
that it was over it was a different thing.

‘I’m not a teetotaller, Jack,’ he said. ‘I can take a glass or leave
it.’ And he called for a long beer, and we drank ‘Here’s luck!’ to each
other.

‘Well,’ I said, ‘I wish I could take a glass or leave it.’ And I meant
it.

Then the Boss spoke as I’d never heard him speak before. I thought for
the moment that the one drink had affected him; but I understood before
the night was over. He laid his hand on my shoulder with a grip like a
man who has suddenly made up his mind to lend you five pounds. ‘Jack!’
he said, ‘there’s worse things than drinking, and there’s worse things
than heavy smoking. When a man who smokes gets such a load of trouble on
him that he can find no comfort in his pipe, then it’s a heavy load.
And when a man who drinks gets so deep into trouble that he can find no
comfort in liquor, then it’s deep trouble. Take my tip for it, Jack.’

He broke off, and half turned away with a jerk of his head, as if
impatient with himself; then presently he spoke in his usual quiet
tone--

‘But you’re only a boy yet, Jack. Never mind me. I won’t ask you to take
the second drink. You don’t want it; and, besides, I know the signs.’

He paused, leaning with both hands on the edge of the counter, and
looking down between his arms at the floor. He stood that way thinking
for a while; then he suddenly straightened up, like a man who’d made up
his mind to something.

‘I want you to come along home with me, Jack,’ he said; ‘we’ll fix you a
shake-down.’

I forgot to tell you that he was married and lived in Bathurst.

‘But won’t it put Mrs Head about?’

‘Not at all. She’s expecting you. Come along; there’s nothing to see in
Bathurst, and you’ll have plenty of knocking round in Sydney. Come on,
we’ll just be in time for tea.’

He lived in a brick cottage on the outskirts of the town--an
old-fashioned cottage, with ivy and climbing roses, like you see in some
of those old settled districts. There was, I remember, the stump of a
tree in front, covered with ivy till it looked like a giant’s club with
the thick end up.

When we got to the house the Boss paused a minute with his hand on the
gate. He’d been home a couple of days, having ridden in ahead of the
bullocks.

‘Jack,’ he said, ‘I must tell you that Mrs Head had a great trouble at
one time. We--we lost our two children. It does her good to talk to a
stranger now and again--she’s always better afterwards; but there’s very
few I care to bring. You--you needn’t notice anything strange. And agree
with her, Jack. You know, Jack.’

‘That’s all right, Boss,’ I said. I’d knocked about the Bush too long,
and run against too many strange characters and things, to be surprised
at anything much.

The door opened, and he took a little woman in his arms. I saw by the
light of a lamp in the room behind that the woman’s hair was grey, and
I reckoned that he had his mother living with him. And--we do have odd
thoughts at odd times in a flash--and I wondered how Mrs Head and her
mother-in-law got on together. But the next minute I was in the room,
and introduced to ‘My wife, Mrs Head,’ and staring at her with both
eyes.

It was his wife. I don’t think I can describe her. For the first minute
or two, coming in out of the dark and before my eyes got used to the
lamp-light, I had an impression as of a little old woman--one of those
fresh-faced, well-preserved, little old ladies--who dressed young, wore
false teeth, and aped the giddy girl. But this was because of Mrs Head’s
impulsive welcome of me, and her grey hair. The hair was not so grey as
I thought at first, seeing it with the lamp-light behind it: it was like
dull-brown hair lightly dusted with flour. She wore it short, and
it became her that way. There was something aristocratic about her
face--her nose and chin--I fancied, and something that you couldn’t
describe. She had big dark eyes--dark-brown, I thought, though they
might have been hazel: they were a bit too big and bright for me, and
now and again, when she got excited, the white showed all round the
pupils--just a little, but a little was enough.

She seemed extra glad to see me. I thought at first that she was a bit
of a gusher.

‘Oh, I’m so glad you’ve come, Mr Ellis,’ she said, giving my hand a
grip. ‘Walter--Mr Head--has been speaking to me about you. I’ve been
expecting you. Sit down by the fire, Mr Ellis; tea will be ready
presently. Don’t you find it a bit chilly?’ She shivered. It was a bit
chilly now at night on the Bathurst plains. The table was set for tea,
and set rather in swell style. The cottage was too well furnished
even for a lucky boss drover’s home; the furniture looked as if it had
belonged to a tony homestead at one time. I felt a bit strange at first,
sitting down to tea, and almost wished that I was having a comfortable
tuck-in at a restaurant or in a pub. dining-room. But she knew a lot
about the Bush, and chatted away, and asked questions about the trip,
and soon put me at my ease. You see, for the last year or two I’d
taken my tucker in my hands,--hunk of damper and meat and a clasp-knife
mostly,--sitting on my heel in the dust, or on a log or a tucker-box.

There was a hard, brown, wrinkled old woman that the Heads called
‘Auntie’. She waited at the table; but Mrs Head kept bustling round
herself most of the time, helping us. Andy came in to tea.

Mrs Head bustled round like a girl of twenty instead of a woman of
thirty-seven, as Andy afterwards told me she was. She had the figure and
movements of a girl, and the impulsiveness and expression too--a womanly
girl; but sometimes I fancied there was something very childish about
her face and talk. After tea she and the Boss sat on one side of the
fire and Andy and I on the other--Andy a little behind me at the corner
of the table.

‘Walter--Mr Head--tells me you’ve been out on the Lachlan river, Mr
Ellis?’ she said as soon as she’d settled down, and she leaned forward,
as if eager to hear that I’d been there.

‘Yes, Mrs Head. I’ve knocked round all about out there.’

She sat up straight, and put the tips of her fingers to the side of her
forehead and knitted her brows. This was a trick she had--she often did
it during the evening. And when she did that she seemed to forget what
she’d said last.

She smoothed her forehead, and clasped her hands in her lap.

‘Oh, I’m so glad to meet somebody from the back country, Mr Ellis,’
she said. ‘Walter so seldom brings a stranger here, and I get tired of
talking to the same people about the same things, and seeing the same
faces. You don’t know what a relief it is, Mr Ellis, to see a new face
and talk to a stranger.’

‘I can quite understand that, Mrs Head,’ I said. And so I could. I never
stayed more than three months in one place if I could help it.

She looked into the fire and seemed to try to think. The Boss
straightened up and stroked her head with his big sun-browned hand, and
then put his arm round her shoulders. This brought her back.

‘You know we had a station out on the Lachlan, Mr Ellis. Did Walter ever
tell you about the time we lived there?’

‘No,’ I said, glancing at the Boss. ‘I know you had a station there;
but, you know, the Boss doesn’t talk much.’

‘Tell Jack, Maggie,’ said the Boss; ‘I don’t mind.’

She smiled. ‘You know Walter, Mr Ellis,’ she said. ‘You won’t mind him.
He doesn’t like me to talk about the children; he thinks it upsets me,
but that’s foolish: it always relieves me to talk to a stranger.’ She
leaned forward, eagerly it seemed, and went on quickly: ‘I’ve been
wanting to tell you about the children ever since Walter spoke to me
about you. I knew you would understand directly I saw your face. These
town people don’t understand. I like to talk to a Bushman. You know we
lost our children out on the station. The fairies took them. Did Walter
ever tell you about the fairies taking the children away?’

This was a facer. ‘I--I beg pardon,’ I commenced, when Andy gave me a
dig in the back. Then I saw it all.

‘No, Mrs Head. The Boss didn’t tell me about that.’

‘You surely know about the Bush Fairies, Mr Ellis,’ she said, her big
eyes fixed on my face--‘the Bush Fairies that look after the little ones
that are lost in the Bush, and take them away from the Bush if they are
not found? You’ve surely heard of them, Mr Ellis? Most Bushmen have that
I’ve spoken to. Maybe you’ve seen them? Andy there has?’ Andy gave me
another dig.

‘Of course I’ve heard of them, Mrs Head,’ I said; ‘but I can’t swear
that I’ve seen one.’

‘Andy has. Haven’t you, Andy?’

‘Of course I have, Mrs Head. Didn’t I tell you all about it the last
time we were home?’

‘And didn’t you ever tell Mr Ellis, Andy?’

‘Of course he did!’ I said, coming to Andy’s rescue; ‘I remember it now.
You told me that night we camped on the Bogan river, Andy.’

‘Of course!’ said Andy.

‘Did he tell you about finding a lost child and the fairy with it?’

‘Yes,’ said Andy; ‘I told him all about that.’

‘And the fairy was just going to take the child away when Andy found it,
and when the fairy saw Andy she flew away.’

‘Yes,’ I said; ‘that’s what Andy told me.’

‘And what did you say the fairy was like, Andy?’ asked Mrs Head, fixing
her eyes on his face.

‘Like. It was like one of them angels you see in Bible pictures, Mrs
Head,’ said Andy promptly, sitting bolt upright, and keeping his big
innocent grey eyes fixed on hers lest she might think he was telling
lies. ‘It was just like the angel in that Christ-in-the-stable picture
we had at home on the station--the right-hand one in blue.’

She smiled. You couldn’t call it an idiotic smile, nor the foolish
smile you see sometimes in melancholy mad people. It was more of a happy
childish smile.

‘I was so foolish at first, and gave poor Walter and the doctors a lot
of trouble,’ she said. ‘Of course it never struck me, until afterwards,
that the fairies had taken the children.’

She pressed the tips of the fingers of both hands to her forehead, and
sat so for a while; then she roused herself again--

‘But what am I thinking about? I haven’t started to tell you about the
children at all yet. Auntie! bring the children’s portraits, will you,
please? You’ll find them on my dressing-table.’

The old woman seemed to hesitate.

‘Go on, Auntie, and do what I ask you,’ said Mrs Head. ‘Don’t be
foolish. You know I’m all right now.’

‘You mustn’t take any notice of Auntie, Mr Ellis,’ she said with a
smile, while the old woman’s back was turned. ‘Poor old body, she’s a
bit crotchety at times, as old women are. She doesn’t like me to get
talking about the children. She’s got an idea that if I do I’ll start
talking nonsense, as I used to do the first year after the children were
lost. I was very foolish then, wasn’t I, Walter?’

‘You were, Maggie,’ said the Boss. ‘But that’s all past. You mustn’t
think of that time any more.’

‘You see,’ said Mrs Head, in explanation to me, ‘at first nothing would
drive it out of my head that the children had wandered about until they
perished of hunger and thirst in the Bush. As if the Bush Fairies would
let them do that.’

‘You were very foolish, Maggie,’ said the Boss; ‘but don’t think about
that.’

The old woman brought the portraits, a little boy and a little girl:
they must have been very pretty children.

‘You see,’ said Mrs Head, taking the portraits eagerly, and giving them
to me one by one, ‘we had these taken in Sydney some years before the
children were lost; they were much younger then. Wally’s is not a good
portrait; he was teething then, and very thin. That’s him standing on
the chair. Isn’t the pose good? See, he’s got one hand and one little
foot forward, and an eager look in his eyes. The portrait is very dark,
and you’ve got to look close to see the foot. He wants a toy rabbit that
the photographer is tossing up to make him laugh. In the next portrait
he’s sitting on the chair--he’s just settled himself to enjoy the fun.
But see how happy little Maggie looks! You can see my arm where I was
holding her in the chair. She was six months old then, and little Wally
had just turned two.’

She put the portraits up on the mantel-shelf.

‘Let me see; Wally (that’s little Walter, you know)--Wally was five and
little Maggie three and a half when we lost them. Weren’t they, Walter?’

‘Yes, Maggie,’ said the Boss.

‘You were away, Walter, when it happened.’

‘Yes, Maggie,’ said the Boss--cheerfully, it seemed to me--‘I was away.’

‘And we couldn’t find you, Walter. You see,’ she said to me, ‘Walter--Mr
Head--was away in Sydney on business, and we couldn’t find his address.
It was a beautiful morning, though rather warm, and just after the
break-up of the drought. The grass was knee-high all over the run. It
was a lonely place; there wasn’t much bush cleared round the homestead,
just a hundred yards or so, and the great awful scrubs ran back from the
edges of the clearing all round for miles and miles--fifty or a hundred
miles in some directions without a break; didn’t they, Walter?’

‘Yes, Maggie.’

‘I was alone at the house except for Mary, a half-caste girl we had, who
used to help me with the housework and the children. Andy was out on the
run with the men, mustering sheep; weren’t you, Andy?’

‘Yes, Mrs Head.’

‘I used to watch the children close as they got to run about, because
if they once got into the edge of the scrub they’d be lost; but this
morning little Wally begged hard to be let take his little sister down
under a clump of blue-gums in a corner of the home paddock to gather
buttercups. You remember that clump of gums, Walter?’

‘I remember, Maggie.’

‘“I won’t go through the fence a step, mumma,” little Wally said. I
could see Old Peter--an old shepherd and station-hand we had--I could
see him working on a dam we were making across a creek that ran down
there. You remember Old Peter, Walter?’

‘Of course I do, Maggie.’

‘I knew that Old Peter would keep an eye to the children; so I told
little Wally to keep tight hold of his sister’s hand and go straight
down to Old Peter and tell him I sent them.’

She was leaning forward with her hands clasping her knee, and telling me
all this with a strange sort of eagerness.

‘The little ones toddled off hand in hand, with their other hands
holding fast their straw hats. “In case a bad wind blowed,” as little
Maggie said. I saw them stoop under the first fence, and that was the
last that any one saw of them.’

‘Except the fairies, Maggie,’ said the Boss quickly.

‘Of course, Walter, except the fairies.’

She pressed her fingers to her temples again for a minute.

‘It seems that Old Peter was going to ride out to the musterers’ camp
that morning with bread for the men, and he left his work at the dam
and started into the Bush after his horse just as I turned back into the
house, and before the children got near him. They either followed
him for some distance or wandered into the Bush after flowers or
butterflies----’ She broke off, and then suddenly asked me, ‘Do you
think the Bush Fairies would entice children away, Mr Ellis?’

The Boss caught my eye, and frowned and shook his head slightly.

‘No. I’m sure they wouldn’t, Mrs Head,’ I said--‘at least not from what
I know of them.’

She thought, or tried to think, again for a while, in her helpless
puzzled way. Then she went on, speaking rapidly, and rather
mechanically, it seemed to me--

‘The first I knew of it was when Peter came to the house about an hour
afterwards, leading his horse, and without the children. I said--I
said, “O my God! where’s the children?”’ Her fingers fluttered up to her
temples.

‘Don’t mind about that, Maggie,’ said the Boss, hurriedly, stroking her
head. ‘Tell Jack about the fairies.’

‘You were away at the time, Walter?’

‘Yes, Maggie.’

‘And we couldn’t find you, Walter?’

‘No, Maggie,’ very gently. He rested his elbow on his knee and his chin
on his hand, and looked into the fire.

‘It wasn’t your fault, Walter; but if you had been at home do you think
the fairies would have taken the children?’

‘Of course they would, Maggie. They had to: the children were lost.’

‘And they’re bringing the children home next year?’

‘Yes, Maggie--next year.’

She lifted her hands to her head in a startled way, and it was some time
before she went on again. There was no need to tell me about the lost
children. I could see it all. She and the half-caste rushing towards
where the children were seen last, with Old Peter after them. The
hurried search in the nearer scrub. The mother calling all the time
for Maggie and Wally, and growing wilder as the minutes flew past. Old
Peter’s ride to the musterers’ camp. Horsemen seeming to turn up in no
time and from nowhere, as they do in a case like this, and no matter
how lonely the district. Bushmen galloping through the scrub in all
directions. The hurried search the first day, and the mother mad with
anxiety as night came on. Her long, hopeless, wild-eyed watch through
the night; starting up at every sound of a horse’s hoof, and reading
the worst in one glance at the rider’s face. The systematic work of the
search-parties next day and the days following. How those days do fly
past. The women from the next run or selection, and some from the town,
driving from ten or twenty miles, perhaps, to stay with and try to
comfort the mother. [‘Put the horse to the cart, Jim: I must go to that
poor woman!’) Comforting her with improbable stories of children who had
been lost for days, and were none the worse for it when they were
found. The mounted policemen out with the black trackers. Search-parties
cooeeing to each other about the Bush, and lighting signal-fires. The
reckless break-neck rides for news or more help. And the Boss himself,
wild-eyed and haggard, riding about the Bush with Andy and one or two
others perhaps, and searching hopelessly, days after the rest had given
up all hope of finding the children alive. All this passed before me as
Mrs Head talked, her voice sounding the while as if she were in another
room; and when I roused myself to listen, she was on to the fairies
again.

‘It was very foolish of me, Mr Ellis. Weeks after--months after, I
think--I’d insist on going out on the verandah at dusk and calling for
the children. I’d stand there and call “Maggie!” and “Wally!” until
Walter took me inside; sometimes he had to force me inside. Poor Walter!
But of course I didn’t know about the fairies then, Mr Ellis. I was
really out of my mind for a time.’

‘No wonder you were, Mrs Head,’ I said. ‘It was terrible trouble.’

‘Yes, and I made it worse. I was so selfish in my trouble. But it’s all
right now, Walter,’ she said, rumpling the Boss’s hair. ‘I’ll never be
so foolish again.’

‘Of course you won’t, Maggie.’

‘We’re very happy now, aren’t we, Walter?’

‘Of course we are, Maggie.’

‘And the children are coming back next year.’

‘Next year, Maggie.’

He leaned over the fire and stirred it up.

‘You mustn’t take any notice of us, Mr Ellis,’ she went on. ‘Poor Walter
is away so much that I’m afraid I make a little too much of him when he
does come home.’

She paused and pressed her fingers to her temples again. Then she said
quickly--

‘They used to tell me that it was all nonsense about the fairies, but
they were no friends of mine. I shouldn’t have listened to them, Walter.
You told me not to. But then I was really not in my right mind.’

‘Who used to tell you that, Mrs Head?’ I asked.

‘The Voices,’ she said; ‘you know about the Voices, Walter?’

‘Yes, Maggie. But you don’t hear the Voices now, Maggie?’ he asked
anxiously. ‘You haven’t heard them since I’ve been away this time, have
you, Maggie?’

‘No, Walter. They’ve gone away a long time. I hear voices now sometimes,
but they’re the Bush Fairies’ voices. I hear them calling Maggie and
Wally to come with them.’ She paused again. ‘And sometimes I think I
hear them call me. But of course I couldn’t go away without you, Walter.
But I’m foolish again. I was going to ask you about the other voices, Mr
Ellis. They used to say that it was madness about the fairies; but then,
if the fairies hadn’t taken the children, Black Jimmy, or the black
trackers with the police, could have tracked and found them at once.’

‘Of course they could, Mrs Head,’ I said.

‘They said that the trackers couldn’t track them because there was rain
a few hours after the children were lost. But that was ridiculous. It
was only a thunderstorm.’

‘Why!’ I said, ‘I’ve known the blacks to track a man after a week’s
heavy rain.’

She had her head between her fingers again, and when she looked up it
was in a scared way.

‘Oh, Walter!’ she said, clutching the Boss’s arm; ‘whatever have I been
talking about? What must Mr Ellis think of me? Oh! why did you let me
talk like that?’

He put his arm round her. Andy nudged me and got up.

‘Where are you going, Mr Ellis?’ she asked hurriedly. ‘You’re not going
to-night. Auntie’s made a bed for you in Andy’s room. You mustn’t mind
me.’

‘Jack and Andy are going out for a little while,’ said the Boss.
‘They’ll be in to supper. We’ll have a yarn, Maggie.’

‘Be sure you come back to supper, Mr Ellis,’ she said. ‘I really don’t
know what you must think of me,--I’ve been talking all the time.’

‘Oh, I’ve enjoyed myself, Mrs Head,’ I said; and Andy hooked me out.

‘She’ll have a good cry and be better now,’ said Andy when we got away
from the house. ‘She might be better for months. She has been fairly
reasonable for over a year, but the Boss found her pretty bad when he
came back this time. It upset him a lot, I can tell you. She has turns
now and again, and always ends up like she did just now. She gets a
longing to talk about it to a Bushman and a stranger; it seems to do her
good. The doctor’s against it, but doctors don’t know everything.’

‘It’s all true about the children, then?’ I asked.

‘It’s cruel true,’ said Andy.

‘And were the bodies never found?’

‘Yes;’ then, after a long pause, ‘I found them.’

‘You did!’

‘Yes; in the scrub, and not so very far from home either--and in a
fairly clear space. It’s a wonder the search-parties missed it; but it
often happens that way. Perhaps the little ones wandered a long way and
came round in a circle. I found them about two months after they were
lost. They had to be found, if only for the Boss’s sake. You see, in
a case like this, and when the bodies aren’t found, the parents never
quite lose the idea that the little ones are wandering about the Bush
to-night (it might be years after) and perishing from hunger, thirst,
or cold. That mad idea haunts ‘em all their lives. It’s the same, I
believe, with friends drowned at sea. Friends ashore are haunted for a
long while with the idea of the white sodden corpse tossing about and
drifting round in the water.’

‘And you never told Mrs Head about the children being found?’

‘Not for a long time. It wouldn’t have done any good. She was raving
mad for months. He took her to Sydney and then to Melbourne--to the best
doctors he could find in Australia. They could do no good, so he sold
the station--sacrificed everything, and took her to England.’

‘To England?’

‘Yes; and then to Germany to a big German doctor there. He’d offer a
thousand pounds where they only wanted fifty. It was no good. She
got worse in England, and raved to go back to Australia and find the
children. The doctors advised him to take her back, and he did. He spent
all his money, travelling saloon, and with reserved cabins, and a
nurse, and trying to get her cured; that’s why he’s droving now. She was
restless in Sydney. She wanted to go back to the station and wait there
till the fairies brought the children home. She’d been getting the fairy
idea into her head slowly all the time. The Boss encouraged it. But the
station was sold, and he couldn’t have lived there anyway without going
mad himself. He’d married her from Bathurst. Both of them have got
friends and relations here, so he thought best to bring her here. He
persuaded her that the fairies were going to bring the children here.
Everybody’s very kind to them. I think it’s a mistake to run away from a
town where you’re known, in a case like this, though most people do it.
It was years before he gave up hope. I think he has hopes yet--after
she’s been fairly well for a longish time.’

‘And you never tried telling her that the children were found?’

‘Yes; the Boss did. The little ones were buried on the Lachlan river at
first; but the Boss got a horror of having them buried in the Bush, so
he had them brought to Sydney and buried in the Waverley Cemetery near
the sea. He bought the ground, and room for himself and Maggie when they
go out. It’s all the ground he owns in wide Australia, and once he had
thousands of acres. He took her to the grave one day. The doctors were
against it; but he couldn’t rest till he tried it. He took her out, and
explained it all to her. She scarcely seemed interested. She read the
names on the stone, and said it was a nice stone, and asked questions
about how the children were found and brought here. She seemed quite
sensible, and very cool about it. But when he got her home she was back
on the fairy idea again. He tried another day, but it was no use; so
then he let it be. I think it’s better as it is. Now and again, at her
best, she seems to understand that the children were found dead, and
buried, and she’ll talk sensibly about it, and ask questions in a quiet
way, and make him promise to take her to Sydney to see the grave
next time he’s down. But it doesn’t last long, and she’s always worse
afterwards.’

We turned into a bar and had a beer. It was a very quiet drink. Andy
‘shouted’ in his turn, and while I was drinking the second beer a
thought struck me.

‘The Boss was away when the children were lost?’

‘Yes,’ said Andy.

‘Strange you couldn’t find him.’

‘Yes, it was strange; but HE’LL have to tell you about that. Very likely
he will; it’s either all or nothing with him.’

‘I feel damned sorry for the Boss,’ I said.

‘You’d be sorrier if you knew all,’ said Andy. ‘It’s the worst trouble
that can happen to a man. It’s like living with the dead. It’s--it’s
like a man living with his dead wife.’

When we went home supper was ready. We found Mrs Head, bright and
cheerful, bustling round. You’d have thought her one of the happiest and
brightest little women in Australia. Not a word about children or the
fairies. She knew the Bush, and asked me all about my trips. She told
some good Bush stories too. It was the pleasantest hour I’d spent for a
long time.

‘Good night, Mr Ellis,’ she said brightly, shaking hands with me when
Andy and I were going to turn in. ‘And don’t forget your pipe. Here it
is! I know that Bushmen like to have a whiff or two when they turn
in. Walter smokes in bed. I don’t mind. You can smoke all night if you
like.’

‘She seems all right,’ I said to Andy when we were in our room.

He shook his head mournfully. We’d left the door ajar, and we could hear
the Boss talking to her quietly. Then we heard her speak; she had a very
clear voice.

‘Yes, I’ll tell you the truth, Walter. I’ve been deceiving you, Walter,
all the time, but I did it for the best. Don’t be angry with me, Walter!
The Voices did come back while you were away. Oh, how I longed for you
to come back! They haven’t come since you’ve been home, Walter. You
must stay with me a while now. Those awful Voices kept calling me, and
telling me lies about the children, Walter! They told me to kill myself;
they told me it was all my own fault--that I killed the children. They
said I was a drag on you, and they’d laugh--Ha! ha! ha!--like that.
They’d say, “Come on, Maggie; come on, Maggie.” They told me to come to
the river, Walter.’

Andy closed the door. His face was very miserable.

We turned in, and I can tell you I enjoyed a soft white bed after months
and months of sleeping out at night, between watches, on the hard ground
or the sand, or at best on a few boughs when I wasn’t too tired to pull
them down, and my saddle for a pillow.

But the story of the children haunted me for an hour or two. I’ve never
since quite made up my mind as to why the Boss took me home. Probably
he really did think it would do his wife good to talk to a stranger;
perhaps he wanted me to understand--maybe he was weakening as he grew
older, and craved for a new word or hand-grip of sympathy now and then.

When I did get to sleep I could have slept for three or four days, but
Andy roused me out about four o’clock. The old woman that they called
Auntie was up and had a good breakfast of eggs and bacon and coffee
ready in the detached kitchen at the back. We moved about on tiptoe and
had our breakfast quietly.

‘The wife made me promise to wake her to see to our breakfast and say
Good-bye to you; but I want her to sleep this morning, Jack,’ said the
Boss. ‘I’m going to walk down as far as the station with you. She made
up a parcel of fruit and sandwiches for you and Andy. Don’t forget it.’

Andy went on ahead. The Boss and I walked down the wide silent street,
which was also the main road; and we walked two or three hundred yards
without speaking. He didn’t seem sociable this morning, or any way
sentimental; when he did speak it was something about the cattle.

But I had to speak; I felt a swelling and rising up in my chest, and at
last I made a swallow and blurted out--

‘Look here, Boss, old chap! I’m damned sorry!’

Our hands came together and gripped. The ghostly Australian daybreak was
over the Bathurst plains.

We went on another hundred yards or so, and then the Boss said quietly--

‘I was away when the children were lost, Jack. I used to go on a howling
spree every six or nine months. Maggie never knew. I’d tell her I had to
go to Sydney on business, or Out-Back to look after some stock. When
the children were lost, and for nearly a fortnight after, I was beastly
drunk in an out-of-the-way shanty in the Bush--a sly grog-shop. The old
brute that kept it was too true to me. He thought that the story of the
lost children was a trick to get me home, and he swore that he hadn’t
seen me. He never told me. I could have found those children, Jack. They
were mostly new chums and fools about the run, and not one of the three
policemen was a Bushman. I knew those scrubs better than any man in the
country.’

I reached for his hand again, and gave it a grip. That was all I could
do for him.

‘Good-bye, Jack!’ he said at the door of the brake-van. ‘Good-bye,
Andy!--keep those bullocks on their feet.’

The cattle-train went on towards the Blue Mountains. Andy and I sat
silent for a while, watching the guard fry three eggs on a plate over a
coal-stove in the centre of the van.

‘Does the boss never go to Sydney?’ I asked.

‘Very seldom,’ said Andy, ‘and then only when he has to, on business.
When he finishes his business with the stock agents, he takes a run out
to Waverley Cemetery perhaps, and comes home by the next train.’

After a while I said, ‘He told me about the drink, Andy--about his being
on the spree when the children were lost.’

‘Well, Jack,’ said Andy, ‘that’s the thing that’s been killing him ever
since, and it happened over ten years ago.’




A Bush Dance.



‘Tap, tap, tap, tap.’

The little schoolhouse and residence in the scrub was lighted brightly
in the midst of the ‘close’, solid blackness of that moonless December
night, when the sky and stars were smothered and suffocated by drought
haze.

It was the evening of the school children’s ‘Feast’. That is to say that
the children had been sent, and ‘let go’, and the younger ones ‘fetched’
through the blazing heat to the school, one day early in the holidays,
and raced--sometimes in couples tied together by the legs--and caked,
and bunned, and finally improved upon by the local Chadband, and got
rid of. The schoolroom had been cleared for dancing, the maps rolled and
tied, the desks and blackboards stacked against the wall outside. Tea
was over, and the trestles and boards, whereon had been spread better
things than had been provided for the unfortunate youngsters, had been
taken outside to keep the desks and blackboards company.

On stools running end to end along one side of the room sat about twenty
more or less blooming country girls of from fifteen to twenty odd.

On the rest of the stools, running end to end along the other wall, sat
about twenty more or less blooming chaps.

It was evident that something was seriously wrong. None of the girls
spoke above a hushed whisper. None of the men spoke above a hushed oath.
Now and again two or three sidled out, and if you had followed them you
would have found that they went outside to listen hard into the darkness
and to swear.

‘Tap, tap, tap.’

The rows moved uneasily, and some of the girls turned pale faces
nervously towards the side-door, in the direction of the sound.

‘Tap--tap.’

The tapping came from the kitchen at the rear of the teacher’s
residence, and was uncomfortably suggestive of a coffin being made: it
was also accompanied by a sickly, indescribable odour--more like that of
warm cheap glue than anything else.

In the schoolroom was a painful scene of strained listening. Whenever
one of the men returned from outside, or put his head in at the door,
all eyes were fastened on him in the flash of a single eye, and then
withdrawn hopelessly. At the sound of a horse’s step all eyes and ears
were on the door, till some one muttered, ‘It’s only the horses in the
paddock.’

Some of the girls’ eyes began to glisten suspiciously, and at last the
belle of the party--a great, dark-haired, pink-and-white Blue Mountain
girl, who had been sitting for a full minute staring before her, with
blue eyes unnaturally bright, suddenly covered her face with her hands,
rose, and started blindly from the room, from which she was steered in
a hurry by two sympathetic and rather ‘upset’ girl friends, and as she
passed out she was heard sobbing hysterically--

‘Oh, I can’t help it! I did want to dance! It’s a sh-shame! I can’t help
it! I--I want to dance! I rode twenty miles to dance--and--and I want to
dance!’

A tall, strapping young Bushman rose, without disguise, and followed the
girl out. The rest began to talk loudly of stock, dogs, and horses, and
other Bush things; but above their voices rang out that of the girl from
the outside--being man comforted--

‘I can’t help it, Jack! I did want to dance! I--I had such--such--a
job--to get mother--and--and father to let me come--and--and now!’

The two girl friends came back. ‘He sez to leave her to him,’ they
whispered, in reply to an interrogatory glance from the schoolmistress.

‘It’s--it’s no use, Jack!’ came the voice of grief. ‘You don’t know
what--what father and mother--is. I--I won’t--be able--to ge-get
away--again--for--for--not till I’m married, perhaps.’

The schoolmistress glanced uneasily along the row of girls. ‘I’ll take
her into my room and make her lie down,’ she whispered to her sister,
who was staying with her. ‘She’ll start some of the other girls
presently--it’s just the weather for it,’ and she passed out quietly.
That schoolmistress was a woman of penetration.

A final ‘tap-tap’ from the kitchen; then a sound like the squawk of a
hurt or frightened child, and the faces in the room turned quickly in
that direction and brightened. But there came a bang and a sound like
‘damn!’ and hopelessness settled down.

A shout from the outer darkness, and most of the men and some of the
girls rose and hurried out. Fragments of conversation heard in the
darkness--

‘It’s two horses, I tell you!’

‘It’s three, you----!’

‘Lay you----!’

‘Put the stuff up!’

A clack of gate thrown open.

‘Who is it, Tom?’

Voices from gatewards, yelling, ‘Johnny Mears! They’ve got Johnny
Mears!’

Then rose yells, and a cheer such as is seldom heard in scrub-lands.

Out in the kitchen long Dave Regan grabbed, from the far side of the
table, where he had thrown it, a burst and battered concertina, which
he had been for the last hour vainly trying to patch and make air-tight;
and, holding it out towards the back-door, between his palms, as a
football is held, he let it drop, and fetched it neatly on the toe of
his riding-boot. It was a beautiful kick, the concertina shot out into
the blackness, from which was projected, in return, first a short,
sudden howl, then a face with one eye glaring and the other covered by
an enormous brick-coloured hand, and a voice that wanted to know who
shot ‘that lurid loaf of bread?’

But from the schoolroom was heard the loud, free voice of Joe Matthews,
M.C.,--

‘Take yer partners! Hurry up! Take yer partners! They’ve got Johnny
Mears with his fiddle!’




The Buck-Jumper.

Saturday afternoon.

There were about a dozen Bush natives, from anywhere, most of them lanky
and easy-going, hanging about the little slab-and-bark hotel on the
edge of the scrub at Capertee Camp (a teamster’s camp) when Cob & Co.’s
mail-coach and six came dashing down the siding from round Crown Ridge,
in all its glory, to the end of the twelve-mile stage. Some wiry,
ill-used hacks were hanging to the fence and to saplings about the
place. The fresh coach-horses stood ready in a stock-yard close to the
shanty. As the coach climbed the nearer bank of the creek at the foot of
the ridge, six of the Bushmen detached themselves from verandah posts,
from their heels, from the clay floor of the verandah and the rough slab
wall against which they’d been resting, and joined a group of four or
five who stood round one. He stood with his back to the corner post
of the stock-yard, his feet well braced out in front of him, and
contemplated the toes of his tight new ‘lastic-side boots and whistled
softly. He was a clean-limbed, handsome fellow, with riding-cords,
leggings, and a blue sash; he was Graeco-Roman-nosed, blue-eyed, and
his glossy, curly black hair bunched up in front of the brim of a new
cabbage-tree hat, set well back on his head.

‘Do it for a quid, Jack?’ asked one.

‘Damned if I will, Jim!’ said the young man at the post. ‘I’ll do it for
a fiver--not a blanky sprat less.’

Jim took off his hat and ‘shoved’ it round, and ‘bobs’ were ‘chucked’
into it. The result was about thirty shillings.

Jack glanced contemptuously into the crown of the hat.

‘Not me!’ he said, showing some emotion for the first time. ‘D’yer think
I’m going to risk me blanky neck for your blanky amusement for thirty
blanky bob. I’ll ride the blanky horse for a fiver, and I’ll feel the
blanky quids in my pocket before I get on.’

Meanwhile the coach had dashed up to the door of the shanty. There
were about twenty passengers aboard--inside, on the box-seat, on the
tail-board, and hanging on to the roof--most of them Sydney men going up
to the Mudgee races. They got down and went inside with the driver for
a drink, while the stablemen changed horses. The Bushmen raised their
voices a little and argued.

One of the passengers was a big, stout, hearty man--a good-hearted,
sporting man and a racehorse-owner, according to his brands. He had
a round red face and a white cork hat. ‘What’s those chaps got on
outside?’ he asked the publican.

‘Oh, it’s a bet they’ve got on about riding a horse,’ replied the
publican. ‘The flash-looking chap with the sash is Flash Jack, the
horse-breaker; and they reckon they’ve got the champion outlaw in the
district out there--that chestnut horse in the yard.’

The sporting man was interested at once, and went out and joined the
Bushmen.

‘Well, chaps! what have you got on here?’ he asked cheerily.

‘Oh,’ said Jim carelessly, ‘it’s only a bit of a bet about ridin’
that blanky chestnut in the corner of the yard there.’ He indicated an
ungroomed chestnut horse, fenced off by a couple of long sapling poles
in a corner of the stock-yard. ‘Flash Jack there--he reckons he’s the
champion horse-breaker round here--Flash Jack reckons he can take it out
of that horse first try.’

‘What’s up with the horse?’ inquired the big, red-faced man. ‘It looks
quiet enough. Why, I’d ride it myself.’

‘Would yer?’ said Jim, who had hair that stood straight up, and an
innocent, inquiring expression. ‘Looks quiet, does he? YOU ought to know
more about horses than to go by the looks of ‘em. He’s quiet enough just
now, when there’s no one near him; but you should have been here an
hour ago. That horse has killed two men and put another chap’s shoulder
out--besides breaking a cove’s leg. It took six of us all the morning to
run him in and get the saddle on him; and now Flash Jack wants to back
out of it.’

‘Euraliar!’ remarked Flash Jack cheerfully. ‘I said I’d ride that blanky
horse out of the yard for a fiver. I ain’t goin’ to risk my blanky neck
for nothing and only to amuse you blanks.’

‘He said he’d ride the horse inside the yard for a quid,’ said Jim.

‘And get smashed against the rails!’ said Flash Jack. ‘I would be a
fool. I’d rather take my chance outside in the scrub--and it’s rough
country round here.’

‘Well, how much do you want?’ asked the man in the mushroom hat.

‘A fiver, I said,’ replied Jack indifferently. ‘And the blanky stuff in
my pocket before I get on the blanky horse.’

‘Are you frightened of us running away without paying you?’ inquired one
of the passengers who had gathered round.

‘I’m frightened of the horse bolting with me without me being paid,’
said Flash Jack. ‘I know that horse; he’s got a mouth like iron. I might
be at the bottom of the cliff on Crown Ridge road in twenty minutes with
my head caved in, and then what chance for the quids?’

‘You wouldn’t want ‘em then,’ suggested a passenger. ‘Or, say!--we’d
leave the fiver with the publican to bury you.’

Flash Jack ignored that passenger. He eyed his boots and softly whistled
a tune.

‘All right!’ said the man in the cork hat, putting his hand in his
pocket. ‘I’ll start with a quid; stump up, you chaps.’

The five pounds were got together.

‘I’ll lay a quid to half a quid he don’t stick on ten minutes!’ shouted
Jim to his mates as soon as he saw that the event was to come off. The
passengers also betted amongst themselves. Flash Jack, after putting the
money in his breeches-pocket, let down the rails and led the horse into
the middle of the yard.

‘Quiet as an old cow!’ snorted a passenger in disgust. ‘I believe it’s a
sell!’

‘Wait a bit,’ said Jim to the passenger, ‘wait a bit and you’ll see.’

They waited and saw.

Flash Jack leisurely mounted the horse, rode slowly out of the yard, and
trotted briskly round the corner of the shanty and into the scrub, which
swallowed him more completely than the sea might have done.

Most of the other Bushmen mounted their horses and followed Flash Jack
to a clearing in the scrub, at a safe distance from the shanty; then
they dismounted and hung on to saplings, or leaned against their horses,
while they laughed.

At the hotel there was just time for another drink. The driver climbed
to his seat and shouted, ‘All aboard!’ in his usual tone. The passengers
climbed to their places, thinking hard. A mile or so along the road the
man with the cork hat remarked, with much truth--

‘Those blanky Bushmen have got too much time to think.’

     *****

The Bushmen returned to the shanty as soon as the coach was out of
sight, and proceeded to ‘knock down’ the fiver.




Jimmy Grimshaw’s Wooing.


The Half-way House at Tinned Dog (Out-Back in Australia) kept Daniel
Myers--licensed to retail spirituous and fermented liquors--in drink and
the horrors for upward of five years, at the end of which time he lay
hidden for weeks in a back skillion, an object which no decent man would
care to see--or hear when it gave forth sound. ‘Good accommodation
for man and beast’; but few shanties save his own might, for a
consideration, have accommodated the sort of beast which the man Myers
had become towards the end of his career. But at last the eccentric Bush
doctor, ‘Doc’ Wild’ (who perhaps could drink as much as Myers without
its having any further effect upon his temperament than to keep him
awake and cynical), pronounced the publican dead enough to be buried
legally; so the widow buried him, had the skillion cleaned out, and the
sign altered to read, ‘Margaret Myers, licensed, &c.’, and continued to
conduct the pub. just as she had run it for over five years, with the
joyful and blessed exception that there was no longer a human pig and
pigstye attached, and that the atmosphere was calm. Most of the regular
patrons of the Half-way House could have their horrors decently, and,
comparatively, quietly--or otherwise have them privately--in the Big
Scrub adjacent; but Myers had not been one of that sort.

Mrs Myers settled herself to enjoy life comfortably and happily, at
the fixed age of thirty-nine, for the next seven years or so. She was
a pleasant-faced dumpling, who had been baked solid in the droughts of
Out-Back without losing her good looks, and had put up with a hard life,
and Myers, all those years without losing her good humour and nature.
Probably, had her husband been the opposite kind of man, she would have
been different--haggard, bad-tempered, and altogether impossible--for
of such is woman. But then it might be taken into consideration that she
had been practically a widow during at least the last five years of her
husband’s alleged life.

Mrs Myers was reckoned a good catch in the district, but it soon seemed
that she was not to be caught.

‘It would be a grand thing,’ one of the periodical boozers of Tinned Dog
would say to his mates, ‘for one of us to have his name up on a pub.; it
would save a lot of money.’

‘It wouldn’t save you anything, Bill, if I got it,’ was the retort. ‘You
needn’t come round chewing my lug then. I’d give you one drink and no
more.’

The publican at Dead Camel, station managers, professional shearers,
even one or two solvent squatters and promising cockatoos, tried their
luck in vain. In answer to the suggestion that she ought to have a man
to knock round and look after things, she retorted that she had had one,
and was perfectly satisfied. Few trav’lers on those tracks but tried
‘a bit of bear-up’ in that direction, but all to no purpose. Chequemen
knocked down their cheques manfully at the Half-way House--to get
courage and goodwill and ‘put it off’ till, at the last moment, they
offered themselves abjectly to the landlady; which was worse than bad
judgment on their part--it was very silly, and she told them so.

One or two swore off, and swore to keep straight; but she had no faith
in them, and when they found that out, it hurt their feelings so much
that they ‘broke out’ and went on record-breaking sprees.

About the end of each shearing the sign was touched up, with an extra
coat of paint on the ‘Margaret’, whereat suitors looked hopeless.

One or two of the rejected died of love in the horrors in the Big
Scrub--anyway, the verdict was that they died of love aggravated by the
horrors. But the climax was reached when a Queensland shearer, seizing
the opportunity when the mate, whose turn it was to watch him, fell
asleep, went down to the yard and hanged himself on the butcher’s
gallows--having first removed his clothes, with some drink-lurid idea of
leaving the world as naked as he came into it. He climbed the pole, sat
astride on top, fixed the rope to neck and bar, but gave a yell--a yell
of drunken triumph--before he dropped, and woke his mates.

They cut him down and brought him to. Next day he apologised to Mrs
Myers, said, ‘Ah, well! So long!’ to the rest, and departed--cured of
drink and love apparently. The verdict was that the blanky fool should
have dropped before he yelled; but she was upset and annoyed, and it
began to look as though, if she wished to continue to live on happily
and comfortably for a few years longer at the fixed age of thirty-nine,
she would either have to give up the pub. or get married.

Her fame was carried far and wide, and she became a woman whose name was
mentioned with respect in rough shearing-sheds and huts, and round the
camp-fire.

About thirty miles south of Tinned Dog one James Grimshaw,
widower--otherwise known as ‘Old Jimmy’, though he was little past
middle age--had a small selection which he had worked, let, given up,
and tackled afresh (with sinews of war drawn from fencing contracts)
ever since the death of his young wife some fifteen years agone. He was
a practical, square-faced, clean-shaven, clean, and tidy man, with a
certain ‘cleanness’ about the shape of his limbs which suggested the
old jockey or hostler. There were two strong theories in connection with
Jimmy--one was that he had had a university education, and the other
that he couldn’t write his own name. Not nearly such a ridiculous nor
simple case Out-Back as it might seem.

Jimmy smoked and listened without comment to the ‘heard tells’ in
connection with Mrs Myers, till at last one night, at the end of his
contract and over a last pipe, he said quietly, ‘I’ll go up to Tinned
Dog next week and try my luck.’

His mates and the casual Jims and Bills were taken too suddenly to
laugh, and the laugh having been lost, as Bland Holt, the Australian
actor would put it in a professional sense, the audience had time to
think, with the result that the joker swung his hand down through an
imaginary table and exclaimed--

‘By God! Jimmy’ll do it.’ (Applause.)

     *****

So one drowsy afternoon at the time of the year when the breathless day
runs on past 7 P.M., Mrs Myers sat sewing in the bar parlour, when a
clean-shaved, clean-shirted, clean-neckerchiefed, clean-moleskinned,
greased-bluchered--altogether a model or stage swagman came up, was
served in the bar by the half-caste female cook, and took his way to the
river-bank, where he rigged a small tent and made a model camp.

A couple of hours later he sat on a stool on the verandah, smoking a
clean clay pipe. Just before the sunset meal Mrs Myers asked, ‘Is that
trav’ler there yet, Mary?’

‘Yes, missus. Clean pfellar that.’

The landlady knitted her forehead over her sewing, as women do when
limited for ‘stuff’ or wondering whether a section has been cut
wrong--or perhaps she thought of that other who hadn’t been a ‘clean
pfellar’. She put her work aside, and stood in the doorway, looking out
across the clearing.

‘Good-day, mister,’ she said, seeming to become aware of him for the
first time.

‘Good-day, missus!’

‘Hot!’

‘Hot!’

Pause.

‘Trav’lin’?’

‘No, not particular!’

She waited for him to explain. Myers was always explaining when he
wasn’t raving. But the swagman smoked on.

‘Have a drink?’ she suggested, to keep her end up.

‘No, thank you, missus. I had one an hour or so ago. I never take more
than two a-day--one before breakfast, if I can get it, and a night-cap.’

What a contrast to Myers! she thought.

‘Come and have some tea; it’s ready.’

‘Thank you. I don’t mind if I do.’

They got on very slowly, but comfortably. She got little out of him
except the facts that he had a selection, had finished a contract,
and was ‘just having a look at the country.’ He politely declined a
‘shake-down’, saying he had a comfortable camp, and preferred being out
this weather. She got his name with a ‘by-the-way’, as he rose to leave,
and he went back to camp.

He caught a cod, and they had it for breakfast next morning, and
got along so comfortable over breakfast that he put in the forenoon
pottering about the gates and stable with a hammer, a saw, and a box of
nails.

And, well--to make it short--when the big Tinned Dog shed had cut-out,
and the shearers struck the Half-way House, they were greatly impressed
by a brand-new sign whereon glistened the words--

            HALF-WAY HOUSE HOTEL,
                     BY
               JAMES GRIMSHAW.
                Good Stabling.

The last time I saw Mrs Grimshaw she looked about thirty-five.




At Dead Dingo.


It was blazing hot outside and smothering hot inside the weather-board
and iron shanty at Dead Dingo, a place on the Cleared Road, where
there was a pub. and a police-station, and which was sometimes called
‘Roasted’, and other times ‘Potted Dingo’--nicknames suggested by the
everlasting drought and the vicinity of the one-pub. township of Tinned
Dog.

From the front verandah the scene was straight-cleared road, running
right and left to Out-Back, and to Bourke (and ankle-deep in the red
sand dust for perhaps a hundred miles); the rest blue-grey bush, dust,
and the heat-wave blazing across every object.

There were only four in the bar-room, though it was New Year’s Day.
There weren’t many more in the county. The girl sat behind the bar--the
coolest place in the shanty--reading ‘Deadwood Dick’. On a worn and torn
and battered horse-hair sofa, which had seen cooler places and better
days, lay an awful and healthy example, a bearded swagman, with his arms
twisted over his head and his face to the wall, sleeping off the death
of the dead drunk. Bill and Jim--shearer and rouseabout--sat at a table
playing cards. It was about three o’clock in the afternoon, and they had
been gambling since nine--and the greater part of the night before--so
they were, probably, in a worse condition morally (and perhaps
physically) than the drunken swagman on the sofa.

Close under the bar, in a dangerous place for his legs and tail, lay a
sheep-dog with a chain attached to his collar and wound round his neck.

Presently a thump on the table, and Bill, unlucky gambler, rose with an
oath that would have been savage if it hadn’t been drawled.

‘Stumped?’ inquired Jim.

‘Not a blanky, lurid deener!’ drawled Bill.

Jim drew his reluctant hands from the cards, his eyes went slowly and
hopelessly round the room and out the door. There was something in the
eyes of both, except when on the card-table, of the look of a man waking
in a strange place.

‘Got anything?’ asked Jim, fingering the cards again.

Bill sucked in his cheeks, collecting the saliva with difficulty, and
spat out on to the verandah floor.

‘That’s all I got,’ he drawled. ‘It’s gone now.’

Jim leaned back in his chair, twisted, yawned, and caught sight of the
dog.

‘That there dog yours?’ he asked, brightening.

They had evidently been strangers the day before, or as strange to each
other as Bushmen can be.

Bill scratched behind his ear, and blinked at the dog. The dog woke
suddenly to a flea fact.

‘Yes,’ drawled Bill, ‘he’s mine.’

‘Well, I’m going Out-Back, and I want a dog,’ said Jim, gathering the
cards briskly. ‘Half a quid agin the dog?’

‘Half a quid be----!’ drawled Bill. ‘Call it a quid?’

‘Half a blanky quid!’

‘A gory, lurid quid!’ drawled Bill desperately, and he stooped over his
swag.

But Jim’s hands were itching in a ghastly way over the cards.

‘Alright. Call it a---- quid.’

The drunkard on the sofa stirred, showed signs of waking, but died
again. Remember this, it might come in useful.

Bill sat down to the table once more.

Jim rose first, winner of the dog. He stretched, yawned ‘Ah, well!’ and
shouted drinks. Then he shouldered his swag, stirred the dog up with his
foot, unwound the chain, said ‘Ah, well--so long!’ and drifted out and
along the road toward Out-Back, the dog following with head and tail
down.

Bill scored another drink on account of girl-pity for bad luck,
shouldered his swag, said, ‘So long, Mary!’ and drifted out and along
the road towards Tinned Dog, on the Bourke side.

     *****

A long, drowsy, half hour passed--the sort of half hour that is as long
as an hour in the places where days are as long as years, and years hold
about as much as days do in other places.

The man on the sofa woke with a start, and looked scared and wild for a
moment; then he brought his dusty broken boots to the floor, rested his
elbows on his knees, took his unfortunate head between his hands, and
came back to life gradually.

He lifted his head, looked at the girl across the top of the bar, and
formed with his lips, rather than spoke, the words--

‘Put up a drink?’ *

     * ‘Put up a drink’--i.e., ‘Give me a drink on credit’, or
     ‘Chalk it up’.

She shook her head tightly and went on reading.

He staggered up, and, leaning on the bar, made desperate distress
signals with hand, eyes, and mouth.

‘No!’ she snapped. ‘I means no when I says no! You’ve had too many last
drinks already, and the boss says you ain’t to have another. If you
swear again, or bother me, I’ll call him.’

He hung sullenly on the counter for a while, then lurched to his
swag, and shouldered it hopelessly and wearily. Then he blinked round,
whistled, waited a moment, went on to the front verandah, peered round,
through the heat, with bloodshot eyes, and whistled again. He turned and
started through to the back-door.

‘What the devil do you want now?’ demanded the girl, interrupted in her
reading for the third time by him. ‘Stampin’ all over the house. You
can’t go through there! It’s privit! I do wish to goodness you’d git!’

‘Where the blazes is that there dog o’ mine got to?’ he muttered. ‘Did
you see a dog?’

‘No! What do I want with your dog?’

He whistled out in front again, and round each corner. Then he came back
with a decided step and tone.

‘Look here! that there dog was lyin’ there agin the wall when I went
to sleep. He wouldn’t stir from me, or my swag, in a year, if he wasn’t
dragged. He’s been blanky well touched [stolen], and I wouldn’ter lost
him for a fiver. Are you sure you ain’t seen a dog?’ then suddenly, as
the thought struck him: ‘Where’s them two chaps that was playin’ cards
when I wenter sleep?’

‘Why!’ exclaimed the girl, without thinking, ‘there was a dog, now I
come to think of it, but I thought it belonged to one of them chaps.
Anyway, they played for it, and the other chap won it and took it away.’

He stared at her blankly, with thunder gathering in the blankness.

‘What sort of a dog was it?’

Dog described; the chain round the neck settled it.

He scowled at her darkly.

‘Now, look here,’ he said; ‘you’ve allowed gamblin’ in this bar--your
boss has. You’ve got no right to let spielers gamble away a man’s dog.
Is a customer to lose his dog every time he has a doze to suit your
boss? I’ll go straight across to the police camp and put you away, and
I don’t care if you lose your licence. I ain’t goin’ to lose my dog. I
wouldn’ter taken a ten-pound note for that blanky dog! I----’

She was filling a pewter hastily.

‘Here! for God’s sake have a drink an’ stop yer row.’

He drank with satisfaction. Then he hung on the bar with one elbow and
scowled out the door.

‘Which blanky way did them chaps go?’ he growled.

‘The one that took the dog went towards Tinned Dog.’

‘And I’ll haveter go all the blanky way back after him, and most likely
lose me shed! Here!’ jerking the empty pewter across the bar, ‘fill that
up again; I’m narked properly, I am, and I’ll take twenty-four blanky
hours to cool down now. I wouldn’ter lost that dog for twenty quid.’

He drank again with deeper satisfaction, then he shuffled out,
muttering, swearing, and threatening louder every step, and took the
track to Tinned Dog.

               *****

Now the man, girl, or woman, who told me this yarn has never quite
settled it in his or her mind as to who really owned the dog. I leave it
to you.




Telling Mrs Baker.


Most Bushmen who hadn’t ‘known Bob Baker to speak to’, had ‘heard tell
of him’. He’d been a squatter, not many years before, on the Macquarie
river in New South Wales, and had made money in the good seasons, and
had gone in for horse-racing and racehorse-breeding, and long trips to
Sydney, where he put up at swell hotels and went the pace. So after a
pretty severe drought, when the sheep died by thousands on his runs, Bob
Baker went under, and the bank took over his station and put a manager
in charge.

He’d been a jolly, open-handed, popular man, which means that he’d been
a selfish man as far as his wife and children were concerned, for
they had to suffer for it in the end. Such generosity is often born of
vanity, or moral cowardice, or both mixed. It’s very nice to hear the
chaps sing ‘For he’s a jolly good fellow’, but you’ve mostly got to pay
for it twice--first in company, and afterwards alone. I once heard the
chaps singing that I was a jolly good fellow, when I was leaving a place
and they were giving me a send-off. It thrilled me, and brought a warm
gush to my eyes; but, all the same, I wished I had half the money I’d
lent them, and spent on ‘em, and I wished I’d used the time I’d wasted
to be a jolly good fellow.

When I first met Bob Baker he was a boss-drover on the great
north-western route, and his wife lived at the township of Solong on
the Sydney side. He was going north to new country round by the Gulf of
Carpentaria, with a big mob of cattle, on a two years’ trip; and I and
my mate, Andy M’Culloch, engaged to go with him. We wanted to have a
look at the Gulf Country.

After we had crossed the Queensland border it seemed to me that the Boss
was too fond of going into wayside shanties and town pubs. Andy had been
with him on another trip, and he told me that the Boss was only going
this way lately. Andy knew Mrs Baker well, and seemed to think a deal of
her. ‘She’s a good little woman,’ said Andy. ‘One of the right stuff. I
worked on their station for a while when I was a nipper, and I know.
She was always a damned sight too good for the Boss, but she believed in
him. When I was coming away this time she says to me, “Look here, Andy,
I’m afraid Robert is drinking again. Now I want you to look after him
for me, as much as you can--you seem to have as much influence with him
as any one. I want you to promise me that you’ll never have a drink with
him.”

‘And I promised,’ said Andy, ‘and I’ll keep my word.’ Andy was a chap
who could keep his word, and nothing else. And, no matter how the Boss
persuaded, or sneered, or swore at him, Andy would never drink with him.

It got worse and worse: the Boss would ride on ahead and get drunk at a
shanty, and sometimes he’d be days behind us; and when he’d catch up to
us his temper would be just about as much as we could stand. At last he
went on a howling spree at Mulgatown, about a hundred and fifty miles
north of the border, and, what was worse, he got in tow with a flash
barmaid there--one of those girls who are engaged, by the publicans up
country, as baits for chequemen.

He went mad over that girl. He drew an advance cheque from the
stock-owner’s agent there, and knocked that down; then he raised some
more money somehow, and spent that--mostly on the girl.

We did all we could. Andy got him along the track for a couple of
stages, and just when we thought he was all right, he slipped us in the
night and went back.

We had two other men with us, but had the devil’s own bother on account
of the cattle. It was a mixed-up job all round. You see it was all big
runs round there, and we had to keep the bullocks moving along the route
all the time, or else get into trouble for trespass. The agent wasn’t
going to go to the expense of putting the cattle in a paddock until
the Boss sobered up; there was very little grass on the route or the
travelling-stock reserves or camps, so we had to keep travelling for
grass.

The world might wobble and all the banks go bung, but the cattle have
to go through--that’s the law of the stock-routes. So the agent wired
to the owners, and, when he got their reply, he sacked the Boss and sent
the cattle on in charge of another man. The new Boss was a drover coming
south after a trip; he had his two brothers with him, so he didn’t want
me and Andy; but, anyway, we were full up of this trip, so we arranged,
between the agent and the new Boss, to get most of the wages due to
us--the Boss had drawn some of our stuff and spent it.

We could have started on the back track at once, but, drunk or sober,
mad or sane, good or bad, it isn’t Bush religion to desert a mate in a
hole; and the Boss was a mate of ours; so we stuck to him.

We camped on the creek, outside the town, and kept him in the camp with
us as much as possible, and did all we could for him.

‘How could I face his wife if I went home without him?’ asked Andy, ‘or
any of his old mates?’

The Boss got himself turned out of the pub. where the barmaid was, and
then he’d hang round the other pubs., and get drink somehow, and fight,
and get knocked about. He was an awful object by this time, wild-eyed
and gaunt, and he hadn’t washed or shaved for days.

Andy got the constable in charge of the police station to lock him up
for a night, but it only made him worse: we took him back to the camp
next morning and while our eyes were off him for a few minutes he
slipped away into the scrub, stripped himself naked, and started to hang
himself to a leaning tree with a piece of clothes-line rope. We got to
him just in time.

Then Andy wired to the Boss’s brother Ned, who was fighting the drought,
the rabbit-pest, and the banks, on a small station back on the border.
Andy reckoned it was about time to do something.

Perhaps the Boss hadn’t been quite right in his head before he started
drinking--he had acted queer some time, now we came to think of
it; maybe he’d got a touch of sunstroke or got brooding over his
troubles--anyway he died in the horrors within the week.

His brother Ned turned up on the last day, and Bob thought he was the
devil, and grappled with him. It took the three of us to hold the Boss
down sometimes.

Sometimes, towards the end, he’d be sensible for a few minutes and talk
about his ‘poor wife and children’; and immediately afterwards he’d
fall a-cursing me, and Andy, and Ned, and calling us devils. He cursed
everything; he cursed his wife and children, and yelled that they were
dragging him down to hell. He died raving mad. It was the worst case of
death in the horrors of drink that I ever saw or heard of in the Bush.

Ned saw to the funeral: it was very hot weather, and men have to be
buried quick who die out there in the hot weather--especially men who
die in the state the Boss was in. Then Ned went to the public-house
where the barmaid was and called the landlord out. It was a desperate
fight: the publican was a big man, and a bit of a fighting man; but
Ned was one of those quiet, simple-minded chaps who will carry a thing
through to death when they make up their minds. He gave that publican
nearly as good a thrashing as he deserved. The constable in charge of
the station backed Ned, while another policeman picked up the publican.
Sounds queer to you city people, doesn’t it?

Next morning we three started south. We stayed a couple of days at
Ned Baker’s station on the border, and then started on our
three-hundred-mile ride down-country. The weather was still very hot, so
we decided to travel at night for a while, and left Ned’s place at dusk.
He parted from us at the homestead gate. He gave Andy a small packet,
done up in canvas, for Mrs Baker, which Andy told me contained Bob’s
pocket-book, letters, and papers. We looked back, after we’d gone a
piece along the dusty road, and saw Ned still standing by the gate; and
a very lonely figure he looked. Ned was a bachelor. ‘Poor old Ned,’ said
Andy to me. ‘He was in love with Mrs Bob Baker before she got married,
but she picked the wrong man--girls mostly do. Ned and Bob were together
on the Macquarie, but Ned left when his brother married, and he’s been
up in these God-forsaken scrubs ever since. Look, I want to tell you
something, Jack: Ned has written to Mrs Bob to tell her that Bob died of
fever, and everything was done for him that could be done, and that he
died easy--and all that sort of thing. Ned sent her some money, and she
is to think that it was the money due to Bob when he died. Now I’ll have
to go and see her when we get to Solong; there’s no getting out of it,
I’ll have to face her--and you’ll have to come with me.’

‘Damned if I will!’ I said.

‘But you’ll have to,’ said Andy. ‘You’ll have to stick to me; you’re
surely not crawler enough to desert a mate in a case like this? I’ll
have to lie like hell--I’ll have to lie as I never lied to a woman
before; and you’ll have to back me and corroborate every lie.’

I’d never seen Andy show so much emotion.

‘There’s plenty of time to fix up a good yarn,’ said Andy. He said no
more about Mrs Baker, and we only mentioned the Boss’s name casually,
until we were within about a day’s ride of Solong; then Andy told me the
yarn he’d made up about the Boss’s death.

‘And I want you to listen, Jack,’ he said, ‘and remember every word--and
if you can fix up a better yarn you can tell me afterwards. Now it
was like this: the Boss wasn’t too well when he crossed the border. He
complained of pains in his back and head and a stinging pain in the back
of his neck, and he had dysentery bad,--but that doesn’t matter; it’s
lucky I ain’t supposed to tell a woman all the symptoms. The Boss stuck
to the job as long as he could, but we managed the cattle and made it as
easy as we could for him. He’d just take it easy, and ride on from camp
to camp, and rest. One night I rode to a town off the route (or you did,
if you like) and got some medicine for him; that made him better for a
while, but at last, a day or two this side of Mulgatown, he had to give
up. A squatter there drove him into town in his buggy and put him up
at the best hotel. The publican knew the Boss and did all he could for
him--put him in the best room and wired for another doctor. We wired for
Ned as soon as we saw how bad the Boss was, and Ned rode night and day
and got there three days before the Boss died. The Boss was a bit off
his head some of the time with the fever, but was calm and quiet towards
the end and died easy. He talked a lot about his wife and children, and
told us to tell the wife not to fret but to cheer up for the children’s
sake. How does that sound?’

I’d been thinking while I listened, and an idea struck me.

‘Why not let her know the truth?’ I asked. ‘She’s sure to hear of
it sooner or later; and if she knew he was only a selfish, drunken
blackguard she might get over it all the sooner.’

‘You don’t know women, Jack,’ said Andy quietly. ‘And, anyway, even if
she is a sensible woman, we’ve got a dead mate to consider as well as a
living woman.’

‘But she’s sure to hear the truth sooner or later,’ I said, ‘the Boss
was so well known.’

‘And that’s just the reason why the truth might be kept from her,’ said
Andy. ‘If he wasn’t well known--and nobody could help liking him, after
all, when he was straight--if he wasn’t so well known the truth might
leak out unawares. She won’t know if I can help it, or at least not yet
a while. If I see any chaps that come from the North I’ll put them up
to it. I’ll tell M’Grath, the publican at Solong, too: he’s a straight
man--he’ll keep his ears open and warn chaps. One of Mrs Baker’s sisters
is staying with her, and I’ll give her a hint so that she can warn off
any women that might get hold of a yarn. Besides, Mrs Baker is sure to
go and live in Sydney, where all her people are--she was a Sydney girl;
and she’s not likely to meet any one there that will tell her the truth.
I can tell her that it was the last wish of the Boss that she should
shift to Sydney.’

We smoked and thought a while, and by-and-by Andy had what he called a
‘happy thought’. He went to his saddle-bags and got out the small canvas
packet that Ned had given him: it was sewn up with packing-thread, and
Andy ripped it open with his pocket-knife.

‘What are you doing, Andy?’ I asked.

‘Ned’s an innocent old fool, as far as sin is concerned,’ said Andy. ‘I
guess he hasn’t looked through the Boss’s letters, and I’m just going to
see that there’s nothing here that will make liars of us.’

He looked through the letters and papers by the light of the fire. There
were some letters from Mrs Baker to her husband, also a portrait of her
and the children; these Andy put aside. But there were other letters
from barmaids and women who were not fit to be seen in the same street
with the Boss’s wife; and there were portraits--one or two flash ones.
There were two letters from other men’s wives too.

‘And one of those men, at least, was an old mate of his!’ said Andy, in
a tone of disgust.

He threw the lot into the fire; then he went through the Boss’s
pocket-book and tore out some leaves that had notes and addresses on
them, and burnt them too. Then he sewed up the packet again and put it
away in his saddle-bag.

‘Such is life!’ said Andy, with a yawn that might have been half a sigh.

We rode into Solong early in the day, turned our horses out in a
paddock, and put up at M’Grath’s pub. until such time as we made up our
minds as to what we’d do or where we’d go. We had an idea of waiting
until the shearing season started and then making Out-Back to the big
sheds.

Neither of us was in a hurry to go and face Mrs Baker. ‘We’ll go after
dinner,’ said Andy at first; then after dinner we had a drink, and felt
sleepy--we weren’t used to big dinners of roast-beef and vegetables and
pudding, and, besides, it was drowsy weather--so we decided to have a
snooze and then go. When we woke up it was late in the afternoon, so we
thought we’d put it off till after tea. ‘It wouldn’t be manners to walk
in while they’re at tea,’ said Andy--‘it would look as if we only came
for some grub.’

But while we were at tea a little girl came with a message that Mrs
Baker wanted to see us, and would be very much obliged if we’d call
up as soon as possible. You see, in those small towns you can’t move
without the thing getting round inside of half an hour.

‘We’ll have to face the music now!’ said Andy, ‘and no get out of it.’
He seemed to hang back more than I did. There was another pub. opposite
where Mrs Baker lived, and when we got up the street a bit I said to
Andy--

‘Suppose we go and have another drink first, Andy? We might be kept in
there an hour or two.’

‘You don’t want another drink,’ said Andy, rather short. ‘Why, you seem
to be going the same way as the Boss!’ But it was Andy that edged off
towards the pub. when we got near Mrs Baker’s place. ‘All right!’ he
said. ‘Come on! We’ll have this other drink, since you want it so bad.’

We had the drink, then we buttoned up our coats and started across the
road--we’d bought new shirts and collars, and spruced up a bit. Half-way
across Andy grabbed my arm and asked--

‘How do you feel now, Jack?’

‘Oh, I’M all right,’ I said.

‘For God’s sake!’ said Andy, ‘don’t put your foot in it and make a mess
of it.’

‘I won’t, if you don’t.’

Mrs Baker’s cottage was a little weather-board box affair back in a
garden. When we went in through the gate Andy gripped my arm again and
whispered--

‘For God’s sake stick to me now, Jack!’

‘I’ll stick all right,’ I said--‘you’ve been having too much beer,
Andy.’

I had seen Mrs Baker before, and remembered her as a cheerful, contented
sort of woman, bustling about the house and getting the Boss’s shirts
and things ready when we started North. Just the sort of woman that is
contented with housework and the children, and with nothing particular
about her in the way of brains. But now she sat by the fire looking like
the ghost of herself. I wouldn’t have recognised her at first. I never
saw such a change in a woman, and it came like a shock to me.

Her sister let us in, and after a first glance at Mrs Baker I had eyes
for the sister and no one else. She was a Sydney girl, about twenty-four
or twenty-five, and fresh and fair--not like the sun-browned women we
were used to see. She was a pretty, bright-eyed girl, and seemed quick
to understand, and very sympathetic. She had been educated, Andy had
told me, and wrote stories for the Sydney ‘Bulletin’ and other Sydney
papers. She had her hair done and was dressed in the city style, and
that took us back a bit at first.

‘It’s very good of you to come,’ said Mrs Baker in a weak, weary voice,
when we first went in. ‘I heard you were in town.’

‘We were just coming when we got your message,’ said Andy. ‘We’d have
come before, only we had to see to the horses.’

‘It’s very kind of you, I’m sure,’ said Mrs Baker.

They wanted us to have tea, but we said we’d just had it. Then Miss
Standish (the sister) wanted us to have tea and cake; but we didn’t feel
as if we could handle cups and saucers and pieces of cake successfully
just then.

There was something the matter with one of the children in a back-room,
and the sister went to see to it. Mrs Baker cried a little quietly.

‘You mustn’t mind me,’ she said. ‘I’ll be all right presently, and then
I want you to tell me all about poor Bob. It’s seeing you, that saw the
last of him, that set me off.’

Andy and I sat stiff and straight, on two chairs against the wall,
and held our hats tight, and stared at a picture of Wellington meeting
Blucher on the opposite wall. I thought it was lucky that that picture
was there.

The child was calling ‘mumma’, and Mrs Baker went in to it, and her
sister came out. ‘Best tell her all about it and get it over,’ she
whispered to Andy. ‘She’ll never be content until she hears all about
poor Bob from some one who was with him when he died. Let me take your
hats. Make yourselves comfortable.’

She took the hats and put them on the sewing-machine. I wished she’d let
us keep them, for now we had nothing to hold on to, and nothing to do
with our hands; and as for being comfortable, we were just about as
comfortable as two cats on wet bricks.

When Mrs Baker came into the room she brought little Bobby Baker, about
four years old; he wanted to see Andy. He ran to Andy at once, and Andy
took him up on his knee. He was a pretty child, but he reminded me too
much of his father.

‘I’m so glad you’ve come, Andy!’ said Bobby.

‘Are you, Bobby?’

‘Yes. I wants to ask you about daddy. You saw him go away, didn’t you?’
and he fixed his great wondering eyes on Andy’s face.

‘Yes,’ said Andy.

‘He went up among the stars, didn’t he?’

‘Yes,’ said Andy.

‘And he isn’t coming back to Bobby any more?’

‘No,’ said Andy. ‘But Bobby’s going to him by-and-by.’

Mrs Baker had been leaning back in her chair, resting her head on her
hand, tears glistening in her eyes; now she began to sob, and her sister
took her out of the room.

Andy looked miserable. ‘I wish to God I was off this job!’ he whispered
to me.

‘Is that the girl that writes the stories?’ I asked.

‘Yes,’ he said, staring at me in a hopeless sort of way, ‘and poems
too.’

‘Is Bobby going up among the stars?’ asked Bobby.

‘Yes,’ said Andy--‘if Bobby’s good.’

‘And auntie?’

‘Yes.’

‘And mumma?’

‘Yes.’

‘Are you going, Andy?’

‘Yes,’ said Andy hopelessly.

‘Did you see daddy go up amongst the stars, Andy?’

‘Yes,’ said Andy, ‘I saw him go up.’

‘And he isn’t coming down again any more?’

‘No,’ said Andy.

‘Why isn’t he?’

‘Because he’s going to wait up there for you and mumma, Bobby.’

There was a long pause, and then Bobby asked--

‘Are you going to give me a shilling, Andy?’ with the same expression of
innocent wonder in his eyes.

Andy slipped half-a-crown into his hand. ‘Auntie’ came in and told him
he’d see Andy in the morning and took him away to bed, after he’d kissed
us both solemnly; and presently she and Mrs Baker settled down to hear
Andy’s story.

‘Brace up now, Jack, and keep your wits about you,’ whispered Andy to me
just before they came in.

‘Poor Bob’s brother Ned wrote to me,’ said Mrs Baker, ‘but he scarcely
told me anything. Ned’s a good fellow, but he’s very simple, and never
thinks of anything.’

Andy told her about the Boss not being well after he crossed the border.

‘I knew he was not well,’ said Mrs Baker, ‘before he left. I didn’t want
him to go. I tried hard to persuade him not to go this trip. I had a
feeling that I oughtn’t to let him go. But he’d never think of anything
but me and the children. He promised he’d give up droving after this
trip, and get something to do near home. The life was too much for
him--riding in all weathers and camping out in the rain, and living like
a dog. But he was never content at home. It was all for the sake of me
and the children. He wanted to make money and start on a station again.
I shouldn’t have let him go. He only thought of me and the children! Oh!
my poor, dear, kind, dead husband!’ She broke down again and sobbed, and
her sister comforted her, while Andy and I stared at Wellington meeting
Blucher on the field of Waterloo. I thought the artist had heaped up the
dead a bit extra, and I thought that I wouldn’t like to be trod on by
horses, even if I was dead.

‘Don’t you mind,’ said Miss Standish, ‘she’ll be all right presently,’
and she handed us the ‘Illustrated Sydney Journal’. This was a great
relief,--we bumped our heads over the pictures.

Mrs Baker made Andy go on again, and he told her how the Boss broke down
near Mulgatown. Mrs Baker was opposite him and Miss Standish opposite
me. Both of them kept their eyes on Andy’s face: he sat, with his hair
straight up like a brush as usual, and kept his big innocent grey eyes
fixed on Mrs Baker’s face all the time he was speaking. I watched Miss
Standish. I thought she was the prettiest girl I’d ever seen; it was a
bad case of love at first sight, but she was far and away above me, and
the case was hopeless. I began to feel pretty miserable, and to think
back into the past: I just heard Andy droning away by my side.

‘So we fixed him up comfortable in the waggonette with the blankets
and coats and things,’ Andy was saying, ‘and the squatter started into
Mulgatown.... It was about thirty miles, Jack, wasn’t it?’ he asked,
turning suddenly to me. He always looked so innocent that there were
times when I itched to knock him down.

‘More like thirty-five,’ I said, waking up.

Miss Standish fixed her eyes on me, and I had another look at Wellington
and Blucher.

‘They were all very good and kind to the Boss,’ said Andy. ‘They thought
a lot of him up there. Everybody was fond of him.’

‘I know it,’ said Mrs Baker. ‘Nobody could help liking him. He was one
of the kindest men that ever lived.’

‘Tanner, the publican, couldn’t have been kinder to his own brother,’
said Andy. ‘The local doctor was a decent chap, but he was only a young
fellow, and Tanner hadn’t much faith in him, so he wired for an older
doctor at Mackintyre, and he even sent out fresh horses to meet the
doctor’s buggy. Everything was done that could be done, I assure you,
Mrs Baker.’

‘I believe it,’ said Mrs Baker. ‘And you don’t know how it relieves me
to hear it. And did the publican do all this at his own expense?’

‘He wouldn’t take a penny, Mrs Baker.’

‘He must have been a good true man. I wish I could thank him.’

‘Oh, Ned thanked him for you,’ said Andy, though without meaning more
than he said.

‘I wouldn’t have fancied that Ned would have thought of that,’ said Mrs
Baker. ‘When I first heard of my poor husband’s death, I thought perhaps
he’d been drinking again--that worried me a bit.’

‘He never touched a drop after he left Solong, I can assure you, Mrs
Baker,’ said Andy quickly.

Now I noticed that Miss Standish seemed surprised or puzzled, once or
twice, while Andy was speaking, and leaned forward to listen to him;
then she leaned back in her chair and clasped her hands behind her head
and looked at him, with half-shut eyes, in a way I didn’t like. Once or
twice she looked at me as if she was going to ask me a question, but I
always looked away quick and stared at Blucher and Wellington, or into
the empty fireplace, till I felt that her eyes were off me. Then she
asked Andy a question or two, in all innocence I believe now, but it
scared him, and at last he watched his chance and winked at her sharp.
Then she gave a little gasp and shut up like a steel trap.

The sick child in the bedroom coughed and cried again. Mrs Baker went
to it. We three sat like a deaf-and-dumb institution, Andy and I staring
all over the place: presently Miss Standish excused herself, and went
out of the room after her sister. She looked hard at Andy as she left
the room, but he kept his eyes away.

‘Brace up now, Jack,’ whispered Andy to me, ‘the worst is coming.’

When they came in again Mrs Baker made Andy go on with his story.

‘He--he died very quietly,’ said Andy, hitching round, and resting his
elbows on his knees, and looking into the fireplace so as to have his
face away from the light. Miss Standish put her arm round her sister.
‘He died very easy,’ said Andy. ‘He was a bit off his head at times, but
that was while the fever was on him. He didn’t suffer much towards the
end--I don’t think he suffered at all.... He talked a lot about you and
the children.’ (Andy was speaking very softly now.) ‘He said that you
were not to fret, but to cheer up for the children’s sake.... It was the
biggest funeral ever seen round there.’

Mrs Baker was crying softly. Andy got the packet half out of his pocket,
but shoved it back again.

‘The only thing that hurts me now,’ says Mrs Baker presently, ‘is to
think of my poor husband buried out there in the lonely Bush, so far
from home. It’s--cruel!’ and she was sobbing again.

‘Oh, that’s all right, Mrs Baker,’ said Andy, losing his head a little.
‘Ned will see to that. Ned is going to arrange to have him brought down
and buried in Sydney.’ Which was about the first thing Andy had told her
that evening that wasn’t a lie. Ned had said he would do it as soon as
he sold his wool.

‘It’s very kind indeed of Ned,’ sobbed Mrs Baker. ‘I’d never have
dreamed he was so kind-hearted and thoughtful. I misjudged him all
along. And that is all you have to tell me about poor Robert?’

‘Yes,’ said Andy--then one of his ‘happy thoughts’ struck him. ‘Except
that he hoped you’d shift to Sydney, Mrs Baker, where you’ve got friends
and relations. He thought it would be better for you and the children.
He told me to tell you that.’

‘He was thoughtful up to the end,’ said Mrs Baker. ‘It was just like
poor Robert--always thinking of me and the children. We are going to
Sydney next week.’

Andy looked relieved. We talked a little more, and Miss Standish wanted
to make coffee for us, but we had to go and see to our horses. We got up
and bumped against each other, and got each other’s hats, and promised
Mrs Baker we’d come again.

‘Thank you very much for coming,’ she said, shaking hands with us. ‘I
feel much better now. You don’t know how much you have relieved me. Now,
mind, you have promised to come and see me again for the last time.’

Andy caught her sister’s eye and jerked his head towards the door to let
her know he wanted to speak to her outside.

‘Good-bye, Mrs Baker,’ he said, holding on to her hand. ‘And don’t you
fret. You’ve--you’ve got the children yet. It’s--it’s all for the best;
and, besides, the Boss said you wasn’t to fret.’ And he blundered out
after me and Miss Standish.

She came out to the gate with us, and Andy gave her the packet.

‘I want you to give that to her,’ he said; ‘it’s his letters and papers.
I hadn’t the heart to give it to her, somehow.’

‘Tell me, Mr M’Culloch,’ she said. ‘You’ve kept something back--you
haven’t told her the truth. It would be better and safer for me to know.
Was it an accident--or the drink?’

‘It was the drink,’ said Andy. ‘I was going to tell you--I thought it
would be best to tell you. I had made up my mind to do it, but, somehow,
I couldn’t have done it if you hadn’t asked me.’

‘Tell me all,’ she said. ‘It would be better for me to know.’

‘Come a little farther away from the house,’ said Andy. She came along
the fence a piece with us, and Andy told her as much of the truth as he
could.

‘I’ll hurry her off to Sydney,’ she said. ‘We can get away this week as
well as next.’ Then she stood for a minute before us, breathing quickly,
her hands behind her back and her eyes shining in the moonlight. She
looked splendid.

‘I want to thank you for her sake,’ she said quickly. ‘You are good men!
I like the Bushmen! They are grand men--they are noble! I’ll probably
never see either of you again, so it doesn’t matter,’ and she put her
white hand on Andy’s shoulder and kissed him fair and square on the
mouth. ‘And you, too!’ she said to me. I was taller than Andy, and had
to stoop. ‘Good-bye!’ she said, and ran to the gate and in, waving her
hand to us. We lifted our hats again and turned down the road.

I don’t think it did either of us any harm.




A Hero in Dingo-Scrubs.


This is a story--about the only one--of Job Falconer, Boss of the
Talbragar sheep-station up country in New South Wales in the early
Eighties--when there were still runs in the Dingo-Scrubs out of the
hands of the banks, and yet squatters who lived on their stations.

Job would never tell the story himself, at least not complete, and as
his family grew up he would become as angry as it was in his easy-going
nature to become if reference were made to the incident in his presence.
But his wife--little, plump, bright-eyed Gerty Falconer--often told the
story (in the mysterious voice which women use in speaking of private
matters amongst themselves--but with brightening eyes) to women friends
over tea; and always to a new woman friend. And on such occasions she
would be particularly tender towards the unconscious Job, and ruffle his
thin, sandy hair in a way that embarrassed him in company--made him look
as sheepish as an old big-horned ram that has just been shorn and turned
amongst the ewes. And the woman friend on parting would give Job’s hand
a squeeze which would surprise him mildly, and look at him as if she
could love him.

According to a theory of mine, Job, to fit the story, should have been
tall, and dark, and stern, or gloomy and quick-tempered. But he wasn’t.
He was fairly tall, but he was fresh-complexioned and sandy (his skin
was pink to scarlet in some weathers, with blotches of umber), and his
eyes were pale-grey; his big forehead loomed babyishly, his arms were
short, and his legs bowed to the saddle. Altogether he was an awkward,
unlovely Bush bird--on foot; in the saddle it was different. He hadn’t
even a ‘temper’.

The impression on Job’s mind which many years afterwards brought about
the incident was strong enough. When Job was a boy of fourteen he saw
his father’s horse come home riderless--circling and snorting up by the
stockyard, head jerked down whenever the hoof trod on one of the snapped
ends of the bridle-reins, and saddle twisted over the side with bruised
pommel and knee-pad broken off.

Job’s father wasn’t hurt much, but Job’s mother, an emotional woman, and
then in a delicate state of health, survived the shock for three months
only. ‘She wasn’t quite right in her head,’ they said, ‘from the day
the horse came home till the last hour before she died.’ And, strange to
say, Job’s father (from whom Job inherited his seemingly placid nature)
died three months later. The doctor from the town was of the opinion
that he must have ‘sustained internal injuries’ when the horse threw
him. ‘Doc. Wild’ (eccentric Bush doctor) reckoned that Job’s father was
hurt inside when his wife died, and hurt so badly that he couldn’t pull
round. But doctors differ all over the world.


Well, the story of Job himself came about in this way. He had been
married a year, and had lately started wool-raising on a pastoral lease
he had taken up at Talbragar: it was a new run, with new slab-and-bark
huts on the creek for a homestead, new shearing-shed, yards--wife and
everything new, and he was expecting a baby. Job felt brand-new himself
at the time, so he said. It was a lonely place for a young woman;
but Gerty was a settler’s daughter. The newness took away some of the
loneliness, she said, and there was truth in that: a Bush home in the
scrubs looks lonelier the older it gets, and ghostlier in the twilight,
as the bark and slabs whiten, or rather grow grey, in fierce summers.
And there’s nothing under God’s sky so weird, so aggressively lonely, as
a deserted old home in the Bush.

Job’s wife had a half-caste gin for company when Job was away on the
run, and the nearest white woman (a hard but honest Lancashire woman
from within the kicking radius in Lancashire--wife of a selector) was
only seven miles away. She promised to be on hand, and came over two or
three times a-week; but Job grew restless as Gerty’s time drew near, and
wished that he had insisted on sending her to the nearest town (thirty
miles away), as originally proposed. Gerty’s mother, who lived in town,
was coming to see her over her trouble; Job had made arrangements with
the town doctor, but prompt attendance could hardly be expected of a
doctor who was very busy, who was too fat to ride, and who lived thirty
miles away.

Job, in common with most Bushmen and their families round there, had
more faith in Doc. Wild, a weird Yankee who made medicine in a saucepan,
and worked more cures on Bushmen than did the other three doctors of
the district together--maybe because the Bushmen had faith in him, or
he knew the Bush and Bush constitutions--or, perhaps, because he’d do
things which no ‘respectable practitioner’ dared do. I’ve described him
in another story. Some said he was a quack, and some said he wasn’t.
There are scores of wrecks and mysteries like him in the Bush. He drank
fearfully, and ‘on his own’, but was seldom incapable of performing an
operation. Experienced Bushmen preferred him three-quarters drunk: when
perfectly sober he was apt to be a bit shaky. He was tall, gaunt, had
a pointed black moustache, bushy eyebrows, and piercing black eyes. His
movements were eccentric. He lived where he happened to be--in a town
hotel, in the best room of a homestead, in the skillion of a sly-grog
shanty, in a shearer’s, digger’s, shepherd’s, or boundary-rider’s hut;
in a surveyor’s camp or a black-fellows’ camp--or, when the horrors were
on him, by a log in the lonely Bush. It seemed all one to him. He lost
all his things sometimes--even his clothes; but he never lost a pigskin
bag which contained his surgical instruments and papers. Except once;
then he gave the blacks 5 Pounds to find it for him.

His patients included all, from the big squatter to Black Jimmy; and he
rode as far and fast to a squatter’s home as to a swagman’s camp. When
nothing was to be expected from a poor selector or a station hand, and
the doctor was hard up, he went to the squatter for a few pounds. He
had on occasions been offered cheques of 50 Pounds and 100 Pounds by
squatters for ‘pulling round’ their wives or children; but such offers
always angered him. When he asked for 5 Pounds he resented being offered
a 10 Pound cheque. He once sued a doctor for alleging that he held no
diploma; but the magistrate, on reading certain papers, suggested a
settlement out of court, which both doctors agreed to--the other doctor
apologising briefly in the local paper. It was noticed thereafter
that the magistrate and town doctors treated Doc. Wild with great
respect--even at his worst. The thing was never explained, and the case
deepened the mystery which surrounded Doc. Wild.

As Job Falconer’s crisis approached Doc. Wild was located at a shanty
on the main road, about half-way between Job’s station and the town.
(Township of Come-by-Chance--expressive name; and the shanty was the
‘Dead Dingo Hotel’, kept by James Myles--known as ‘Poisonous Jimmy’,
perhaps as a compliment to, or a libel on, the liquor he sold.) Job’s
brother Mac. was stationed at the Dead Dingo Hotel with instructions
to hang round on some pretence, see that the doctor didn’t either drink
himself into the ‘D.T.’s’ or get sober enough to become restless; to
prevent his going away, or to follow him if he did; and to bring him
to the station in about a week’s time. Mac. (rather more careless,
brighter, and more energetic than his brother) was carrying out these
instructions while pretending, with rather great success, to be himself
on the spree at the shanty.

But one morning, early in the specified week, Job’s uneasiness was
suddenly greatly increased by certain symptoms, so he sent the black boy
for the neighbour’s wife and decided to ride to Come-by-Chance to hurry
out Gerty’s mother, and see, by the way, how Doc. Wild and Mac. were
getting on. On the arrival of the neighbour’s wife, who drove over in a
spring-cart, Job mounted his horse (a freshly broken filly) and started.

‘Don’t be anxious, Job,’ said Gerty, as he bent down to kiss her. ‘We’ll
be all right. Wait! you’d better take the gun--you might see those
dingoes again. I’ll get it for you.’

The dingoes (native dogs) were very bad amongst the sheep; and Job and
Gerty had started three together close to the track the last time they
were out in company--without the gun, of course. Gerty took the loaded
gun carefully down from its straps on the bedroom wall, carried it out,
and handed it up to Job, who bent and kissed her again and then rode
off.

It was a hot day--the beginning of a long drought, as Job found to his
bitter cost. He followed the track for five or six miles through the
thick, monotonous scrub, and then turned off to make a short cut to the
main road across a big ring-barked flat. The tall gum-trees had been
ring-barked (a ring of bark taken out round the butts), or rather
‘sapped’--that is, a ring cut in through the sap--in order to kill them,
so that the little strength in the ‘poor’ soil should not be drawn out
by the living roots, and the natural grass (on which Australian stock
depends) should have a better show. The hard, dead trees raised their
barkless and whitened trunks and leafless branches for three or four
miles, and the grey and brown grass stood tall between, dying in the
first breaths of the coming drought. All was becoming grey and ashen
here, the heat blazing and dancing across objects, and the pale brassy
dome of the sky cloudless over all, the sun a glaring white disc with
its edges almost melting into the sky. Job held his gun carelessly ready
(it was a double-barrelled muzzle-loader, one barrel choke-bore for
shot, and the other rifled), and he kept an eye out for dingoes. He was
saving his horse for a long ride, jogging along in the careless Bush
fashion, hitched a little to one side--and I’m not sure that he didn’t
have a leg thrown up and across in front of the pommel of the saddle--he
was riding along in the careless Bush fashion, and thinking
fatherly thoughts in advance, perhaps, when suddenly a great black,
greasy-looking iguana scuttled off from the side of the track amongst
the dry tufts of grass and shreds of dead bark, and started up a
sapling. ‘It was a whopper,’ Job said afterwards; ‘must have been over
six feet, and a foot across the body. It scared me nearly as much as the
filly.’

The filly shied off like a rocket. Job kept his seat instinctively,
as was natural to him; but before he could more than grab at the
rein--lying loosely on the pommel--the filly ‘fetched up’ against a dead
box-tree, hard as cast-iron, and Job’s left leg was jammed from stirrup
to pocket. ‘I felt the blood flare up,’ he said, ‘and I knowed that
that’--(Job swore now and then in an easy-going way)--‘I knowed that
that blanky leg was broken alright. I threw the gun from me and freed
my left foot from the stirrup with my hand, and managed to fall to the
right, as the filly started off again.’

What follows comes from the statements of Doc. Wild and Mac. Falconer,
and Job’s own ‘wanderings in his mind’, as he called them. ‘They took
a blanky mean advantage of me,’ he said, ‘when they had me down and I
couldn’t talk sense.’

The filly circled off a bit, and then stood staring--as a mob of
brumbies, when fired at, will sometimes stand watching the smoke. Job’s
leg was smashed badly, and the pain must have been terrible. But he
thought then with a flash, as men do in a fix. No doubt the scene at
the lonely Bush home of his boyhood started up before him: his father’s
horse appeared riderless, and he saw the look in his mother’s eyes.

Now a Bushman’s first, best, and quickest chance in a fix like this is
that his horse go home riderless, the home be alarmed, and the horse’s
tracks followed back to him; otherwise he might lie there for days, for
weeks--till the growing grass buries his mouldering bones. Job was on an
old sheep-track across a flat where few might have occasion to come for
months, but he did not consider this. He crawled to his gun, then to a
log, dragging gun and smashed leg after him. How he did it he doesn’t
know. Half-lying on one side, he rested the barrel on the log, took aim
at the filly, pulled both triggers, and then fell over and lay with his
head against the log; and the gun-barrel, sliding down, rested on his
neck. He had fainted. The crows were interested, and the ants would come
by-and-by.


Now Doc. Wild had inspirations; anyway, he did things which seemed,
after they were done, to have been suggested by inspiration and in no
other possible way. He often turned up where and when he was wanted
above all men, and at no other time. He had gipsy blood, they said; but,
anyway, being the mystery he was, and having the face he had, and living
the life he lived--and doing the things he did--it was quite probable
that he was more nearly in touch than we with that awful invisible world
all round and between us, of which we only see distorted faces and hear
disjointed utterances when we are ‘suffering a recovery’--or going mad.

On the morning of Job’s accident, and after a long brooding silence,
Doc. Wild suddenly said to Mac. Falconer--

‘Git the hosses, Mac. We’ll go to the station.’

Mac., used to the doctor’s eccentricities, went to see about the horses.

And then who should drive up but Mrs Spencer--Job’s mother-in-law--on
her way from the town to the station. She stayed to have a cup of tea
and give her horses a feed. She was square-faced, and considered a
rather hard and practical woman, but she had plenty of solid flesh, good
sympathetic common-sense, and deep-set humorous blue eyes. She lived
in the town comfortably on the interest of some money which her husband
left in the bank. She drove an American waggonette with a good width
and length of ‘tray’ behind, and on this occasion she had a pole and two
horses. In the trap were a new flock mattress and pillows, a generous
pair of new white blankets, and boxes containing necessaries,
delicacies, and luxuries. All round she was an excellent mother-in-law
for a man to have on hand at a critical time.

And, speaking of mother-in-law, I would like to put in a word for her
right here. She is universally considered a nuisance in times of peace
and comfort; but when illness or serious trouble comes home! Then it’s
‘Write to Mother! Wire for Mother! Send some one to fetch Mother! I’ll
go and bring Mother!’ and if she is not near: ‘Oh, I wish Mother were
here! If Mother were only near!’ And when she is on the spot, the
anxious son-in-law: ‘Don’t YOU go, Mother! You’ll stay, won’t you,
Mother?--till we’re all right? I’ll get some one to look after your
house, Mother, while you’re here.’ But Job Falconer was fond of his
mother-in-law, all times.

Mac. had some trouble in finding and catching one of the horses. Mrs
Spencer drove on, and Mac. and the doctor caught up to her about a mile
before she reached the homestead track, which turned in through the
scrubs at the corner of the big ring-barked flat.

Doc. Wild and Mac. followed the cart-road, and as they jogged along in
the edge of the scrub the doctor glanced once or twice across the flat
through the dead, naked branches. Mac. looked that way. The crows were
hopping about the branches of a tree way out in the middle of the flat,
flopping down from branch to branch to the grass, then rising hurriedly
and circling.

‘Dead beast there!’ said Mac. out of his Bushcraft.

‘No--dying,’ said Doc. Wild, with less Bush experience but more
intellect.

‘There’s some steers of Job’s out there somewhere,’ muttered Mac. Then
suddenly, ‘It ain’t drought--it’s the ploorer at last! or I’m blanked!’

Mac. feared the advent of that cattle-plague, pleuro-pneumonia, which
was raging on some other stations, but had been hitherto kept clear of
Job’s run.

‘We’ll go and see, if you like,’ suggested Doc. Wild.

They turned out across the flat, the horses picking their way amongst
the dried tufts and fallen branches.

‘Theer ain’t no sign o’ cattle theer,’ said the doctor; ‘more likely a
ewe in trouble about her lamb.’

‘Oh, the blanky dingoes at the sheep,’ said Mac. ‘I wish we had a
gun--might get a shot at them.’

Doc. Wild hitched the skirt of a long China silk coat he wore, free of
a hip-pocket. He always carried a revolver. ‘In case I feel obliged to
shoot a first person singular one of these hot days,’ he explained once,
whereat Bushmen scratched the backs of their heads and thought feebly,
without result.

‘We’d never git near enough for a shot,’ said the doctor; then he
commenced to hum fragments from a Bush song about the finding of a lost
Bushman in the last stages of death by thirst,--

   ‘“The crows kept flyin’ up, boys!
       The crows kept flyin’ up!
    The dog, he seen and whimpered, boys,
       Though he was but a pup.”’

‘It must be something or other,’ muttered Mac. ‘Look at them blanky
crows!’

    ‘“The lost was found, we brought him round,
       And took him from the place,
    While the ants was swarmin’ on the ground,
       And the crows was sayin’ grace!”’

‘My God! what’s that?’ cried Mac., who was a little in advance and rode
a tall horse.

It was Job’s filly, lying saddled and bridled, with a rifle-bullet (as
they found on subsequent examination) through shoulders and chest, and
her head full of kangaroo-shot. She was feebly rocking her head against
the ground, and marking the dust with her hoof, as if trying to write
the reason of it there.

The doctor drew his revolver, took a cartridge from his waistcoat
pocket, and put the filly out of her misery in a very scientific manner;
then something--professional instinct or the something supernatural
about the doctor--led him straight to the log, hidden in the grass,
where Job lay as we left him, and about fifty yards from the dead filly,
which must have staggered off some little way after being shot. Mac.
followed the doctor, shaking violently.

‘Oh, my God!’ he cried, with the woman in his voice--and his face so
pale that his freckles stood out like buttons, as Doc. Wild said--‘oh,
my God! he’s shot himself!’

‘No, he hasn’t,’ said the doctor, deftly turning Job into a healthier
position with his head from under the log and his mouth to the air: then
he ran his eyes and hands over him, and Job moaned. ‘He’s got a
broken leg,’ said the doctor. Even then he couldn’t resist making a
characteristic remark, half to himself: ‘A man doesn’t shoot himself
when he’s going to be made a lawful father for the first time, unless he
can see a long way into the future.’ Then he took out his whisky-flask
and said briskly to Mac., ‘Leave me your water-bag’ (Mac. carried a
canvas water-bag slung under his horse’s neck), ‘ride back to the track,
stop Mrs Spencer, and bring the waggonette here. Tell her it’s only a
broken leg.’

Mac. mounted and rode off at a break-neck pace.

As he worked the doctor muttered: ‘He shot his horse. That’s what gits
me. The fool might have lain there for a week. I’d never have suspected
spite in that carcass, and I ought to know men.’

But as Job came round a little Doc. Wild was enlightened.

‘Where’s the filly?’ cried Job suddenly between groans.

‘She’s all right,’ said the doctor.

‘Stop her!’ cried Job, struggling to rise--‘stop her!--oh God! my leg.’

‘Keep quiet, you fool!’

‘Stop her!’ yelled Job.

‘Why stop her?’ asked the doctor. ‘She won’t go fur,’ he added.

‘She’ll go home to Gerty,’ shouted Job. ‘For God’s sake stop her!’

‘O--h!’ drawled the doctor to himself. ‘I might have guessed that. And I
ought to know men.’

‘Don’t take me home!’ demanded Job in a semi-sensible interval. ‘Take me
to Poisonous Jimmy’s and tell Gerty I’m on the spree.’

When Mac. and Mrs Spencer arrived with the waggonette Doc. Wild was in
his shirt-sleeves, his Chinese silk coat having gone for bandages. The
lower half of Job’s trouser-leg and his ‘lastic-side boot lay on the
ground, neatly cut off, and his bandaged leg was sandwiched between
two strips of bark, with grass stuffed in the hollows, and bound by
saddle-straps.

‘That’s all I kin do for him for the present.’

Mrs Spencer was a strong woman mentally, but she arrived rather pale and
a little shaky: nevertheless she called out, as soon as she got within
earshot of the doctor--

‘What’s Job been doing now?’ (Job, by the way, had never been remarkable
for doing anything.)

‘He’s got his leg broke and shot his horse,’ replied the doctor. ‘But,’
he added, ‘whether he’s been a hero or a fool I dunno. Anyway, it’s a
mess all round.’

They unrolled the bed, blankets, and pillows in the bottom of the trap,
backed it against the log, to have a step, and got Job in. It was a
ticklish job, but they had to manage it: Job, maddened by pain and heat,
only kept from fainting by whisky, groaning and raving and yelling to
them to stop his horse.

‘Lucky we got him before the ants did,’ muttered the doctor. Then he had
an inspiration--

‘You bring him on to the shepherd’s hut this side the station. We must
leave him there. Drive carefully, and pour brandy into him now and then;
when the brandy’s done pour whisky, then gin--keep the rum till the
last’ (the doctor had put a supply of spirits in the waggonette at
Poisonous Jimmy’s). ‘I’ll take Mac.’s horse and ride on and send Peter’
(the station hand) ‘back to the hut to meet you. I’ll be back myself if
I can. THIS BUSINESS WILL HURRY UP THINGS AT THE STATION.’

Which last was one of those apparently insane remarks of the doctor’s
which no sane nor sober man could fathom or see a reason for--except in
Doc. Wild’s madness.

He rode off at a gallop. The burden of Job’s raving, all the way, rested
on the dead filly--

‘Stop her! She must not go home to Gerty!... God help me shoot!...
Whoa!--whoa, there!... “Cope--cope--cope”--Steady, Jessie, old girl....
Aim straight--aim straight! Aim for me, God!--I’ve missed!... Stop her!’
&c.

‘I never met a character like that,’ commented the doctor afterwards,
‘inside a man that looked like Job on the outside. I’ve met men behind
revolvers and big mustarshes in Califo’nia; but I’ve met a derned sight
more men behind nothing but a good-natured grin, here in Australia.
These lanky sawney Bushmen will do things in an easy-going way some day
that’ll make the old world sit up and think hard.’

He reached the station in time, and twenty minutes or half an hour
later he left the case in the hands of the Lancashire woman--whom he saw
reason to admire--and rode back to the hut to help Job, whom they soon
fixed up as comfortably as possible.

They humbugged Mrs Falconer first with a yarn of Job’s alleged
phenomenal shyness, and gradually, as she grew stronger, and the truth
less important, they told it to her. And so, instead of Job being
pushed, scarlet-faced, into the bedroom to see his first-born, Gerty
Falconer herself took the child down to the hut, and so presented Uncle
Job with my first and favourite cousin and Bush chum.

Doc. Wild stayed round until he saw Job comfortably moved to the
homestead, then he prepared to depart.

‘I’m sorry,’ said Job, who was still weak--‘I’m sorry for that there
filly. I was breaking her in to side-saddle for Gerty when she should
get about. I wouldn’t have lost her for twenty quid.’

‘Never mind, Job,’ said the doctor. ‘I, too, once shot an animal I was
fond of--and for the sake of a woman--but that animal walked on two legs
and wore trousers. Good-bye, Job.’

And he left for Poisonous Jimmy’s.




The Little World Left Behind.


I lately revisited a western agricultural district in Australia after
many years. The railway had reached it, but otherwise things were
drearily, hopelessly, depressingly unchanged. There was the same old
grant, comprising several thousands of acres of the richest land in the
district, lying idle still, except for a few horses allowed to run there
for a shilling a-head per week.

There were the same old selections--about as far off as ever from
becoming freeholds--shoved back among the barren ridges; dusty little
patches in the scrub, full of stones and stumps, and called farms,
deserted every few years, and tackled again by some little dried-up
family, or some old hatter, and then given best once more. There was
the cluster of farms on the flat, and in the foot of the gully, owned by
Australians of Irish or English descent, with the same number of stumps
in the wheat-paddock, the same broken fences and tumble-down huts and
yards, and the same weak, sleepy attempt made every season to scratch up
the ground and raise a crop. And along the creek the German farmers--the
only people there worthy of the name--toiling (men, women, and children)
from daylight till dark, like slaves, just as they always had done; the
elder sons stoop-shouldered old men at thirty.

The row about the boundary fence between the Sweeneys and the Joneses
was unfinished still, and the old feud between the Dunderblitzens
and the Blitzendunders was more deadly than ever--it started three
generations ago over a stray bull. The O’Dunn was still fighting for his
great object in life, which was not to be ‘onneighborly’, as he put it.
‘I DON’T want to be onneighborly,’ he said, ‘but I’ll be aven wid some
of ‘em yit. It’s almost impossible for a dacent man to live in sich a
neighborhood and not be onneighborly, thry how he will. But I’ll be aven
wid some of ‘em yit, marruk my wurrud.’

Jones’s red steer--it couldn’t have been the same red steer--was
continually breaking into Rooney’s ‘whate an’ bringin’ ivery head av
the other cattle afther him, and ruinin’ him intirely.’ The Rooneys and
M’Kenzies were at daggers drawn, even to the youngest child, over the
impounding of a horse belonging to Pat Rooney’s brother-in-law, by a
distant relation of the M’Kenzies, which had happened nine years ago.

The same sun-burned, masculine women went past to market twice a-week
in the same old carts and driving much the same quality of carrion. The
string of overloaded spring-carts, buggies, and sweating horses went
whirling into town, to ‘service’, through clouds of dust and broiling
heat, on Sunday morning, and came driving cruelly out again at noon.
The neighbours’ sons rode over in the afternoon, as of old, and hung up
their poor, ill-used little horses to bake in the sun, and sat on their
heels about the verandah, and drawled drearily concerning crops, fruit,
trees, and vines, and horses and cattle; the drought and ‘smut’ and
‘rust’ in wheat, and the ‘ploorer’ (pleuro-pneumonia) in cattle,
and other cheerful things; that there colt or filly, or that there
cattle-dog (pup or bitch) o’ mine (or ‘Jim’s’). They always talked
most of farming there, where no farming worthy of the name was
possible--except by Germans and Chinamen. Towards evening the old local
relic of the golden days dropped in and announced that he intended to
‘put down a shaft’ next week, in a spot where he’d been going to put
it down twenty years ago--and every week since. It was nearly time that
somebody sunk a hole and buried him there.

An old local body named Mrs Witherly still went into town twice a-week
with her ‘bit av prodjuce’, as O’Dunn called it. She still drove a long,
bony, blind horse in a long rickety dray, with a stout sapling for a
whip, and about twenty yards of clothes-line reins. The floor of the
dray covered part of an acre, and one wheel was always ahead of the
other--or behind, according to which shaft was pulled. She wore, to all
appearances, the same short frock, faded shawl, men’s ‘lastic sides, and
white hood that she had on when the world was made. She still stopped
just twenty minutes at old Mrs Leatherly’s on the way in for a yarn and
a cup of tea--as she had always done, on the same days and at the same
time within the memory of the hoariest local liar. However, she had a
new clothes-line bent on to the old horse’s front end--and we fancy that
was the reason she didn’t recognise us at first. She had never looked
younger than a hard hundred within the memory of man. Her shrivelled
face was the colour of leather, and crossed and recrossed with lines
till there wasn’t room for any more. But her eyes were bright yet, and
twinkled with humour at times.

She had been in the Bush for fifty years, and had fought fires,
droughts, hunger and thirst, floods, cattle and crop diseases, and all
the things that God curses Australian settlers with. She had had two
husbands, and it could be said of neither that he had ever done an
honest day’s work, or any good for himself or any one else. She had
reared something under fifteen children, her own and others; and there
was scarcely one of them that had not given her trouble. Her sons had
brought disgrace on her old head over and over again, but she held up
that same old head through it all, and looked her narrow, ignorant world
in the face--and ‘lived it down’. She had worked like a slave for fifty
years; yet she had more energy and endurance than many modern city women
in her shrivelled old body. She was a daughter of English aristocrats.

And we who live our weak lives of fifty years or so in the cities--we
grow maudlin over our sorrows (and beer), and ask whether life is worth
living or not.

I sought in the farming town relief from the general and particular
sameness of things, but there was none. The railway station was about
the only new building in town. The old signs even were as badly in need
of retouching as of old. I picked up a copy of the local ‘Advertiser’,
which newspaper had been started in the early days by a brilliant
drunkard, who drank himself to death just as the fathers of our nation
were beginning to get educated up to his style. He might have made
Australian journalism very different from what it is. There was nothing
new in the ‘Advertiser’--there had been nothing new since the last time
the drunkard had been sober enough to hold a pen. There was the same
old ‘enjoyable trip’ to Drybone (whereof the editor was the hero), and
something about an on-the-whole very enjoyable evening in some place
that was tastefully decorated, and where the visitors did justice to the
good things provided, and the small hours, and dancing, and our host and
hostess, and respected fellow-townsmen; also divers young ladies sang
very nicely, and a young Mr Somebody favoured the company with a comic
song.

There was the same trespassing on the valuable space by the old
subscriber, who said that ‘he had said before and would say again’, and
he proceeded to say the same things which he said in the same paper when
we first heard our father reading it to our mother. Farther on the old
subscriber proceeded to ‘maintain’, and recalled attention to the fact
that it was just exactly as he had said. After which he made a few
abstract, incoherent remarks about the ‘surrounding district’, and
concluded by stating that he ‘must now conclude’, and thanking the
editor for trespassing on the aforesaid valuable space.

There was the usual leader on the Government; and an agitation was still
carried on, by means of horribly-constructed correspondence to both
papers, for a bridge over Dry-Hole Creek at Dustbin--a place where no
sane man ever had occasion to go.

I took up the ‘unreliable contemporary’, but found nothing there except
a letter from ‘Parent’, another from ‘Ratepayer’, a leader on the
Government, and ‘A Trip to Limeburn’, which latter I suppose was made in
opposition to the trip to Drybone.

There was nothing new in the town. Even the almost inevitable gang of
city spoilers hadn’t arrived with the railway. They would have been
a relief. There was the monotonous aldermanic row, and the worse than
hopeless little herd of aldermen, the weird agricultural portion of whom
came in on council days in white starched and ironed coats, as we had
always remembered them. They were aggressively barren of ideas; but
on this occasion they had risen above themselves, for one of them had
remembered something his grandfather (old time English alderman) had
told him, and they were stirring up all the old local quarrels and
family spite of the district over a motion, or an amendment on a motion,
that a letter--from another enlightened body and bearing on an
equally important matter (which letter had been sent through the
post sufficiently stamped, delivered to the secretary, handed to the
chairman, read aloud in council, and passed round several times for
private perusal)--over a motion that such letter be received.

There was a maintenance case coming on--to the usual well-ventilated
disgust of the local religious crank, who was on the jury; but the case
differed in no essential point from other cases which were always coming
on and going off in my time. It was not at all romantic. The local youth
was not even brilliant in adultery.

After I had been a week in that town the Governor decided to visit
it, and preparations were made to welcome him and present him with
an address. Then I thought that it was time to go, and slipped away
unnoticed in the general lunacy.




The Never-Never Country.


    By homestead, hut, and shearing-shed,
     By railroad, coach, and track--
    By lonely graves of our brave dead,
     Up-Country and Out-Back:
    To where ‘neath glorious clustered stars
     The dreamy plains expand--
    My home lies wide a thousand miles
     In the Never-Never Land.

    It lies beyond the farming belt,
     Wide wastes of scrub and plain,
    A blazing desert in the drought,
     A lake-land after rain;
    To the sky-line sweeps the waving grass,
     Or whirls the scorching sand--
    A phantom land, a mystic land!
     The Never-Never Land.

    Where lone Mount Desolation lies,
     Mounts Dreadful and Despair--
    ‘Tis lost beneath the rainless skies
     In hopeless deserts there;
    It spreads nor’-west by No-Man’s Land--
     Where clouds are seldom seen--
    To where the cattle-stations lie
     Three hundred miles between.

    The drovers of the Great Stock Routes
     The strange Gulf country know--
    Where, travelling from the southern droughts,
     The big lean bullocks go;
    And camped by night where plains lie wide,
     Like some old ocean’s bed,
    The watchmen in the starlight ride
     Round fifteen hundred head.

    And west of named and numbered days
     The shearers walk and ride--
    Jack Cornstalk and the Ne’er-do-well,
     And the grey-beard side by side;
    They veil their eyes from moon and stars,
     And slumber on the sand--
    Sad memories sleep as years go round
     In Never-Never Land.

    By lonely huts north-west of Bourke,
     Through years of flood and drought,
    The best of English black-sheep work
     Their own salvation out:
    Wild fresh-faced boys grown gaunt and brown--
     Stiff-lipped and haggard-eyed--
    They live the Dead Past grimly down!
     Where boundary-riders ride.

    The College Wreck who sunk beneath,
     Then rose above his shame,
    Tramps West in mateship with the man
     Who cannot write his name.
    ‘Tis there where on the barren track
     No last half-crust’s begrudged--
    Where saint and sinner, side by side,
     Judge not, and are not judged.

    Oh rebels to society!
     The Outcasts of the West--
    Oh hopeless eyes that smile for me,
     And broken hearts that jest!
    The pluck to face a thousand miles--
     The grit to see it through!
    The communism perfected!--
     And--I am proud of you!

    The Arab to true desert sand,
     The Finn to fields of snow;
    The Flax-stick turns to Maoriland,
     Where the seasons come and go;
    And this old fact comes home to me--
     And will not let me rest--
    However barren it may be,
     Your own land is the best!

    And, lest at ease I should forget
     True mateship after all,
    My water-bag and billy yet
     Are hanging on the wall;
    And if my fate should show the sign,
     I’d tramp to sunsets grand
    With gaunt and stern-eyed mates of mine
     In Never-Never Land.



[End of original text.]



*****



A Note on the Author and the Text:


Henry Lawson was born near Grenfell, New South Wales, Australia on 17
June 1867. Although he has since become the most acclaimed Australian
writer, in his own lifetime his writing was often “on the side”--his
“real” work was whatever he could find, often painting houses, or
doing rough carpentry. His writing was often taken from memories of his
childhood, especially at Pipeclay/Eurunderee. In his autobiography, he
states that many of his characters were taken from the better class of
diggers and bushmen he knew there. His experiences at this time
deeply influenced his work, for it is interesting to note a number of
descriptions and phrases that are identical in his autobiography and in
his stories and poems. He died in Sydney, 2 September 1922. Much of his
writing was for periodicals, and even his regular publications were
so varied, including books originally released as one volume being
reprinted as two, and vice versa, that the multitude of permutations
cannot be listed here. However, the following should give a basic
outline of his major works.


  Books of Short Stories:
    While the Billy Boils  (1896)
    On the Track  (1900)
    Over the Sliprails  (1900)
    The Country I Come From  (1901)     | These works were first published
    Joe Wilson and His Mates  (1901)    | in England, during or shortly after
    Children of the Bush  (1902)        | Lawson’s stay there.
    Send Round the Hat  (1907)          | These two books were first published
    The Romance of the Swag  (1907)     | as “Children of the Bush”.
    The Rising of the Court  (1910)

  Poetry:
    In the Days When the World Was Wide  (1896)
    Verses Popular and Humorous  (1900)
    When I Was King and Other Verses (1905)
    The Skyline Riders (1910)
    Selected Poems of Henry Lawson (1918)


Joe Wilson and His Mates was later published as two separate volumes,
“Joe Wilson” and “Joe Wilson’s Mates”, which correspond to Parts I & II
in Joe Wilson and His Mates. This work was first published in England,
which may be evident from some of Lawson’s comments in the text which
are directed at English readers. For example, Lawson writes in ‘The
Golden Graveyard’: “A gold washing-dish is a flat dish--nearer the shape
of a bedroom bath-tub than anything else I have seen in England, or the
dish we used for setting milk--I don’t know whether the same is used
here....”

Alan Light, Monroe, North Carolina, June 1997.





End of Project Gutenberg’s Joe Wilson and His Mates, by Henry Lawson

