The Project Gutenberg eBook of Three Philosophical Poets, by George Santayana

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Three Philosophical Poets
       Lucretius, Dante, and Goethe

Author: George Santayana

Release Date: March 18, 2011 [eBook #35612]
[Most recently updated: October 16, 2021]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Marc D’Hooghe





THREE PHILOSOPHICAL POETS

LUCRETIUS, DANTE, AND GOETHE

BY

GEORGE SANTAYANA


PROFESSOR OF PHILOSOPHY IN HARVARD UNIVERSITY


HARVARD STUDIES IN COMPARATIVE LITERATURE

VOLUME I


CAMBRIDGE

HARVARD UNIVERSITY

1910




PREFACE


The present volume is composed, with a few additions, of six lectures
read at Columbia University in February, 1910, and repeated in April of
the same year, at the University of Wisconsin. These lectures, in turn,
were based on a regular course which I had been giving for some time at
Harvard College. Though produced under such learned auspices, my book
can make no great claims to learning. It contains the impressions of an
amateur, the appreciations of an ordinary reader, concerning three great
writers, two of whom at least might furnish matter enough for the
studies of a lifetime, and actually have academies, libraries, and
university chairs especially consecrated to their memory. I am no
specialist in the study of Lucretius; I am not a Dante scholar nor a
Goethe scholar. I can report no facts and propose no hypotheses about
these men which are not at hand in their familiar works, or in
well-known commentaries upon them. My excuse for writing about them,
notwithstanding, is merely the human excuse which every new poet has for
writing about the spring. They have attracted me; they have moved me to
reflection; they have revealed to me certain aspects of nature and of
philosophy which I am prompted by mere sincerity to express, if anybody
seems interested or willing to listen. What I can offer the benevolent
reader, therefore, is no learned investigation. It is only a piece of
literary criticism, together with a first broad lesson in the history of
philosophy--and, perhaps, in philosophy itself.

                                                     G.S.


_Harvard College_

_June, 1910_




CONTENTS


I

INTRODUCTION

_Lucretius, Dante, and Goethe sum up the chief phases of European
philosophy,--naturalism, supernaturalism, and romanticism--Ideal
relation between philosophy and poetry._

