II

LUCRETIUS

_Development of Greek cosmology--Democritus--Epicurean moral
sentiment--Changes inspired by it in the system of
Democritus--Accidental alliance of materialism with
hedonism--Imaginative value of naturalism: The Lucretian Venus, or the
propitious movement in nature--The Lucretian Mars, or the destructive
movement--Preponderant melancholy, and the reason for it--Materiality
of the soul--The fear of death and the fear of life--Lucretius a true
poet of nature--Comparison with Shelley and Wordsworth--Things he might
have added consistently: Indefeasible worth of his insight and
sentiment._

III

DANTE

_Character of Platonism--Its cosmology a parable--Combination of this
with Hebraic philosophy of history--Theory of the Papacy and the Empire
adopted by Dante--His judgement on Florence--Dante as a lyric
poet--Beatrice the woman, the symbol, and the reality--Love, magic, and
symbolism constitutive principles of Dante’s universe--Idea of the
Divine Comedy--The scheme of virtues and vices--Retributive theory of
rewards and punishments--Esoteric view of this, which makes even
punishment intrinsic to the sins--Examples--Dantesque cosmography--The
genius of the poet--His universal scope--His triumphant execution of the
Comedy--His defects, in spite of which he remains the type of a supreme
poet._

IV

GOETHE’S FAUST _Page_

_The romantic spirit--The ideals of the Renaissance--Expression of both
in the legendary Faust--Marlowe’s version--Tendency to vindicate
Faust--Contrast with Calderon’s “Wonder-working Magician”--The original
Faust of Goethe,--universal ambition and eternal dissatisfaction
--Modifications--The series of experiments in living--The story of
Gretchen fitted in--Goethe’s naturalistic theory of life and
rejuvenation: Helen--The classic manner and the judgement on
classicism--Faust’s last ambition--The conflict over his soul and his
ascent to heaven symbolical--Moral of the whole._

V

CONCLUSION

_Comparison of the three poets--Their relative rank--Ideal of a
philosophic or comprehensive poet--Untried possibilities of art._




I


INTRODUCTION


The sole advantage in possessing great works of literature lies in what
they can help us to become. In themselves, as feats performed by their
authors, they would have forfeited none of their truth or greatness if
they had perished before our day. We can neither take away nor add to
their past value or inherent dignity. It is only they, in so far as they
are appropriate food and not poison for us, that can add to the present
value and dignity of our minds. Foreign classics have to be retranslated
and reinterpreted for each generation, to render their old naturalness
in a natural way, and keep their perennial humanity living and capable
of assimilation. Even native classics have to be reapprehended by every
reader. It is this continual digestion of the substance supplied by the
past that alone renders the insights of the past still potent in the
present and for the future. Living criticism, genuine appreciation, is
the interest we draw from year to year on the unrecoverable capital of
human genius.

Regarded from this point of view, as substances to be digested, the
poetic remains of Lucretius, Dante, and Goethe (though it is his _Faust_
only that I shall speak of) afford rather a varied feast. In their
doctrine and genius they may seem to be too much opposed to be at all
convergent or combinable in their wisdom. Some, who know and care for
one, perhaps, of these poets, may be disposed to doubt whether they have
anything vital to learn from the other two. Yet it is as a pupil--I hope
a discriminating pupil--of each in turn that I mean to speak; and I
venture to maintain that in what makes them great they are compatible;
that without any vagueness or doubleness in one’s criterion of taste one
may admire enthusiastically the poetry of each in turn; and that one may
accept the essential philosophy, the positive intuition, of each,
without lack of definition or system in one’s own thinking.

Indeed, the diversity of these three poets passes, if I may use the
Hegelian dialect, into a unity of a higher kind. Each is typical of an
age. Taken together they sum up all European philosophy. Lucretius
adopts the most radical and the most correct of those cosmological
systems which the genius of early Greece had devised. He sees the world
to be one great edifice, one great machine, all its parts reacting upon
one another, and growing out of one another in obedience to a general
pervasive process or life. His poem describes the nature, that is, the
birth and composition, of all things. It shows how they are compounded
out of elements, and how these elements, which he thinks are atoms in
perpetual motion, are being constantly redistributed, so that old
things perish and new things arise. Into this view of the world he fits
a view of human life as it ought to be led under such conditions. His
materialism is completed by an aspiration towards freedom and quietness
of spirit. Allowed to look once upon the wonderful spectacle, which is
to repeat itself in the world for ever, we should look and admire, for
to-morrow we die; we should eat, drink, and be merry, but moderately and
with much art, lest we die miserably, and die to-day.

This is one complete system of philosophy,--materialism in natural
science, humanism in ethics. Such was the gist of all Greek philosophy
before Socrates, of that philosophy which was truly Hellenic and
corresponded with the movement which produced Greek manners, Greek
government, and Greek art--a movement towards simplicity, autonomy, and
reasonableness in everything, from dress to religion. Such is the gist
also of what may be called the philosophy of the Renaissance, the
reassertion of science and liberty in the modern world, by Bacon, by
Spinoza, by the whole contemporary school that looks to science for its
view of the facts, and to the happiness of men on earth for its ideal.
This system is called naturalism; and of this Lucretius is the
unrivalled poet.

Skip a thousand years and more, and a contrasting spectacle is before
us. All minds, all institutions, are dominated by a religion that
represents the soul as a pilgrim upon earth; the world is fallen and
subject to the devil; pain and poverty are considered normal, happiness
impossible here and to be hoped for only in a future life, provided the
snares and pleasures of the present life have not entrapped us. Meantime
a sort of Jacob’s ladder stretches from the stone on which the wayfarer
lays his head into the heaven he hopes for; and the angels he sees
ascending and descending upon it are beautiful stories, wonderful
theories, and comforting rites. Through these he partakes, even on
earth, of what will be his heavenly existence. He partly understands his
destiny; his own history and that of the world are transfigured before
him and, without ceasing to be sad, become beautiful. The raptures of a
perfect conformity with the will of God, and of union with Him, overtake
him in his prayers. This is supernaturalism, a system represented in
Christendom chiefly by the Catholic Church, but adopted also by the
later pagans, and widespread in Asia from remote antiquity down to the
present time. Little as the momentary temper of Europe and America may
now incline to such a view, it is always possible for the individual, or
for the race, to return to it. Its sources are in the solitude of the
spirit and in the disparity, or the opposition, between what the spirit
feels it is fitted to do, and what, in this world, it is condemned to
waste itself upon. The unmatched poet of this supernaturalism is Dante.

Skip again some five hundred years, and there is another change of
scene. The Teutonic races that had previously conquered Europe have
begun to dominate and understand themselves. They have become
Protestants, or protesters against the Roman world. An infinite fountain
of life seems to be unlocked within their bosom. They turn successively
to the Bible, to learning, to patriotism, to industry, for new objects
to love and fresh worlds to conquer; but they have too much vitality, or
too little maturity, to rest in any of these things. A demon drives them
on; and this demon, divine and immortal in its apparent waywardness, is
their inmost self. It is their insatiable will, their radical courage.
Nay, though this be a hard saying to the uninitiated, their will is the
creator of all those objects by which it is sometimes amused, and
sometimes baffled, but never tamed. Their will summons all opportunities
and dangers out of nothing to feed its appetite for action; and in that
ideal function lies their sole reality. Once attained, things are
transcended. Like the episodes of a spent dream, they are to be smiled
at and forgotten; the spirit that feigned and discarded them remains
always strong and undefiled; it aches for new conquests over new
fictions. This is romanticism. It is an attitude often found in English
poetry, and characteristic of German philosophy. It was adopted by
Emerson and ought to be sympathetic to Americans; for it expresses the
self-trust of world-building youth, and mystical faith in will and
action. The greatest monument to this romanticism is Goethe’s _Faust._

Can it be an accident that the most adequate and probably the most
lasting exposition of these three schools of philosophy should have been
made by poets? Are poets, at heart, in search of a philosophy? Or is
philosophy, in the end, nothing but poetry? Let us consider the
situation.

If we think of philosophy as an investigation into truth, or as
reasoning upon truths supposed to be discovered, there is nothing in
philosophy akin to poetry. There is nothing poetic about the works of
Epicurus, or St. Thomas Aquinas, or Kant; they are leafless forests. In
Lucretius and in Dante themselves we find passages where nothing is
poetical except the metre, or some incidental ornament. In such passages
the form of poetry is thrown over the substance of prose, as Lucretius
himself confesses where he says: “As when physicians would contrive to
administer loathsome wormwood to little boys they first moisten the rim
of the cup round about with sweet and golden honey, that the children’s,
unsuspecting youth may be beguiled--to the lips, but no further--while
they drink down the bitter potion, by deception not betrayed, but
rather by that stratagem made whole and restored;... so I have willed to
set forth our doctrine before thee in sweet-sounding Pierian song, and
to smear it, as it were, with the Muses’ honey.”[1]

But poetry cannot be spread upon things like butter; it must play upon
them like light, and be the medium through which we see them. Lucretius
does himself an injustice. If his philosophy had been wormwood to him,
he could not have said, as he does just before this passage: “Like a
sharp blow of the thyrsus, a great hope of praise vibrates through my
heart and fills my breast with tender love of the Muses, whereby now,
instinct with flowering fancy, I traverse pathless haunts of the
Pierides, by no man’s foot trodden before. It is joy to reach undefiled
fountains and quaff; it is joy to gather fresh flowers and weave a
matchless crown for my head of those bays with which never yet the Muses
veiled the brow of any man; first, in that I teach sublime truths and
come to free the soul from the strangling knots of superstition; then,
in that on so dark a theme I pour forth so clear a song, suffusing all
with poetic beauty,... if haply by such means I might keep thy mind
intent upon my verses, until thine eye fathoms the whole structure of
nature, and the fixed form that makes it beautiful.”[2]

Here, I think, we have the solution to our doubt. The reasonings and
investigations of philosophy are arduous, and if poetry is to be linked
with them, it can be artificially only, and with a bad grace. But the
vision of philosophy is sublime. The order it reveals in the world is
something beautiful, tragic, sympathetic to the mind, and just what
every poet, on a small or on a large scale, is always trying to catch.

In philosophy itself investigation and reasoning are only preparatory
and servile parts, means to an end. They terminate in insight, or what
in the noblest sense of the word may be called _theory, θεωρία_,--a
steady contemplation of all things in their order and worth. Such
contemplation is imaginative. No one can reach it who has not enlarged
his mind and tamed his heart. A philosopher who attains it is, for the
moment, a poet; and a poet who turns his practised and passionate
imagination on the order of all things, or on anything in the light of
the whole, is for that moment a philosopher.

Nevertheless, even if we grant that the philosopher, in his best
moments, is a poet, we may suspect that the poet has his worst moments
when he tries to be a philosopher, or rather, when he succeeds in being
one. Philosophy is something reasoned and heavy; poetry something
winged, flashing, inspired. Take almost any longish poem, and the parts
of it are better than the whole. A poet is able to put together a few
words, a cadence or two, a single interesting image. He renders in that
way some moment of comparatively high tension, of comparatively keen
sentiment. But at the next moment the tension is relaxed, the sentiment
has faded, and what succeeds is usually incongruous with what went
before, or at least inferior. The thought drifts away from what it had
started to be. It is lost in the sands of versification. As man is now
constituted, to be brief is almost a condition of being inspired.

Shall we say, then,--and I now broach an idea by which I set some
store,--that poetry is essentially short-winded, that what is poetic is
necessarily intermittent in the writings of poets, that only the
fleeting moment, the mood, the episode, can be rapturously felt, or
rapturously rendered, while life as a whole, history, character, and
destiny are objects unfit for imagination to dwell on, and repellent to
poetic art? I cannot think so. If it be a fact, as it often is, that we
find little things pleasing and great things arid and formless, and if
we are better poets in a line than in an epic, that is simply due to
lack of faculty on our part, lack of imagination and memory, and above
all to lack of discipline.

This might be shown, I think, by psychological analysis, if we cared to
rely on something so abstract and so debatable. For in what does the
short-winded poet himself excel the common unimaginative person who
talks or who stares? Is it that he thinks even less? Rather, I suppose,
in that he feels more; in that his moment of intuition, though fleeting,
has a vision, a scope, a symbolic something about it that renders it
deep and expressive. Intensity, even momentary intensity, if it can be
expressed at all, comports fullness and suggestion compressed into that
intense moment. Yes, everything that comes to us at all must come to us
at some time or other. It is always the fleeting moment in which we
live. To this fleeting moment the philosopher, as well as the poet, is
actually confined. Each must enrich it with his endless vistas, vistas
necessarily focused, if they are to be disclosed at all, in the eye of
the observer, here and now. What makes the difference between a moment
of poetic insight and a vulgar moment is that the passions of the poetic
moment have more perspective. Even the short-winded poet selects his
words so that they have a magic momentum in them which carries us, we
know not how, to mountain-tops of intuition. Is not the poetic quality
of phrases and images due to their concentrating and liberating the
confused promptings left in us by a long experience? When we feel the
poetic thrill, is it not that we find sweep in the concise and depth in
the clear, as we might find all the lights of the sea in the water of a
jewel? And what is a philosophic thought but such an epitome?

If a short passage is poetical because it is pregnant with suggestion of
a few things, which stretches our attention and makes us rapt and
serious, how much more poetical ought a vision to be which was pregnant
with all we care for? Focus a little experience, give some scope and
depth to your feeling, and it grows imaginative; give it more scope and
more depth, focus all experience within it, make it a philosopher’s
vision of the world, and it will grow imaginative in a superlative
degree, and be supremely poetical. The difficulty, after having the
experience to symbolize, lies only in having enough imagination to hold
and suspend it in a thought; and further to give this thought such
verbal expression that others maybe able to decipher it, and to be
stirred by it as by a wind of suggestion sweeping the whole forest of
their memories.

Poetry, then, is not poetical for being short-winded or incidental, but,
on the contrary, for being comprehensive and having range. If too much
matter renders it heavy, that is the fault of the poet’s weak intellect,
not of the outstretched world. A quicker eye, a more synthetic
imagination, might grasp a larger subject with the same ease. The
picture that would render this larger subject would not be flatter and
feebler for its extent, but, on the contrary, deeper and stronger, since
it would possess as much unity as the little one with greater volume. As
in a supreme dramatic crisis all our life seems to be focused in the
present, and used in colouring our consciousness and shaping our
decisions, so for each philosophic poet the whole world of man is
gathered together; and he is never so much a poet as when, in a single
cry, he summons all that has affinity to him in the universe, and
salutes his ultimate destiny. It is the acme of life to understand life.
The height of poetry is to speak the language of the gods.

But enough of psychological analysis and of reasoning in the void.
Three historical illustrations will prove my point more clearly and more
conclusively.


       *       *       *       *       *

[1] Lucretius, I. 936-47:

       Veluti pueris absinthia tetra medentes
     Cum dare conantur, prius oras pocula circura
     Contingunt mellis dulci flavoque liquore,
     Ut puerorum aetas improvida ludificetur
     Labrorum tenus, interea perpotet amarum
     Absinthi laticem, deceptaque non capiatur,
     Sed potius tali pacto recreata valescat:
     Sic ego nunc ... volui tibi suaviloquenti
     Carmine Pierio rationem exponere nostram,
     Et quasi musaeo dulci contingere melle.


[2] Lucretius, i. 922-34, 948-50:

                                              Acri
     Percussit thyrso laudis spes magna meum cor
     Et simul incussit suavem mi in pectus amorem
     Musarum, quo nunc instinctus mente vigenti
     Avia Pieridum peragro loca nullius ante
     Trita solo: iuvat integros accedere fontes,
     Atque haurire; iuvatque novos decerpere flores,
     Insignemque meo capiti petere inde coronam,
     Unde prius nulli velarint tempora musae.
     Primum, quod magnis doceo de rebus, et artis
     Religionum animum nodis exsolvere pergo:
     Deinde, quod obscura de re tam lucida pango
     Carmina, musaeo contingens cuncta lepore....
     Si tibi forte animum tali ratione tenere
     Versibus in nostris possem, dum perspicis omnem
     Naturam rerum, qua constet compta figura.





