Chapter VI. The Life Of A Christian. Scriptural Arguments And Exhortations
To It.


We have said that the end of regeneration is, that the life of believers
may exhibit a symmetry and agreement between the righteousness of God and
their obedience; and that thus they may confirm the adoption by which they
are accepted as his children. But though the law of God contains in it
that newness of life by which his image is restored in us, yet since our
tardiness needs much stimulation and assistance, it will be useful to
collect from various places of Scripture a rule for the reformation of the
life, that they who cordially repent may not be bewildered in their
pursuits. Now, when I undertake the regulation of a Christian’s life, I
know that I am entering on an argument various and copious, and the
magnitude of which might fill a large volume, if I designed a complete
discussion of every part of it. For we see to what great prolixity the
fathers have extended the exhortations composed by them only on single
virtues; and that without any excessive loquacity; for, whatever virtue it
is intended to recommend in an oration, the copiousness of the matter
naturally produces such a diffusiveness of style, that unless you have
spoken largely, you seem not to have done justice to the subject. But my
design is not to extend the plan of life, which I am now about to deliver,
so far as particularly to discourse on each distinct virtue, and expatiate
into exhortations. These things may be sought in the writings of others,
especially in the homilies of the fathers. It will be sufficient for me if
I point out a method by which a pious man may be conducted to the right
end in the regulation of his life, and briefly assign a universal rule, by
which he may properly estimate his duties. There will, perhaps, at some
future period be a suitable opportunity for declamations; or I shall leave
to others an office for which I am not calculated. I am naturally fond of
brevity; and, perhaps, were I desirous of speaking in a more copious
manner, I should not succeed. And if a more prolix method of teaching were
most acceptable, yet I should scarcely be inclined to make the trial. The
plan of the present work, however, requires me to treat a simple doctrine
with all possible brevity. As the philosophers have certain principles of
rectitude and honour, whence they deduce particular duties and the whole
circle of virtues, so the Scripture is not without its order in this
respect, but maintains an economy superlatively beautiful, and far more
certain, than all the systems of the philosophers. There is only this
difference—that, the philosophers being ambitious men, they have
sedulously affected an exquisite perspicuity of method, in order to make
an ostentatious display of their ingenious dexterity. But the Spirit,
whose teaching is void of affectation, has not so exactly or perpetually
observed a methodical plan; which, nevertheless, by using it in some
places, he sufficiently indicates ought not to be neglected by us.

II. This Scripture plan, of which we are now treating, consists chiefly in
these two things—the first, that a love of righteousness, to which we have
otherwise no natural propensity, be instilled and introduced into our
hearts; the second, that a rule be prescribed to us, to prevent our taking
any devious steps in the race of righteousness. Now, in the recommendation
of righteousness, it uses a great number of very excellent arguments, many
of which we have before noticed on different occasions, and some we shall
briefly touch on in this place. With what better foundation can it begin,
than when it admonishes us that we ought to be holy, because _our God is
holy_?(1821) For when we were dispersed like scattered sheep, and lost in
the labyrinth of the world, he gathered us together again, that he might
associate us to himself. When we hear any mention of our union with God,
we should remember, that holiness must be the bond of it; not that we
attain communion with him by the merit of holiness, (since it is rather
necessary for us, in the first place, to adhere to him, in order that,
being endued with his holiness, we may follow whither he calls;) but
because it is a peculiar property of his glory not to have any intercourse
with iniquity and uncleanness. Wherefore also it teaches, that this is the
end of our vocation, which it is requisite for us always to keep in view,
if we desire to correspond to the design of God in calling us. For to what
purpose was it that we were delivered from the iniquity and pollution of
the world, in which we had been immerged, if we permit ourselves to wallow
in them as long as we live? Besides, it also admonishes us that, to be
numbered among the people of God, we must inhabit the holy city
Jerusalem;(1822) which, he having consecrated it to himself, cannot
without impiety be profaned by impure inhabitants. Whence these
expressions: “He shall abide in the tabernacle of the Lord, that walketh
uprightly and worketh righteousness,” &c.,(1823) because it is very
unbecoming the sanctuary which he inhabits, to be rendered as filthy as a
stable.

III. And as a further incitement to us, it shows, that as God the Father
has reconciled us to himself in Christ, so he has exhibited to us in him a
pattern, to which it is his will that we should be conformed.(1824) Now,
let those who are of opinion that the philosophers have the only just and
orderly systems of moral philosophy, show me, in any of their works, a
more excellent economy than that which I have stated. When they intend to
exhort us to the sublimest virtue, they advance no argument but that we
ought to live agreeably to nature; but the Scripture deduces its
exhortation from the true source, when it not only enjoins us to refer our
life to God the author of it, to whom it belongs, but, after having taught
us, that we are degenerated from the original state in which we were
created, adds, that Christ, by whom we have been reconciled to God, is
proposed to us as an example, whose character we should exhibit in our
lives. What can be required more efficacious than this one consideration?
indeed, what can be required besides? For if the Lord has adopted us as
his sons on this condition,—that we exhibit in our life an imitation of
Christ the bond of our adoption,—unless we addict and devote ourselves to
righteousness, we not only most perfidiously revolt from our Creator, but
also abjure him as our Saviour. The Scripture derives matter of
exhortation from all the blessings of God which it recounts to us, and
from all the parts of our salvation. It argues, that since God has
discovered himself as a Father to us, we must be convicted of the basest
ingratitude, unless we, on our part, manifest ourselves to be his
children; that since Christ has purified us in the laver of his blood, and
has communicated this purification by baptism, it does not become us to be
defiled with fresh pollution; that since he has united us to his body, we
should, as his members, solicitously beware lest we asperse ourselves with
any blemish or disgrace; that since he who is our Head has ascended to
heaven, we ought to divest ourselves of all terrestrial affection, and
aspire thither with all our soul; that since the Holy Spirit has dedicated
us as temples to God, we should use our utmost exertions, that the glory
of God may be displayed by us; and ought not to allow ourselves to be
profaned with the pollution of sin; that since both our soul and our body
are destined to heavenly incorruption and a never‐fading crown, we ought
to exert our most strenuous efforts to preserve them pure and uncorrupt
till the day of the Lord. These, I say, are the best foundations for the
proper regulation of the life, such as we cannot find in the philosophers;
who, in the recommendation of virtue, never rise above the natural dignity
of man.

IV. This is a proper place to address those who have nothing but the name
and the symbol of Christ, and yet would be denominated Christians. But
with what face do they glory in his sacred name? For none have any
intercourse with Christ but those who have received the true knowledge of
him from the word of the gospel. Now, the apostle denies that any have
rightly learned Christ, who have not been taught that they must put off
the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and put on
Christ.(1825) Their knowledge of Christ, then, is proved to be a false and
injurious pretence, with whatever eloquence and volubility they may talk
concerning the gospel. For it is a doctrine not of the tongue, but of the
life; and is not apprehended merely with the understanding and memory,
like other sciences, but is then only received, when it possesses the
whole soul, and finds a seat and residence in the inmost affection of the
heart. Let them, therefore, either cease to insult God by boasting
themselves to be what they are not, or show themselves disciples not
unworthy of Christ, their Master. We have allotted the first place to the
doctrine which contains our religion, because it is the origin of our
salvation; but that it may not be unprofitable to us, it must be
transfused into our breast, pervade our manners, and thus transform us
into itself. If the philosophers are justly incensed against, and banish
with disgrace from their society, those who, while they profess an art
which ought to be a rule of life, convert it into a sophistical
loquacity,—with how much better reason may we detest those sophists who
are contented to have the gospel on their lips, whilst its efficacy ought
to penetrate the inmost affections of the heart, to dwell in the soul, and
to affect the whole man with a hundred times more energy than the frigid
exhortations of the philosophers!

V. Yet I would not insist upon it as absolutely necessary, that the
manners of a Christian should breathe nothing but the perfect gospel;
which, nevertheless, ought both to be wished and to be aimed at. But I do
not so rigorously require evangelical perfection as not to acknowledge as
a Christian, one who has not yet attained to it; for then all would be
excluded from the Church; since no man can be found who is not still at a
great distance from it; and many have hitherto made but a very small
progress, whom it would, nevertheless, be unjust to reject. What then? let
us set before our eyes that mark, to which alone our pursuit must be
directed. Let that be prescribed as the goal towards which we must
earnestly tend. For it is not lawful for you to make such a compromise
with God, as to undertake a part of the duties prescribed to you in his
word, and to omit part of them, at your own pleasure. For, in the first
place, he every where recommends integrity as a principal branch of his
worship; by which he intends a sincere simplicity of heart, free from all
guile and falsehood; the opposite of which is a double heart; as though it
had been said, that the beginning of a life of uprightness is spiritual,
when the internal affection of the mind is unfeignedly devoted to God in
the cultivation of holiness and righteousness. But since no man in this
terrestrial and corporeal prison has strength sufficient to press forward
in his course with a due degree of alacrity, and the majority are
oppressed with such great debility, that they stagger and halt, and even
creep on the ground, and so make very inconsiderable advances,—let us
every one proceed according to our small ability, and prosecute the
journey we have begun. No man will be so unhappy, but that he may every
day make some progress, however small. Therefore, let us not cease to
strive, that we may be incessantly advancing in the way of the Lord; nor
let us despair on account of the smallness of our success; for however our
success may not correspond to our wishes, yet our labour is not lost, when
this day surpasses the preceding one; provided that, with sincere
simplicity, we keep our end in view, and press forward to the goal, not
practising self‐adulation, nor indulging our own evil propensities, but
perpetually exerting our endeavours after increasing degrees of
amelioration, till we shall have arrived at a perfection of goodness,
which, indeed, we seek and pursue as long as we live, and shall then
attain, when, divested of all corporeal infirmity, we shall be admitted by
God into complete communion with him.




