Chapter IX. Meditation On The Future Life.


With whatever kind of tribulation we may be afflicted, we should always
keep this end in view—to habituate ourselves to a contempt of the present
life, that we may thereby be excited to meditation on that which is to
come. For the Lord, well knowing our strong natural inclination to a
brutish love of the world, adopts a most excellent method to reclaim us
and rouse us from our insensibility, that we may not be too tenaciously
attached to that foolish affection. There is not one of us who is not
desirous of appearing, through the whole course of his life, to aspire and
strive after celestial immortality. For we are ashamed of excelling in no
respect the brutal herds, whose condition would not be at all inferior to
ours, unless there remained to us a hope of eternity after death. But if
you examine the designs, pursuits, and actions of every individual, you
will find nothing in them but what is terrestrial. Hence that stupidity,
that the mental eyes, dazzled with the vain splendour of riches, power,
and honours, cannot see to any considerable distance. The heart also,
occupied and oppressed with avarice, ambition, and other inordinate
desires, cannot rise to any eminence. In a word, the whole soul,
fascinated by carnal allurements, seeks its felicity on earth. To oppose
this evil, the Lord, by continual lessons of miseries, teaches his
children the vanity of the present life. That they may not promise
themselves profound and secure peace in it, therefore he permits them to
be frequently disquieted and infested with wars or tumults, with robberies
or other injuries. That they may not aspire with too much avidity after
transient and uncertain riches, or depend on those which they
possess,—sometimes by exile, sometimes by the sterility of the land,
sometimes by a conflagration, sometimes by other means, he reduces them to
indigence, or at least confines them within the limits of mediocrity. That
they may not be too complacently delighted with conjugal blessings, he
either causes them to be distressed with the wickedness of their wives, or
humbles them with a wicked offspring, or afflicts them with want or loss
of children. But if in all these things he is more indulgent to them, yet
that they may not be inflated with vain glory, or improper confidence, he
shows them by diseases and dangers the unstable and transitory nature of
all mortal blessings. We therefore truly derive advantage from the
discipline of the cross, only when we learn that this life, considered in
itself, is unquiet, turbulent, miserable in numberless instances, and in
no respect altogether happy; and that all its reputed blessings are
uncertain, transient, vain, and adulterated with a mixture of many evils;
and in consequence of this at once conclude, that nothing can be sought or
expected on earth but conflict, and that when we think of a crown we must
raise our eyes towards heaven. For it must be admitted, that the mind is
never seriously excited to desire and meditate on the future life, without
having previously imbibed a contempt of the present.

II. There is no medium between these two extremes; either the earth must
become vile in our estimation, or it must retain our immoderate love.
Wherefore, if we have any concern about eternity, we must use our most
diligent efforts to extricate ourselves from these fetters. Now, since the
present life has numerous blandishments to attract us, and much pleasure,
beauty, and sweetness to delight us,—it is very necessary to our highest
interests, that we should be frequently called off, that we may not be
fascinated with such allurements. For what would be the consequence, if we
were perpetually happy in the enjoyment of the blessings of this life;
since we cannot, even by the incessant stimulus of calamity after
calamity, be sufficiently aroused to a consideration of its misery? That
human life is like a vapour or a shadow, is not only known to the learned,
but even the vulgar have no proverb more common; and perceiving it to be a
thing the knowledge of which would be eminently useful, they have
represented it in many remarkable sentences. But there is scarcely any
thing which we more carelessly consider, or sooner forget; for we
undertake every thing as though we were erecting for ourselves an
immortality on earth. If a funeral pass by, or we walk among the tombs,
because the image of death is then presented to our eyes, we philosophize,
I confess, in an admirable manner concerning the vanity of the present
life; although even that is not always the case, for frequently we are
quite unaffected with all these things. But when this effect is produced,
our philosophy is momentary, vanishing as soon as we withdraw, and leaving
not even the smallest vestige behind it; in short, it passes away, and is
forgotten just like the plaudits of a theatre at any entertaining
exhibition. And forgetting not only death, but mortality itself, as though
no rumour concerning it had ever reached us, we relapse into a supine
security of immortality on earth. If any one, in the mean time, reminds us
of the unwelcome proverb, that man is a creature of a day, we acknowledge
the truth of it indeed, but with such inattention that the idea of
perpetually living here still remains fixed in our minds. Who, then, can
deny, that it is highly useful to us all, I do not say to be admonished by
words, but by every possible evidence to be convinced, of the miserable
condition of the present life; since even after we are convinced of it, we
scarcely cease to be besotted with a perverse and foolish admiration of
it, as though it contained the greatest attainable blessings? But if it be
necessary for God to instruct us, it is, on the other hand, our duty to
listen to him when he calls, and rebukes our sluggishness; in order that,
despising the world, we may apply ourselves with our whole heart to
meditate on the life which is to come.

III. But believers should accustom themselves to such a contempt of the
present life, as may not generate either hatred of life, or ingratitude
towards God. For this life, though it is replete with innumerable
miseries, is yet deservedly reckoned among the Divine blessings which must
not be despised. Wherefore, if we discover nothing of the Divine
beneficence in it, we are already guilty of no small ingratitude towards
God himself. But to believers especially it should be a testimony of the
Divine benevolence, since the whole of it is destined to the advancement
of their salvation. For before he openly discovers to us the inheritance
of eternal glory, he intends to reveal himself as our Father in inferior
instances; and those are the benefits which he daily confers on us. Since
this life, then, is subservient to a knowledge of the Divine goodness,
shall we fastidiously scorn it, as though it contained no particle of
goodness in it? We must therefore have this sense and affection, to class
it among the bounties of the Divine benignity which are not to be
rejected. For if Scripture testimonies were wanting, which are very
numerous and clear, even nature itself exhorts us to give thanks to the
Lord for having introduced us to the light of life, for granting us the
use of it, and giving us all the helps necessary to its preservation. And
it is a far superior reason for gratitude, if we consider that here we are
in some measure prepared for the glory of the heavenly kingdom. For the
Lord has ordained, that they who are to be hereafter crowned in heaven,
must first engage in conflicts on earth, that they may not triumph without
having surmounted the difficulties of warfare and obtained the victory.
Another reason is, that here we begin in various blessings to taste the
sweetness of the Divine benignity, that our hope and desire may be excited
after the full revelation of it. When we have come to this conclusion,
that our life in this world is a gift of the Divine clemency, which, as we
owe to him, we ought to remember with gratitude, it will then be time for
us to descend to a consideration of its most miserable condition, that we
may be delivered from excessive love of it, to which, as has been
observed, we are naturally inclined.

IV. Now, whatever is abstracted from the corrupt love of this life should
be added to the desire of a better. I grant, indeed, the correctness of
their opinion, who considered it as the greatest blessing not to be born,
and as the next, to die immediately. For, being heathens, destitute of the
knowledge of God and of true religion, what could they see in it but
unhappiness and misery? Nor was there any thing irrational in the conduct
of those who mourned and wept at the births of their relations, and
solemnly rejoiced at their funerals. But they practised this without any
advantage; for, destitute of the true doctrine of faith, they did not
perceive how that can conduce to the benefit of the pious, which in itself
is neither blessed nor desirable; and so their views terminated in
despair. It should be the object of believers, therefore, in judging of
this mortal life, that understanding it to be of itself nothing but
misery, they may apply themselves wholly, with increasing cheerfulness and
readiness, to meditate on the future and eternal life. When we come to
this comparison, then indeed the former may be not only securely
neglected, but, in competition with the latter, altogether despised and
abhorred. For if heaven is our country, what is the earth but a place of
exile? If the departure out of the world is an entrance into life, what is
the world but a sepulchre? What is a continuance in it but an absorption
in death? If deliverance from the body is an introduction into complete
liberty, what is the body but a prison? If to enjoy the presence of God is
the summit of felicity, is it not misery to be destitute of it? But till
we escape out of the world, “we are absent from the Lord.”(1865)
Therefore, if the terrestrial life be compared with the celestial, it
should undoubtedly be despised and accounted of no value. It certainly is
never to be hated, except in as much as it keeps us obnoxious to sin;
although even that hatred is not properly to be applied to life itself. It
becomes us, however, to be so affected with weariness or hatred of it, as
to desire its end, but to be also prepared to remain in it during the
Divine pleasure; that is to say, our weariness should be remote from all
murmuring and impatience. For it is a post at which the Lord has placed
us, to be retained by us till he call us away. Paul, indeed, bewails his
lot, that he is kept in bondage by the fetters of the body longer than he
would wish, and sighs with an ardent desire of deliverance;(1866)
nevertheless, obedient to the Divine authority, he professes himself
prepared for both; for he acknowledges himself under an obligation to God
to glorify his name either by life or by death;(1867) but that it belongs
to the Lord to determine what will conduce most to his glory. Therefore,
if it becomes us “to live and to die to the Lord,”(1868) let us leave the
limits of our life and death to his decision; yet in such a manner, as
ardently to desire and continually to meditate on the latter, but to
despise the former in comparison with future immortality, and on account
of the servitude of sin, to wish to forsake it whenever it shall please
the Lord.

V. But it is monstrous, that instead of this desire of death, multitudes
who boast themselves to be Christians, are filled with such a dread of it,
that they tremble whenever it is mentioned, as if it were the greatest
calamity that could befall them. It is no wonder, indeed, if our natural
feelings should be alarmed at hearing of our dissolution. But it is
intolerable that there should not be in a Christian breast sufficient
light of piety to overcome and suppress all that fear with superior
consolation. For if we consider, that this unstable, depraved,
corruptible, frail, withering, and rotten tabernacle of our body is
dissolved, in order that it may hereafter be restored to a durable,
perfect, incorruptible, and heavenly glory,—will not faith constrain us
ardently to desire what nature dreads? If we consider, that by death we
are recalled from exile to inhabit our own country, and that a heavenly
one, shall we derive thence no consolation? But it will be said, There is
nothing that does not desire to be permanent. I admit it; and contend that
we ought therefore to direct our views to a future immortality, where we
may obtain a fixed condition, which is nowhere to be found on earth. For
Paul excellently teaches believers to go with alacrity to death, “not for
that they would be unclothed, but clothed upon.”(1869) Shall brute
animals, and even inanimate creatures, down to stocks and stones,
conscious of their present vanity, be looking forward to the resurrection
at the last day, that they may be delivered from vanity, together with the
children of God; and shall we, endued with the light of understanding,
and, what is superior to the natural understanding, illuminated with the
Spirit of God, when the question respects our own existence, not raise our
minds above the corruption of this world? But it is not necessary to my
present design, nor suitable in this place, to argue against such extreme
perverseness. And I have already declared in the beginning, that I would
not undertake a diffuse discussion of commonplace topics. I would persuade
such timid minds to read Cyprian’s treatise on Mortality, did they not
deserve rather to be referred to the philosophers, that they may begin to
blush, when they see the contempt of death discovered by them. But this we
may positively conclude, that no man has made any good proficiency in the
school of Christ, but he who joyfully expects both the day of death and
that of the final resurrection. For Paul describes all believers by this
character,(1870) and the Scripture often recalls our attention to it, when
it intends to furnish us with a reason for true joy. “Look up,” saith the
Lord, “and lift up your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh.”(1871) Is
it reasonable, that what he designed so powerfully to excite us to
exultation and alacrity, should produce nothing but sorrow and
consternation? If this be the case, why do we still glory in him as our
Master? Let us therefore acquire a sounder judgment; and notwithstanding
the opposition of the blind and stupid cupidity of our flesh, let us not
hesitate ardently to desire the advent of the Lord, as of all events the
most auspicious. For he shall come to us as a Redeemer, to deliver us from
this bottomless gulf of all evils and miseries, and introduce us into that
blessed inheritance of his life and glory.

VI. It is certainly true, that the whole family of believers, as long as
they dwell on the earth, must be “accounted as sheep for the
slaughter,”(1872) that they may be conformed to Christ their Head. Their
state, therefore, would be extremely deplorable, if they did not elevate
their thoughts towards heaven, rise above all sublunary things, and look
beyond present appearances.(1873) On the contrary, when they have once
raised their heads above this world, although they see the impious
flourishing in riches and honours, and enjoying the most profound
tranquillity; though they see them boasting of their splendour and luxury,
and behold them abounding in every delight; though they may also be
harassed by their wickedness, insulted by their pride, defrauded by their
avarice, and may receive from them any other lawless provocations,—yet
they will find no difficulty in supporting themselves even under such
calamities as these. For they will keep in view that day when the Lord
will receive his faithful servants into his peaceful kingdom; will wipe
every tear from their eyes,(1874) invest them with robes of joy, adorn
them with crowns of glory, entertain them with his ineffable delights,
exalt them to fellowship with his majesty, and, in a word, honour them
with a participation of his happiness. But the impious, who have been
great in this world, he will precipitate down to the lowest ignominy; he
will change their delights into torments, and their laughter and mirth
into weeping and gnashing of teeth; he will disturb their tranquillity
with dreadful agonies of conscience, and will punish their delicacy with
inextinguishable fire, and even put them in subjection to the pious, whose
patience they have abused. For, according to Paul, “it is a righteous
thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble” the saints,
“and to” them “who are troubled, rest, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven.”(1875) This is our only consolation; and deprived of
this, we must of necessity either sink into despondency of mind, or solace
ourselves to our own destruction with the vain pleasures of the world. For
even the Psalmist confesses that he staggered,(1876) when he was too much
engaged in contemplating the present prosperity of the impious; and that
he could no otherwise establish himself, till he entered the sanctuary of
God, and directed his views to the last end of the godly and of the
wicked. To conclude in one word, the cross of Christ triumphs, in the
hearts of believers, over the devil and the flesh, over sin and impious
men, only when their eyes are directed to the power of the resurrection.




