Chapter III. On Repentance.


Though we have already shown, in some respect, how faith possesses Christ,
and how by means of faith we enjoy his benefits, yet the subject would
still be involved in obscurity, unless we were to add a description of the
effects which we experience. The substance of the gospel is, not without
reason, said to be comprised in “repentance and remission of sins.”
Therefore, if these two points be omitted, every controversy concerning
faith will be jejune and incomplete, and consequently of little use. Now,
since both are conferred on us by Christ, and we obtain both by
faith,—that is, newness of life and gratuitous reconciliation,—the regular
method of instruction requires me, in this place, to enter on the
discussion of both. But our immediate transition will be from faith to
repentance; because, when this point is well understood, it will better
appear how man is justified by faith alone, and mere pardon, and yet that
real sanctity of life (so to speak) is not separated from the gratuitous
imputation of righteousness. Now, it ought not to be doubted that
repentance not only immediately follows faith, but is produced by it. For
since pardon, or remission, is offered by the preaching of the gospel, in
order that the sinner, liberated from the tyranny of Satan, from the yoke
of sin, and the miserable servitude of his vices, may remove into the
kingdom of God,—no one can embrace the grace of the gospel, but he must
depart from the errors of his former life, enter into the right way, and
devote all his attention to the exercise of repentance. Those who imagine
that repentance rather precedes faith, than is produced by it, as fruit by
a tree, have never been acquainted with its power, and are induced to
adopt that sentiment by a very insufficient argument.

II. They argue that Jesus Christ and John the Baptist, in their preaching,
first exhort the people to repentance; and afterwards add, that “the
kingdom of heaven is at hand;”(1608) that thus the apostles were commanded
to preach, and that this (according to the account of Luke)(1609) was the
method followed by Paul. But they superstitiously attend to the connection
of the syllables, and disregard the sense and coherence of the words. For
when Christ and John preach in this manner, “Repent, for the kingdom of
heaven is at hand,”(1610) do they not derive an argument for repentance
from grace itself, and the promise of salvation? The meaning of their
language, therefore, is just as though they had said, Since the kingdom of
heaven is at hand, therefore repent. For Matthew, having related that John
preached in this manner, informs us, that in him was accomplished the
prediction of Isaiah concerning “the voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.” But,
in the prophet, that voice is commanded to begin with consolation and glad
tidings.(1611) Yet, when we speak of faith as the origin of repentance, we
dream not of any space of time which it employs in producing it; but we
intend to signify, that a man cannot truly devote himself to repentance,
unless he knows himself to be of God. Now, no man is truly persuaded that
he is of God, except he has previously received his grace. But these
things will be more clearly discussed as we proceed. This circumstance,
perhaps, has deceived them—that many are overcome or led to obedience by
terrors of conscience, before they have imbibed a knowledge of grace, or
have even tasted it. And this is the initial fear, which some number among
the graces, because they perceive it to be nearly connected with true and
righteous obedience. But we are not inquiring, at present, in how many
ways Christ draws us to himself, or prepares us for the practice of piety:
only I assert, that no rectitude can be found but where that Spirit
reigns, whom he has received in order to communicate him to his members.
In the next place, according to this passage in the Psalms, “There is
forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be feared,”(1612) no man will ever
reverence God, but he who confides in his being propitious to him: no man
will cheerfully devote himself to the observance of his law, but he who is
persuaded that his services are pleasing to him: and this indulgence in
pardoning us, and bearing with our faults, is an evidence of his paternal
favour. The same also appears from this exhortation of Hosea, “Come, and
let us return unto the Lord; for he hath torn, and he will heal us; he
hath smitten, and he will bind us up;”(1613) because the hope of pardon is
added as a stimulus, to prevent them from being stupefied in their sins.
But there is not the least appearance of reason in the notion of those
who, in order to begin with repentance, prescribe to their young converts
certain days, during which they must exercise themselves in repentance;
after the expiration of which, they admit them to the communion of
evangelical grace. I speak of many of the Anabaptists, especially of those
who wonderfully delight in being accounted spiritual; and their
companions, the Jesuits, and other such worthless men. Such are the
effects produced by that spirit of fanaticism, that it terminates
repentance within the limits of a few short days, which a Christian ought
to extend throughout his whole life.

III. But concerning repentance, some learned men, in times very remote
from the present, desiring to express themselves with simplicity and
sincerity according to the rule of the Scripture, have said that it
consists of two parts—mortification and vivification. Mortification they
explain to be the sorrow of the mind, and the terror experienced from a
knowledge of sin and a sense of the Divine judgments. For when any one has
been brought to a true knowledge of sin, he then begins truly to hate and
abhor it; then he is heartily displeased with himself, confesses himself
to be miserable and lost, and wishes that he were another man. Moreover,
when he is affected with some sense of the Divine judgment, (for the one
immediately follows the other,) then, indeed, he is stricken with
consternation, he trembles with humility and dejection, he feels a
despondency of mind, he falls into despair. This is the first part of
repentance, which they have generally styled contrition. Vivification they
explain to be the consolation which is produced by faith; when a man,
after having been humbled with a consciousness of sin, and stricken with
the fear of God, afterwards contemplates the goodness of God, and the
mercy, grace, and salvation bestowed through Christ, rises from his
depression, feels himself re‐invigorated, recovers his courage, and as it
were returns from death to life. These terms, provided they be rightly
understood, are sufficiently adapted to express the nature of repentance;
but when they explain vivification of that joy which the mind experiences
after its perturbations and fears are allayed, I cannot coincide with
them; since it should rather signify an ardent desire and endeavour to
live a holy and pious life, as though it were said, that a man dies to
himself, that he may begin to live to God.

IV. Others, perceiving this word to have various acceptations in
Scripture, have laid down two kinds of repentance; and, to distinguish
them by some character, have called one Legal; in which the sinner,
wounded by the envenomed dart of sin, and harassed by the fear of Divine
wrath, is involved in deep distress, without the power of extricating
himself: the other they style Evangelical; in which the sinner is
grievously afflicted in himself, but rises above his distress, and
embraces Christ as the medicine for his wound, the consolation of his
terrors, and his refuge from all misery. Of legal repentance, they
consider Cain, Saul, and Judas, as examples;(1614) the scriptural account
of whose repentance gives us to understand, that from a knowledge of the
greatness of their sins they dreaded the Divine wrath, but that
considering God only as an avenger and a judge, they perished under that
apprehension. Their repentance, therefore, was only, as it were, the
antechamber of hell, which having already entered in this life, they began
to suffer punishment from the manifestation of the wrath of the Divine
Majesty. Evangelical repentance we discover in all who have been
distressed by a sense of sin in themselves, but have been raised from
their depression, and reinvigorated by a confidence in the Divine mercy,
and converted to the Lord. Hezekiah was terrified when he received the
message of death;(1615) but he wept and prayed, and, contemplating the
goodness of God, recovered his former confidence. The Ninevites were
confounded by the terrible denunciation of destruction;(1616) but they
covered themselves with sackcloth and ashes, and prayed, in hope that the
Lord might be appeased, and the fury of his wrath averted. David confessed
that he had committed a great sin in numbering the people; but added, “O
Lord, take away the iniquity of thy servant.”(1617) He acknowledged his
crime of adultery at the rebuke of Nathan, and prostrated himself before
the Lord; but at the same time cherished an expectation of pardon.(1618)
Such was the repentance of those who felt compunction of heart at the
preaching of Peter, but, confiding in the goodness of God, exclaimed, “Men
and brethren, what shall we do?”(1619) Such also was that of Peter
himself, who wept bitterly, but never lost his hope.

V. Though all these observations are true, yet the term repentance, as far
as I can ascertain from the Scriptures, must have a different acceptation.
For to include faith in repentance, is repugnant to what Paul says in the
Acts—that he testified “both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks,
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ;”(1620)
where he mentions faith and repentance, as two things totally distinct.
What then? Can true repentance exist without faith? Not at all. But though
they cannot be separated, yet they ought to be distinguished. As faith
exists not without hope, and yet there is a difference between them, so
repentance and faith, although they are perpetually and indissolubly
united, require to be connected rather than confounded. I am well aware,
that under the term _repentance_ is comprehended a complete conversion to
God, of which faith is one of the principal branches; but in what sense,
will best appear from an explication of its nature and properties. The
Hebrew word for repentance denotes conversion or return. The Greek word
signifies change of mind and intention. Repentance itself corresponds very
well with both etymologies, for it comprehends these two things—that,
forsaking ourselves, we should turn to God, and laying aside our old mind,
should assume a new one. Wherefore I conceive it may be justly defined to
be “_a true conversion of our life to God, proceeding from a sincere and
serious fear of God, and consisting in the mortification of our flesh and
of the old man, and in the vivification of the Spirit_.” In this sense we
must understand all the addresses, in which either the prophets in ancient
days, or the apostles in a succeeding age, exhorted their contemporaries
to repentance. For the point to which they endeavoured to bring them was
this—that being confounded by their sins, and penetrated with a fear of
the Divine judgment, they might prostrate themselves in humility before
him against whom they had offended, and with true penitence return into
his right way. Therefore these expressions, “_to repent_”(1621) and “_to
return to the Lord_,”(1622) are promiscuously used by them in the same
signification. Hence also the sacred history expresses repentance by
_seeking after_ and _following God_, when men who have disregarded him,
and indulged their criminal propensities, begin to obey his word, and are
ready to follow whithersoever he calls them. And John and Paul have spoken
of “bringing forth fruits meet for repentance,” to signify a life which,
in every action, will discover and testify such a repentance.

VI. But before we proceed any further, it will be useful to amplify and
explain the definition we have given; in which there are three points to
be particularly considered. In the first place, when we call repentance “a
conversion of the life to God,” we require a transformation, not only in
the external actions, but in the soul itself; which, after having put off
its old nature, should produce the fruits of actions corresponding to its
renovation. The prophet, intending to express this idea, commands those
whom he calls to repentance, to make themselves a new heart.(1623)
Wherefore Moses, when about to show how the Israelites might repent and be
rightly converted to the Lord, frequently teaches them that it must be
done with all their heart, and with all their soul; and by speaking of the
circumcision of the heart, he enters into the inmost affections of the
mind. This mode of expression we find often repeated by the prophets; but
there is no passage from which we may obtain clearer ideas of the true
nature of repentance, than from the language of God in the fourth chapter
of Jeremiah: “If thou wilt return, O Israel, saith the Lord, return unto
me. Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns. Circumcise
yourselves to the Lord, and take away the foreskins of your heart.”(1624)
Observe how he denounces that they shall labour in vain in the pursuit of
righteousness, unless impiety be previously eradicated from the bottom of
their hearts. And in order to make a deeper impression upon them, he
apprizes them that they have to do with God, with whom subterfuges are of
no avail, because he abhors all duplicity of heart. For this reason,
Isaiah ridicules the preposterous endeavours of hypocrites, who did indeed
strenuously attempt an external repentance by the observance of
ceremonies, but at the same time were not concerned “to loose the bands of
wickedness,”(1625) with which they oppressed the poor. In that passage he
also beautifully shows, in what duties unfeigned repentance properly
consists.

VII. In the second place, we represented repentance as proceeding from a
serious fear of God. For before the mind of a sinner can be inclined to
repentance, it must be excited by a knowledge of the Divine judgment. But
when this thought has once been deeply impressed, that God will one day
ascend his tribunal to exact an account of all words and actions, it will
not permit the miserable man to take any interval of rest, or to enjoy
even a momentary respite, but perpetually stimulates him to adopt a new
course of life, that he may be able to appear with security at that
judgment. Wherefore the Scripture, when it exhorts to repentance,
frequently introduces a mention of the judgment; as in Jeremiah; “Lest my
fury come forth like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of
the evil of your doings:”(1626) in the address of Paul to the Athenians;
“The times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men
every where to repent; because he hath appointed a day in which he will
judge the world in righteousness:”(1627) and in many other places.
Sometimes, by the punishments already inflicted, it declares that God is a
judge; in order that sinners may consider with themselves that worse
calamities await them, unless they speedily repent. We have an example of
this in the twenty‐ninth chapter of Deuteronomy. But since conversion
commences with a dread and hatred of sin, therefore the apostle makes
godly sorrow the cause of repentance.(1628) He calls it godly sorrow when
we not only dread punishment, but hate and abhor sin itself, from a
knowledge that it is displeasing to God. Nor ought this to be thought
strange; for, unless we felt sharp compunction, our carnal sluggishness
could never be corrected, and even these distresses of mind would not be
sufficient to arouse it from its stupidity and indolence, if God, by the
infliction of his chastisements, did not make a deeper impression. Beside
this, there is a rebellious obstinacy, which requires violent blows, as it
were, to overcome it. The severity, therefore, which God uses in his
threatenings, is extorted from him by the depravity of our minds; since it
would be in vain for him to address kind and alluring invitations to those
who are asleep. I forbear to recite the testimonies with which the
Scripture abounds. The fear of God is called the beginning of repentance
also for another reason; because though a man’s life were perfect in every
virtue, if it be not devoted to the worship of God, it may indeed be
commended by the world, but in heaven it will be only an abomination;
since the principal branch of righteousness consists in rendering to God
the honour due to him, of which he is impiously defrauded, when it is not
our end and aim to submit ourselves to his government.

VIII. It remains for us, in the third place, to explain our position, that
repentance consists of two parts—the mortification of the flesh and the
vivification of the spirit. This is clearly expressed by the prophets,
although in a simple and homely manner, according to the capacity of a
carnal people, when they say, “Depart from evil, and do good.”(1629)
Again: “Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from
before mine eyes; cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek judgment;
relieve the oppressed,” &c.(1630) For when they call men from the paths of
wickedness, they require the total destruction of the flesh, which is full
of wickedness and perverseness. It is a thing truly difficult and arduous
to put off ourselves, and to depart from the native bias of our minds. Nor
must the flesh be considered as entirely dead, unless all that we have of
ourselves be destroyed. But since the universal disposition of the flesh
is settled “enmity against God,”(1631) the first step to an obedience of
the law is this renunciation of our own nature. They afterwards designate
the renovation by its fruits—righteousness, judgment, and mercy. For a
punctual performance of these external duties would not be sufficient,
unless the mind and heart had previously acquired a disposition of
righteousness, judgment, and mercy. This takes place when the Spirit of
God has tinctured our souls with his holiness, and given them such new
thoughts and affections, that they may be justly considered as new, [or
altogether different from what they were before.] And certainly, as we
have a natural aversion to God, we shall never aim at that which is right,
without a previous renunciation of ourselves. Therefore we are so
frequently commanded to put off the old man, to renounce the world and the
flesh, to forsake our lusts, and to be renewed in the spirit of our mind.
Besides, the very word mortification reminds us how difficult it is to
forget our former nature; for it implies that we cannot be formed to the
fear of God, and learn the rudiments of piety, without being violently
slain and annihilated by the sword of the Spirit. As though God had
pronounced that, in order to our being numbered among his children, there
is a necessity for the destruction of our common nature.

IX. Both these branches of repentance are effects of our participation of
Christ. For if we truly partake of his death, our old man is crucified by
its power, and the body of sin expires, so that the corruption of our
former nature loses all its vigour.(1632) If we are partakers of his
resurrection, we are raised by it to a newness of life, which corresponds
with the righteousness of God. In one word I apprehend repentance to be
regeneration, the end of which is the restoration of the Divine image
within us; which was defaced, and almost obliterated, by the transgression
of Adam. Thus the apostle teaches us, when he says, “But we all, with open
face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the
same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.”(1633)
Again: “Be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind; and put on the new man,
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.”(1634)
Again, in another place: “And ye have put on the new man, which is renewed
in knowledge after the image of him that created him.”(1635) Wherefore, in
this regeneration, we are restored by the grace of Christ to the
righteousness of God, from which we fell in Adam; in which manner the Lord
is pleased completely to restore all those whom he adopts to the
inheritance of life. And this restoration is not accomplished in a single
moment, or day, or year; but by continual, and sometimes even tardy
advances, the Lord destroys the carnal corruptions of his chosen, purifies
them from all pollution, and consecrates them as temples to himself;
renewing all their senses to real purity, that they may employ their whole
life in the exercise of repentance, and know that this warfare will be
terminated only by death. And so much the greater is the wickedness of
that impure and quarrelsome apostate Staphylus, who idly pretends that I
confound the state of the present life with the glory of heaven, when I
explain the image of God, according to Paul, to be righteousness and true
holiness. As if, indeed, when any thing is to be defined, we are not to
inquire after the completeness and perfection of it. It is not denied that
there is room for further advances; but I assert, that as far as any man
approaches to a resemblance of God, so far the image of God is displayed
in him. That believers may attain to this, God assigns them the race of
repentance to run during their whole life.

X. Thus, therefore, the children of God are liberated by regeneration from
the servitude of sin; not that they have already obtained the full
possession of liberty, and experience no more trouble from the flesh, but
there remains in them a perpetual cause of contention to exercise them;
and not only to exercise them, but also to make them better acquainted
with their own infirmity. And on this subject all sound writers are
agreed—that there still remains in a regenerate man a fountain of evil,
continually producing irregular desires, which allure and stimulate him to
the commission of sin. They acknowledge, also, that saints are still so
afflicted with the disease of concupiscence, that they cannot prevent
their being frequently stimulated and incited either to lust, or to
avarice, or to ambition, or to other vices. There is no need of a
laborious investigation, to learn what were the sentiments of the fathers
on this subject: it will be sufficient to consult Augustine alone, who
with great diligence and fidelity has collected the opinions of them all.
From him, then, the reader may receive all the certainty he can desire
concerning the sense of antiquity. Between him and us, this difference may
be discovered—that while he concedes that believers, as long as they
inhabit a mortal body, are so bound by concupiscence that they cannot but
feel irregular desires, yet he ventures not to call this disease by the
name of _sin_, but, content with designating it by the appellation of
infirmity, teaches that it only becomes sin in cases where either action
or consent is added to the conception or apprehension of the mind, that
is, where the will yields to the first impulse of appetite. But we, on the
contrary, deem it to be sin, whenever a man feels any evil desires
contrary to the Divine law; and we also assert the depravity itself to be
sin, which produces these desires in our minds. We maintain, therefore,
that sin always exists in the saints, till they are divested of the mortal
body; because their flesh is the residence of that depravity of
concupiscence, which is repugnant to all rectitude. Nevertheless, he has
not always refrained from using the word sin in this sense; as when he
says, “Paul gives the appellation of sin to this, from which all sins
proceed, that is, to carnal concupiscence. This, as it respects the
saints, loses its kingdom on earth, and has no existence in heaven.” In
these words he acknowledges that believers are guilty of sin, inasmuch as
they are the subjects of carnal concupiscence.

XI. But when God is said “to cleanse his church”(1636) from all sin, to
promise the grace of deliverance in baptism, and to fulfil it in his
elect,—we refer these phrases rather to the guilt of sin, than to the
existence of sin. In the regeneration of his children, God does indeed
destroy the kingdom of sin in them, (for the Spirit supplies them with
strength, which renders them victorious in the conflict;) but though it
ceases to reign, it continues to dwell in them. Wherefore we say, that
“the old man is crucified,”(1637) that the law of sin is abolished in the
children of God, yet so that some relics remain; not to predominate over
them, but to humble them with a consciousness of their infirmity. We
grant, indeed, that they are not imputed, any more than if they did not
exist; but we likewise contend that it is owing to the mercy of God that
the saints are delivered from this guilt, who would otherwise be justly
accounted sinners and guilty before him. Nor will it be difficult for us
to confirm this opinion, since there are clear testimonies of Scripture to
support it. What can we desire more explicit than the declaration of Paul
to the Romans?(1638) In the first place, that he there speaks in the
character of a regenerate man, we have already shown; and Augustine has
evinced the same by the strongest arguments. I say nothing of his using
the words evil and sin. However those who wish to oppose us may cavil at
those words, yet who can deny that a resistance to the Divine law is evil?
who can deny that an opposition to righteousness is sin? finally, who will
not admit that there is guilt wherever there is spiritual misery? But all
these things are affirmed by Paul respecting this disease. Besides, we
have a certain demonstration from the law, by which this whole question
may be briefly decided. For we are commanded to love God with all our
heart, with all our mind, and with all our strength. Since all the powers
of our soul ought to be thus occupied by the love of God, it is evident
that the precept is not fulfilled by those who receive into their hearts
the least desire, or admit into their minds any thought, which may draw
them aside from the love of God into vanity. What then? Are not these
properties of the soul,—to be affected with sudden emotions, to apprehend
in the sensory, and to form conceptions in the mind? When these,
therefore, open a way for the admission of vain and corrupt thoughts, do
they not show that they are so far destitute of the love of God? Whoever,
therefore, refuses to acknowledge that all the inordinate desires of the
flesh are sins, and that that malady of concupiscence, which they call an
incentive to sin, is the source of sin, must necessarily deny the
transgression of the law to be sin.

XII. If it be thought absurd, that all the natural appetites of man should
be thus universally condemned, since they were implanted by God, the
author of nature,—we reply, that we by no means condemn those desires,
which God implanted so deeply in the nature of man at his first creation
that they cannot be eradicated from it without destroying humanity itself,
but only those insolent and lawless appetites which resist the commands of
God. But now, since, through the depravity of nature, all its powers are
so vitiated and corrupted, that disorder and intemperance are visible in
all our actions; because the appetites are inseparable from such excesses,
therefore we maintain that they are corrupt. Or, if it be wished to have
the substance of our opinion in fewer words, we say, that all the desires
of men are evil; and we consider them to be sinful, not as they are
natural, but because they are inordinate; and we affirm they are
inordinate, because nothing pure or immaculate can proceed from a
corrupted and polluted nature. Nor does Augustine deviate from this
doctrine so much as he appears to do. When he is too much afraid of the
odium with which the Pelagians endeavoured to overwhelm him, he sometimes
refrains from using the word _sin_: yet when he says, “that the law of sin
remains in the saints, and that only the guilt is abolished,” he
sufficiently indicates that he is not averse to our opinion.

XIII. We will adduce some other passages, from which his sentiments will
more fully appear. In his second book against Julian: “This law of sin is
both abolished in the spiritual regeneration, and continues in the mortal
flesh; abolished, since the guilt is removed in the sacrament, by which
believers are regenerated; but continues, because it produces those
desires against which also believers contend.” Again: “Therefore the law
of sin, which was in the members even of so great an apostle, is abolished
in baptism, but not finally destroyed.” Again: “The law of sin, the
remaining guilt of which is removed in baptism, Ambrose has called
_iniquity_; because it is iniquitous for the flesh to lust against the
spirit.” Again: “Sin is dead in that guilt in which it held us; and,
although dead, it will rebel till it is cured by the perfection of
burial.” In the fifth book, he is still more explicit: “As blindness of
heart is both a sin, which consists in a man’s not believing in God; and a
punishment for sin, by which a proud heart is deservedly punished; and
also a cause of sin, when any is committed through the error of a blind
heart; so the concupiscence of the flesh, against which the good spirit
lusteth, is both a sin, because it is a disobedience against the
government of the mind; and a punishment for sin, because it is inflicted
for the demerits of the disobedient; and also a cause of sin, consenting
by defection, or produced from contagion.” Here he styles it _sin_,
without any ambiguity; because, having overthrown error and confirmed the
truth, he is not so much afraid of calumnies; as also in the forty‐first
homily on John, where he undoubtedly speaks the real sentiments of his
mind: “If in the flesh you serve the law of sin, do what the apostle
himself says—’Let not sin reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey
it in the lusts thereof.’(1639) He says not, let it not exist; but, let it
not reign. As long as you live, sin must necessarily exist in your
members; let it at least be divested of its kingdom, so that its commands
may not be fulfilled.” Those who contend that concupiscence is not sin,
commonly object this passage of James—“When lust hath conceived, it
bringeth forth sin.”(1640) But this objection is easily repelled; for,
unless we understand him there to speak of evil works exclusively, or of
actual sins, even an evil volition cannot be accounted sin. But from his
calling flagitious and criminal actions the offspring of lust, and
attributing to them the name of sin, it does not necessarily follow that
concupiscence is not an evil thing, and deserving of condemnation in the
sight of God.

XIV. Some Anabaptists, in the present age, imagine I know not what frantic
intemperance, instead of spiritual regeneration—that the children of God,
being restored to a state of innocence, are no longer obliged to be
solicitous to restrain the licentiousness of the flesh, but that they
ought to follow the leadings of the Spirit, under whose direction it is
impossible ever to err. It would be incredible that the mind of man should
fall into such madness, did they not publicly and haughtily disseminate
this opinion. It is indeed truly prodigious; but it is just and
reasonable, that those who have persuaded themselves to pervert the truth
of God into a falsehood, should suffer such punishment for their
sacrilegious presumption. Must all distinction, then, of honour and
turpitude, justice and injustice, good and evil, virtue and vice, be
annihilated? This difference, they say, proceeds from the malediction of
the old Adam, from which we are delivered by Christ. Then there will be no
difference now between chastity and fornication, sincerity and knavery,
truth and falsehood, equity and rapine. Dismiss (they say) all vain fear;
the Spirit will command you nothing that is evil, provided you securely
and intrepidly resign yourself to his direction. Who is not astonished at
these monstrous notions? Yet this is a popular philosophy among those,
who, blinded by the violence of their appetites, have discarded common
sense. But what kind of a Christ, and what kind of a Spirit, have they
fabricated for us? For we acknowledge one Christ and his Spirit alone;
whom the prophets have celebrated, whom the gospel proclaims as revealed,
but of whom it gives us no such account as this. That Spirit is not the
patron of murder, fornication, drunkenness, pride, contention, avarice, or
fraud; but the author of love, chastity, sobriety, modesty, peace,
moderation, and truth. He is not a Spirit of fanaticism, rushing
precipitately, without any consideration, through right and wrong; but is
full of wisdom and understanding, rightly to discern between justice and
injustice. He never instigates to dissolute and unrestrained
licentiousness; but, discriminating between what is lawful and what is
unlawful, inculcates temperance and moderation. But why should we spend
any more labour in refuting this monstrous frenzy? To Christians the
Spirit of the Lord is not a turbulent phantom, which they have either
spawned themselves in a dream, or received from the invention of others;
but they religiously seek the knowledge of him in the Scriptures, where
these two things are delivered concerning him—first, that he is given to
us in order to our sanctification, to purify us from all our pollutions,
and lead us to obey the Divine righteousness; which obedience cannot exist
without the subjugation of the appetites, to which these men would allow
an unlimited license: in the next place, that we are so purified by his
sanctification, that we are nevertheless still encompassed with numerous
vices and great infirmity, as long as we are burdened with the body.
Wherefore, being at a great distance from perfection, it behoves us to
make continual advances; and being entangled in vices, we have need to
strive against them every day. Hence, also, it follows that we ought to
shake off all slothful security, and exert the most vigilant attention,
lest, without caution, we should be surprised and overcome by the snares
of our flesh; unless we are well assured that we have made a greater
progress than the apostle; who, nevertheless, was buffeted by the
“messenger of Satan,”(1641) that his strength might be “made perfect in
weakness;”(1642) and who faithfully represented the conflict between the
flesh and the Spirit, which he experienced in his own person.

XV. When the apostle, in a description of repentance, enumerates seven
things, which are either causes producing it, or effects proceeding from
it, or members and parts of it, he does it for a very good reason. These
things are, carefulness, excuse, indignation, fear, vehement desire, zeal,
revenge.(1643) Nor ought it to be thought strange that I venture not to
determine whether they should be considered as causes or effects; for
arguments may be adduced in support of both. They may also be styled
affections connected with repentance; but as we may discover the meaning
of Paul without discussing these questions, we shall be content with a
simple exposition of them. He says, then, that godly sorrow produces
_solicitude_. For a person who is affected with a serious sense of
displeasure because he has sinned against his God, is at the same time
stimulated to diligence and attention, that he may completely extricate
himself from the snares of the devil, and be more cautious of his
insidious attacks, that he may not in future disobey the government of the
Spirit, or be overcome with a careless security. The next thing is _self‐
excuse_, which in this place signifies not a defence by which a sinner
tries to escape the judgment of God, either by denying his transgressions
or extenuating his guilt, but a kind of excuse, consisting rather in
deprecation of punishment than in confidence of his cause. Just as
children, who are not absolutely lost to all sense of duty, while they
acknowledge and confess their faults, at the same time deprecate
punishment, and, in order to succeed, testify by every possible method
that they have not cast off that reverence which is due to their parents;
in a word, they excuse themselves in such a manner, not to prove
themselves righteous and innocent, but only to obtain pardon. This is
followed by _indignation_, in which the sinner laments within himself,
expostulates with himself, and is angry with himself, while he recollects
his perverseness and ingratitude to God. The word _fear_ denotes that
trepidation with which our minds are penetrated, whenever we reflect upon
our demerits, and on the terrible severity of the Divine wrath against
sinners. For we cannot but be agitated with an amazing inquietude, which
teaches us humility, and renders us more cautious for the future. Now, if
the solicitude before mentioned be the offspring of fear, we see the
connection and coherence between them. He appears to me to have used the
word _desire_ to denote diligence in duty and alacrity of obedience, to
which the knowledge of our faults ought to be a most powerful stimulus.
Similar to this is the meaning of _zeal_, which he immediately subjoins;
for it signifies the ardour with which we are inflamed, when we are roused
with such thoughts as these: “What have I done? Whither had I precipitated
myself, if I had not been succoured by the mercy of God?” The last thing
is _revenge_, or punishment; for the greater our severity is towards
ourselves, and the stricter inquisition we make concerning our sins, so
much the stronger hope ought we to entertain that God will be propitious
and merciful. And, indeed, it is impossible but that a soul, impressed
with a dread of the Divine judgment, must inflict some punishment on
itself. Truly pious persons experience what punishments are contained in
shame, confusion, lamentation, displeasure with themselves, and the other
affections which arise from a serious acknowledgment of their
transgressions. But let us remember that some limit must be observed, that
we may not be overwhelmed in sorrow; for to nothing are terrified
consciences more liable than to fall into despair. And with this artifice,
also, whomsoever Satan perceives to be dejected by a fear of God, he
plunges them further and further into the deep gulf of sorrow, that they
may never arise again. That fear, indeed, cannot be excessive, which
terminates in humility, and departs not from the hope of pardon.
Nevertheless, the sinner should always be on his guard, according to the
direction of the apostle,(1644)lest while he excites his heart to be
displeased with himself, he be _wearied_ with excessive dread, and _faint
in his mind_; for this would drive us away from God, who calls us to
himself by repentance. On this subject, Bernard also gives a very useful
admonition: “Sorrow for sin is necessary, if it be not perpetual. I advise
you sometimes to quit the anxious and painful recollection of your own
ways, and to arise to an agreeable and serene remembrance of the Divine
blessings. Let us mingle honey with wormwood, that its salutary bitterness
may restore our health, when it shall be drunk tempered with a mixture of
sweetness; and if you reflect on your own meanness, reflect also on the
goodness of the Lord.”

XVI. Now, it may also be understood what are the fruits of repentance.
They are, the duties of piety towards God, and of charity towards men,
with sanctity and purity in our whole life. In a word, the more diligently
any one examines his life by the rule of the Divine law, so much the more
certain evidences he discovers of his repentance. The Spirit, therefore,
in frequently exhorting us to repentance, calls our attention, sometimes
to all the precepts of the law, sometimes to the duties of the second
table; though in other places, after having condemned impurity in the very
fountain of the heart, he proceeds to those external testimonies which
evidence a sincere repentance; a view of which I will soon exhibit to the
reader, in a description of the Christian life. I shall not collect
testimonies from the prophets, in which they partly ridicule the follies
of those who attempt to appease God by ceremonies, and demonstrate them to
be mere mockeries; and partly inculcate, that external integrity of life
is not the principal branch of repentance, because God looks at the heart.
He that is but ordinarily acquainted with the Scripture, will discover of
himself, without being informed by any one, that in our concerns with God,
we advance not a single step unless we begin with the internal affection
of the heart. And this passage of Joel will afford us no small assistance
in the interpretation of others: “Rend your heart, and not your
garments.”(1645) Both these ideas are briefly expressed in these words of
James—“Cleanse your hands, ye sinners; and purify your hearts, ye double
minded;”(1646) where there is indeed an addition made to the first clause;
but the fountain, or original, is next discovered, showing the necessity
of cleansing the secret pollution, that an altar may be erected to God
even in the heart. There are likewise some external exercises which we
use, in private, as remedies either to humble ourselves, or to subdue our
carnality; and in public, to testify our repentance. They proceed from the
revenge mentioned by Paul;(1647) for it is natural to an afflicted mind to
continue in a squalid condition, groaning and weeping, to avoid every kind
of splendour and pomp, and to forsake all pleasures. He who experiences
the great evil of the rebellion of the flesh, seeks every remedy to
restrain it. He who properly considers what a grievous thing it is to have
offended the justice of God, can enjoy no repose till he has glorified God
by his humility. Such exercises are frequently mentioned by the old
writers, when they speak of the fruits of repentance. And though they by
no means make repentance wholly to consist in them, yet the reader will
pardon me if I deliver my opinion, that they appear to me to insist upon
them more than they ought. And I hope every one, on a sober examination,
will agree with me, that they have gone beyond all due bounds in two
respects. For when they so strongly urged and so extravagantly recommended
that corporeal discipline, the consequence was indeed that the common
people adopted it with great ardour; but they also obscured that which
ought to be esteemed of infinitely greater importance. Secondly, in the
infliction of castigations, they used rather more rigour than was
consistent with ecclesiastical gentleness. But we shall have to treat of
this in another place.

XVII. But as some persons, when they find weeping, fasting, and ashes
mentioned, not only in many other passages of Scripture, but particularly
in Joel,(1648) consider fasting and weeping as the principal part of
repentance, their mistake requires to be rectified. What is there said of
the conversion of the whole heart to the Lord, and of rending not the
garments, but the heart, properly belongs to repentance; but weeping and
fasting are not added as perpetual or necessary effects of it, but as
circumstances belonging to a particular case. Having prophesied that a
most grievous destruction was impending over the Jews, he persuades them
to prevent the Divine wrath, not only by repentance, but also by
exhibiting external demonstrations of sorrow. For as it was customary, in
ancient times, for an accused person to present himself in a suppliant
posture, with a long beard, dishevelled hair, and mourning apparel, in
order to conciliate the compassion of the judge, so it became those who
stood as criminals before the tribunal of God, to deprecate his severity
in a condition calculated to excite commiseration. Though sackcloth and
ashes were perhaps more suitable to those times, yet it is evident that
the practice of weeping and fasting would be very seasonable among us,
whenever the Lord appears to threaten us with any affliction or calamity.
For when he causes danger to appear, he, as it were, denounces that he is
prepared and armed for the exercise of vengeance. The prophet, therefore,
was right in exhorting his countrymen to weeping and fasting; that is, to
the sadness of persons under accusation, into whose offences he had just
before said that an examination was instituted. Neither would the pastors
of the church act improperly in the present age, if, when they perceived
calamity impending over the heads of their people, they called them to
immediate weeping and fasting; provided they always insisted with the
greatest fervour and diligence on the principal point, which is, that they
must rend their hearts, and not their garments. It is certain, that
fasting is not always the concomitant of repentance, but is appointed for
times of peculiar calamity; wherefore Christ connects it with mourning,
when he frees the apostles from any obligation to it, till they should be
affected with grief at the loss of his presence.(1649) I speak of solemn
fasting. For the life of the pious ought at all times to be regulated by
frugality and sobriety, that through its whole progress it may appear to
be a kind of perpetual fast. But as the whole of this subject must be
discussed again, when we come to treat of Ecclesiastical Discipline, I
touch the more slightly upon it at present.

XVIII. I will again remark, however, that when the word _repentance_ is
transferred to this external profession, it is improperly changed from the
genuine signification which I have stated. For this external profession is
not so much a conversion to God, as a confession of sin, with a
deprecation of punishment and guilt. Thus to “repent in sackcloth and
ashes,”(1650) is only a declaration of our displeasure against ourselves,
when God is angry with us on account of our grievous offences. And this is
a public species of confession, by which condemning ourselves before
angels and men, we prevent the judgment of God. For Paul rebukes the
sluggishness of those who indulge their sins, saying, “If we would judge
ourselves, we should not be judged.”(1651) It is not necessary, in all
cases, publicly to make men witnesses of our repentance; but a private
confession to God is a branch of true penitence which cannot be omitted.
For nothing is more unreasonable than that God should pardon sins, in
which we encourage ourselves, and which, lest he should bring them to
light, we conceal under the garb of hypocrisy. And it is not only
necessary to confess the sins which we commit from day to day; more
grievous falls ought to lead us further, and to recall to our remembrance
those which appear to have been long buried in oblivion. We learn this
from the example of David;(1652) for, being ashamed of a recent and
flagitious crime, he examines himself back to the time of his conception,
and acknowledges that even then he was corrupted and contaminated with
carnal impurity; and this not to extenuate his guilt, as many conceal
themselves in a multitude, and endeavour to escape with impunity by
implicating others with themselves. Very different was the conduct of
David, who ingenuously aggravated his guilt, by confessing that he was
corrupted from his earliest infancy, and had never ceased to accumulate
crimes upon crimes. In another place, also, he enters on such an
examination of his past life, that he implores the Divine mercy to pardon
the sins of his youth.(1653) And certainly we shall never give proof that
we have shaken off our lethargy, till, groaning under the burden, and
bewailing our misery, we pray to God for relief. It is further to be
remarked, that the repentance which we are commanded constantly to
practise, differs from that which arouses, as it were, from death those
who have either fallen into some great enormity, or abandoned themselves
to a course of sin with unrestrained license, or by any rebellion shaken
off the Divine yoke. For when the Scripture exhorts to repentance, it
frequently signifies a kind of transition and resurrection from death to
life; and when it states that the people repented, it means that they
departed from idolatry and other gross enormities; in which sense Paul
declares his grief for sinners, who “have not repented of their
uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness.”(1654) This difference
should be carefully observed, lest, when we hear that few are called to
repentance, we fall into a supine security, as though we had no more to do
with the mortification of the flesh, from which the depraved appetites
that perpetually disturb us, and the vices that often arise in us, will
never permit us to relax. The special repentance, therefore, which is only
required of some whom the devil has seduced from the fear of God, and
entangled in his fatal snares, supersedes not that ordinary repentance,
which the corruption of nature obliges us to practise during the whole
course of our lives.

XIX. Now, if it be true, as it certainly is, that the whole substance of
the gospel is comprised in these two points, repentance and remission of
sins,—do not we perceive that the Lord freely justifies his children, that
he may also restore them to true righteousness by the sanctification of
his Spirit? John, the “messenger sent before the face” of Christ to
“prepare his way before him,”(1655) preached, “Repent ye, for the kingdom
of heaven is at hand.”(1656) By calling men to repentance, he taught them
to acknowledge themselves to be sinners, and every thing belonging to them
to be condemned before God, that they might earnestly desire and pray for
a mortification of the flesh, and new regeneration in the Spirit. By
announcing the kingdom of God, he called them to exercise faith; for by
“the kingdom of God,” the approach of which he proclaimed, he intended
remission of sins, salvation, life, and in general all the benefits that
we obtain in Christ. Wherefore, in the other evangelists, it is said, that
“John came, preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of
sins.”(1657) What was intended by this, but that, oppressed and wearied
with the burden of sins, men should turn themselves to the Lord, and
entertain a hope of remission and salvation? Thus, also, Christ commenced
his public ministrations. “The kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and
believe the gospel.”(1658) First, he declares that the treasures of mercy
are opened in himself; then he requires repentance; and lastly, a reliance
on the Divine promises. Therefore, when he would give a brief summary of
the whole gospel, he said, that “it behoved him to suffer, and to rise
from the dead; and that repentance and remission of sins should be
preached in his name.”(1659) The apostles also, after his resurrection,
preached that he was exalted by God, “to give repentance to Israel and
remission of sins.”(1660) Repentance is preached in the name of Christ,
when men are informed, by the doctrine of the gospel, that all their
thoughts, their affections, and their pursuits, are corrupt and vicious;
and that therefore it is necessary for them to be born again, if they wish
to enter the kingdom of God. Remission of sins is preached, when men are
taught that Christ is made unto them “wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption;”(1661) in whose name they are gratuitously
accounted righteous and innocent in the sight of God. Both these blessings
of grace, as we have already shown, are apprehended by faith; yet since
the goodness of God in the remission of sins is the peculiar object of
faith, it was necessary that it should be carefully distinguished from
repentance.

XX. Now, as a hatred of sin, which is the commencement of repentance, is
our first introduction to the knowledge of Christ, who reveals himself to
none but miserable and distressed sinners, who mourn, and labour, and are
heavy laden; who hunger and thirst, and are pining away with grief and
misery;(1662) so it is necessary for us, if we desire to abide in Christ,
to strive for this repentance, to devote our whole lives to it, and to
pursue it to the last. For he “came to call sinners,” but it was to call
them “to repentance.”(1663) He was “sent to bless” the unworthy; but it
was “in turning away every one from his iniquities.”(1664) The Scripture
is full of such expressions. Wherefore, when God offers remission of sins,
he generally requires repentance on the part of the sinner; implying that
his mercy ought to furnish a motive to excite us to repentance. “Keep ye
judgment, and do justice; for my salvation is near.”(1665) Again: “The
Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in
Jacob.”(1666) Again: “Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon
him while he is near: let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous
man his thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy
upon him.”(1667) Again: “Repent, and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out.”(1668) Here it must be remarked, however, that this condition
is not annexed in such a manner, as though our repentance were the
fundamental and meritorious cause of pardon; but rather, because the Lord
has determined to have mercy upon men, in order that they may repent, he
informs them what course they must take if they wish to obtain his favour.
Therefore, as long as we inhabit the prison of our body, we shall have to
maintain an incessant conflict with the vices of our corrupt nature, and
even with our natural soul. Plato sometimes says, that the life of a
philosopher is a meditation of death. We may assert with more truth, that
the life of a Christian is perpetually employed in the mortification of
the flesh, till it is utterly destroyed, and the Spirit of God obtains the
sole empire within us. Wherefore I think that he has made a very
considerable proficiency, who has learned to be exceedingly displeased
with himself: not that he should remain in this distress, and advance no
further, but rather hasten and aspire towards God; that being ingrafted
into the death and life of Christ, he may make repentance the object of
his constant meditation and pursuit. And this cannot but be the conduct of
those who feel a genuine hatred of sin; for no man ever hated sin, without
having been previously captivated with the love of righteousness. This
doctrine, as it is the most simple of all, so also it appears to me to be
most consistent with the truth of the Scripture.

XXI. That repentance is a peculiar gift of God, must, I think, be so
evident from the doctrine just stated, as to preclude the necessity of a
long discourse to prove it. Therefore the Church praises and admires the
goodness of God, that he “hath granted to the Gentiles repentance unto
life;”(1669) and Paul, when he enjoins Timothy to be patient and gentle
towards unbelievers, says, “If God, peradventure, will give them
repentance, that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the
devil.”(1670) God affirms, indeed, that he wills the conversion of all
men, and directs his exhortations promiscuously to all; but the efficacy
of these exhortations depends on the Spirit of regeneration. For it were
more easy to make ourselves men, than by our own power to endue ourselves
with a more excellent nature. Therefore, in the whole course of
regeneration, we are justly styled God’s “workmanship, created unto good
works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them.”(1671)
Whomsoever God chooses to rescue from destruction, them he vivifies by the
Spirit of regeneration: not that repentance is properly the cause of
salvation, but because, as we have already seen, it is inseparable from
faith and the mercy of God; since, according to the testimony of Isaiah,
“the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from
transgression in Jacob.”(1672) It remains an unshaken truth, that wherever
the fear of God prevails in the heart, the Spirit has operated to the
salvation of that individual. Therefore, in Isaiah, where believers are
bewailing and deploring their being deserted by God, they mention this as
a sign of reprobation, that their hearts are hardened by him.(1673) The
apostle also, intending to exclude apostates from all hope of salvation,
asserts, as a reason, that “it is impossible to renew them again unto
repentance;”(1674) because God, in the renewal of those whom he will not
suffer to perish, discovers an evidence of his paternal favour, and
attracts them to himself with the radiance of his serene and joyful
countenance; whilst, on the contrary, he displays his wrath in hardening
the reprobate, whose impiety is never to be forgiven.(1675) This kind of
vengeance the apostle denounces against wilful apostates, who, when they
depart from the faith of the gospel, deride God, contumeliously reject his
grace, profane and trample on the blood of Christ, and do all in their
power to crucify him again. For he does not, as is pretended by some
preposterously severe persons, preclude all voluntary sinners from a hope
of pardon. His design is to show that apostasy is unworthy of every
excuse, and therefore it is not strange that God punishes such a
sacrilegious contempt of himself with inexorable rigour. “For it is
impossible (he tells us) for those who were once enlightened, and have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost,
and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,
if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they
crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open
shame.”(1676) Again: “If we sin wilfully after that we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but a
certain fearful looking‐for of judgment.”(1677) These are the passages,
from a misinterpretation of which the Novatians formerly derived a
pretence for their extravagant opinions; and the apparent harshness of
which has offended some good men, and induced them to believe that this
Epistle is supposititious, though every part of it contains unequivocal
evidences of the apostolic spirit. But as we are contending only with
those who receive it, it is easy to show that these passages afford not
the least countenance to their error. In the first place, the apostle must
necessarily be in unison with his Master, who affirms that “all sin and
blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost, which shall not be forgiven, neither in this world, neither in the
world to come.”(1678) The apostle, I say, must certainly have been content
with this exception, unless we wish to make him an enemy to the grace of
Christ. Whence it follows, that pardon is denied to no particular sins,
except one, which proceeds from desperate fury, and cannot be attributed
to infirmity, but clearly proves a man to be possessed by the devil.

XXII. But, for the further elucidation of this subject, it is necessary to
inquire into the nature of that dreadful crime which will obtain no
forgiveness. Augustine somewhere defines it to be an obstinate
perverseness, attended with a despair of pardon, and continued till death;
but this is not consistent with the language of Christ, that “it shall not
be forgiven in this world.” For either this is a vain assertion, or the
sin may be committed in this life. But if the definition of Augustine be
right, it is never committed unless it continue till death. Others say,
that a man sins against the Holy Ghost, who envies the grace bestowed on
his brother. I know no foundation for this notion. But we will adduce the
true definition; which when it shall have been proved by strong
testimonies, will of itself easily overturn all others. I say, then, that
the sin against the Holy Ghost is committed by those who, though they are
so overpowered with the splendour of Divine truth that they cannot pretend
ignorance, nevertheless resist it with determined malice, merely for the
sake of resisting it. For Christ, in explanation of what he had asserted,
immediately subjoins, “Whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man,
it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost,
it shall not be forgiven him.”(1679) And Matthew, instead of “blasphemy
against the Spirit,” says, “blasphemy of the Spirit.”(1680) How can any
one cast a reproach on the Son, that is not also directed against the
Spirit? Those who unadvisedly offend against the truth of God, which they
know not, and who ignorantly revile Christ, but at the same time have such
a disposition that they would not extinguish the Divine truth if revealed
to them, or utter one injurious word against him whom they knew to be the
Lord’s Christ,—they sin against the Father and the Son. Thus there are
many, in the present day, who most inveterately execrate the doctrines of
the gospel, which if they knew to be the evangelical doctrine, they would
be ready to venerate with their whole heart. But those who are convinced
in their conscience, that it is the word of God which they reject and
oppose, and yet continue their opposition,—they are said to blaspheme
against the Spirit, because they strive against the illumination which is
the work of the Holy Spirit. Such were some among the Jews, who, when they
were not able to resist the Spirit(1681) that spake by Stephen, yet
obstinately strove to resist. Many of them were undoubtedly urged to this
conduct by a zeal for the law; but it appears that there were others, who
were infuriated by a malignant impiety against God himself, that is,
against the doctrine which they knew to be from God. Such also were the
Pharisees, whom the Lord rebuked; who, in order to counteract the
influence of the Holy Spirit, slanderously ascribed it to the power of
Beelzebub.(1682) This, then, is “blasphemy of the Spirit,” where the
presumption of man deliberately strives to annihilate the glory of God.
This is implied in the observation of Paul, that he “obtained mercy,
because” he had “ignorantly in unbelief” committed those crimes, the
demerits of which would otherwise have excluded him from the grace of the
Lord.(1683) If the union of ignorance and unbelief was the reason of his
obtaining pardon, it follows that there is no room for pardon where
unbelief has been attended with knowledge.

XXIII. But, on a careful observation, you will perceive that the apostle
speaks not of one or more particular falls, but of the universal
defection, by which the reprobate exclude themselves from salvation. We
need not wonder that those whom John, in his canonical Epistle, affirms
not to have been of the number of the elect from whom they departed,
experience God to be implacable towards them.(1684) For he directs his
discourse against those who imagined that they might return to the
Christian religion, although they had once apostatized from it; to whom he
contradicts this false and pernicious notion, declaring, what is
absolutely true, that it is impossible for persons to return to the
communion of Christ, who have knowingly and wilfully rejected it. And it
is rejected, not by those who simply transgress the word of the Lord by a
dissolute and licentious life, but by those who professedly renounce all
his doctrines. Therefore the fallacy lies in the terms _falling away_ and
_sinning_; for the Novatians explain _falling away_ to take place, when
any one, after having been instructed by the law of the Lord that theft
and fornication ought not to be committed, yet abstains not from either of
these sins. But, on the contrary, I affirm that there is a tacit
antithesis understood, which ought to contain a repetition of all the
opposites of the things which had been previously mentioned; so that this
passage expresses not any particular vice, but a universal defection from
God, and if I may use the expression, an apostasy of the whole man. When
he speaks, therefore, of some who fell away, “after they were once
enlightened, and had tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers
of the Holy Ghost, and the powers of the world to come,”(1685) it must be
understood of persons who, with deliberate impiety, have smothered the
light of the Spirit, rejected the taste of the heavenly gift, alienated
themselves from the sanctification of the Spirit, and trampled on the word
of God and the powers of the world to come. And the more fully to express
that decided determination of impiety, he afterwards, in another place,
adds the word _wilfully_. For when he says, that “if we sin wilfully after
that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more
sacrifice,”(1686) he denies not that Christ is a perpetual sacrifice to
expiate the iniquities of the saints, which almost the whole Epistle
expressly proclaims in describing the priesthood of Christ, but intends
that there remains no other where that is rejected. But it is rejected,
when the truth of the gospel is avowedly renounced.

XXIV. The objection of some, who conceive it to be severe and inconsistent
with the Divine clemency, that pardon should be refused to any who flee to
the Lord imploring his mercy, is easily answered. For he affirms not that
pardon is denied to them if they turn themselves to the Lord; but he
absolutely denies the possibility of their attaining to repentance,
because they are stricken with eternal blindness by the righteous judgment
of God, on account of their ingratitude. Nor is it any objection that the
same apostle afterwards accommodates to this subject the example of Esau,
who vainly endeavoured with weeping and lamentation to recover his lost
rights of primogeniture. Nor that the prophet utters this denunciation:
“though they shall cry unto me, I will not hearken unto them.”(1687) For
such forms of expression signify neither true conversion nor invocation of
God, but the anxiety felt by the impious in extreme calamity, which
constrains them to consider, what before they carelessly disregarded, that
nothing can do them any good but the assistance of the Lord. And this they
do not so much implore, as bewail its being withheld from them. Therefore
the prophet intends by _crying_, and the apostle by _weeping_, only that
dreadful torment which excruciates the impious with the agonies of
despair. This requires to be carefully observed, because otherwise this
procedure of God would contradict his proclamation by the mouth of the
prophet, that as soon as the sinner shall have turned, he will be
propitious to him.(1688) And, as I have already remarked, it is certain
that the human mind is not changed for the better, except by the previous
influence of his grace. Nor will his promise respecting those who call
upon him, ever deceive; but it is improper to apply the terms _conversion_
and _prayer_ to that blind torment by which the reprobate are distracted,
when they see that it is necessary for them to seek God in order to find a
remedy for their miseries, while at the same time they continue to flee
from his approach.

XXV. But it is inquired, since the apostle denies that God is appeased by
a hypocritical repentance, how Ahab obtained pardon, and averted the
punishment with which he had been threatened, though he appears, from the
subsequent tenor of his life, to have been only terrified by a sudden
consternation. He clothed himself with sackcloth, sprinkled ashes upon his
head, lay on the ground, and, as it is declared concerning him, “humbled
himself before God;”(1689) but it was nothing to rend his garments, while
his heart remained perverse and inflated with wickedness. Yet we see how
God is inclined to clemency. I reply, that sometimes hypocrites are thus
spared for a season, yet that the wrath of God always abides upon them,
and that this is done not so much for their sakes, as for a public
example. For what benefit did Ahab receive from the mitigation of the
threatened punishment, but a respite from it during his continuance in
this world? The malediction of God, therefore, although concealed, fixed
itself in his family, and he himself went forward to eternal perdition.
The same may be observed in the case of Esau; for though he suffered a
repulse, yet a temporal benediction was granted to his tears.(1690) But
since the spiritual inheritance, according to the oracle of God, could
remain only with one of the brothers, when Jacob was chosen and Esau
rejected, that preterition shut out the Divine mercy; yet this consolation
was left to him as to a man on a level with the brutes, that he should be
enriched with “the fatness of the earth and the dew of heaven.” This is
what I have just observed ought to be considered as an example to others,
that we may learn to devote our minds and our exertions with more alacrity
to sincere repentance; because it is not to be doubted that those who are
truly and cordially converted will find God readily disposed to
forgiveness, whose clemency extends itself even to the unworthy, as long
as they manifest any appearance of contrition. At the same time, also, we
are taught what dreadful vengeance awaits all the obstinate, who, with
impudent countenances and hardened hearts, despise, disregard, and
ridicule the Divine threatenings. Thus he frequently extended his hand to
the children of Israel, to alleviate their distresses, notwithstanding
their supplications were hypocritical, and their hearts full of duplicity
and perfidy; as he complains in one of the Psalms,(1691) that they
immediately after returned to their former courses. He designed by his
merciful kindness, either to bring them to a serious conversion, or to
render them inexcusable. Yet, by the temporary remission of punishments,
he imposes on himself no perpetual law, but sometimes arises against
hypocrites with the greater severity, and enhances their punishments, to
manifest his extreme displeasure against hypocrisy. But he exhibits, as I
have observed, some examples of his readiness to pardon, in order to
animate the pious to a correction of their lives, and the more severely to
condemn the pride of those who obstinately kick against the goads.




