Chapter X. The Right Use Of The Present Life And Its Supports.


By such principles, the Scripture also fully instructs us in the right use
of terrestrial blessings—a thing that ought not to be neglected in a plan
for the regulation of life. For if we must live, we must also use the
necessary supports of life; nor can we avoid even those things which
appear to subserve our pleasures rather than our necessities. It behooves
us, therefore, to observe moderation, that we may use them with a pure
conscience, whether for necessity or for pleasure. This the Lord
prescribes in his word, when he teaches us, that to his servants the
present life is like a pilgrimage, in which they are travelling towards
the celestial kingdom. If we are only to pass through the earth, we ought
undoubtedly to make such a use of its blessings as will rather assist than
retard us in our journey. It is not without reason, therefore, that Paul
advises us to use this world as though we used it not, and to buy with the
same disposition with which we sell.(1877) But as this is a difficult
subject, and there is danger of falling into one of two opposite errors,
let us endeavour to proceed on safe ground, that we may avoid both
extremes. For there have been some, in other respects good and holy men,
who, seeing that intemperance and luxury, unless restrained with more than
ordinary severity, would perpetually indulge the most extravagant
excesses, and desiring to correct such a pernicious evil, have adopted the
only method which occurred to them, by permitting men to use corporeal
blessings no further than their necessity should absolutely require. This
advice was well intended, but they were far too austere. For they
committed the very dangerous error of imposing on the conscience stricter
rules than those which are prescribed to it by the word of the Lord. By
restriction within the demands of necessity, they meant an abstinence from
every thing from which it is possible to abstain; so that, according to
them, it would scarcely be lawful to eat or drink any thing but bread and
water. Others have discovered still greater austerity, like Crates the
Theban, who is said to have thrown his wealth into the sea, from an
apprehension that, unless it were destroyed, he should himself be
destroyed by it. On the contrary, many in the present day, who seek a
pretext to excuse intemperance in the use of external things, and at the
same time desire to indulge the licentiousness of the flesh, assume as
granted, what I by no means concede to them, that this liberty is not to
be restricted by any limitation; but that it ought to be left to the
conscience of every individual to use as much as he thinks lawful for
himself. I grant, indeed, that it is neither right nor possible to bind
the conscience with the fixed and precise rules of law in this case; but
since the Scripture delivers general rules for the lawful use of earthly
things, our practice ought certainly to be regulated by them.

II. It must be laid down as a principle, that the use of the gifts of God
is not erroneous, when it is directed to the same end for which the
Creator himself has created and appointed them for us; since he has
created them for our benefit, not for our injury. Wherefore, no one will
observe a more proper rule, than he who shall diligently regard this end.
Now, if we consider for what end he has created the various kinds of
aliment, we shall find that he intended to provide not only for our
necessity, but likewise for our pleasure and delight. So in clothing, he
has had in view not mere necessity, but propriety and decency. In herbs,
trees, and fruits, beside their various uses, his design has been to
gratify us by graceful forms and pleasant odours. For if this were not
true, the Psalmist would not recount among the Divine blessings, “wine
that maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to
shine;”(1878) nor would the Scriptures universally declare, in
commendation of his goodness, that he has given all these things to men.
And even the natural properties of things sufficiently indicate for what
end, and to what extent, it is lawful to use them. But shall the Lord have
endued flowers with such beauty, to present itself to our eyes, with such
sweetness of smell, to impress our sense of smelling; and shall it be
unlawful for our eyes to be affected with the beautiful sight, or our
olfactory nerves with the agreeable odour? What! has he not made such a
distinction of colours as to render some more agreeable than others? Has
he not given to gold and silver, to ivory and marble, a beauty which makes
them more precious than other metals or stones? In a word, has he not made
many things worthy of our estimation, independently of any necessary use?

III. Let us discard, therefore, that inhuman philosophy which, allowing no
use of the creatures but what is absolutely necessary, not only
malignantly deprives us of the lawful enjoyment of the Divine beneficence,
but which cannot be embraced till it has despoiled man of all his senses,
and reduced him to a senseless block. But, on the other hand, we must,
with equal diligence, oppose the licentiousness of the flesh; which,
unless it be rigidly restrained, transgresses every bound. And, as I have
observed, it has its advocates, who, under the pretext of liberty, allow
it every thing. In the first place, it will be one check to it, if it be
concluded, that all things are made for us, in order that we may know and
acknowledge their Author, and celebrate his goodness towards us by giving
him thanks. What will become of thanksgiving, if you overcharge yourself
with dainties or wine, so as to be stupefied or rendered unfit for the
duties of piety and the business of your station? Where is any
acknowledgment of God, if your body, in consequence of excessive
abundance, being inflamed with the vilest passions, infects the mind with
its impurity, so that you cannot discern what is right or virtuous? Where
is gratitude towards God for clothing, if, on account of our sumptuous
apparel, we admire ourselves and despise others? if with the elegance and
beauty of it, we prepare ourselves for unchastity? Where is our
acknowledgment of God, if our minds be fixed on the splendour of our
garments? For many so entirely devote all their senses to the pursuit of
pleasure, that the mind is, as it were, buried in it; many are so
delighted with marble, gold, and pictures, that they become like statues,
are, as it were, metamorphosed into metal, and resemble painted images.
The flavour of meats, or the sweetness of odours, so stupefies some, that
they have no relish for any thing spiritual. The same may be observed in
other cases. Wherefore it is evident, that this principle lays some
restraint on the license of abusing the Divine bounties, and confirms the
rule given us by Paul, that we “make not provision for the flesh, to
fulfil the lusts thereof;”(1879) which, if they are allowed too much
latitude, will transgress all the bounds of temperance and moderation.

IV. But there is no way more certain or concise, than what we derive from
a contempt of the present life, and meditation on a heavenly immortality.
For thence follow two rules. The first is, “that they that have wives be
as though they had none; and they that buy, as though they possessed not;
and they that use this world, as not abusing it;”(1880) according to the
direction of Paul: the second, that we should learn to bear penury with
tranquillity and patience, as well as to enjoy abundance with moderation.
He who commands us to use this world as though we used it not, prohibits
not only all intemperance in eating and drinking, and excessive delicacy,
ambition, pride, haughtiness, and fastidiousness in our furniture, our
habitations, and our apparel, but every care and affection, which would
either seduce or disturb us from thoughts of the heavenly life, and
attention to the improvement of our souls. Now, it was anciently and truly
observed by Cato, That there is a great concern about adorning the body,
and a great carelessness about virtue; and it is an old proverb, That they
who are much engaged in the care of the body, are generally negligent of
the soul. Therefore, though the liberty of believers in external things
cannot be reduced to certain rules, yet it is evidently subject to this
law, That they should indulge themselves as little as possible; that, on
the contrary, they should perpetually and resolutely exert themselves to
retrench all superfluities and to restrain luxury; and that they should
diligently beware lest they pervert into impediments things which were
given for their assistance.

V. The other rule will be, That persons whose property is small should
learn to be patient under their privations, that they may not be tormented
with an immoderate desire of riches. They who observe this moderation,
have attained no small proficiency in the school of the Lord, as he who
has made no proficiency in this point can scarcely give any proof of his
being a disciple of Christ. For besides that an inordinate desire of
earthly things is accompanied by most other vices, he who is impatient
under penury, in abundance generally betrays the opposite passion. By this
I mean, that he who is ashamed of a mean garment, will be proud of a
splendid one; he who, not content with a slender meal, is disquieted with
the desire of a more sumptuous one, would also intemperately abuse those
dainties, should they fall to his lot; he who bears a private and mean
condition with discontent and disquietude, would not abstain from pride
and arrogance, should he rise to eminence and honours. Let all, therefore,
who are sincere in the practice of piety, earnestly endeavour to learn,
after the apostolic example, “both to be full and to be hungry, both to
abound and to suffer need.”(1881) The Scripture has also a third rule, by
which it regulates the use of earthly things; of which something was said,
when we treated of the precepts of charity. For it states, that while all
these things are given to us by the Divine goodness, and appointed for our
benefit, they are, as it were, deposits intrusted to our care, of which we
must one day give an account. We ought, therefore, to manage them in such
a manner that this alarm may be incessantly sounding in our ears, “Give an
account of thy stewardship.”(1882) Let it also be remembered by whom this
account is demanded; that it is by him who has so highly recommended
abstinence, sobriety, frugality, and modesty; who abhors profusion, pride,
ostentation, and vanity; who approves of no other management of his
blessings, than such as is connected with charity; who has with his own
mouth already condemned all those pleasures which seduce the heart from
chastity and purity, or tend to impair the understanding.

VI. Lastly, it is to be remarked, that the Lord commands every one of us,
in all the actions of life, to regard his vocation. For he knows with what
great inquietude the human mind is inflamed, with what desultory levity it
is hurried hither and thither, and how insatiable is its ambition to grasp
different things at once. Therefore, to prevent universal confusion being
produced by our folly and temerity, he has appointed to all their
particular duties in different spheres of life. And that no one might
rashly transgress the limits prescribed, he has styled such spheres of
life vocations, or callings. Every individual’s line of life, therefore,
is, as it were, a post assigned him by the Lord, that he may not wander
about in uncertainty all his days. And so necessary is this distinction,
that in his sight all our actions are estimated according to it, and often
very differently from the sentence of human reason and philosophy. There
is no exploit esteemed more honourable, even among philosophers, than to
deliver our country from tyranny; but the voice of the celestial Judge
openly condemns the private man who lays violent hands on a tyrant. It is
not my design, however, to stay to enumerate examples. It is sufficient if
we know that the principle and foundation of right conduct in every case
is the vocation of the Lord, and that he who disregards it will never keep
the right way in the duties of his station. He may sometimes, perhaps,
achieve something apparently laudable; but however it may appear in the
eyes of men, it will be rejected at the throne of God; besides which,
there will be no consistency between the various parts of his life. Our
life, therefore, will then be best regulated, when it is directed to this
mark; since no one will be impelled by his own temerity to attempt more
than is compatible with his calling, because he will know that it is
unlawful to transgress the bounds assigned him. He that is in obscurity
will lead a private life without discontent, so as not to desert the
station in which God has placed him. It will also be no small alleviation
of his cares, labours, troubles, and other burdens, when a man knows that
in all these things he has God for his guide. The magistrate will execute
his office with greater pleasure, the father of a family will confine
himself to his duty with more satisfaction, and all, in their respective
spheres of life, will bear and surmount the inconveniences, cares,
disappointments, and anxieties which befall them, when they shall be
persuaded that every individual has his burden laid upon him by God. Hence
also will arise peculiar consolation, since there will be no employment so
mean and sordid (provided we follow our vocation) as not to appear truly
respectable, and be deemed highly important in the sight of God.




