Chapter XIII. Christ’s Assumption Of Real Humanity.


The arguments for the Divinity of Christ, which has already been proved by
clear and irrefragable testimonies, it would, I conceive, be unnecessary
to reiterate. It remains, then, for us to examine, how, after having been
invested with our flesh, he has performed the office of a Mediator. Now,
the reality of his humanity was anciently opposed by the Manichæans and by
the Marcionites. Of whom the latter imagined to themselves a visionary
phantom instead of the body of Christ; and the former dreamed that he had
a celestial body. But both these notions are contrary to numerous and
powerful testimonies of Scripture. For the blessing is promised, neither
in a heavenly seed, nor in a phantom of a man, but in the seed of Abraham
and Jacob; nor is the eternal throne promised to an aërial man, but to the
Son of David and the fruit of his loins.(1140) Wherefore, on his
manifestation in the flesh, he is called the Son of David and of Abraham,
not because he was merely born of the virgin after having been formed of
some aërial substance; but because, according to Paul, he was “made of the
seed of David according to the flesh;” as the same apostle in another
place informs us, that “according to the flesh” he descended from the
Jews.(1141) Wherefore the Lord himself, not content with the appellation
of _man_, frequently calls himself also _the Son of Man_—a term which he
intended as a more express declaration of his real humanity. As the Holy
Spirit has on so many occasions, by so many instruments, and with such
great diligence and simplicity, declared a fact by no means abstruse in
itself, who could have supposed that any mortals would have such
consummate impudence as to dare to obscure it with subtilties? But more
testimonies offer themselves, if we wished to multiply them; such as this
of Paul, that “God sent forth his Son made of a woman;”(1142) and
innumerable others, from which he appears to have been liable to hunger,
thirst, cold, and other infirmities of our nature. But from the multitude
we must chiefly select those, which may conduce to the edification of our
minds in true faith; as when it is said, that “he took not on him the
nature of angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham;” that he took
flesh and blood, “that through death he might destroy him that had the
power of death;” for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren;
that “in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that
he might be a merciful and faithful high priest;” that “we have not a high
priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities;”(1143)
and the like. To the same purpose is what we have just before mentioned,
that it was necessary for the sins of the world to be expiated in our
flesh; which is clearly asserted by Paul.(1144) And certainly all that the
Father has conferred on Christ, belongs to us, because he “is the head,
from whom the whole body is fitly joined together, and compacted by that
which every joint supplieth.”(1145) There will otherwise be no propriety
in the declaration, “that God giveth the Spirit not by measure unto him,
that we may all receive of his fulness;”(1146) since nothing would be more
absurd, than that God should be enriched in his essence by any
adventitious gift. For this reason also Christ himself says in another
place, “For their sakes I sanctify myself.”(1147)

II. The passages which they adduce in confirmation of this error, they
most foolishly pervert; nor do their frivolous subtilties at all avail
them in their endeavours to obviate the arguments which I have advanced in
defence of our sentiments. Marcion imagines that Christ invested himself
with a phantom instead of a real body; because he is said to have been
“made in the likeness of men,” and to have been “found in fashion as a
man.”(1148) But in drawing this conclusion, he totally overlooks the scope
of Paul in that passage. For his design is, not to describe the nature of
the body which Christ assumed, but to assert that whilst he might have
displayed his Divinity, he manifested himself in the condition of an
abject and despised man. For, to exhort us to humility by the example of
Christ, he shows, that being God, he might have instantaneously made a
conspicuous exhibition of his glory to the world; yet that he receded from
his right, and voluntarily debased himself, for that he assumed the form
of a servant, and content with that humble station, suffered his Divinity
to be hidden behind the veil of humanity. The subject of this statement,
without doubt, is not the nature of Christ, but his conduct. From the
whole context also it is easy to infer, that Christ humbled himself by the
assumption of a real human nature. For what is the meaning of this clause,
“that he was found in fashion as a man,” but that for a time his Divine
glory was invisible, and nothing appeared but the human form, in a mean
and abject condition? For otherwise there would be no foundation for this
assertion of Peter, that he was “put to death in the flesh, but quickened
by the Spirit,”(1149) if the Son of God had not been subject to the
infirmities of human nature. This is more plainly expressed by Paul, when
he says, that “he was crucified through weakness.”(1150) The same is
confirmed by his exaltation, because he is positively asserted to have
obtained a new glory after his humiliation; which could only be applicable
to a real man composed of body and soul. Manichæus fabricates for Christ
an aërial body; because he is called “the second Adam, the Lord from
heaven.”(1151) But the apostle in that place is not speaking of a
celestial corporeal essence, but of a spiritual energy, which, being
diffused from Christ, raises us into life. That energy we have already
seen that Peter and Paul distinguish from his body. The orthodox doctrine,
therefore, concerning the body of Christ, is firmly established by this
very passage. For unless Christ had the same corporeal nature with us,
there would be no force in the argument which Paul so vehemently urges,
that if Christ be risen from the dead, then we also shall rise; that if we
rise not, neither is Christ risen.(1152) Of whatever cavils either the
ancient Manichæans, or their modern disciples, endeavour to avail
themselves, they cannot succeed. Their nugatory pretence that Christ is
called “the Son of man,” because he was promised to men, is a vain
subterfuge; for it is evident that in the Hebrew idiom, _the Son of man_
is a phrase expressive of a real man. And Christ undoubtedly retained the
phraseology of his own language. There is no room for disputing what is
meant by _the sons of Adam_. And not to go any further, it will be fully
sufficient to quote a passage in the eighth psalm which the apostles apply
to Christ: “What is man, that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man,
that thou visitest him?” This phrase expresses the true humanity of
Christ; because, though he was not immediately begotten by a mortal
father, yet his descent was derived from Adam. Nor would there otherwise
be any truth in what we have just quoted, that Christ became a partaker of
flesh and blood, that he might bring many sons to glory—language which
clearly styles him to be a partaker of the same common nature with us. In
the same sense the apostle says, that “both he that sanctifieth and they
who are sanctified are all of one.” For the context proves that this
refers to a community of nature; because he immediately adds, “for which
cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren.”(1153) For if he had
already said that the faithful are of God, what reason could Jesus Christ
have to be ashamed of such great dignity? But because Christ, of his
infinite grace, associates himself with those who are vile and
contemptible, it is therefore said that he is not ashamed. It is a vain
objection which they make, that on this principle the impious will become
the brethren of Christ; because we know that the children of God are born,
not of flesh and blood, but of the Spirit through faith; therefore a
community of nature alone is not sufficient to constitute a fraternal
union. But though it is only to the faithful that the apostle assigns the
honour of being one with Christ, yet it does not follow that unbelievers
are not, according to the flesh, born of the same original; as, when we
say that Christ was made man, to make us children of God, this expression
extends not to all men; because faith is the medium by which we are
spiritually ingrafted into the body of Christ. They likewise raise a
foolish contention respecting the appellation of _first‐born_. They plead
that Christ ought to have been born at the beginning, immediately of Adam,
in order “that he might be the first‐born among many brethren.”(1154) But
the primogeniture attributed to him refers not to age, but to the degree
of honour and the eminence of power which he enjoys. Nor is there any more
plausibility in their notion, that Christ is said to have assumed the
nature of man, and not of angels, because he received the human race into
his favour. For the apostle, to magnify the honour with which Christ has
favoured us, compares us with the angels, before whom in this respect we
are preferred.(1155) And if the testimony of Moses be duly considered,
where he says that the Seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the
serpent,(1156) it will decide the whole controversy. For that prediction
relates not to Christ alone, but to the whole human race. Because the
victory was to be gained for us by Christ, God pronounces, in general,
that the posterity of the woman should be superior to the devil. Whence it
follows, that Christ descended from the human race; because the design of
God, in that promise to Eve, was to comfort her with a good hope, that she
might not be overcome with sorrow.

III. Those passages, where Christ is called “the seed of Abraham,” and
“the fruit of the body of David,” they with equal folly and wickedness
involve in allegories. For if the word _seed_ had been used in an
allegorical sense, Paul certainly would not have been silent respecting
it, where, without any figure, he explicitly affirms, that there are not
many sons of Abraham who are Redeemers, but Christ alone.(1157) Equally
unfounded is their notion, that Christ is called the Son of David in no
other sense, but because he had been promised, and was at length
manifested in due time. For after Paul has declared him to have been “made
of the seed of David,” the immediate addition of this phrase, “according
to the flesh,”(1158) is certainly a designation of nature. Thus also in
another place he calls him “God blessed for ever,” and distinctly states
that he descended from the Jews “as concerning the flesh.”(1159) Now, if
he was not really begotten of the seed of David, what is the meaning of
this expression, “the fruit of his loins?”(1160) What becomes of this
promise, “Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne?”(1161) They
likewise trifle in a sophistical manner with the genealogy of Christ, as
it is given by Matthew. For though he mentions the parents of Joseph, and
not of Mary, yet as he was treating of a thing then generally known, he
thought it sufficient to show that Joseph descended from the seed of
David, while there could be no doubt that Mary was of the same family. But
Luke goes further, with a view to signify, that the salvation procured by
Christ is common to all mankind; since Christ, the author of salvation, is
descended from Adam, the common parent of all. I grant, indeed, that from
the genealogy it cannot be inferred that Christ is the Son of David, any
otherwise than as he was born of the Virgin. But the modern Marcionites,
to give a plausibility to their error, that Christ derived his body from
nothing, contend that women have no generative semen; and thus they
subvert the elements of nature. But as this is not a theological question,
and the arguments which they adduce are so futile that there will be no
difficulty in repelling them, I shall not meddle with points belonging to
philosophy and the medical art. It will be sufficient for me to obviate
the objection which they allege from the Scripture, namely, that Aaron and
Jehoiada married wives of the tribe of Judah; and thus, if women contain
generative semen, the distinction of tribes was confounded. But it is
sufficiently known, that, for the purposes of political regulation, the
posterity is always reckoned from the father; yet that the superiority of
the male sex forms no objection to the coöperation of the female semen in
the process of generation. This solution extends to all the genealogies.
Frequently, when the Scripture exhibits a catalogue of names, it mentions
none but men; is it therefore to be concluded that women are nothing? Even
children themselves know that women are comprehended under their husbands.
For this reason women are said to bear children to their husbands, because
the name of the family always remains with the males. Now, as it is a
privilege conceded to the superiority of the male sex, that children
should be accounted noble or ignoble, according to the condition of their
fathers, so, on the other hand, it is held by the lawyers, that in a state
of slavery the offspring follows the condition of the mother. Whence we
may infer, that the offspring is produced partly from the seed of the
mother; and the common language of all nations implies that mothers have
some share in the generation of children. This is in harmony with the
Divine law, which otherwise would have no ground for the prohibition of
the marriage of an uncle with his sister’s daughter; because in that case
there would be no consanguinity. It would also be lawful for a man to
marry his uterine sister, provided she were begotten by another father.
But while I grant that a passive power is ascribed to women, I also
maintain that the same that is affirmed of men is indiscriminately
predicated of them. Nor is Christ himself said to be “made” by a woman,
but “of a woman.”(1162) Some of these persons, casting off all modesty,
impudently inquire, whether we choose to say that Christ was procreated
from the menstrual seed of the Virgin. I will inquire, on the other hand,
whether he was not united with the blood of his mother; and this they must
be constrained to confess. It is properly inferred, therefore, from the
language of Matthew, that inasmuch as Christ was begotten of Mary,(1163)
he was procreated from her seed; as when Booz is said to have been
begotten of Rahab,(1164) it denotes a similar generation. Nor is it the
design of Matthew here to describe the Virgin as a tube through which
Christ passed, but to discriminate this miraculous conception from
ordinary generation, in that Jesus Christ was generated of the seed of
David by means of a Virgin. In the same sense, and for the same reason
that Isaac is said to have been begotten of Abraham, Solomon of David, and
Joseph of Jacob, so Christ is said to have been begotten of his mother.
For the evangelist has written the whole of his account upon this
principle; and to prove that Christ descended from David, he has contented
himself with this one fact, that he was begotten of Mary. Whence it
follows, that he took for granted the consanguinity of Mary and Joseph.

IV. The absurdities, with which these opponents wish to press us, are
replete with puerile cavils. They esteem it mean and dishonourable to
Christ, that he should derive his descent from men; because he could not
be exempt from the universal law, which concludes all the posterity of
Adam, without exception, under sin.(1165) But the antithesis, which we
find in Paul, easily solves this difficulty: “As by one man sin entered
into the world, and death by sin, even so by the righteousness of one, the
grace of God hath abounded.”(1166) To this the following passage
corresponds: “The first man is of the earth, earthy; the second man is the
Lord from heaven.”(1167) Therefore the same apostle, in another place, by
teaching us that Christ was “sent in the likeness of sinful flesh”(1168)
to satisfy the law, expressly distinguishes him from the common condition
of mankind; so that he is a real man, and yet free from all fault and
corruption. They betray their ignorance in arguing that, if Christ is
perfectly immaculate, and was begotten of the seed of Mary, by the secret
operation of the Spirit, then it follows that there is no impurity in the
seed of women, but only in that of men. For we do not represent Christ as
perfectly immaculate, merely because he was born of the seed of a woman
unconnected with any man, but because he was sanctified by the Spirit, so
that his generation was pure and holy, such as it would have been before
the fall of Adam. And it is a fixed maxim with us, that whenever the
Scripture mentions the purity of Christ, it relates to a real humanity;
because to assert the purity of Deity would be quite unnecessary. The
sanctification, also, of which he speaks in the seventeenth chapter of
John,(1169) could have no reference to the Divine nature. Nor do we, as
they pretend, imagine two kinds of seed in Adam, notwithstanding Christ
was free from all contagion. For the generation of man is not naturally
and originally impure and corrupt, but only accidentally so, in
consequence of the fall. Therefore we need not wonder, that Christ, who
was to restore our integrity, was exempted from the general corruption.
But what they urge on us as an absurdity, that if the Word of God was
clothed with flesh, it was therefore confined within the narrow prison of
an earthly body, is mere impudence; because, although the infinite essence
of the Word is united in one person with the nature of man, yet we have no
idea of its incarceration or confinement. For the Son of God miraculously
descended from heaven, yet in such a manner that he never left heaven; he
chose to be miraculously conceived in the womb of the Virgin, to live on
the earth, and to be suspended on the cross; and yet he never ceased to
fill the universe, in the same manner as from the beginning.




