Chapter XII. A Consideration Of The Divine Tribunal, Necessary To A
Serious Conviction Of Gratuitous Justification.


Though it appears, from the plainest testimonies, that all these things
are strictly true, yet we shall not clearly discover how necessary they
are, till we shall have taken a view of what ought to be the foundation of
all this argument. In the first place, therefore, we should reflect that
we are not treating of the righteousness of a human court, but of that of
the heavenly tribunal; in order that we may not apply any diminutive
standard of our own, to estimate the integrity of conduct required to
satisfy the Divine justice. But it is wonderful, with what temerity and
presumption this is commonly decided; and it is even observable, that no
men give us more confident or pompous declamations concerning the
righteousness of works, than those who are notoriously guilty of open sins
or addicted to secret vices. This arises from their never thinking of the
righteousness of God, the smallest sense of which would prevent them from
treating it with such contempt. And certainly it is exceedingly
undervalued, if it be not acknowledged to be so perfect that nothing can
be acceptable to it but what is absolutely complete and immaculate, such
as it never was, nor ever will be, possible to find in fallen man. It is
easy for any one in the cloisters of the schools, to indulge himself in
idle speculations on the merit of works to justify men; but when he comes
into the presence of God, he must bid farewell to these amusements, for
there the business is transacted with seriousness, and no ludicrous
logomachy practised. To this point, then, must our attention be directed,
if we wish to make any useful inquiry concerning true righteousness; how
we can answer the celestial Judge, when he shall call us to an account.
Let us place that Judge before our eyes, not according to the spontaneous
imaginations of our minds, but according to the descriptions given of him
in the Scripture; which represents him as one whose refulgence eclipses
the stars, whose power melts the mountains, whose anger shakes the earth,
whose wisdom takes the subtle in their own craftiness, whose purity makes
all things appear polluted, whose righteousness even the angels are unable
to bear, who acquits not the guilty, whose vengeance, when it is once
kindled, penetrates even to the abyss of hell.(1963) Let him seat himself,
I say, on the tribunal, to examine the actions of men: who will present
himself fearless before his throne? “Who shall dwell with the devouring
fire?” saith the prophet. “Who shall dwell with everlasting burnings? He
that walketh righteously and speaketh uprightly,” &c.(1964) Now let him
come forward, whoever he is. But this answer causes not one to appear.
For, on the contrary, we hear this fearful speech, “If thou, Lord,
shouldst mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?”(1965) In truth, all
must speedily perish, as it is written in another place, “Shall mortal man
be more just than God? Shall a man be more pure than his Maker? Behold, he
put no trust in his servants; and his angels he charged with folly; how
much less in them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the
dust, which are crushed before the moth? They are destroyed from morning
to evening.”(1966) Again: “Behold, he putteth no trust in his saints; yea,
the heavens are not clean in his sight; how much more abominable and
filthy is man, which drinketh iniquity like water?”(1967) I confess that
in the Book of Job mention is made of a righteousness which is superior to
the observance of the law. And it will be of use to remember this
distinction; because, though any one could satisfy the law, he could not
even then stand the scrutiny of that righteousness which exceeds all
comprehension. Therefore, though Job is conscious of his own integrity,
yet he is mute with astonishment, when he sees that God could not be
pleased even with the sanctity of angels, if he were to enter into a
strict examination of their works. I shall, therefore, now pass over that
righteousness to which I have alluded, because it is incomprehensible, and
content myself with asserting, that we must be worse than stupid, if, on
an examination of our lives by the rule of the written law, we are not
tormented with awful dread in consequence of so many maledictions, which
God has designed to arouse us, and among the rest this general one:
“Cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this law to do
them.”(1968) In short, this whole controversy will be uninteresting and
useless, unless every one present himself as a criminal before the
celestial Judge, and voluntarily prostrate and humble himself in deep
solicitude concerning his absolution.

II. To this point our eyes ought to have been raised, that we might learn
rather to tremble through fear, than to indulge in vain exultation. It is
easy, indeed, while the comparison is made only between men, for every man
to imagine himself to be possessed of something which others ought not to
contemn; but when we ascend to the contemplation of God, that confidence
is immediately lost. And the case of our soul with respect to God is
similar to that of our body with respect to the visible heavens; for the
eye, as long as it is employed in beholding adjacent objects, receives
proofs of its own perspicacity; but if it be directed towards the sun,
dazzled and confounded with his overpowering brightness, it feels no less
debility in beholding him, than strength in the view of inferior objects.
Let us not, then, deceive ourselves with a vain confidence, although we
consider ourselves equal or superior to other men. That is nothing to God,
to whose decision this cause must be submitted. But if our insolence
cannot be restrained by these admonitions, he will reply to us in the
language which he addressed to the Pharisees: “Ye are they which justify
yourselves before men; but that which is highly esteemed among men, is
abomination in the sight of God.”(1969) Go now, and among men proudly
glory in your righteousness, while the God of heaven abominates it. But
what is the language of the servants of God, who are truly taught by his
Spirit? One says, “Enter not into judgment with thy servant; for in thy
sight shall no man living be justified.”(1970) And another, though in a
sense somewhat different, “How should man be just with God? If he will
contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand.”(1971) Here we
are plainly informed respecting the righteousness of God, that it is such
as no human works can satisfy; and such as renders it impossible for us,
if accused of a thousand crimes, to exculpate ourselves from one of them.
The same idea of this righteousness had very properly been entertained by
Paul, that “chosen vessel”(1972) of God, when he professed, “I am
conscious to myself of nothing; yet am I not hereby justified.”(1973)

III. Nor is it only in the sacred Scriptures that such examples are found.
All pious writers discover similar sentiments. Thus Augustine says, “The
only hope of all the pious, who groan under this burden of corruptible
flesh, and amidst the infirmities of this life, is, that we have a
Mediator, Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the propitiation for our
sins.” What is the meaning of this observation? If this is their only
hope, where is any confidence in works? For when he asserts this to be the
only one, he precludes every other. Bernard also says, “And in fact where
can be found safe and solid rest and security for the weak, but in the
wounds of the Saviour? There I dwell with the greater security, in
proportion to his power to save. The world rages, the body oppresses, the
devil lies in wait to destroy. I do not fall, because my foundation is on
a firm rock. I have committed heinous sin. My conscience is disturbed, but
shall not fall into despair, because I shall recall to remembrance the
wounds of the Lord.” From these considerations he afterwards concludes,
“My merit, therefore, is the compassion of the Lord: I am clearly not
destitute of merit, as long as he is not destitute of compassions. But if
the mercies of the Lord be a multitude of mercies, my merits are likewise
equally numerous. Shall I sing of my own righteousness? O Lord, I will
remember thy righteousness alone. For it is mine also, since he is made of
God righteousness unto me.” Again, in another place: “This is the whole
merit of man—to fix all his hope on him who saves the whole man.” Likewise
in another place, retaining peace to himself, and ascribing the glory to
God, he says, “To thee let the glory remain undiminished. It is happy for
me, if I have peace. The glory I entirely renounce; lest, if I usurp what
is not mine, I lose also that which is offered me.” In another place he is
still more explicit: “Why should the Church be solicitous about merits,
while it has a stronger and more secure reason for glorying in the designs
of God? You need not inquire on account of what merits we hope for
blessings, especially when you read in the prophet, ‘Thus saith the Lord
God; I do not this for your sakes, but for mine holy name’s sake.’(1974)
It suffices with respect to merit, to know that merits are not sufficient;
but as it suffices for merit not to presume on merits, so to be destitute
of merits is sufficient cause of condemnation.” We must excuse his custom
of freely using the word _merits_ for good works. But his ultimate design
was to terrify hypocrites, who indulge themselves in a licentious course
of sin against the grace of God; as he presently declares: “Happy is the
Church which wants neither merits without presumption, nor presumption
without merits. It has some ground of presumption, but not merits. It has
merits, but in order to deserve, not to presume. Is not the absence of
presumption itself a merit? Therefore the Church presumes the more
securely, because it does not presume, having ample cause for glorying in
the multitude of the Divine mercies.”

IV. This is the real truth. The troubled conscience finds this to be the
only asylum of safety, where it can enjoy any tranquillity, when it has to
do with the Divine justice. For if the stars, which appeared most
brilliant during the night, lose their splendour on the rising of the sun,
what can we suppose will be the case with the most excellent innocence of
man, when compared with the purity of God? For that will be an examination
inconceivably severe, which shall penetrate into all the most secret
thoughts of the heart, and, as Paul says, “bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the hearts;”(1975)
which shall constrain the reluctant conscience to confess all those things
which have now passed away even from our own remembrance. We shall be
urged by an accusing devil, who has been privy to all the crimes which he
has impelled us to perpetrate. There the external appearance of good
works, which now is the sole object of esteem, will be of no avail;
sincerity of heart is all that will be required. Wherefore hypocrisy, not
only that by which a man, conscious of his guilt before God, affects
ostentation before men, but that also by which every man imposes on
himself before God, for we are all prone to self‐complacency and
adulation; hypocrisy in all its forms will then be overwhelmed with
confusion, however it may now be intoxicated with presumption and pride.
Persons who never look forward to such a spectacle, may, indeed,
delightfully and complacently compose for themselves a temporary
righteousness, of which they will immediately be stripped at the Divine
judgment; just as immense riches, accumulated by us in a dream, vanish as
soon as we awake. But they who inquire seriously, and as in the presence
of God, respecting the true standard of righteousness, will certainly find
that all the actions of men, if estimated according to their intrinsic
worth, are utterly defiled and polluted; that what is commonly considered
as righteousness, is, in the Divine view, nothing but iniquity; that what
is accounted integrity, is mere pollution; and that what is reputed glory,
is real ignominy.

V. From this contemplation of the Divine perfection, let us not be
unwilling to descend to take a view of ourselves, without adulation or
blind self‐love. For it is not to be wondered at, if we are so extremely
blind in this respect, since not one of us is sufficiently cautious of
that pestilent self‐indulgence, which the Scripture declares to be
naturally inherent in us all. “Every way of man,” says Solomon, “is right
in his own eyes.”(1976) Again: “All the ways of a man are clean in his own
eyes.”(1977) But what follows from this? Is he absolved from guilt by this
delusion? Not at all; but, as is immediately added, “the Lord weigheth the
spirits;” that is, while men are congratulating themselves on account of
the external mask of righteousness which they wear, the Lord is at the
same time weighing in his own balance the latent impurity of their hearts.
Since we are so far from deriving any advantage, therefore, from such
blandishments, let us not voluntarily delude ourselves to our own
perdition. That we may examine ourselves properly, it is necessary for us
to summon our conscience to the tribunal of God. For we have the greatest
need of his light in order to detect the recesses of our depravity, which
otherwise are too deeply concealed. For then only shall we clearly
perceive the force of this language: “How can man be justified with
God—man, who is” corruption and “a worm, abominable and filthy, and who
drinketh iniquity like water?”(1978) “Who can bring a clean thing out of
an unclean? Not one.”(1979) Then also we shall experience what Job said
concerning himself: “If I justify myself, mine own mouth shall condemn me;
if I say I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse.”(1980) For the
complaint, which the prophet formerly made respecting Israel, “All we like
sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way;”(1981) is
applicable not only to one period of time, but to all ages. For he there
comprehends all to whom the grace of redemption was to extend; and the
rigour of this examination ought to proceed till it shall have filled us
with complete consternation, and thus prepared us to receive the grace of
Christ. For he is deceived who supposes himself capable of this enjoyment,
without having first been truly humbled. It is a well‐known observation,
that “God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble.”(1982)

VI. But what means have we of humbling ourselves, except by submitting,
all poor and destitute, to the Divine mercy? For I do not call it
humility, if we suppose that we have any thing left. And hitherto they
have taught a pernicious hypocrisy, who have connected these two
maxims—that we should entertain humble thoughts of ourselves before God,
and that we should attach some dignity to our own righteousness. For if we
address to God a confession which is contrary to our real sentiments, we
are guilty of telling him an impudent falsehood; but we cannot think of
ourselves as we ought to think, without utterly despising every thing that
may be supposed an excellence in us. When we hear, therefore, from the
Psalmist, that “God will save the afflicted people, but will bring down
high looks,”(1983) let us consider, first, that there is no way of
salvation till we have laid aside all pride, and attained sincere
humility; secondly, that this humility is not a species of modesty,
consisting in conceding to God a small portion of what we might justly
claim, as they are called humble among men, who neither haughtily exalt
themselves nor behave with insolence to others, while they nevertheless
entertain some consciousness of excellence: this humility is the unfeigned
submission of a mind overwhelmed with a weighty sense of its own misery
and poverty; for such is the uniform description of it in the word of God.
When the Lord speaks thus in Zephaniah, “I will take away out of the midst
of thee them that rejoice in thy pride; I will also leave in the midst of
thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the
Lord;”(1984) does he not clearly show who are truly humble? even such as
are afflicted with a knowledge of their own poverty. On the contrary, he
describes the proud as persons “rejoicing,” because this is the usual
consequence of prosperity. But to the humble, whom he intends to save, he
leaves nothing but that “they trust in the name of the Lord.” Thus also in
Isaiah, “To this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a
contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word.”(1985) Again: “Thus saith the
high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy; I dwell
in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble
spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the
contrite ones.”(1986) By the contrition so frequently mentioned, we must
understand a wounded heart, which prevents a man from rising when humbled
in the dust. With such contrition must our heart be wounded, if we desire,
according to the declaration of the Lord, to be exalted with the humble.
If this be not the case, we shall be abased by the powerful hand of God to
our shame and disgrace.(1987)

VII. And, not content with mere precepts, our excellent Master, in a
parable, as in a picture, has presented us with an example of genuine
humility. For he introduces a publican, who, “standing afar off, would not
lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast,
saying, God be merciful to me a sinner.”(1988) We must not conclude these
circumstances—his not presuming to look upwards, standing afar off,
smiting upon his breast, and confessing himself a sinner—to be marks of
feigned modesty; we may be certain that they were sincere evidences of the
disposition of his heart. To him our Lord opposes a Pharisee, who said,
“God, I thank thee that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as this publican. I fast twice in the week, I give
tithes of all that I possess.” He openly confesses the righteousness which
he has, to be the gift of God; but because he confides in his being
righteous, he departs from the presence of God unacceptable and hateful to
him. The publican, acknowledging his iniquity, is justified. Hence we may
see how very pleasing our humiliation is in the sight of God; so that the
heart is not open for the reception of his mercy unless it be divested of
all idea of its own dignity. When this notion has occupied the mind, it
precludes the admission of Divine mercy. That no one might have any doubt
of this, Christ was sent by his Father into the world with a commission,
“to preach good tidings unto the meek; to bind up the broken‐hearted; to
proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them
that are bound; to comfort all that mourn; to give unto them beauty for
ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit
of heaviness.”(1989) In pursuance of this commission, he invites to a
participation of his benefits none but those who “labour and are heavy
laden.”(1990) And in another place he says, “I am not come to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance.”(1991)

VIII. Therefore, if we would obey the call of Christ, let us dismiss all
arrogance and carelessness from our minds. The former arises from a
foolish persuasion of our own righteousness, when a man supposes himself
to be possessed of any thing, the merit of which can recommend him to God;
the latter may exist without any consideration of works. For multitudes of
sinners, inebriated with criminal pleasures, and forgetful of the Divine
judgment, are in a state, as it were, of lethargic insensibility, so that
they never aspire after the mercy which is offered to them. But it is
equally necessary for us to shake off such stupidity, and to reject all
confidence in ourselves, in order that, being freed from every
incumbrance, we may hasten to Christ, all destitute and hungry, to be
filled with his blessings. For we shall never have sufficient confidence
in him, unless we entirely lose all confidence in ourselves; we shall
never find sufficient encouragement in him, unless we are previously
dejected in ourselves; we shall never enjoy sufficient consolation in him,
unless we are utterly disconsolate in ourselves. We are prepared,
therefore, to seek and obtain the grace of God, discarding at the same
time all confidence in ourselves, and relying solely on the assurance of
his mercy, “when,” as Augustine says, “forgetting our own merits, we
embrace the free gifts of Christ; because, if he sought merits in us, we
should not come to his free gifts.” With him Bernard fully agrees, when he
compares proud men, that arrogate ever so little to their own merits, to
unfaithful servants, because they unjustly claim the praise of the grace
which passes through them; just as though a wall should say that it
produces the sunbeams which it receives through a window. But not to dwell
any longer on this, we may lay it down as a brief, but general and certain
maxim, that he is prepared for a participation of the benefits of Divine
mercy, who has wholly divested himself, I will not say of his
righteousness, which is a mere nullity, but of the vain and airy phantom
of righteousness; for as far as any man is satisfied with himself, so far
he raises an impediment to the exercise of the grace of God.




