Chapter VII. Summary Of The Christian Life. Self‐Denial.


Although the Divine law contains a most excellent and well‐arranged plan
for the regulation of life, yet it has pleased the heavenly Teacher to
conform men by a more accurate doctrine to the rule which he had
prescribed in the law. And the principle of that doctrine is this—that it
is the duty of believers to “present their bodies a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable unto God;”(1826) and that in this consists the legitimate
worship of him. Hence is deduced an argument for exhorting them, “Be not
conformed to this world; but be ye transformed by the renewing of your
mind, that ye may prove what is that will of God.” This is a very
important consideration, that we are consecrated and dedicated to God;
that we may not hereafter think, speak, meditate, or do any thing but with
a view to his glory. For that which is sacred cannot, without great
injustice towards him, be applied to unholy uses. If we are not our own,
but the Lord’s, it is manifest both what error we must avoid, and to what
end all the actions of our lives are to be directed. We are not our own;
therefore neither our reason nor our will should predominate in our
deliberations and actions. We are not our own; therefore let us not
propose it as our end, to seek what may be expedient for us according to
the flesh. We are not our own; therefore let us, as far as possible,
forget ourselves and all things that are ours. On the contrary, we are
God’s; to him, therefore, let us live and die. We are God’s; therefore let
his wisdom and will preside in all our actions. We are God’s; towards him,
therefore, as our only legitimate end, let every part of our lives be
directed. O, how great a proficiency has that man made, who, having been
taught that he is not his own, has taken the sovereignty and government of
himself from his own reason, to surrender it to God! For as compliance
with their own inclinations leads men most effectually to ruin, so to
place no dependence on our own knowledge or will, but merely to follow the
guidance of the Lord, is the only way of safety. Let this, then, be the
first step, to depart from ourselves, that we may apply all the vigour of
our faculties to the service of the Lord. By service I mean, not that only
which consists in verbal obedience, but that by which the human mind,
divested of its natural carnality, resigns itself wholly to the direction
of the Divine Spirit. Of this transformation, which Paul styles a
renovation of the mind,(1827) though it is the first entrance into life,
all the philosophers were ignorant. For they set up Reason as the sole
directress of man; they think that she is exclusively to be attended to;
in short, to her alone they assign the government of the conduct. But the
Christian philosophy commands her to give place and submit to the Holy
Spirit; so that now the man himself lives not, but carries about Christ
living and reigning within him.(1828)

II. Hence also that other consequence, that we should seek not our own
things, but those which are agreeable to the will of the Lord, and
conducive to the promotion of his glory. This also argues a great
proficiency, that almost forgetting ourselves, and certainly neglecting
all selfish regards, we endeavour faithfully to devote our attention to
God and his commandments. For when the Scripture enjoins us to discard all
private and selfish considerations, it not only erases from our minds the
cupidity of wealth, the lust of power, and the favour of men, but also
eradicates ambition and all appetite after human glory, with other more
secret plagues. Indeed, a Christian man ought to be so disposed and
prepared, as to reflect that he has to do with God every moment of his
life. Thus, as he will measure all his actions by his will and
determination, so he will refer the whole bias of his mind religiously to
him. For he who has learned to regard God in every undertaking, is also
raised above every vain imagination. This is that denial of ourselves,
which Christ, from the commencement of their course, so diligently enjoins
on his disciples; which, when it has once obtained the government of the
heart, leaves room neither for pride, haughtiness, or ostentation, nor for
avarice, libidinousness, luxury, effeminacy, or any other evils which are
the offspring of self‐love. On the contrary, wherever it does not reign,
there either the grossest vices are indulged without the least shame; or,
if there exist any appearance of virtue, it is vitiated by a depraved
passion for glory. Show me, if you can, a single individual, who, unless
he has renounced himself according to the command of the Lord, is
voluntarily disposed to practise virtue among men. For all who have not
been influenced by this disposition, have followed virtue merely from the
love of praise. And even those of the philosophers who have ever contended
that virtue is desirable for its own sake, have been inflated with so much
arrogance, that it is evident they desired virtue for no other reason than
to furnish them occasion for the exercise of pride. But God is so far from
being delighted, either with those who are ambitious of popular praise, or
with hearts so full of pride and presumption, that he pronounces “they
have their reward” in this world, and represents harlots and publicans as
nearer to the kingdom of heaven than such persons. But we have not yet
clearly stated the number and magnitude of the obstacles by which a man is
impeded in the pursuit of that which is right, as long as he has refrained
from all self‐denial. For it is an ancient and true observation, that
there is a world of vices concealed in the soul of man. Nor can you find
any other remedy than to deny yourself and discard all selfish
considerations, and to devote your whole attention to the pursuit of those
things which the Lord requires of you, and which ought to be pursued for
this sole reason, because they are pleasing to him.

III. The same apostle, in another place, gives a more distinct, though a
brief, representation of all the parts of a well‐regulated life. “The
grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men, teaching
us, that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly, in this present world; looking for that blessed
hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus
Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works.”(1829) For after having proposed the grace of God to animate us, in
order to prepare the way for us truly to worship God, he removes two
obstacles, which are our chief impediments; first, ungodliness, to which
we have naturally too strong a propensity, and secondly, worldly lusts,
which extend themselves further. The term “ungodliness” not only denotes
superstitions, but comprehends also every thing that is repugnant to the
serious fear of God. And “worldly lusts” mean the carnal affections.
Therefore he enjoins us, with reference to both tables of the law, to
forsake our former propensities, and to renounce all the dictates of our
own reason and will. He reduces all the actions of life to three
classes—sobriety, righteousness, and godliness. “Sobriety” undoubtedly
denotes chastity and temperance, as well as a pure and frugal use of
temporal blessings, and patience under poverty. “Righteousness” includes
all the duties of equity, that every man may receive what is his due.
“Godliness” separates us from the pollutions of the world, and by true
holiness unites us to God. When these virtues are indissolubly connected,
they produce absolute perfection. But since nothing is more difficult than
to forsake all carnal considerations, to subdue and renounce our
appetites, to devote ourselves to God and our brethren, and to live the
life of angels amidst the corruptions of the world,—in order to extricate
our minds from every snare, Paul recalls our attention to the hope of a
blessed immortality; apprizing us that our efforts are not in vain;
because, as Christ once appeared as a Redeemer, so, at his final advent,
he will manifest the benefits of the salvation he has obtained. Thus he
dispels the fascinations which blind us, and prevent our aspiring with
becoming ardour to the glories of heaven, and at the same time teaches us
that we must live as strangers and pilgrims in the world, that we may not
lose the heavenly inheritance.

IV. In these words we perceive, that self‐denial relates partly to men,
but partly, and indeed principally, to God. For when the Scripture enjoins
us to conduct ourselves in such a manner towards men, as in honour to
prefer one another, and faithfully to devote our whole attention to the
promotion of their advantage,(1830) it gives such commands as our heart
can by no means receive, without having been previously divested of its
natural bias. For we are all so blinded and fascinated with self‐love,
that every one imagines he has a just right to exalt himself, and to
undervalue all others who stand in competition with him. If God has
conferred on us any valuable qualification, relying thereon, our hearts
are immediately lifted up; and we not only swell, but almost burst with
pride. The vices in which we abound, we sedulously conceal from others,
and flatter ourselves with the pretence that they are diminutive and
trivial, and even sometimes embrace them as virtues. If the same talents
which we admire in ourselves, or even superior ones, appear in others, in
order that we may not be obliged to acknowledge their superiority, we
depreciate and diminish them with the utmost malignity: if they have any
vices, not content to notice them with severe and sharp animadversions, we
odiously amplify them. Hence that insolence, that every one of us, as if
exempted from the common lot, is desirous of pre‐eminence above the rest
of mankind; and severely and haughtily contemns every man, or at least
despises him as an inferior. The poor yield to the rich, plebeians to
nobles, servants to masters, the illiterate to the learned; but there is
no man who does not cherish within him some idea of his own excellence.
Thus all men, in flattering themselves, carry, as it were, a kingdom in
their own breast; for arrogating to themselves the height of self‐
gratulation, they pass censure on the understandings and conduct of
others; but if any contention arises, it produces an eruption of the
poison. For many discover some gentleness, as long as they find every
thing pleasant and amiable; but how many are there who preserve the same
constant course of good humour when they are disturbed and irritated? Nor
is there any other remedy, than the eradication from the inmost recesses
of the heart of this most noxious pest of ambition and self‐love; as it is
indeed eradicated by the doctrine of the Scripture. For if we attend to
its instructions, we must remember, that the talents with which God has
favoured us, are not excellences originating from ourselves, but free
gifts of God; of which if any are proud, they betray their ingratitude.
“Who maketh thee to differ?” saith Paul. “Now, if thou didst receive all
things, why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received them?”(1831) In
the next place, by assiduous observation and acknowledgment of our faults,
we must recall our minds to humility. Thus there will remain in us nothing
to inflate us, but great reason for dejection. On the other hand, we are
enjoined, whatever gifts of God we perceive in others, to revere and
esteem them, so as to honour those in whom they reside. For it would
betray great wickedness in us to rob them of that honour which God has
given them. Their faults we are taught to overlook, not indeed to
encourage them by adulation, but never on account of them to insult those
whom we ought to cherish with benevolence and honour. The result of
attention to these directions will be, that with whomsoever we are
concerned, we shall conduct ourselves not only with moderation and good
humour, but with civility and friendship. For we shall never arrive at
true meekness by any other way, than by having our hearts imbued with
self‐abasement and a respect for others.

V. How extremely difficult it is for you to discharge your duty in seeking
the advantage of your neighbour! Unless you quit all selfish
considerations, and, as it were, lay aside yourself, you will effect
nothing in this duty. For how can you perform those which Paul inculcates
as works of charity, unless you renounce yourself, and devote yourself
wholly to serve others? “Charity,” says he, “suffereth long, and is kind;
charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth
not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked,”
&c.(1832) If this be all that is required, that we seek not our own, yet
we must do no small violence to nature, which so strongly inclines us to
the exclusive love of ourselves, that it does not so easily permit us to
neglect ourselves and our own concerns in order to be vigilant for the
advantage of others, and even voluntarily to recede from our right, to
resign it to another. But the Scripture leads us to this, admonishes us,
that whatever favours we obtain from the Lord, we are intrusted with them
on this condition, that they should be applied to the common benefit of
the Church; and that, therefore, the legitimate use of all his favours, is
a liberal and kind communication of them to others. There cannot be
imagined a more certain rule, or a more powerful exhortation to the
observance of it, than when we are taught, that all the blessings we enjoy
are Divine deposits, committed to our trust on this condition, that they
should be dispensed for the benefit of our neighbours. But the Scripture
goes still further, when it compares them to the powers with which the
members of the human body are endued. For no member has its power for
itself, nor applies it to its private use; but transfuses it among its
fellow‐members, receiving no advantage from it but what proceeds from the
common convenience of the whole body. So, whatever ability a pious man
possesses, he ought to possess it for his brethren, consulting his own
private interest in no way inconsistent with a cordial attention to the
common edification of the Church. Let this, then, be our rule for
benignity and beneficence,—that whatever God has conferred on us, which
enables us to assist our neighbour, we are the stewards of it, and must
one day render an account of our stewardship; and that the only right
dispensation of what has been committed to us, is that which is regulated
by the law of love. Thus we shall not only always connect the study to
promote the advantage of others with a concern for our own private
interests, but shall prefer the good of others to our own. To teach us
that the dispensation of the gifts we receive from heaven ought to be
regulated by this law, God anciently enjoined the same even in regard to
the smallest bounties of his liberality. For he commanded the people to
offer to him the first‐fruits of the corn, as a solemn avowal that it was
unlawful for them to enjoy any blessings not previously consecrated to
him. And if the gifts of God are not sanctified to us till after we have
with our own hands dedicated them to their Author, that must evidently be
a sinful abuse which is unconnected with such a dedication. But in vain
would you attempt to enrich the Lord by a communication of your
possessions. Therefore, since your “goodness extendeth not to him,”(1833)
as the Psalmist says, you must exercise it “towards the saints that are in
the earth;” and alms are compared to sacred oblations, to show that these
exercises of charity under the gospel, correspond to those offerings under
the law.

VI. Moreover, that we may not be weary of doing good, which otherwise
would of necessity soon be the case, we must add also the other character
mentioned by the apostle, that “charity suffereth long, and is not easily
provoked.” The Lord commands us to do “good unto all men,”(1834)
universally, a great part of whom, estimated according to their own
merits, are very undeserving; but here the Scripture assists us with an
excellent rule, when it inculcates, that we must not regard the intrinsic
merit of men, but must consider the image of God in them, to which we owe
all possible honour and love; but that this image is most carefully to be
observed in them “who are of the household of faith,”(1835) inasmuch as it
is renewed and restored by the Spirit of Christ. Whoever, therefore, is
presented to you that needs your kind offices, you have no reason to
refuse him your assistance. Say that he is a stranger; yet the Lord has
impressed on him a character which ought to be familiar to you; for which
reason he forbids you to despise your own flesh.(1836) Say that he is
contemptible and worthless; but the Lord shows him to be one whom he has
deigned to grace with his own image. Say that you are obliged to him for
no services; but God has made him, as it were, his substitute, to whom you
acknowledge yourself to be under obligations for numerous and important
benefits. Say that he is unworthy of your making the smallest exertion on
his account; but the image of God, by which he is recommended to you,
deserves your surrender of yourself and all that you possess. If he not
only has deserved no favour, but, on the contrary, has provoked you with
injuries and insults,—even this is no just reason why you should cease to
embrace him with your affection, and to perform to him the offices of
love. He has deserved, you will say, very different treatment from me. But
what has the Lord deserved? who, when he commands you to forgive men all
their offences against you, certainly intends that they should be charged
to himself. This is the only way of attaining that which is not only
difficult, but utterly repugnant to the nature of man—to love them who
hate us,(1837) to requite injuries with kindnesses, and to return
blessings for curses.(1838) We should remember, that we must not reflect
on the wickedness of men, but contemplate the Divine image in them; which,
concealing and obliterating their faults, by its beauty and dignity
allures us to embrace them in the arms of our love.

VII. This mortification, therefore, will not take place in us unless we
fulfil all the duties of charity. These are fulfilled, not by him who
merely performs all the external offices of charity, even without the
omission of one, but by him who does this from a sincere principle of
love. For it may happen, that a man may fully discharge his duty to all
men, with respect to external actions, and, at the same time, be very far
from discharging it in the right way. For you may see some men who would
be thought extremely liberal, and yet never bestow any thing without
upbraiding, either by pride of countenance, or by insolence of language.
And we are sunk to such a depth of calamity in this unhappy age, that
scarcely any alms are given, at least by the majority of mankind, but in a
haughty and contemptuous manner—a corruption which ought not to have been
tolerated even among heathen; for of Christians there is something further
required, than to display a cheerfulness of countenance, and to render
their benefactions amiable by civility of language. In the first place,
they ought to imagine themselves in the situation of the person who needs
their assistance, and to commiserate his case, just as though they
themselves felt and suffered the same; so that they may be impelled, by a
sense of mercy and humanity, to afford assistance to him as readily as if
it were to themselves. He who comes to the assistance of his brethren
under the influence of such a disposition, not only will not contaminate
his services with arrogance or reproach, but will neither despise his
brother who is the object of his beneficence, as needing assistance, nor
domineer over him as under an obligation to him; no more, for instance,
than we insult a diseased member, for whose restoration the rest of the
body labours, or suppose it to be under particular obligations to the
other members, because it has needed more assistance than it returned. For
the communication of services between the members of the body, is esteemed
to be in no sense gratuitous, but rather a discharge of that which, being
due by the law of nature, it would be monstrous to refuse. And for this
reason, he will not suppose himself to have discharged all his duty, who
has performed one kind of service; as it generally happens, that a rich
man, after having bestowed some part of his property, leaves other burdens
to be borne by other persons, and considers himself as exempted from all
concern about them. On the contrary, every man will reflect with himself,
that however great he may be, he is a debtor to his neighbour, and that no
bounds should be fixed to the exercise of beneficence towards them, except
when his ability fails, which, as far as it extends, ought to be limited
by the rule of charity.

VIII. Let us describe again, more at large, the principal branch of self‐
denial, which we have said relates to God; and indeed many observations
have already been made concerning it, which it would be needless to
repeat: it will be sufficient to show how it habituates us to equanimity
and patience. First, therefore, in seeking the convenience or tranquillity
of the present life, the Scripture calls us to this point; that resigning
ourselves and all that we have to the will of God, we should surrender to
him the affections of our heart, to be conquered and reduced to
subjection. To desire wealth and honours, to be ambitious of power, to
accumulate riches, to amass all those vanities which appear conducive to
magnificence and pomp, our passion is furious, and our cupidity unbounded.
On the contrary, to poverty, obscurity, and meanness, we feel a wonderful
fear and abhorrence, which stimulate us to avoid them by all possible
means. Hence we may see, how restless the minds of all those persons are,
who regulate their lives according to their own reason; how many arts they
try, and with what exertions they fatigue themselves, in order, on the one
hand, to obtain the objects of ambition or avarice, on the other, to avoid
poverty and meanness. Pious men, therefore, that they may not be involved
in such snares, must pursue the following course: First, let them neither
desire, nor hope, nor entertain a thought of prosperity, from any other
cause than the Divine blessing; and on that let them securely and
confidently depend. For however the flesh may appear to itself to be
abundantly sufficient, when it either attempts by its own industry, or
strenuous exertions, to attain honours and wealth, or is assisted by the
favour of man,—yet it is certain, that all these things are nothing, and
that we shall obtain no advantage, either by ingenuity or by labour, but
as far as the Lord shall prosper both. On the contrary, his benediction
alone finds a way, even through all impediments, so as to bring all our
affairs to a joyful and prosperous conclusion. And though we may, for the
most part, be able without it to obtain for ourselves some degree of
opulence and glory, as we daily behold impious men accumulating great
honours and enormous wealth, yet, since those who are under the curse of
God enjoy not even the smallest particle of happiness, we shall acquire
nothing without the Divine blessing, which will not eventually prove a
calamity to us. And that is by no means to be desired, the acquisition of
which renders men more miserable.

IX. Therefore, if we believe that all the cause of desirable prosperity
consists in the Divine benediction alone, without which miseries and
calamities of every kind await us, it follows also, that we should not
passionately strive for wealth and honours, either relying on our own
diligence or acuteness of understanding, or depending on the favour of
men, or confiding in a vain imagination of chance; but that we should
always regard the Lord, to be conducted by his direction to whatsoever lot
he has provided for us. The consequence of this will be, in the first
place, that we shall not rush forward to seize on wealth or honours by
unlawful actions, by deceitful and criminal arts, by rapacity and injury
of our neighbours; but shall confine ourselves to the pursuit of those
interests, which will not seduce us from the path of innocence. For who
can expect the assistance of the Divine benediction, amidst fraud, rapine,
and other iniquitous acts? For as that follows him only whose thoughts are
pure, and whose actions are upright, so it calls away all those by whom it
is sought, from irregular thoughts and corrupt practices. In the next
place, we shall find a restraint laid upon us, to keep us from being
inflamed with an inordinate desire of growing rich, and from ambitiously
aspiring after honours. For with what face can any man confide in the
assistance of God, towards obtaining things which he desires in opposition
to the Divine word? Far be it from God to follow with the aid of his
blessing, what he curses with his mouth. Lastly, if our success be not
equal to our wishes and hopes, yet we shall be restrained from impatience,
and from execrating our condition, whatever it may be; because we shall
know, that this would be murmuring against God, at whose pleasure are
dispensed riches and poverty, honour and contempt. In short, he who shall
repose himself, in the manner we have mentioned, on the Divine blessing,
will neither hunt after the objects violently coveted by men in general,
by evil methods, from which he will expect no advantage; nor will he
impute any prosperous event to himself, and to his own diligence,
industry, or good fortune; but will acknowledge God to be the author of
it. If, while the affairs of others are flourishing, he makes but a small
progress, or even moves in a retrograde direction, yet he will bear his
poverty with more equanimity and moderation, than any profane man would
feel with a mediocrity of success, which would merely be inferior to his
wishes; possessing, indeed, a consolation in which he may enjoy more
tranquil satisfaction, than in the zenith of opulence or power; because he
considers, that his affairs are ordered by the Lord in such a manner as is
conducive to his salvation. This, we see, was the disposition of David,
who, while he follows God, surrenders himself to his government, and
declares, that he is “as a child that is weaned of his mother; neither do
I exercise myself,” says he, “in great matters, or in things too high for
me.”(1839)

X. Nor is this the only instance in which pious persons should feel such
tranquillity and patience; the same state of mind ought to be extended to
all the events to which the present life is exposed. Therefore no man has
rightly renounced himself, but he who has wholly resigned himself to the
Lord, so as to leave all the parts of his life to be governed by his will.
He whose mind is thus composed, whatever may befall him, will neither
think himself miserable, nor invidiously complain against God on account
of his lot. The great necessity of this disposition will appear, if we
consider the numerous accidents to which we are subject. Diseases of
various kinds frequently attack us: at one time, the pestilence is raging;
at another, we are cruelly harassed with the calamities of war; at another
time, frost or hail, devouring the hopes of the year, produces sterility,
which brings us to penury; a wife, parents, children, or other relatives,
are snatched away by death; our dwelling is consumed by a fire; these are
the events, on the occurrence of which, men curse this life, or their
natal day, execrate heaven and earth, reproach God, and, as they are
eloquent to blaspheme, accuse him of injustice and cruelty. But it behoves
a believer, even in these events, to contemplate the clemency and truly
paternal goodness of God. Wherefore, if he sees his relatives removed, and
his house rendered a solitary place, he must not cease to bless the Lord,
but rather have recourse to this reflection: Yet the grace of the Lord,
which inhabits my house, will not leave it desolate. Or if he sees his
crops bitten or destroyed by frost, or beaten down by hail, and famine
threatening him, yet he will not sink into despondency or displeasure
against God, but will abide in this confidence—We are under the guardian
care of God, we are “the sheep of his pasture;”(1840) he therefore will
supply us with food even in seasons of the greatest barrenness. If he
shall be afflicted with disease, even then he will not be so far
discouraged by the bitterness of his pain, as to break out into
impatience, and to complain against God; but will rather strengthen his
patience by a consideration of the justice and lenity of the Divine
correction. Finally, whatever may happen, knowing it to be ordained by the
Lord, he will receive it with a placid and grateful heart, that he may not
be guilty of contumaciously resisting his authority, to whose power he has
once resigned himself and all that belongs to him. Far, therefore, from
the heart of a Christian man be that foolish and most wretched consolation
of the heathen, who, to fortify their minds against adversity, imputed it
to Fortune; with whom they esteemed it foolish to be displeased, because
she was thoughtless and rash, and blindly wounded without discrimination
the worthy and the unworthy. On the contrary, the rule of piety is, that
God alone is the arbiter and governor of all events, both prosperous and
adverse, and that he does not proceed with inconsiderate impetuosity, but
dispenses to us blessings and calamities with the most systematic justice.




