Chapter I. The Fall And Defection Of Adam The Cause Of The Curse Inflicted
On All Mankind, And Of Their Degeneracy From Their Primitive Condition.
The Doctrine Of Original Sin.


There is much reason in the old adage, which so strongly recommends to man
the knowledge of himself. For if it be thought disgraceful to be ignorant
of whatever relates to the conduct of human life, ignorance of ourselves
is much more shameful, which causes us, in deliberating on subjects of
importance, to grope our way in miserable obscurity, or even in total
darkness. But in proportion to the utility of this precept ought to be our
caution not to make a preposterous use of it; as we see some philosophers
have done. For while they exhort man to the knowledge of himself, the end
they propose is, that he may not remain ignorant of his own dignity and
excellence: nor do they wish him to contemplate in himself any thing but
what may swell him with vain confidence, and inflate him with pride. But
the knowledge of ourselves consists, first, in considering what was
bestowed on us at our creation, and the favours we continually receive
from the Divine benignity, that we may know how great the excellence of
our nature would have been, if it had retained its integrity; yet, at the
same time, recollecting that we have nothing properly our own, may feel
our precarious tenure of all that God has conferred on us, so as always to
place our dependence upon him. Secondly, we should contemplate our
miserable condition since the fall of Adam, the sense of which tends to
destroy all boasting and confidence, to overwhelm us with shame, and to
fill us with real humility. For as God, at the beginning, formed us after
his own image, that he might elevate our minds both to the practice of
virtue, and to the contemplation of eternal life, so, to prevent the great
excellence of our species, which distinguishes us from the brutes, from
being buried in sottish indolence, it is worthy of observation, that the
design of our being endued with reason and intelligence is, that, leading
a holy and virtuous life, we may aspire to the mark set before us of a
blessed immortality. But we cannot think upon that primeval dignity,
without having our attention immediately called to the melancholy
spectacle of our disgrace and ignominy, since in the person of the first
man we are fallen from our original condition. Hence arise disapprobation
and abhorrence of ourselves, and real humility; and we are inflamed with
fresh ardour to seek after God, to recover in him those excellences of
which we find ourselves utterly destitute.

II. This is what the truth of God directs us to seek in the examination of
ourselves: it requires a knowledge that will abstract us from all
confidence in our own ability, deprive us of every cause of boasting, and
reduce us to submission. We must observe this rule, if we wish to reach
the proper point of knowledge and action. I am aware of the superior
plausibility of that opinion, which invites us rather to a consideration
of our goodness, than to a view of our miserable poverty and ignominy,
which ought to overwhelm us with shame. For there is nothing more desired
by the human mind than soothing flatteries; and therefore, it listens with
extreme credulity, to hear its excellences magnified. Wherefore it is the
less wonderful that the majority of mankind have fallen into such a
pernicious error. For, an immoderate self‐love being innate in all men,
they readily persuade themselves that there is nothing in them which
justly deserves to be an object of aversion. Thus, without any extraneous
support, this very false opinion, that man has in himself sufficient
ability to insure his own virtue and happiness, generally prevails. But if
some prefer more modest sentiments, though they concede something to God,
in order to avoid the appearance of arrogating every thing to themselves,
yet they make such a distribution, that the principal cause of boasting
and confidence always remains with them. If they hear any discourse that
flatters the pride already operating spontaneously in their hearts,
nothing can gratify them more. Therefore every one who in his preaching
has kindly extolled the excellence of human nature, has received great
applause from almost all ages. But such a commendation of human excellence
as teaches man to be satisfied with himself, only enamours him of his own
amiableness, and thus produces an illusion which involves those who assent
to it in most dreadful perdition. For to what purpose is it for us,
relying on every vain confidence, to deliberate, to determine, and to
attempt things which we think tend to our advantage, and in our first
efforts, to find ourselves destitute of sound understanding and true
virtue, yet securely to proceed, till we fall into destruction? But this
must be the fate of all who confide in the efficacy of their own virtue.
Whosoever, therefore, attends to such teachers as amuse us with a mere
exhibition of our virtues, will make no progress in the knowledge of
himself, but will be absorbed in the most pernicious ignorance.

III. Therefore, whilst the truth of God agrees in this point with the
common consent of all mankind, that the second branch of wisdom consists
in the knowledge of ourselves, yet with respect to the knowledge itself
there is no small disagreement. For, according to carnal apprehension, a
man is thought to be well acquainted with himself, when, confiding in his
own understanding and integrity, he assumes a presumptuous boldness,
incites himself to the duties of virtue, and, declaring war against vice,
uses his most strenuous endeavours to adhere to what is fair and
honourable. But he, who inspects and examines himself by the rule of the
Divine judgment, finds nothing that can raise his mind to a genuine
confidence; and the more fully he has examined himself, the greater is his
dejection; till, entirely discarding all confidence, he leaves himself no
ability for the proper conduct of his life. Yet it is not the will of God
that we should forget the primitive dignity conferred by him on our father
Adam, which ought justly to awaken us to the pursuit of righteousness and
goodness. For we cannot reflect on our original condition, and on the end
of our creation, without being excited to meditate on immortality, and to
aspire after the kingdom of God. But this reflection is so far from
elating us with pride, that it rather produces humility. For what is that
original condition? That from which we are fallen. What is that end of our
creation? That from which we are wholly departed; so that we should lament
the miseries of our present state, and in the midst of our lamentation,
aspire after the dignity which we have lost. Now, when we say that man
should behold in himself nothing that might elate him with pride, we mean
that there is nothing in him in the confidence of which he ought to be
proud. Wherefore we may divide the knowledge man ought to have of himself
into these two parts. First, he should consider the end of his being
created and endued with such estimable gifts; a reflection which may
excite him to the consideration of Divine worship, and of a future life.
Secondly, he should examine his own ability, or rather his want of
ability, the view of which may confound and almost annihilate him. The
former consideration is adapted to acquaint him with his duty, the latter
with his power to perform it. We shall treat of them both in regular
order.

IV. But, since it could not have been a trivial offence, but must have
been a detestable crime, that was so severely punished by God, we must
consider the nature of Adam’s sin, which kindled the dreadful flame of
Divine wrath against the whole human race. The vulgar opinion concerning
the intemperance of gluttony is quite puerile; as though the sum and
substance of all virtues consisted in an abstinence from one particular
kind of fruit, when there were diffused on every side all the delights
which could possibly be desired, and the happy fecundity of the earth
afforded an abundance and variety of dainties. We must therefore look
further, because the prohibition of the tree of knowledge of good and evil
was a test of obedience, that Adam might prove his willing submission to
the Divine government. And the name itself shows that the precept was
given for no other purpose than that he might be contented with his
condition, and not aim with criminal cupidity at any higher. But the
promise which authorized him to expect eternal life, as long as he should
eat of the tree of life, and, on the other hand, the dreadful denunciation
of death, as soon as he should taste of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, were calculated for the probation and exercise of his faith. Hence
it is easy to infer by what means Adam provoked the wrath of God against
him. Augustine, indeed, properly observes, that pride was the first of all
evils; because, if ambition had not elated man beyond what was lawful and
right, he might have continued in his honourable situation. But we may
obtain a more complete definition from the nature of the temptation as
described by Moses. For as the woman, by the subtlety of the serpent, was
seduced to discredit the word of God, it is evident that the fall
commenced in disobedience. This is also confirmed by Paul, who states that
all men were ruined by the disobedience of one.(541) But it is also to be
observed, that when the first man rebelled against the government of God,
he not only was ensnared by the allurements of Satan, but despised the
truth, and turned aside to falsehood. And there certainly can be no
reverence of God left, where his word is contemned; for we preserve a
sense of his majesty and the purity of his worship, no longer than we
implicitly attend to his voice. Infidelity, therefore, was the root of
that defection. But hence sprang ambition, pride, and ingratitude, since
Adam, by coveting more than was granted, offered an indignity to the
Divine goodness, which had so greatly enriched him. Now, it was monstrous
impiety, that a son of the earth should not be satisfied with being made
after the similitude of God, unless he could also be equal to him. If
apostasy, which consists in revolting from the government of the Creator,
and petulantly rejecting his authority, be a base and execrable crime, it
is a vain attempt to extenuate the sin of Adam. Though the transgression
of our first parents was not simple apostasy; they were also guilty of
vile reproaches against God, in consenting to the calumnies of Satan, who
accused God of falsehood, envy, and malignity. Finally, infidelity opened
the gate to ambition, and ambition produced obstinacy, so that they cast
off the fear of God, and precipitated themselves whithersoever they were
led by their lawless desires. With propriety, therefore, Bernard teaches
that the gate of salvation is opened to us, when in the present day we
receive the Gospel with our ears, as death was once admitted at the same
doors when they lay open to Satan. For Adam had never dared to resist the
authority of God, if he had not discredited his word. This was certainly
the best check for a due regulation of all the affections, that the chief
good consists in the practice of righteousness, in obedience to the
commands of God; and that the ultimate end of a happy life is to be
beloved by him. Being seduced, therefore, by the blasphemies of the devil,
he did all that was in his power towards a total annihilation of the glory
of God.

V. As the spiritual life of Adam consisted in a union to his Maker, so an
alienation from him was the death of his soul. Nor is it surprising that
he ruined his posterity by his defection, which has perverted the whole
order of nature in heaven and earth. “The creatures groan,” says Paul,
“being made subject to vanity, not willingly.”(542) If the cause be
inquired, it is undoubtedly that they sustain part of the punishment due
to the demerits of man, for whose use they were created. And his guilt
being the origin of that curse which extends to every part of the world,
it is reasonable to conclude its propagation to all his offspring.
Therefore, when the Divine image in him was obliterated, and he was
punished with the loss of wisdom, strength, sanctity, truth, and
righteousness, with which he had been adorned, but which were succeeded by
the dreadful pests of ignorance, impotence, impurity, vanity, and
iniquity, he suffered not alone, but involved all his posterity with him,
and plunged them into the same miseries. This is that hereditary
corruption which the fathers called _original sin_; meaning by sin, the
depravation of a nature previously good and pure; on which subject they
had much contention, nothing being more remote from natural reason, than
that all should be criminated on account of the guilt of one, and thus his
sin become common; which seems to have been the reason why the most
ancient doctors of the Church did but obscurely glance at this point, or
at least explained it with less perspicuity than it required. Yet this
timidity could not prevent Pelagius from arising, who profanely pretended,
that the sin of Adam only ruined himself, and did not injure his
descendants. By concealing the disease with this delusion, Satan attempted
to render it incurable. But when it was evinced by the plain testimony of
the Scripture, that sin was communicated from the first man to all his
posterity, he sophistically urged that it was communicated by imitation,
not by propagation. Therefore good men, and beyond all others Augustine,
have laboured to demonstrate that we are not corrupted by any adventitious
means, but that we derive an innate depravity from our very birth. The
denial of this was an instance of consummate impudence. But the temerity
of the Pelagians and Celestians will not appear surprising to him who
perceives from the writings of Augustine, what a want of modesty they
discover in every thing else. There is certainly no ambiguity in the
confession of David, that he was shapen in iniquity, and in sin his mother
conceived him.(543) He is not there exposing the sins of his mother or of
his father; but to enhance his commendations of the Divine goodness
towards him, he commences the confession of his depravity from the time of
his conception. As it is evident that this was not peculiar to David, it
is fairly concluded, that his case exemplifies the common condition of
mankind. Every descendant, therefore, from the impure source, is born
infected with the contagion of sin; and even before we behold the light of
life, we are in the sight of God defiled and polluted. For “who can bring
a clean thing out of an unclean?” The book of Job tells us, “Not
one.”(544)

VI. We have heard that the impurity of the parents is so transmitted to
the children, that all, without a single exception, are polluted as soon
as they exist. But we shall not find the origin of this pollution, unless
we ascend to the first parent of us all, as to the fountain which sends
forth all the streams. Thus it is certain that Adam was not only the
progenitor, but as it were the root of mankind, and therefore that all the
race were necessarily vitiated in his corruption. The Apostle explains
this by a comparison between him and Christ: “As,” says he, “by one man
sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all
men, for that all have sinned,”(545) so, by the grace of Christ,
righteousness and life have been restored to us. What cavil will the
Pelagians raise here? That the sin of Adam was propagated by imitation? Do
we then receive no other advantage from the righteousness of Christ than
the proposal of an example for our imitation? Who can bear such blasphemy?
But if it cannot be controverted that the righteousness of Christ is ours
by communication, and life as its consequence, it is equally evident that
both were lost in Adam, in the same manner in which they were recovered in
Christ, and that sin and death were introduced by Adam, in the same manner
in which they are abolished by Christ. There is no obscurity in the
declaration that many are made righteous by the obedience of Christ,(546)
as they had been made sinners by the disobedience of Adam. And, therefore,
between these two persons there is this relation, that the one ruined us
by involving us in his destruction, the other by his grace has restored us
to salvation. Any more prolix or tedious proof of a truth supported by
such clear evidence must, I think, be unnecessary. Thus also in the First
Epistle to the Corinthians, with a view to confirm the pious in a
confidence of the resurrection, he shows, that the life which had been
lost in Adam, was recovered in Christ.(547) He, who pronounces that we
were all dead in Adam, does also at the same time plainly declare, that we
were implicated in the guilt of his sin. For no condemnation could reach
those who were perfectly clear from all charge of iniquity. But his
meaning cannot be better understood than from the relation of the other
member of the sentence, where he informs us that the hope of life is
restored in Christ. But that is well known to be accomplished, only when
Christ, by a wonderful communication, transfuses into us the virtue of his
righteousness; as it is elsewhere said, “The Spirit is life, because of
righteousness.”(548) No other explanation therefore can be given of our
being said to be dead in Adam, than that his transgression not only
procured misery and ruin for himself, but also precipitated our nature
into similar destruction. And that not by his personal guilt as an
individual, which pertains not to us, but because he infected all his
descendants with the corruption into which he had fallen. Otherwise there
would be no truth in the assertion of Paul, that all are by nature
children of wrath,(549) if they had not been already under the curse even
before their birth. Now, it is easily inferred that our nature is there
characterized, not as it was created by God, but as it was vitiated in
Adam; because it would be unreasonable to make God the author of death.
Adam, therefore, corrupted himself in such a manner, that the contagion
has been communicated from him to all his offspring. And Christ himself,
the heavenly Judge, declares, in the most unequivocal terms, that all are
born in a state of pravity and corruption, when he teaches, that
“whatsoever is born of the flesh is flesh,”(550) and that, therefore, the
gate of life is closed against all who have not been regenerated.

VII. Nor, to enable us to understand this subject, have we any need to
enter on that tedious dispute, with which the fathers were not a little
perplexed, whether the soul of a son proceeds by derivation or
transmission from the soul of the father, because the soul is the
principal seat of the pollution. We ought to be satisfied with this, that
the Lord deposited with Adam the endowments he chose to confer on the
human nature; and therefore that when he lost the favours he had received,
he lost them not only for himself, but for us all. Who will be solicitous
about a transmission of the soul, when he hears that Adam received the
ornaments that he lost, no less for us than for himself? that they were
given, not to one man only, but to the whole human nature? There is
nothing absurd therefore, if, in consequence of his being spoiled of his
dignities, that nature be destitute and poor; if, in consequence of his
being polluted with sin, the whole nature be infected with the contagion.
From a putrefied root, therefore, have sprung putrid branches, which have
transmitted their putrescence to remoter ramifications. For the children
were so vitiated in their parent, that they became contagious to their
descendants: there was in Adam such a spring of corruption, that it is
transfused from parents to children in a perpetual stream. But the cause
of the contagion is not in the substance of the body or of the soul; but
because it was ordained by God, that the gifts which he conferred on the
first man should by him be preserved or lost both for himself and for all
his posterity. But the cavil of the Pelagians, that it is improbable that
children should derive corruption from pious parents, whereas they ought
rather to be sanctified by their purity, is easily refuted. For they
descend from their carnal generation, not from their spiritual generation.
Therefore, as Augustine says, “Neither the guilty unbeliever, nor the
justified believer, generates innocent, but guilty children, because the
generation of both is from corrupted nature.” If they in some measure
participate of the sanctity of their parents, that is the peculiar
benediction of the people of God, which supersedes not the first and
universal curse previously denounced on the human nature. For their guilt
is from nature, but their sanctification from supernatural grace.

VIII. To remove all uncertainty and misunderstanding on this subject, let
us define original sin. It is not my intention to discuss all the
definitions given by writers; I shall only produce one, which I think
perfectly consistent with the truth. Original sin, therefore, appears to
be an hereditary pravity and corruption of our nature, diffused through
all the parts of the soul, rendering us obnoxious to the Divine wrath, and
producing in us those works which the Scripture calls “works of the
flesh.”(551) And this is indeed what Paul frequently denominates _sin_.
The works which proceed thence, such as adulteries, fornications, thefts,
hatreds, murders, revellings, he calls in the same manner “fruits of sin;”
although they are also called “sins” in many passages of Scripture, and
even by himself. These two things therefore should be distinctly observed:
first, that our nature being so totally vitiated and depraved, we are, on
account of this very corruption, considered as convicted and justly
condemned in the sight of God, to whom nothing is acceptable but
righteousness, innocence, and purity. And this liableness to punishment
arises not from the delinquency of another; for when it is said that the
sin of Adam renders us obnoxious to the Divine judgment, it is not to be
understood as if we, though innocent, were undeservedly loaded with the
guilt of his sin; but, because we are all subject to a curse, in
consequence of his transgression, he is therefore said to have involved us
in guilt. Nevertheless we derive from him, not only the punishment, but
also the pollution to which the punishment is justly due. Wherefore
Augustine, though he frequently calls it the sin of another, the more
clearly to indicate its transmission to us by propagation, yet, at the
same time, also asserts it properly to belong to every individual. And the
Apostle himself expressly declares, that “death has therefore passed upon
all men, for that all have sinned;”(552) that is, have been involved in
original sin, and defiled with its blemishes. And therefore infants
themselves, as they bring their condemnation into the world with them, are
rendered obnoxious to punishment by their own sinfulness, not by the
sinfulness of another. For though they have not yet produced the fruits of
their iniquity, yet they have the seed of it within them; even their whole
nature is as it were a seed of sin, and therefore cannot but be odious and
abominable to God. Whence it follows, that it is properly accounted sin in
the sight of God, because there could be no guilt without crime. The other
thing to be remarked is, that this depravity never ceases in us, but is
perpetually producing new fruits, those works of the flesh, which we have
before described, like the emission of flame and sparks from a heated
furnace, or like the streams of water from a never failing spring.
Wherefore those who have defined original sin as a privation of the
original righteousness, which we ought to possess, though they comprise
the whole of the subject, yet have not used language sufficiently
expressive of its operation and influence. For our nature is not only
destitute of all good, but is so fertile in all evils that it cannot
remain inactive. Those who have called it _concupiscence_ have used an
expression not improper, if it were only added, which is far from being
conceded by most persons, that every thing in man, the understanding and
will, the soul and body, is polluted and engrossed by this concupiscence;
or, to express it more briefly, that man is of himself nothing else but
concupiscence.

IX. Wherefore I have asserted that sin has possessed all the powers of the
soul, since Adam departed from the fountain of righteousness. For man has
not only been ensnared by the inferior appetites, but abominable impiety
has seized the very citadel of his mind, and pride has penetrated into the
inmost recesses of his heart; so that it is weak and foolish to restrict
the corruption which has proceeded thence, to what are called the sensual
affections, or to call it an incentive which allures, excites, and
attracts to sin, only what they style the sensual part. In this the
grossest ignorance has been discovered by Peter Lombard, who, when
investigating the seat of it, says that it is in the flesh, according to
the testimony of Paul,(553) not indeed exclusively, but because it
principally appears in the flesh; as though Paul designated only a part of
the soul, and not the whole of our nature, which is opposed to
supernatural grace. Now, Paul removes every doubt by informing us that the
corruption resides not in one part only, but that there is nothing pure
and uncontaminated by its mortal infection. For, when arguing respecting
corrupt nature, he not only condemns the inordinate motions of the
appetites, but principally insists on the blindness of the mind, and the
depravity of the heart;(554) and the third chapter of his Epistle to the
Romans is nothing but a description of original sin. This appears more
evident from our renovation. For “the Spirit,” which is opposed to “the
old man” and “the flesh,” not only denotes the grace, which corrects the
inferior or sensual part of the soul, but comprehends a complete
reformation of all its powers. And therefore Paul not only enjoins us to
mortify our sensual appetites, but exhorts us to be renewed in the spirit
of our mind;(555) and in another place he directs us to be transformed by
the renewing of our mind.(556) Whence it follows, that that part, which
principally displays the excellence and dignity of the soul, is not only
wounded, but so corrupted, that it requires not merely to be healed, but
to receive a new nature. How far sin occupies both the mind and the heart,
we shall presently see. My intention here was only to hint, in a brief
way, that man is so totally overwhelmed, as with a deluge, that no part is
free from sin; and therefore that whatever proceeds from him is accounted
sin; as Paul says that all the affections or thoughts of the flesh are
enmity against God, and therefore death.(557)

X. Now, let us dismiss those who dare to charge God with their
corruptions, because we say that men are naturally corrupt. They err in
seeking for the work of God in their own pollution, whereas they should
rather seek it in the nature of Adam while yet innocent and uncorrupted.
Our perdition therefore proceeds from the sinfulness of our flesh, not
from God; it being only a consequence of our degenerating from our
primitive condition. And let no one murmur that God might have made a
better provision for our safety, by preventing the fall of Adam. For such
an objection ought to be abominated, as too presumptuously curious, by all
pious minds; and it also belongs to the mystery of predestination, which
shall afterwards be treated in its proper place. Wherefore let us
remember, that our ruin must be imputed to the corruption of our nature,
that we may not bring an accusation against God himself, the author of
nature. That this fatal wound is inherent in our nature, is indeed a
truth; but it is an important question, whether it was in it originally,
or was derived from any extraneous cause. But it is evident that it was
occasioned by sin. We have therefore no reason to complain, but of
ourselves; which in the Scripture is distinctly remarked. For the Preacher
says, “This only have I found, that God hath made man upright; but they
have sought out many inventions.”(558) It is clear that the misery of man
must be ascribed solely to himself, since he was favoured with rectitude
by the Divine goodness, but has lapsed into vanity through his own folly.

XI. We say, therefore, that man is corrupted by a natural depravity, but
which did not originate from nature. We deny that it proceeded from
nature, to signify that it is rather an adventitious quality or accident,
than a substantial property originally innate. Yet we call it natural,
that no one may suppose it to be contracted by every individual from
corrupt habit, whereas it prevails over all by hereditary right. Nor is
this representation of ours without authority. For the same reason the
Apostle says, that we are all by nature the children of wrath.(559) How
could God, who is pleased with all his meanest works, be angry with the
noblest of all his creatures? But he is angry rather with the corruption
of his work, than with his work itself. Therefore, if, on account of the
corruption of human nature, man be justly said to be naturally abominable
to God, he may also be truly said to be naturally depraved and corrupt; as
Augustine, in consequence of the corruption of nature, hesitates not to
call those sins natural, which necessarily predominate in our flesh, where
they are not prevented by the grace of God. Thus vanishes the foolish and
nugatory system of the Manichæans, who, having imagined in man a
substantial wickedness, presumed to invent for him a new creator, that
they might not appear to assign the cause and origin of evil to a
righteous God.




