Chapter VIII. An Exposition Of The Moral Law


Here I think it will not be foreign to our subject to introduce the ten
precepts of the law, with a brief exposition of them. For this will more
clearly evince what I have suggested, that the service which God has once
prescribed always remains in full force; and will also furnish us with a
confirmation of the second remark, that the Jews not only learned from it
the nature of true piety, but when they saw their inability to observe it,
were led by the fear of its sentence, though not without reluctance, to
the Mediator. Now, in giving a summary of those things which are requisite
to the true knowledge of God, we have shown that we can form no
conceptions of his greatness, but his majesty immediately discovers itself
to us, to constrain us to worship him. In the knowledge of ourselves, we
have laid down this as a principal article, that being divested of all
opinion of our own strength, and confidence in our own righteousness, and,
on the other hand, discouraged and depressed by a consciousness of our
poverty, we should learn true humility and self‐dejection. The Lord
accomplishes both these things in his law, where, in the first place,
claiming to himself the legitimate authority to command, he calls us to
revere his Divinity, and prescribes the parts of which this reverence
consists; and in the next place, promulgating the rule of his
righteousness, (the rectitude of which, our nature, being depraved and
perverted, perpetually opposes; and from the perfection of which, our
ability, through its indolence and imbecility towards that which is good,
is at a great distance,) he convicts us both of impotence and of
unrighteousness. Moreover, the internal law, which has before been said to
be inscribed and as it were engraven on the hearts of all men, suggests to
us in some measure the same things which are to be learned from the two
tables. For our conscience does not permit us to sleep in perpetual
insensibility, but is an internal witness and monitor of the duties we owe
to God, shows us the difference between good and evil, and so accuses us
when we deviate from our duty. But man, involved as he is in a cloud of
errors, scarcely obtains from this law of nature the smallest idea of what
worship is accepted by God; but is certainly at an immense distance from a
right understanding of it. Besides, he is so elated with arrogance and
ambition, and so blinded with self‐love, that he cannot yet take a view of
himself, and as it were retire within, that he may learn to submit and
humble himself, and to confess his misery. Since it was necessary,
therefore, both for our dulness and obstinacy, the Lord gave us a written
law; to declare with greater certainty what in the law of nature was too
obscure, and by arousing our indolence, to make a deeper impression on our
understanding and memory.

II. Now, it is easy to perceive, what we are to learn from the law;
namely, that God, as he is our Creator, justly sustains towards us the
character of a Father and of a Lord; and that on this account we owe to
him glory and reverence, love and fear. Moreover, that we are not at
liberty to follow every thing to which the violence of our passions may
incite us; but that we ought to be attentive to his will, and to practise
nothing but what is pleasing to him. In the next place, that righteousness
and rectitude are a delight, but iniquity an abomination to him; and that,
therefore, unless we will with impious ingratitude rebel against our
Maker, we must necessarily spend our whole lives in the practice of
righteousness. For if we manifest a becoming reverence for him, only when
we prefer his will to our own, it follows that there is no other
legitimate worship of him, but the observance of righteousness, sanctity,
and purity. Nor can we pretend to excuse ourselves by a want of ability,
like insolvent debtors. For it is improper for us to measure the glory of
God by our ability; for whatever may be our characters, he ever remains
like himself, the friend of righteousness, the enemy of iniquity. Whatever
he requires of us, since he can require nothing but what is right, we are
under a natural obligation to obey; but our inability is our own fault.
For if we are bound by our own passions, which are under the government of
sin, so that we are not at liberty to obey our Father, there is no reason
why we should plead this necessity in our defence, the criminality of
which is within ourselves, and must be imputed to us.

III. When we have made such a proficiency as this by means of the
instruction of the law, we ought, under the same teacher, to retire within
ourselves; from which we may learn two things: First, by comparing our
life with the righteousness of the law, we shall find, that we are very
far from acting agreeably to the will of God, and are therefore unworthy
to retain a place among his creatures, much less to be numbered among his
children. Secondly, by examining our strength, we shall see, that it is
not only unequal to the observance of the law, but a mere nullity. The
necessary consequence of this will be a diffidence in our own strength,
and an anxiety and trepidation of mind. For the conscience cannot sustain
the load of iniquity, without an immediate discovery of the Divine
judgment. And the Divine judgment cannot be perceived, without inspiring a
dread of death. Compelled also by proofs of its impotence, it cannot avoid
falling into an absolute despair of its own strength. Both these
dispositions produce humility and dejection. The result of all this is,
that the man terrified with the apprehension of eternal death, which he
sees justly impending over him for his unrighteousness, betakes himself
entirely to the Divine mercy, as to the only port of salvation; and
perceiving his inability to fulfil the commands of the law, and feeling
nothing but despair in himself, he implores and expects assistance from
another quarter.

IV. But not contented with having conciliated a reverence for his
righteousness, the Lord has also subjoined promises and threatenings, in
order that our hearts might imbibe a love for him, and at the same time a
hatred to iniquity. For since the eyes of our mind are too dim to be
attracted with the mere beauty of virtue, our most merciful Father has
been graciously pleased to allure us to the love and worship of himself by
the sweetness of his rewards. He announces, therefore, that he has
reserved rewards for virtue, and that the person who obeys his
commandments shall not labour in vain. He proclaims, on the contrary, not
only that unrighteousness is execrable in his sight, but also that it
shall not escape with impunity; but that he will avenge himself on all the
despisers of his majesty. And to urge us by all possible motives, he
promises also the blessings of the present life, as well as eternal
felicity, to the obedience of those who keep his commandments, the
transgressors of which he threatens not only with present calamities, but
with the torments of eternal death. For that promise, “these if a man do,
he shall live in them,”(818) and this correspondent threatening, “the soul
that sinneth, it shall die,”(819) undoubtedly relate to a future and
endless immortality or death. Wherever we read of the Divine benevolence
or wrath, the former comprehends eternal life, the latter eternal
destruction. Now, of present blessings and curses, the law contains a long
catalogue. The penal sanctions display the consummate purity of God, which
cannot tolerate iniquity; while the promises not only manifest his perfect
love of righteousness, which he cannot defraud of its reward, but likewise
illustrate his wonderful goodness. For since we, with all that belongs to
us, are indebted to his majesty, whatever he requires of us, he most
justly demands as the payment of a debt; but the payment of a debt is not
entitled to remuneration. Therefore he recedes from the strictness of his
claims, when he proposes a reward to our obedience, which is not performed
spontaneously, as if it were not a duty. But the effect of those promises
on us has partly been mentioned already, and will hereafter more clearly
appear in its proper place. Suffice it at present, if we remember and
consider that the promises of the law contain no mean recommendation of
righteousness, to make it more evident how much God is pleased with the
observance of it; and that the penal sanctions are annexed, to render
unrighteousness more execrable, lest the sinner, amidst the fascinations
of sin, should forget that the judgment of the Legislator awaits him.

V. Now, since the Lord, when about to deliver a rule of perfect
righteousness, referred all the parts of it to his own will, this shows
that nothing is more acceptable to him than obedience. This is worthy of
the most diligent observation, since the licentiousness of the human mind
is so inclined to the frequent invention of various services in order to
merit his favour. For this irreligious affectation of religion, which is a
principle innate in the human mind, has betrayed itself in all ages, and
betrays itself even in the present day; for men always take a pleasure in
contriving some way of attaining righteousness, which is not agreeable to
the Divine word. Hence, among those which are commonly esteemed good
works, the precepts of the law hold a very contracted station, the
numberless multitude of human inventions occupying almost the whole space.
But what was the design of Moses, unless it was to repress such an
unwarrantable license, when, after the promulgation of the law, he
addressed the people in the following manner! “Observe and hear all these
words which I command thee, that it may go well with thee, and with thy
children after thee for ever, when thou doest that which is good and right
in the sight of the Lord thy God. What thing soever I command you, observe
to do it: thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it.”(820) And
before, when he had declared that this was their wisdom and their
understanding in the sight of other nations, that they had received
statutes, and judgments, and ceremonies, from the Lord, he had added,
“Take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the
things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all
the days of thy life.”(821) Foreseeing that the Israelites would not rest,
but, even after the reception of the law, would labour to produce new
species of righteousness, foreign from what the law requires, unless they
should be rigorously restrained, God pronounces that his word comprehends
the perfection of righteousness; and yet, though this ought most
effectually to have prevented them, they were guilty of that very
presumption which was so expressly forbidden. But what is this to us? We
are certainly bound by the same declaration; for the claims of the Lord on
behalf of his law, that it contains the doctrine of perfect righteousness,
beyond all doubt remain perpetually the same; yet not contented with it,
we are wonderfully laborious in inventing and performing other good works,
one after another. The best remedy for this fault will be a constant
attention to this reflection; that the law was given to us from heaven to
teach us a perfect righteousness; that in it no righteousness is taught,
but that which is conformable to the decrees of the Divine will; that it
is therefore vain to attempt new species of works in order to merit the
favour of God, whose legitimate worship consists solely in obedience, but
that any pursuit of good works deviating from the law of God is an
intolerable profanation of the Divine and real righteousness. There is
much truth also in the observation of Augustine, who calls obedience to
God sometimes the parent and guardian, and sometimes the origin of all
virtues.

VI. But when we have given an exposition of the Divine law, we shall then
more suitably and profitably confirm what has been already advanced
concerning its office and use. Before we enter, however, on the discussion
of each article separately, it will be useful to premise some things which
may contribute to a general knowledge of it. First, let it be understood,
that the law inculcates a conformity of life, not only to external
probity, but also to internal and spiritual righteousness. Now, though
none can deny this, yet very few persons pay proper attention to it. This
arises from their not considering the Legislator, by whose nature we ought
to estimate also the nature of the law. If a king prohibit, by an edict,
adultery, murder, or theft, no man, I confess, will be liable to the
penalty of such a law, who has only conceived in his mind a desire to
commit adultery, murder, or theft, but has not perpetrated any of them.
Because the superintendence of a mortal legislator extends only to the
external conduct, and his prohibitions are not violated unless the crimes
be actually committed. But God, whose eye nothing escapes, and who esteems
not so much the external appearance as the purity of the heart, in the
prohibition of adultery, murder, and theft, comprises a prohibition of
lust, wrath, hatred, coveting what belongs to another, fraud, and every
similar vice. For, being a spiritual Legislator, he addresses himself to
the soul as much as to the body. Now, the murder of the soul is wrath and
hatred; the theft of the soul is evil concupiscence and avarice; the
adultery of the soul is lust. But it will be said, that human laws also
relate to designs and intentions, and not to fortuitous events. This I
grant; but they relate to such designs and intentions as have been
manifested in outward actions. They examine and consider with what
intention every act has been performed; but do not scrutinize the secret
thoughts. Human laws therefore are satisfied, when a man abstains from
external transgression. But, on the contrary, the Divine law being given
to our minds, the proper regulation of them is the principal requisite to
a righteous observance of it. But men in general, even while they
resolutely dissemble their contempt of the law, dispose their eyes, their
feet, their hands, and all the parts of their body, to some kind of
observance of it, while at the same time their hearts are entirely
alienated from all obedience to it, and they suppose that they have
discharged their duty, if they have concealed from man what they practise
in the sight of God. They hear the commands, Thou shalt not kill, Thou
shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal. They draw not the sword
to commit murder; they never associate with harlots; they lay no violent
hands on the property of others. All these things thus far are well; but
in their whole souls they breathe after murders, they kindle into lust,
they look with dishonest eyes on the property of others, and in their
cupidity they devour it. Now, then, they are destitute of the principal
requisite of the law. Whence arises such gross stupidity, but from
discarding the Legislator, and accommodating a righteousness to their own
inclination? These persons Paul strongly opposes, when he affirms that
“the law is spiritual;”(822) signifying that it requires not only the
obedience of the soul, the understanding, and the will, but even an
angelic purity, which, being cleansed from all the pollution of the flesh,
may savour entirely of the Spirit.

VII. When we say that this is the sense of the law, we are not introducing
a novel interpretation of our own, but following Christ, who is the best
interpreter of it. For the people having imbibed from the Pharisees the
corrupt opinion, that he, who has perpetrated no external act of
disobedience to the law, is an observer of the law, he confutes this very
dangerous error, and pronounces an unchaste look at a woman to be
adultery; he declares them to be murderers, who hate a brother; he makes
them “in danger of the judgment,” who have only conceived resentment in
their hearts; them “in danger of the council,” who in murmuring or
quarrelling have discovered any sign of an angry mind; and them “in danger
of hell fire,” who with opprobrious and slanderous language have broken
forth into open rage.(823) Persons who have not perceived these things,
have pretended that Christ was another Moses, the giver of an evangelical
law, which supplied the deficiencies of the law of Moses. Whence that
common maxim, concerning the perfection of the evangelical law, that it is
far superior to the old law—a maxim in many respects very pernicious. For
when we introduce a summary of the commandments, it will appear from Moses
himself what an indignity this fixes on the Divine law. It certainly
insinuates that all the sanctity of the fathers under the Old Testament,
was not very remote from hypocrisy, and draws us aside from that one
perpetual rule of righteousness. But there is not the least difficulty in
the confutation of this error; for they have supposed that Christ made
additions to the law, whereas he only restored it to its genuine purity,
by clearing it from the obscurities and blemishes which it had contracted
from the falsehoods and the leaven of the Pharisees.

VIII. It must be observed, in the second place, that the commands and
prohibitions always imply more than the words express; but this must be so
restricted, that we may not make it a Lesbian rule, by the assistance of
which the Scripture may be licentiously perverted, and any sense be
extorted at pleasure from any passage. For some people, by this immoderate
and excursive liberty, cause one person to despise the authority of the
law, and another to despair of understanding it. Therefore, if it be
possible, we must find some way that may lead us by a straight and steady
course to the will of God. We must inquire, I say, how far our
interpretation ought to exceed the limits of the expressions; that it may
evidently appear, not to be an appendix of human glosses annexed to the
Divine law, but a faithful explanation of the pure and genuine sense of
the legislator. Indeed, in all the commandments, the figure synecdoche, by
which a part is expressed instead of the whole, is so conspicuous, that he
may justly be the object of ridicule, who would restrict the sense of the
law within the narrow limits of the words. It is plain, then, that a sober
exposition of the law goes beyond the words of it; but how far, remains
doubtful, unless some rule be laid down. The best rule, then, I conceive
will be, that the exposition be directed to the design of the precept;
that in regard to every precept it should be considered for what end it
was given. For example, every precept is either imperative or prohibitory.
The true meaning of both these kinds of precepts will immediately occur to
us, if we consider the design or the end of them; as the end of the fifth
commandment is, that honour may be given to them to whom God assigns it.
The substance of this precept, then, is, that it is right, and pleasing to
God, that we should honour those on whom he has conferred any excellence,
and that contemptuous and contumacious conduct towards them is an
abomination to him. The design of the first commandment is, that God alone
may be worshipped. The substance of this precept, then, will be, that true
piety, that is, the worship of his majesty, is pleasing to God, and that
he abominates impiety. Thus in every commandment we should first examine
the subject of it; in the next place we should inquire the end of it, till
we discover what the Legislator really declares in it to be either
pleasing or displeasing to him. Lastly, we must draw an argument from this
commandment to the opposite of it, in this manner:—If this please God, the
contrary must displease him; if this displease him, the contrary must
please him; if he enjoin this, he forbids the contrary; if he forbid this,
he enjoins the contrary.

IX. What we now rather obscurely hint at, will be fully and practically
elucidated in our exposition of the commandments. Wherefore it is
sufficient to have suggested it; only the last position, which otherwise
might not be understood, or, if understood, might seem unreasonable,
requires to be briefly established by suitable proof. It needs no proof,
that an injunction of any thing good is a prohibition of the opposite
evil; for every man will concede it. And common sense will easily admit,
that a prohibition of crimes is a command to practise the contrary duties.
It is commonly considered as a commendation of virtues, when censure is
passed on the opposite vices. But we require somewhat more than is
commonly intended by those forms of expression. For men generally
understand the virtue which is opposite to any vice to be an abstinence
from that vice; but we affirm that it goes further, even to the actual
performance of the opposite duty. Therefore, in this precept, “Thou shalt
not kill,” the common sense of mankind will perceive nothing more than
that we ought to abstain from all acts of injury to others, and from all
desire to commit any such acts. I maintain that it also implies, that we
should do every thing that we possibly can towards the preservation of the
life of our neighbour. And not to speak without reason, I prove it in the
following manner: God forbids us to injure the safety of our brother,
because he wishes his life to be dear and precious to us: he therefore at
the same time requires of us all those offices of love which may
contribute to the preservation of it. Thus we perceive, that the end of
the precept will always discover to us whatever it enjoins or forbids us
to do.

X. Many reasons are frequently given, why God has, as it were, in
incomplete precepts, rather partially intimated his will than positively
expressed it; but the reason which affords me more satisfaction than all
others is the following. Because the flesh always endeavours to extenuate,
and by specious pretexts to conceal the turpitude of sin, unless it be
exceedingly palpable, he has proposed, by way of example, in every kind of
transgression, that which is most atrocious and detestable, and the
mention of which inspires us with horror, in order that our minds might be
impressed with the greater detestation of every sin. This often deceives
us in forming an opinion of vices; if they be private, we extenuate them.
The Lord destroys these subterfuges, when he accustoms us to refer the
whole multitude of vices to these general heads, which best represent the
abominable nature of every species of transgressions. For example, anger
and hatred are not supposed to be such execrable crimes when they are
mentioned under their own proper appellations; but when they are forbidden
to us under the name of murder, we have a clearer perception how
abominable they are in the view of God, by whose word they are classed
under such a flagitious and horrible species of crimes; and being
influenced by his judgment, we accustom ourselves more seriously to
consider the atrociousness of those offences which we previously accounted
trivial.

XI. In the third place, let it be considered, what is intended by the
division of the Divine law into two tables; the frequent and solemn
mention of which all wise men will judge not to be without some particular
design. And we have a reason at hand, which removes all ambiguity on this
subject. For God has divided his law into two parts, which comprise the
perfection of righteousness, so that he has assigned the first part to the
duties of religion, which peculiarly belongs to the worship of his
majesty, and the second to those duties of charity, which respect men. The
first foundation of righteousness is certainly the worship of God; and if
this be destroyed, all the other branches of righteousness, like the parts
of a disjointed and falling edifice, are torn asunder and scattered. For
what kind of righteousness will you pretend to, because you refrain from
harassing men by acts of theft and rapine, if at the same time you
atrociously and sacrilegiously defraud the majesty of God of the glory
which is due to him?—because you do not pollute your body with
fornication, if you blasphemously profane the sacred name of God?—because
you murder no man, if you strive to destroy and extinguish all memory of
God? It is in vain, therefore, to boast of righteousness without religion;
as well might the trunk of a body be exhibited as a beautiful object,
after the head has been cut off. Nor is religion only the head of
righteousness, but the very soul of it, constituting all its life and
vigour; for without the fear of God, men preserve no equity and love among
themselves. We therefore call the worship of God the principle and
foundation of righteousness, because, if that be wanting, whatever equity,
continence, and temperance men may practise among themselves, it is all
vain and frivolous in the sight of God. We assert also that it is the
source and soul of righteousness; because men are taught by it to live
temperately and justly with one another, if they venerate God as the judge
of right and wrong. In the first table, therefore, he instructs us in
piety and the proper duties of religion, in which his majesty is to be
worshipped; in the second he prescribes the duties which the fear of his
name should excite us to practise in society. For this reason our Lord, as
the evangelists inform us,(824) summarily comprised the whole law in two
principal points—that we love God with all our heart, with all our soul,
and with all our strength; and that we love our neighbour as ourselves. Of
the two parts in which he comprehends the whole law, we see how he directs
one towards God, and assigns the other to men.

XII. But, although the whole law is contained in these two principal
points, yet our God, in order to remove every pretext of excuse, has been
pleased in the ten commandments more diffusely and explicitly to declare,
as well those things which relate to our honour, love, and fear of him, as
those which pertain to that charity, which he commands us for his sake to
exercise towards men. Nor is it a useless study to examine into the
division of the commandments; provided you remember it is a subject of
such a nature, that every man ought to be at liberty to judge of it, and
that we ought not contentiously to oppose any who may differ from us
respecting it. But we are under a necessity of touching on this topic,
lest the reader should despise or wonder at the division that we shall
adopt, as a novel invention. That the law is divided into ten precepts, is
beyond all controversy, being frequently established by the authority of
God himself. The question, therefore, is not concerning the number of the
precepts, but concerning the manner of dividing them. Those who divide
them, so as to assign three precepts to the first table, and leave the
remaining seven to the second, expunge from the number the precept
concerning images, or at least conceal it under the first; whereas it is
undoubtedly delivered by the Lord as a distinct commandment. But the
tenth, against coveting the property of our neighbour, they improperly
divide into two. We shall see presently that such a method of division was
unknown in purer ages. Others reckon with us four articles in the first
table; but the first commandment they consider as a simple promise,
without a precept. Now, I understand the “ten words” mentioned by Moses to
be ten precepts; and I think I see that number disposed in the most
beautiful order. And therefore, unless I am convinced by clear argument,
leaving them in possession of their opinion, I shall follow what appears
to me to be preferable; that is, that what they make the first precept is
a preface to the whole law; that it is followed by the precepts, four
belonging to the first table and six to the second, in the order in which
they will now be recited. Origen has mentioned this division as if it were
universally received in his time without any controversy. Augustine also
coincides with us; for in enumerating them to Boniface, he observes this
order: That God alone be religiously worshipped; that no adoration be paid
to an idol; that the name of the Lord be not taken in vain. He had before
spoken separately of the shadowy precept of the sabbath. It is true, that
in another passage he expresses his approbation of the former division,
but for a most trivial reason; namely, that if the first table be digested
into three precepts, the trinal number will be a more conspicuous
exhibition of the mystery of the Trinity. In the same place, however, he
does not conceal that in other respects he prefers our division. Beside
these writers, the author of the unfinished treatise on Matthew is of the
same opinion with us. Josephus, doubtless according to the common opinion
of his time, assigns five precepts to each table. This is repugnant to
reason, because it confounds the distinction between religion and charity;
and is also refuted by the authority of our Lord, who in Matthew places
the precept concerning honour to parents in the second table. Now let us
hear God himself speaking in his own words.



The First Commandment.


    _I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of
    Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt have no other gods
    before me._


XIII. Whether you make the first sentence a part of the first commandment,
or read it separately, is a matter of indifference to me, provided you
allow it to be a preface to the whole law. The first object of attention
in making laws is to guard against their being abrogated by contempt.
Therefore God in the first place provides, that the majesty of the law,
which he is about to deliver, may never fall into contempt; and to
sanction it he uses a threefold argument. He asserts his authority and
right of giving commands, and thereby lays his chosen people under a
necessity of obeying them. He exhibits a promise of grace, to allure them
by its charms to the pursuit of holiness. He reminds the Israelites of his
favour, to convict them of ingratitude if they do not conduct themselves
in a manner correspondent to his goodness. The name LORD, or JEHOVAH,
designates his authority and legitimate dominion. For if all things be of
him, and if in him all things consist, it is reasonable that all things be
referred to him, agreeably to the observation of Paul.(825) Therefore by
this word alone we are brought into complete subjection to the power of
the Divine majesty; for it would be monstrous for us to desire to remove
ourselves from his jurisdiction, out of whom we cannot exist.

XIV. After having shown that he has a right to command, and that obedience
is his just due,—that he may not appear to constrain us by necessity
alone, he sweetly allures us by pronouncing himself the God of the Church.
For the expression implies the mutual relation which is contained in that
promise, “I will be their God, and they shall be my people.”(826) Whence
Christ proves the immortality of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, from the
declaration of the Lord, that he is their God.(827) Wherefore it is the
same as if he had said, I have chosen you as my people, not only to bless
you in the present life, but to bestow upon you abundant felicity in the
life to come. The design of this favour is remarked in various places in
the law; for when the Lord in mercy condescends to number us among the
society of his people, “He chooseth us,” says Moses, “to be a peculiar
people unto himself, a holy people, to keep his commandments.”(828) Hence
that exhortation, “Ye shall be holy, for I am holy.”(829) Now, from these
two considerations is derived the remonstrance of the Lord by the Prophet:
“A son honoureth his father, and a servant his master; if then I be a
father, where is mine honour? and if I be a master, where is my
fear?”(830)

XV. Next follows a recital of his kindness, which ought to produce a most
powerful effect upon our minds, in proportion to the detestable guilt of
ingratitude, even among men. He reminded the Israelites, indeed, of a
favour which they had recently experienced, but which, on account of its
magnitude and concomitant miracles, being worthy of everlasting
remembrance, might also have an influence on succeeding generations.
Besides, it was particularly suitable to the present occasion, when the
law was about to be published; for the Lord suggests that they were
liberated from a miserable slavery in order that they might serve the
author of their liberty with a promptitude of reverence and obedience. To
retain us in the true and exclusive worship of himself, he generally
distinguishes himself by certain epithets, by which he discriminates his
sacred name from all idols and fictitious deities. For, as I have before
observed, such is our proneness to vanity and presumption, that as soon as
God is mentioned, our mind is unable to guard itself from falling into
some vain imagination. Therefore, when God intends to apply a remedy to
this evil, he adorns his majesty with certain titles, and thus
circumscribes us with barriers, that we may not run into various follies,
and presumptuously invent to ourselves some new deity, discarding the
living God, and setting up an idol in his stead. For this reason the
Prophets, whenever they intend a proper designation of him, invest him,
and as it were surround him, with those characters under which he had
manifested himself to the people of Israel. Yet, when he is called “the
God of Abraham,” or “the God of Israel,” when he is said to reside
“between the cherubim,” “in the temple,” “at Jerusalem,”(831) these and
similar forms of expression do not confine him to one place, or to one
nation; they are only used to fix the thoughts of the pious on that God,
who, in the covenant which he has made with Israel, has given such a
representation of himself, that it is not proper to deviate in the
smallest instance from such a model. Nevertheless, let it be concluded,
that the deliverance of the Jews is mentioned to induce them to devote
themselves with more alacrity to the service of God, who justly claims a
right to their obedience. But, that we may not suppose this to have no
relation to us, it behoves us to consider, that the servitude of Israel in
Egypt was a type of the spiritual captivity, in which we are all detained,
till our celestial Deliverer extricates us by the power of his arm, and
introduces us into the kingdom of liberty. As formerly, therefore, when he
designed to restore the dispersed Israelites to the worship of his name,
he rescued them from the intolerable tyranny of Pharaoh, by which they
were oppressed, so now he delivers all those, whose God he declares
himself to be, from the fatal dominion of Satan, which was represented by
that corporeal captivity. Wherefore there is no one, whose mind ought not
to be excited to listen to the law, which he is informed came from the
King of kings; from whom as all creatures derive their origin, so it is
reasonable that they should regard him as their end in all things. Every
man, I say, ought to welcome the Legislator; to observe whose commands he
is taught that he is particularly chosen; from whose benignity he expects
an abundance of temporal blessings, and a life of immortality and glory;
by whose wonderful power and mercy he knows himself to be delivered from
the jaws of death.

XVI. Having firmly established the authority of his law, he publishes the
first commandment, “That we should have no other gods before him.” The end
of this precept is, that God chooses to have the sole preëminence, and to
enjoy undiminished his authority among his people. To produce this end, he
enjoins us to keep at a distance from all impiety and superstition, by
which we should either diminish or obscure the glory of his Deity; and for
the same reason he directs us to worship and adore him in the exercise of
true piety. The simplicity of the language almost expresses this; for we
cannot “have” God without at the same time comprising all that belongs to
him. Therefore, when he forbids us to “have” any other gods, he implies,
that we must not transfer to another what belongs to him. But although the
duties we owe to God are innumerable, yet they may not improperly be
classed under four general heads—adoration, a necessary branch of which is
the spiritual obedience of the conscience; trust; invocation; and
thanksgiving. By adoration I mean the reverence and worship which he
receives from every one of us who has submitted to his majesty. Wherefore
it is not without reason that I make it partly to consist in a subjection
of our consciences to his law; [for it is a spiritual homage which is
rendered to him, as to a sovereign King possessed of all power over our
souls.] Trust is a secure dependence on him arising from a knowledge of
his perfections; when ascribing to him all wisdom, righteousness, power,
truth, and goodness, we esteem ourselves happy only in communications from
him. Invocation is the application of our minds, under every pressure of
necessity, resorting to his fidelity, faithfulness, and assistance, as its
only defence. Thanksgiving is gratitude, which ascribes to him the praise
of all blessings. As the Lord permits no portion of these duties to be
transferred to another, so he commands them to be wholly given to himself.
Nor will it be sufficient for you to refrain from worshipping any other
god, unless you also refrain from imitating certain nefarious despisers,
who take the compendious method of treating all religions with contempt.
But the observance of this precept must be preceded by true religion,
leading our minds to the living God; that being endued with the knowledge
of him, they may aspire to admire, fear, and worship his majesty, to
receive his communication of blessings, to request his aid upon all
occasions, to acknowledge and celebrate the magnificence of his works, as
the sole end in all the actions of our lives. We must also beware of
corrupt superstition, by which those whose minds are diverted from the
true God, are carried about after various deities. Therefore, if we be
contented with one God, let us remember what has before been observed,
that all fictitious deities must be driven far away, and that we must not
divide that worship which he claims exclusively to himself. For it is
criminal to detract even the smallest portion from his glory; he must be
left in possession of all that belongs to him. The following clause,
“before me,” aggravates the atrociousness of the offence; for God is
provoked to jealousy whenever we substitute the figments of our own minds
instead of him; just as an immodest woman, by openly introducing an
adulterer into the presence of her husband, would inflame his mind with
the greater resentment. When God, therefore, by the presence of his power
and grace, gave a proof of his regard to the people whom he had chosen,—in
order the more forcibly to deter them from the crime of rebellion against
him, he warns them of the impossibility of introducing new deities without
his being a witness and spectator of the sacrilege. For this presumption
rises to the highest degree of impiety, when man imagines that he can
elude the observation of God in his acts of rebellion. God, on the
contrary, proclaims, that whatever we devise, whatever we attempt,
whatever we perform, is present to his view. Our conscience must therefore
be pure even from the most latent thoughts of apostasy, if we wish our
religion to obtain the approbation of the Lord. For he requires from us
the glory due to his Divinity undiminished and uncorrupted, not only in
external confession, but in his own eyes, which penetrate the inmost
recesses of our hearts.



The Second Commandment.


    _Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness
    of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth
    beneath, or that is in the water under the earth. Thou shalt not
    bow down thyself to them, nor serve them._


XVII. As in the preceding commandment the Lord has declared himself to be
the one God, besides whom no other deities ought to be imagined or
worshipped, so in this he more clearly reveals his nature, and the kind of
worship with which he ought to be honoured, that we may not dare to form
any carnal conceptions of him. The end, therefore, of this precept is,
that he will not have his legitimate worship profaned with superstitious
rites. Wherefore, in a word, he calls us off, and wholly abstracts us from
carnal observances, which our foolish minds are accustomed to devise, when
they conceive of God according to the grossness of their own
apprehensions; and therefore he calls us to the service which rightfully
belongs to him; that is, the spiritual worship which he has instituted. He
marks what is the grossest transgression of this kind; that is, external
idolatry. And this precept consists of two parts. The first restrains us
from licentiously daring to make God, who is incomprehensible, the subject
of our senses, or to represent him under any visible form. The second
prohibits us from paying religious adoration to any images. He likewise
briefly enumerates all the forms, in which he used to be represented by
profane and superstitious nations. By those things which are in heaven, he
means the sun, the moon, and the other stars, and perhaps birds; as, when
he explains his meaning in the fourth chapter of Deuteronomy, he mentions
birds as well as the stars.(832) This I should not have remarked, had I
not known some persons injudiciously refer this clause to angels. I omit
the other particulars, as needing no explanation. And in the first
book(833) we have already sufficiently proved that whatever visible
representations of God are invented by man, are diametrically opposite to
his nature; and that, therefore, as soon as ever idols are introduced,
true religion is immediately corrupted and adulterated.

XVIII. The penal sanction which is annexed ought to have no small
influence in arousing us from our lethargy. He thus threatens:


    _For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of
    the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation
    of them that hate me; and showing mercy unto thousands of them
    that love me, and keep my commandments._


This is equivalent to a declaration that it is to him alone that we ought
to adhere. And to urge us to it, he announces his power, which he permits
none with impunity to despise or undervalue. For the Hebrew word _El_,
which is here used for God, is expressive of strength. In the second
place, he calls himself “a jealous God,” who can bear no rival. Thirdly,
he declares that he will avenge his majesty and glory on those who
transfer it to creatures or to graven images; and that not with the
transient punishment of the original transgressors only, but of their
posterity to the third and fourth generation; that is, of those who shall
imitate the impiety of their fathers; as he also permanently displays his
mercy and goodness, through a long line of posterity, to those who love
him and keep his law. It is very common for God to assume the character of
a husband to us; for the union, in which he connects us with himself, when
he receives us into the bosom of his Church, bears a resemblance to the
sacred conjugal relation, which requires to be supported by mutual
fidelity. As he performs towards us all the duties of a true and faithful
husband, so he demands from us the reciprocal duties of conjugal love and
chastity; that is, that we do not prostitute our souls to Satan, to lust,
and to the impurity of the carnal appetites. Wherefore, when he reproves
the apostasy of the Jews, he complains that they had discarded chastity,
and were polluted with adulteries.(834) Therefore, as a husband, in
proportion to the superiority of his purity and chastity, is the more
grievously incensed, if he perceive the affection of his wife inclining to
a rival, so the Lord, who has in truth espoused us to himself, declares
that he feels the most ardent jealousy, whenever we neglect the sacred
purity of his conjugal relation to us, and defile ourselves with criminal
lusts, but especially when we transfer to any other, or adulterate with
any superstition, the worship of his majesty, which ought to be preserved
in the most consummate perfection; since by such conduct we not only
violate the faith pledged in our nuptials, but even pollute our souls with
spiritual adultery.

XIX. Let us inquire what he intends by his threatening to “visit the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children to the third and fourth
generation.” For besides that it is inconsistent with the equity of the
Divine justice to inflict upon an innocent person the punishment due to
the offences of another, God himself declares that “the son shall not bear
the iniquity of the father.”(835) But this expression is repeated more
than once, concerning a deferring to future generations of the punishments
of crimes committed by their ancestors. For Moses frequently speaks of
“the Lord visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the
third and fourth generation.”(836) In like manner Jeremiah: “Thou showest
loving‐kindness unto thousands, and recompensest the iniquity of the
fathers into the bosom of their children after them.”(837) Some, who
labour very hard to solve this difficulty, are of opinion that its meaning
is to be confined to temporal punishments; which if children sustain
through the sins of their parents, there is nothing absurd in it; because
they frequently conduce to the salvation of those on whom they are
inflicted. This is certainly true. For Isaiah denounced to Hezekiah, that
on account of the sin which he had committed, his sons should be despoiled
of the kingdom and carried away into exile.(838) The families of Pharaoh
and Abimelech are afflicted on account of the injury sustained by
Abraham.(839) But when this is adduced as a solution of these questions,
it is rather an evasion of it, than a proper explanation. For in this and
in similar places the Lord threatens a punishment too great to be
terminated by the limits of the present life. It must therefore be
understood as a declaration that the curse of the Lord righteously rests,
not only on the person of an impious man, but also on his whole family.
Where it has rested, what can be expected, but that the father, being
destitute of the Spirit of God, will lead a most flagitious life; and that
the son, experiencing, in consequence of the iniquity of his father, a
similar dereliction by the Lord, will pursue the same path to perdition;
and that the grandson and the great grandson, the execrable posterity of
detestable men, will run headlong after them down the same precipice of
destruction?

XX. First let us inquire, whether such punishment be inconsistent with the
Divine justice. If the whole nature of man be worthy of condemnation, we
know that destruction awaits those who are not favoured by the Lord with
the communication of his grace. Nevertheless, they perish through their
own iniquity, and not through the unjust hatred of God. Nor is there any
room left for expostulation, why they are not assisted by Divine grace to
obtain salvation as well as others. Since it is a punishment, therefore,
inflicted on the impious and flagitious, in consequence of their
transgressions, that their families remain destitute of Divine grace for
many generations, who can bring any accusation against God for this most
righteous instance of his vengeance? But it will be said, the Lord
declares, on the contrary, that the punishment of the sin of the father
shall not be transferred to the son. Observe the subject that is treated
of in that place. The Israelites, after they had been long harassed by
numerous and unceasing calamities, began to use this proverb, “The fathers
have eaten sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on edge;”(840) by
which they insinuated, that sins had been committed by their parents, the
punishment of which was inflicted on them who were otherwise righteous and
innocent, more through the implacable wrath of God, than through a just
severity. The Prophet announces to them that this is not the case, but
that they are punished for their own transgressions, and that it is
incompatible with the Divine justice to punish a righteous son for the
iniquity of a wicked father. Nor is this to be found in the penal sanction
now under consideration. For if the visitation, of which we are treating,
be fulfilled, when God removes from the family of the impious his grace,
the light of his truth, and the other means of salvation, the very
circumstance of children blinded and abandoned by him being found treading
in the footsteps of their fathers, is an instance of their bearing the
curse in consequence of the crimes of their parents. But their being the
subjects of temporal miseries, and at length of eternal perdition, are
punishments from the righteous judgment of God, not for the sins of
others, but on account of their own iniquity.

XXI. On the other hand, God gives a promise to extend his mercy to a
thousand generations; which also frequently occurs in the Scripture, and
is inserted in the solemn covenant with the Church: “I will be a God unto
thee, and to thy seed after thee.”(841) In allusion to this, Solomon says,
that “the children of the just man are blessed after him;”(842) not only
as the effect of a religious education, which is of no small importance,
but also in consequence of the blessing promised in the covenant, that the
grace of God shall perpetually remain in the families of the pious. This
is a source of peculiar consolation to the faithful, but to the impious of
great terror; for if, even after death, the memory of righteousness and
iniquity has so much influence with God, that the curse of the one and the
blessing of the other will redound to posterity, much more will it remain
on the persons of the actors themselves. Now, it is no objection to our
argument, that the descendants of the impious sometimes grow better, while
those of the faithful degenerate; since the Legislator never intended to
establish in this case such an invariable rule, as would derogate from his
own free choice. For it is sufficient for the consolation of the righteous
and the terror of the sinner, that the denunciation is not vain or
inefficacious, although it be not always executed. For as the temporal
punishments inflicted on a few wicked men are testimonies of the Divine
wrath against sin, and of the judgment that will hereafter be pronounced
on all sinners, though many escape with impunity even to the end of their
lives, so, when the Lord exhibits one example of this blessing, in
manifesting his mercy and goodness to the son for the sake of his father,
he affords a proof of his constant and perpetual favour to his
worshippers; and when, in any one instance, he pursues the iniquity of the
father in the son, he shows what a judgment awaits all the reprobate on
account of their own transgressions; the certainty of which was what he
principally designed in this passage. He also gives us a cursory
intimation of the greatness of his mercy, which he extends to a thousand
generations, while he has assigned only four generations to his vengeance.



The Third Commandment.


    _Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain._


XXII. The end of this precept is, that the Lord will have the majesty of
his name to be held inviolably sacred by us. The substance of the command
therefore is, that we ought not to profane that name by a contemptuous or
irreverent use of it. This prohibition necessarily implies an injunction,
that we studiously and carefully treat it with religious veneration.
Therefore it becomes us to regulate our thoughts and words in such a
manner that we may not think or speak any thing concerning God and his
mysteries, but with the greatest sobriety and reverence; that in
meditating on his works we may form no opinion that is dishonourable to
him. These three things, I say, we ought most carefully to observe—first,
that whatever we think, and whatever we say of him, should savour of his
excellence, correspond to the sacred sublimity of his name, and tend to
the exaltation of his magnificence. Secondly, we should not rashly and
preposterously abuse his holy word and adorable mysteries to the purposes
of ambition, of avarice, or of amusement; but as they bear an impression
of the dignity of his name, they should always receive from us the honour
and esteem which belong to them. Lastly, we should not injure his works by
obloquy or detraction, as some miserable mortals are accustomed to do; but
whenever we mention any thing done by him, we should celebrate it with
encomiums of wisdom, justice, and goodness. This is “sanctifying” the name
of God. In every other case, it is violated by a vain and criminal abuse,
because it is carried beyond the limits of that legitimate use, to which
alone it is consecrated; and though no other consequence ensue, it is
deprived of its dignity, and by degrees rendered contemptible. But if it
be so criminal thus rashly and unseasonably to introduce the name of God
on every occasion, much more so must it be to apply it to such nefarious
uses as they do, who make it subservient to the superstitions of
necromancy, to horrible imprecations, to unlawful exorcisms, and to other
impious incantations. But an oath is the thing principally contemplated in
the command, as the most detestable instance of the perverse abuse of the
Divine name; and this is done to inspire us with the greater horror of
every species of profanation of it. That this precept relates to the
worship of God and the reverence of his name, and not to the equity that
ought to be observed among mankind, appears from this—that the subsequent
condemnation, in the second table, of perjury and false witness, by which
society is injured, would be a needless repetition, if the present precept
related to a civil duty. Besides, the division of the law requires this;
for, as we have already observed, it is not in vain that God has
distributed the law into two tables. Whence we conclude, that in this
command he vindicates his just claims, and guards the sanctity of his
name, but does not teach the duties which men owe to each other.

XXIII. In the first place, we have to explain what an oath is. It consists
in calling upon God as a witness, to confirm the truth of any declaration
that we make. For execrations, which contain manifest reproaches against
God, are not worthy to be mentioned among oaths. That such an attestation,
when rightly performed, is a species of Divine worship, is evident from
many places of Scripture; as when Isaiah prophesies of the vocation of the
Assyrians and Egyptians to participate in the covenant with Israel. “They
shall speak,” says he, “the language of Canaan, and swear to the Lord of
hosts.”(843) By “swearing to the Lord” here is intended making a
profession of religion. Again, when he speaks of the extension of his
kingdom: “He who blesseth himself in the earth shall bless himself in the
God of truth; and he that sweareth in the earth shall swear by the God of
truth.”(844) Jeremiah says, “If they will diligently learn the ways of my
people, to swear by my name, The Lord liveth; as they taught my people to
swear by Baal, then shall they be built in the midst of my people.”(845)
And we are justly said to profess our religion to the Lord, when we invoke
his name to bear witness to us. For thereby we confess that he is truth
itself, eternal and immutable; whom we call not only as a witness of the
truth, excelling all others, but also as the only defender of it, who is
able to bring to light things which are concealed, and in a word, as the
searcher of all hearts. For where human testimonies are wanting, we resort
for refuge to the testimony of God; and particularly when any thing is to
be affirmed, which is hidden in the conscience. For which reason the Lord
is extremely angry with them who swear by strange gods, and interprets
that species of swearing as a proof of manifest defection from him. “Thy
children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no gods.”(846) And
he declares the atrociousness of this crime by his denunciation of
punishment: “I will cut off them that swear by the Lord, and that swear by
Malcham.”(847)

XXIV. Now, since we understand it to be the will of the Lord, that we
should reverence his name in our oaths, we ought to use so much the more
caution, lest, instead of reverence, they betray dishonour or contempt of
it. It is no trifling insult to him, when perjury is committed in his
name; and therefore the law calls it a profanation.(848) But what remains
to the Lord, when he is despoiled of his truth? he will then cease to be
God. But he is certainly despoiled of it, when he is made an abettor and
approver of a falsehood. Wherefore, when Joshua would induce Achan to a
confession of the truth, he says, “My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the
Lord God of Israel;”(849) implying in this that the Lord is grievously
dishonoured, if perjury be committed in his name. Nor is this strange; for
in such a case we do all that is in our power to brand his sacred name
with a falsehood. And that this form of expression was customary among the
Jews, whenever any man was called to take an oath, appears from a similar
adjuration used by the Pharisees in the Gospel of John.(850) To this
caution we are accustomed by the forms of oaths which are used in the
Scriptures: “The Lord liveth;”(851) “God do so and more also to me;”(852)
“I call God for a record upon my soul;”(853) which imply, that we cannot
invoke God to be a witness to our declarations, without imprecating his
vengeance upon us if we be guilty of perjury.

XXV. The name of God is rendered vile and contemptible, when it is used in
unnecessarily swearing even to what is true; for in this instance also it
is taken in vain. Wherefore it will not be sufficient to abstain from
perjury; unless we also remember, that swearing is permitted and
appointed, not for the sake of our pleasure or caprice, but from
necessity; and that the lawful use of it, therefore, is transgressed by
those who apply it to cases where it is not necessary. Now, no other
necessity can be pretended, but when we want to serve either religion or
charity. This crime, in the present day, is carried to a very great
extent; and it is so much the more intolerable, since by its frequency it
has ceased to be considered as a crime, though before the Divine tribunal
it is deemed no trivial offence. For the name of God is universally
profaned without concern in trifling conversations; and it is not
considered as sinful, because this presumptuous wickedness has been so
long practised with impunity. But the Divine command remains valid; the
sanction remains firm; and a future day will witness the completion of
that part of it which denounces a particular punishment against those who
take his name in vain. This precept is violated also in another way. If in
our oaths we substitute the servants of God in the place of God himself,
we are guilty of manifest impiety; because we thereby transfer to them the
glory due to the Deity. Nor is it without reason, that God, by a special
command, enjoins us to swear by his name,(854) and by a special
prohibition interdicts us from swearing by any strange gods.(855) And the
Apostle evidently attests the same, when he says, that “men swear by the
greater, but that God, because he could swear by no greater, sware by
himself.”(856)

XXVI. The Anabaptists, not satisfied with this limitation of oaths,
condemn all oaths without exception; because the prohibition of Christ is
general: “I say unto you, Swear not at all. But let your communication be,
Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than these cometh of
evil.”(857) But by this mode of interpretation they set Christ in
opposition to the Father, as though he descended into this world to
abrogate the Father’s decrees. For in the law the eternal God not only
permits an oath, as a lawful thing, which would be sufficient to justify
the use of it, but in cases of necessity commands it.(858) Now, Christ
asserts, that “he and his Father are one,” that “he acts only according to
the commands of the Father,” that “his doctrine is not of himself,”
&c.(859) What then? Will they make God to contradict himself, by
prohibiting and condemning in our conduct that which he has before
approved and enjoined? But as the words of Christ involve some difficulty,
let us enter on a brief examination of them. Here we shall never arrive at
the truth, unless we attend to the design of Christ, and advert to the
subject of which he is there treating. His design is not to relax or to
restrict the law, but to reduce it to its true and genuine meaning, which
had been very much corrupted by the false comments of the scribes and
Pharisees. If we bear this in our minds, we shall not be of opinion that
Christ condemned all oaths, but only those which transgress the rule of
the law. It appears to have been the custom of the people at that time to
avoid nothing but perjuries; whereas the law forbids not only perjuries,
but likewise all vain and superfluous oaths. Our Lord, therefore, that
infallible expositor of the law, apprizes them that it is sinful, not only
to perjure themselves, but even to swear. To swear in what manner? In
vain. But the oaths which are sanctioned in the law he leaves without any
objection. They consider themselves as urging a very powerful argument,
when they violently insist on the particle _at all_; which, nevertheless,
refers not to the word _swear_, but to the forms of oaths that are there
subjoined. For the error there condemned consisted, partly, in a
supposition that in swearing by heaven and earth, there was no
interference with the name of God. Therefore, after the principal instance
of transgression, the Lord goes on to destroy all their subterfuges, that
they may not imagine themselves to have escaped by suppressing the name of
God, and calling heaven and earth to witness for them. For here, by the
way, it must be remarked, that men indirectly swear by God, though his
name is not expressed; as when they swear by the light of life, by the
bread which they eat, by their baptism, or by any other blessings which
they have received from the Divine munificence. Nor does Christ in that
place prohibit them from swearing by heaven, and earth, and Jerusalem, in
order to correct superstition, as some falsely imagine; but rather to
confute the sophistical subtlety of persons who thought there was no crime
in the foolish use of indirect oaths, as though they were not chargeable
with profaning the sacred name of God, which is engraven, however, on all
his benefits. But the case is different, where any mortal man, or one that
is dead, or an angel, is substituted in the place of God; as, among
idolatrous nations, adulation invented that odious form of swearing by the
life or genius of a king; because in such cases the deification of a
creature obscures and diminishes the glory of the only true God. But when
we mean nothing but to derive a confirmation to our assertions from the
sacred name of God, although it be done in an indirect manner, yet all
such frivolous oaths are offensive to his majesty. Christ deprives this
licentious practice of every vain excuse, by his prohibition of swearing
at all. James also aims at the same point,(860) where he uses the language
of Christ, which I have cited; because this presumption has always been
prevalent in the world, notwithstanding it is a profanation of the name of
God. For if you refer the particle _at all_ to the substance of swearing,
as though every oath, without exception, were unlawful, what means the
explanation which is immediately annexed, “Neither by heaven, neither by
earth,” &c., language evidently used in refutation of those cavils, which
the Jews considered as furnishing an excuse for their sin.

XXVII. It can no longer be doubtful, therefore, to persons of sound
judgment, that the Lord, in that passage, only condemns those oaths which
had been forbidden by the law. For even he, who exhibited in his life an
example of the perfection which he inculcated, hesitated not to make use
of oaths whenever occasion required; and his disciples, who, we doubt not,
were obedient to their master in all things, followed the same example.
Who can dare to assert, that Paul would have sworn, if all oaths had been
prohibited? But when the occasion requires it, he swears without any
scruple, and sometimes even adds an imprecation. The question, however, is
not yet decided; for it is the opinion of some persons, that public oaths
are the only exceptions from this prohibition; such as we take when
required by a magistrate; such also as princes are accustomed to use in
ratifying treaties; or subjects, when they swear allegiance to their
princes; or soldiers, as a military test; and others of a similar kind. To
this class also they justly refer those oaths which we find used by Paul
in assertion of the dignity of the gospel; because the Apostles, in the
exercise of their functions, were not private persons, but public
ministers of God. And indeed I will not deny that these are the safest
oaths; because they are sanctioned by the strongest testimonies of
Scripture. A magistrate is directed, in a dubious case, to put a witness
to his oath, and the witness, on the other hand, is required to answer on
his oath; and the Apostle says, that human controversies are adjusted by
this expedient.(861) In this precept both parties are furnished with a
complete justification of their conduct. Moreover we may observe, that
among the ancient heathen a public and solemn oath was held in great
reverence; but that common ones, which they used in their ordinary
intercourse, were not esteemed of any, or of much importance, because they
imagined that these were not regarded by the Divine majesty. But it would
be too dangerous to condemn private oaths, which are taken, in cases of
necessity, with sobriety, integrity, and reverence, since they are
supported both by reason and by scriptural examples. For if it be lawful
for private persons in an important and serious affair to appeal to God as
a judge between them, much more must it be allowable to invoke him as a
witness. Your brother will accuse you of perfidy; you endeavour to
exculpate yourself; he will not permit himself by any means to be
satisfied. If your reputation be endangered by his obstinate malignity,
you may, without any offence, appeal to the judgment of God, that in his
own time he will manifest your innocence. If the words be strictly
examined, it is a less thing to appeal to him as a witness than as a
judge. I see not, therefore, why we should assert such an appeal to him to
be unlawful. There are not wanting numerous examples of it. If the oath of
Abraham and Isaac with Abimelech be alleged to have been taken in a public
capacity, certainly Jacob and Laban were private persons, and yet they
confirmed the covenant between them by a mutual oath.(862) Boaz was a
private person, who confirmed in the same manner his promise of marriage
to Ruth.(863) Obadiah was a private person, a righteous man, and one that
feared the Lord, who declared with an oath the fact of which he wished to
convince Elijah.(864) I can find, therefore, no better rule, than that we
regulate our oaths in such a manner, that they be not rash or
inconsiderate, wanton or frivolous, but used in cases of real necessity,
as for vindicating the glory of the Lord, or promoting the edification of
our brother; which is the end of this commandment of the law.



The Fourth Commandment.


    _Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six days shalt thou
    labour, and do all thy work; but the seventh day is the sabbath of
    the Lord thy God; in it thou shalt not do any work, &c._


XXVIII. The end of this precept is, that, being dead to our own affections
and works, we should meditate on the kingdom of God, and be exercised in
that meditation in the observance of his institutions. But, as it has an
aspect peculiar and distinct from the others, it requires a little
different kind of exposition. The fathers frequently call it a _shadowy
commandment_, because it contains the external observance of the day,
which was abolished with the rest of the figures at the advent of Christ.
And there is much truth in their observation; but it reaches only half of
the subject. Wherefore it is necessary to seek further for an exposition,
and to consider three causes, on which I think I have observed this
commandment to rest. For it was the design of the heavenly Lawgiver, under
the rest of the seventh day, to give the people of Israel a figure of the
spiritual rest, by which the faithful ought to refrain from their own
works, in order to leave God to work within them. His design was,
secondly, that there should be a stated day, on which they might assemble
together to hear the law and perform the ceremonies, or at least which
they might especially devote to meditations on his works; that by this
recollection they might be led to the exercises of piety. Thirdly, he
thought it right that servants, and persons living under the jurisdiction
of others, should be indulged with a day of rest, that they might enjoy
some remission from their labour.

XXIX. Yet we are taught in many places that this adumbration of the
spiritual rest was the principal design of the sabbath. For the Lord is
hardly so strict in his requisitions of obedience to any other
precept.(865) When he means to intimate, in the Prophets, that religion is
totally subverted, he complains that his sabbaths are polluted, violated,
neglected, and profaned;(866) as though, in case of that duty being
neglected, there remained no other way in which he could be honoured. On
the other hand, he notices the observance of it with singular encomiums.
Wherefore also, among the other Divine communications, the faithful used
very highly to esteem the revelation of the sabbath. For this is the
language of the Levites in a solemn assembly, recorded by Nehemiah: “Thou
madest known unto our fathers thy holy sabbath, and commandedst them
precepts, statutes, and laws, by the hand of Moses.”(867) We see the
singular estimation in which it is held above all the commandments of the
law. All these things tend to display the dignity of the mystery, which is
beautifully expressed by Moses and Ezekiel. In Exodus we read as follows:
“Verily my sabbaths ye shall keep; for it is a sign between me and you
throughout your generations; that ye may know that I am the Lord that doth
sanctify you. Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto
you. The children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath
throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant. It is a sign
between me and the children of Israel for ever.”(868) This is more fully
expressed by Ezekiel; but the substance of what he says is, that the
sabbath was a sign by which the Israelites might know that God was their
sanctifier.(869) If our sanctification consists properly in the
mortification of our own will, there is a very natural analogy between the
external sign and the internal thing which it represents. We must rest
altogether, that God may operate within us; we must recede from our own
will, resign our own heart, and renounce all our carnal affections; in
short, we must cease from all the efforts of our own understanding, that
having God operating within us, we may enjoy rest in him, as we are also
taught by the Apostle.(870)

XXX. This perpetual cessation was represented to the Jews by the
observance of one day in seven, which the Lord, in order that it might be
the more religiously kept, recommended by his own example. For it is no
small stimulus to any action, for a man to know that he is imitating his
Creator. If any one inquire after a hidden signification in the septenary
number, it is probable, that because in Scripture it is the number of
perfection, it is here selected to denote perpetual duration. This is
confirmed also by the circumstance, that Moses, with that day in which he
narrates that the Lord rested from his works, concludes his description of
the succession of days and nights. We may also adduce another probable
conjecture respecting this number—that the Lord intended to signify that
the sabbath would never be completed until the arrival of the last day.
For in it we begin that blessed rest, in which we make new advances from
day to day. But because we are still engaged in a perpetual warfare with
the flesh, it will not be consummated before the completion of that
prediction of Isaiah, “It shall come to pass, that from one new moon to
another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship
before me, saith the Lord;”(871) that is, when God shall be “all in
all.”(872) The Lord may be considered, therefore, as having delineated to
his people, in the seventh day, the future perfection of his sabbath in
the last day, that, by a continual meditation on the sabbath during their
whole life, they might be aspiring towards this perfection.

XXXI. If any one disapprove of this observation on the number, as too
curious, I object not to its being understood in a more simple manner;
that the Lord ordained a certain day, that the people under the discipline
of the law might be exercised in continual meditations on the spiritual
rest; that he appointed the seventh day, either because he foresaw it
would be sufficient, or in order that the proposal of a resemblance to his
own example might operate as a stronger stimulus to the people, or at
least to apprize them that the only end of the sabbath was to promote
their conformity to their Creator. For this is of little importance,
provided we retain the mystery, which is principally exhibited, of a
perpetual rest from our own works. To the contemplation of this, the
Prophets used frequently to recall the Jews, that they might not suppose
themselves to have discharged their duty merely by a cessation from manual
labours. Beside the passages already cited, we have the following in
Isaiah: “If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy
pleasure on my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the
Lord, honourable; and shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways, nor
finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words; then shalt thou
delight thyself in the Lord,” &c.(873) But all that it contained of a
ceremonial nature was without doubt abolished by the advent of the Lord
Christ. For he is the truth, at whose presence all figures disappear; the
body, at the sight of which all the shadows are relinquished. He, I say,
is the true fulfilment of the sabbath. Having been “buried with him by
baptism, we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, that
being partakers of his resurrection, we may walk in newness of life.”(874)
Therefore the Apostle says in another place, that “the sabbath was a
shadow of things to come; but the _body_ is of Christ;”(875) that is, the
real substance of the truth, which he has beautifully explained in that
passage. This is contained not in one day, but in the whole course of our
life, till, being wholly dead to ourselves, we be filled with the life of
God. Christians therefore ought to depart from all superstitious
observance of days.

XXXII. As the two latter causes, however, ought not to be numbered among
the ancient shadows, but are equally suitable to all ages,—though the
sabbath is abrogated, yet it is still customary among us to assemble on
stated days for hearing the word, for breaking the mystic bread, and for
public prayers; and also to allow servants and labourers a remission from
their labour. That in commanding the sabbath, the Lord had regard to both
these things, cannot be doubted. The first is abundantly confirmed even by
the practice of the Jews. The second is proved by Moses, in Deuteronomy,
in these words: “that thy man‐servant and thy maid‐servant may rest as
well as thou. And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of
Egypt.”(876) Also, in Exodus: “that thine ox and thine ass may rest, and
the son of thy handmaid, and the stranger, may be refreshed.”(877) Who can
deny that both these things are as proper for us as for the Jews?
Assemblies of the Church are enjoined in the Divine word, and the
necessity of them is sufficiently known even from the experience of life.
Unless there be stated days appointed for them, how can they be held?
According to the direction of the Apostle, “all things” are to “be done
decently and in order” among us.(878) But so far is it from being possible
to preserve order and decorum without this regulation, that, if it were
abolished, the Church would be in imminent danger of immediate convulsion
and ruin. But if we feel the same necessity, to relieve which the Lord
enjoined the sabbath upon the Jews, let no one plead that it does not
belong to us. For our most provident and indulgent Father has been no less
attentive to provide for our necessity than for that of the Jews. But why,
it may be asked, do we not rather assemble on every day, that so all
distinction of days may be removed? I sincerely wish that this were
practised; and truly spiritual wisdom would be well worthy of some portion
of time being daily allotted to it; but if the infirmity of many persons
will not admit of daily assemblies, and charity does not permit us to
require more of them, why should we not obey the rule which we have
imposed upon us by the will of God?

XXXIII. I am obliged to be rather more diffuse on this point, because, in
the present age, some unquiet spirits have been raising noisy contentions
respecting the Lord’s day. They complain that Christians are tinctured
with Judaism, because they retain any observance of days. But I reply,
that the Lord’s day is not observed by us upon the principles of Judaism;
because in this respect the difference between us and the Jews is very
great. For we celebrate it not with scrupulous rigour, as a ceremony which
we conceive to be a figure of some spiritual mystery, but only use it as a
remedy necessary to the preservation of order in the Church. But they say,
Paul teaches that Christians are not to be judged in the observance of it,
because it is a shadow of something future.(879) Therefore he is “afraid
lest” he has “bestowed” on the Galatians “labour in vain,” because they
continued to “observe days.”(880) And in the Epistle to the Romans, he
asserts him to be “weak in the faith,” who “esteemeth one day above
another.”(881) But who, these furious zealots only excepted, does not see
what observance the apostle intends? For they did not observe them for the
sake of political and ecclesiastical order; but when they retained them as
shadows of spiritual things, they were so far guilty of obscuring the
glory of Christ and the light of the gospel. They did not, therefore, rest
from their manual labours, as from employments which would divert them
from sacred studies and meditations; but from a principle of superstition,
imagining their cessation from labour to be still an expression of
reverence for the mysteries formerly represented by it. This preposterous
distinction of days the Apostle strenuously opposes; and not that
legitimate difference which promotes the peace of the Christian Church.
For in the churches which he founded, the sabbath was retained for this
purpose. He prescribes the same day to the Corinthians, for making
collections for the relief of the brethren at Jerusalem. If superstition
be an object of fear, there was more danger in the holy days of the Jews,
than in the Lord’s days now observed by Christians. Now, whereas it was
expedient for the destruction of superstition, the day which the Jews kept
holy was abolished; and it being necessary for the preservation of
decorum, order, and peace, in the Christian Church, another day was
appointed for the same use.

XXXIV. However, the ancients have not without sufficient reason
substituted what we call the Lord’s day in the room of the sabbath. For
since the resurrection of the Lord is the end and consummation of that
true rest, which was adumbrated by the ancient sabbath, the same day which
put an end to the shadows, admonishes Christians not to adhere to a
shadowy ceremony. Yet I do not lay so much stress on the septenary number,
that I would oblige the Church to an invariable adherence to it; nor will
I condemn those churches which have other solemn days for their
assemblies, provided they keep at a distance from superstition. And this
will be the case, if they be only designed for the observance of
discipline and well‐regulated order. Let us sum up the whole in the
following manner: As the truth was delivered to the Jews under a figure,
so it is given to us without any shadows; first, in order that during our
whole life we should meditate on a perpetual rest from our own works, that
the Lord may operate within us by his Spirit; secondly, that every man,
whenever he has leisure, should diligently exercise himself in private in
pious reflections on the works of God, and also that we should at the same
time observe the legitimate order of the Church, appointed for the hearing
of the word, for the administration of the sacraments, and for public
prayer; thirdly, that we should not unkindly oppress those who are subject
to us. Thus vanish all the dreams of false prophets, who in past ages have
infected the people with a Jewish notion, affirming that nothing but the
ceremonial part of this commandment, which, according to them, is the
appointment of the seventh day, has been abrogated, but that the moral
part of it, that is, the observance of one day in seven, still remains.
But this is only changing the day in contempt of the Jews, while they
retain the same opinion of the holiness of a day; for on this principle
the same mysterious signification would still be attributed to particular
days, which they formerly obtained among the Jews. And indeed we see what
advantages have arisen from such a sentiment. For those who adhere to it,
far exceed the Jews in a gross, carnal, and superstitious observance of
the sabbath; so that the reproofs, which we find in Isaiah, are equally
applicable to them in the present age, as to those whom the Prophet
reproved in his time. But the principal thing to be remembered is the
general doctrine; that, lest religion decay or languish among us, sacred
assemblies ought diligently to be held, and that we ought to use those
external means which are adapted to support the worship of God.



The Fifth Commandment.


    _Honour thy father and thy mother; that thy days may be long upon
    the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee._


XXXV. The end of this precept is, that since the Lord God desires the
preservation of the order he has appointed, the degrees of preëminence
fixed by him ought to be inviolably preserved. The sum of it, therefore,
will be, that we should reverence them whom God has exalted to any
authority over us, and should render them honour, obedience, and
gratitude. Whence follows a prohibition to derogate from their dignity by
contempt, obstinacy, or ingratitude. For in the Scripture the word
“honour” has an extensive signification; as, when the Apostle directs that
“the elders who rule well be counted worthy of double honour,”(882) he
means not only that they are entitled to reverence, but likewise such a
remuneration as their ministry deserves. But as this precept, which
enjoins subjection to superiors, is exceedingly repugnant to the depravity
of human nature, whose ardent desire of exaltation will scarcely admit of
subjection, it has therefore proposed as an example that kind of
superiority which is naturally most amiable and least invidious; because
that might the more easily mollify and incline our minds to a habit of
submission. By that subjection, therefore, which is most easy to be borne,
the Lord accustoms us by degrees to every kind of legitimate obedience;
because the reason of all is the same. For to those, to whom he gives any
preëminence, he communicates his own authority, as far as is necessary for
the preservation of that preëminence. The titles of Father, God, and Lord,
are so eminently applicable to him, that, whenever we hear either of them
mentioned, our minds cannot but be strongly affected with a sense of his
majesty. Those, therefore, on whom he bestows these titles, he illuminates
with a ray of his splendour, to render them all honourable in their
respective stations. Thus in a father we ought to recognize something
Divine; for it is not without reason that he bears one of the titles of
the Deity. Our prince, or our lord, enjoys an honour somewhat similar to
that which is given to God.

XXXVI. Wherefore it ought not to be doubted that God here lays down a
universal rule for our conduct; namely, that to every one, whom we know to
be placed in authority over us by his appointment, we should render
reverence, obedience, gratitude, and all the other services in our power.
Nor does it make any difference, whether they are worthy of this honour,
or not. For whatever be their characters, yet it is not without the
appointment of the Divine providence, that they have attained that
station, on account of which the supreme Legislator has commanded them to
be honoured. He has particularly enjoined reverence to our parents, who
have brought us into this life; which nature itself ought to teach us. For
those who violate the parental authority by contempt or rebellion, are not
men, but monsters. Therefore the Lord commands all those, who are
disobedient to their parents, to be put to death, as having rendered
themselves unworthy to enjoy the light, by their disregard of those by
whose means they were introduced to it. And various appendices to the law
evince the truth of our observation, that the honour here intended
consists in reverence, obedience, and gratitude. The first the Lord
confirms, when he commands him to be slain who has cursed his father or
mother;(883) for in that case he punishes contempt. He confirms the
second, when he denounces the punishment of death against disobedient and
rebellious children.(884) The third is supported by Christ, who says, “God
commanded, saying, Honour thy father and mother;” and, “He that curseth
father or mother, let him die the death. But ye say, Whosoever shall say
to his father or his mother, It is a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be
profited by me; and honour not his father or his mother, he shall be free.
Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your
tradition.”(885) And whenever Paul mentions this commandment, he explains
it as a requisition of obedience.(886)

XXXVII. In order to recommend it, a promise is annexed, which is a further
intimation how acceptable to God that submission is which is here
enjoined. Paul employs that stimulus to arouse our inattention, when he
says, “This is the first commandment with promise.” For the preceding
promise, in the first table, was not particularly confined to one
commandment, but extended to the whole law. Now, the true explanation of
this promise is, that the Lord spake particularly to the Israelites
concerning the land which he had promised them as an inheritance. If the
possession of that land therefore was a pledge of the Divine goodness, we
need not wonder, if it was the Lord’s will to manifest his favour by
bestowing length of life, in order to prolong the enjoyment of the
blessing conferred by him. The meaning of it therefore is, Honour thy
father and thy mother, that through the space of a long life thou mayest
enjoy the possession of the land, which will be to thee a testimony of my
favour. But, as the whole earth is blessed to the faithful, we justly
place the present life among the blessings we receive from God. Wherefore
this promise belongs likewise to us, inasmuch as the continuance of the
present life affords us a proof of the Divine benevolence. For neither is
it promised to us, nor was it promised to the Jews, as though it contained
any blessedness in itself; but because to the pious it is generally a
token of the Divine favour. Therefore, if a son, that is obedient to his
parents, happen to be removed out of life before the age of
maturity,—which is a case of frequent occurrence,—the Lord, nevertheless,
perseveres with as much punctuality in the completion of his promise, as
if he were to reward a person with a hundred acres of land to whom he had
only promised one. The whole consists in this: We should consider that
long life is promised to us so far as it is the blessing of God; but that
it is a blessing, only as it is a proof of the favour of God, which he
infinitely more richly and substantially testifies and actually
demonstrates to his servants in their death.

XXXVIII. Moreover, when the Lord promises the blessing of the present life
to those children who honour their parents with proper reverence, he at
the same time implies that a certain curse impends over all those who are
disobedient and perverse. And that it might not fail of being executed, he
pronounces them in his law to be liable to the sentence of death, and
commands that punishment to be inflicted on them. If they escape that, he
punishes them himself in some other way. For we see what great numbers of
persons of this character fall in battles and in private quarrels; others
are afflicted in unusual ways; and almost all of them are proofs of the
truth of this threatening. But if any arrive at an extreme age, being
deprived of the Divine blessing, they only languish in misery in this
life, and are reserved to greater punishments hereafter; and consequently
they are far from participating in the blessing promised to dutiful
children. But it must be remarked by the way, that we are commanded to
obey them only “in the Lord;” and this is evident from the foundation
before laid; for they preside in that station to which the Lord has
exalted them by communicating to them a portion of his honour. Wherefore
the submission exercised towards them ought to be a step towards honouring
the Supreme Father. Therefore, if they instigate us to any transgression
of the law, we may justly consider them not as parents, but as strangers,
who attempt to seduce us from obedience to our real Father. The same
observation is applicable to princes, lords, and superiors of every
description. For it is infamous and absurd, that their eminence should
avail to depreciate the preëminence of God, upon which it depends, and to
which it ought to conduct us.



The Sixth Commandment.


    _Thou shalt not kill._


XXXIX. The end of this precept is, that since God has connected mankind
together in a kind of unity, every man ought to consider himself as
charged with the safety of all. In short, then, all violence and
injustice, and every kind of mischief, which may injure the body of our
neighbour, are forbidden to us. And therefore we are enjoined, if it be in
our power, to assist in protecting the lives of our neighbours; to exert
ourselves with fidelity for this purpose; to procure those things which
conduce to their tranquillity; to be vigilant in shielding them from
injuries; and in cases of danger to afford them our assistance. If we
remember that this is the language of the Divine Legislator, we should
consider, at the same time, that he intends this rule to govern the soul.
For it were ridiculous, that he who beholds the thoughts of the heart, and
principally insists on them, should content himself with forming only the
body to true righteousness. Mental homicide, therefore, is likewise
prohibited, and an internal disposition to preserve the life of our
brother is commanded in this law. The hand, indeed, accomplishes the
homicide, but it is conceived by the mind under the influence of anger and
hatred. Examine whether you can be angry with your brother, without being
inflamed with a desire of doing him some injury. If you cannot be angry
with him, then you cannot hate him; for hatred is nothing more than
inveterate anger. However you may dissemble, and endeavour to extricate
yourself by vain subterfuges, whenever there is either anger or hatred,
there is also a disposition to do injury. If you persist in your evasions,
it is already pronounced by the Holy Spirit, that “Whosoever hateth his
brother is a murderer.”(887) It is declared by the Lord Christ, “that
whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of
the judgment; and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in
danger of the council; but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in
danger of hell fire.”(888)

XL. Now, the Scripture states two reasons on which this precept is
founded; the first, that man is the image of God; the second, that he is
our own flesh. Wherefore, unless we would violate the image of God, we
ought to hold the personal safety of our neighbour inviolably sacred; and
unless we would divest ourselves of humanity, we ought to cherish him as
our own flesh. The motives which are derived from the redemption and grace
of Christ will be treated in another place. These two characters, which
are inseparable from the nature of man, God requires us to consider as
motives to our exertions for his security; so that we may reverence his
image impressed on him, and show an affectionate regard for our own flesh.
That person, therefore, is not innocent of the crime of murder, who has
merely restrained himself from the effusion of blood. If you perpetrate,
if you attempt, if you only conceive in your mind any thing inimical to
the safety of another, you stand guilty of murder. Unless you also
endeavour to defend him to the utmost of your ability and opportunity, you
are guilty of the same inhuman transgression of the law. But if so much
concern be discovered for the safety of the body, we may conclude, how
much care and attention should be devoted to the safety of the soul,
which, in the sight of God, is of infinitely superior value.



The Seventh Commandment.


    _Thou shalt not commit adultery._


XLI. The end of this precept is, that because God loves chastity and
purity, we ought to depart from all uncleanness. The sum of it therefore
is, that we ought not to be polluted by any carnal impurity, or libidinous
intemperance. To this prohibition corresponds the affirmative injunction,
that every part of our lives ought to be regulated by chastity and
continence. But he expressly forbids adultery, to which all incontinence
tends; in order that by the turpitude of that which is very gross and
palpable, being an infamous pollution of the body, he may lead us to
abominate every unlawful passion. Since man was created in such a state as
not to live a solitary life, but to be united to a help‐meet; and moreover
since the curse of sin has increased this necessity,—the Lord has afforded
us ample assistance in this case by the institution of marriage—a
connection which he has not only originated by his authority, but also
sanctified by his blessing. Whence it appears, that every other union, but
that of marriage, is cursed in his sight; and that the conjugal union
itself is appointed as a remedy for our necessity, that we may not break
out into unrestrained licentiousness. Let us not flatter ourselves,
therefore, since we hear that there can be no cohabitation of male and
female, except in marriage, without the curse of God.

XLII. Now, since the original constitution of human nature, and the
violence of the passions consequent upon the fall, have rendered a union
of the sexes doubly necessary, except to those whom God has exempted from
that necessity by peculiar grace, let every one carefully examine what is
given to him. Virginity, I acknowledge, is a virtue not to be despised.
But as this is denied to some, and to others is granted only for a season,
let those who are troubled with incontinence, and cannot succeed in
resisting it, avail themselves of the help of marriage, that they may
preserve their chastity according to the degree of their calling. For
persons who “cannot receive this saying,”(889) if they do not assist their
frailty by the remedy offered and granted to them, oppose God and resist
his ordinance. Here let no one object, as many do in the present day, that
with the help of God he can do all things. For the assistance of God is
granted only to them who walk in his ways, that is, in their calling;
which is deserted by all those who neglect the means which God has
afforded them, and strive to overcome their necessities by vain
presumption. That continence is a peculiar gift of God, and of that kind
which is not imparted promiscuously, or to the whole body of the Church,
but only conferred on a few of its members, is affirmed by our Lord. For
he mentions a certain class of men who “have made themselves eunuchs for
the kingdom of heaven’s sake;”(890) that is, that they might be more at
liberty to devote their attention to the affairs of the kingdom of heaven.
But that no one might suppose this to be in the power of man, he had
already declared that “all men cannot receive this saying, save they to
whom it is given.” And he concludes, “He that is able to receive it, let
him receive it.” Paul is still more explicit, when he says, that “every
man hath his proper gift of God, one after this manner, and another after
that.”(891)

XLIII. Since we are so expressly apprized that it is not in the power of
every one to preserve chastity in celibacy, even with the most strenuous
efforts for that purpose, and that it is a peculiar grace, which the Lord
confers only on particular persons, that he may have them more ready for
his service, do we not resist God, and strive against the nature
instituted by him, unless we accommodate our manner of life to the measure
of our ability? In this commandment the Lord prohibits adultery: therefore
he requires of us purity and chastity. The only way of preserving this is,
that every one should measure himself by his own capacity. Let no one
rashly despise marriage as a thing useless or unnecessary to him; let no
one prefer celibacy, unless he can dispense with a wife. And in that state
let him not consult his carnal tranquillity or advantage, but only that,
being exempted from this restraint, he may be the more prompt and ready
for all the duties of piety. Moreover, as this benefit is conferred upon
many persons only for a season, let every one refrain from marriage as
long as he shall be capable of supporting a life of celibacy. When his
strength fails to overcome his passions, let him consider that the Lord
has laid him under a necessity of marrying. This is evident from the
direction of the Apostle: “To avoid fornication, let every man have his
own wife, and let every woman have her own husband.” Again: “If they
cannot contain, let them marry.”(892) Here, in the first place, he
signifies that the majority of men are subject to the vice of
incontinence; in the next place, of those who are subject to it, he makes
no exception, but enjoins them all to have recourse to that sole remedy
which obviates unchastity. Those who are incontinent, therefore, if they
neglect this method of curing their infirmity, are guilty of sin, in not
obeying this injunction of the Apostle. And let not him who refrains from
actual fornication, flatter himself, as though he could not be charged
with unchastity, while his heart at the same time is inflamed with
libidinous desire. For Paul defines chastity to consist in sanctity of
mind connected with purity of body. “The unmarried woman,” he says,
“careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and
in spirit.”(893) Therefore, when he gives a reason to confirm the
preceding injunction, he does not content himself with saying that it is
better for a man to marry than to pollute himself with the society of a
harlot, but affirms that “it is better to marry than to burn.”(894)

XLIV. Now, if married persons are satisfied that their society is attended
with the blessing of the Lord, they are thereby admonished that it must
not be contaminated by libidinous and dissolute intemperance. For if the
honour of marriage conceals the shame of incontinence, it ought not on
that account to be made an incitement to it. Wherefore let it not be
supposed by married persons that all things are lawful to them. Every man
should observe sobriety towards his wife, and every wife, reciprocally,
towards her husband; conducting themselves in such a manner as to do
nothing unbecoming the decorum and temperance of marriage. For thus ought
marriage contracted in the Lord to be regulated by moderation and modesty,
and not to break out into the vilest lasciviousness. Such sensuality has
been stigmatized by Ambrose with a severe, but not unmerited censure, when
he calls those who in their conjugal intercourse have no regard to modesty
or decorum, the adulterers of their own wives. Lastly, let us consider who
the Legislator is, by whom adultery is here condemned. It is no other than
he who ought to have the entire possession of us, and justly requires the
whole of our spirit, soul, and body. Therefore, when he prohibits us from
committing adultery, he at the same time forbids us, either by
lasciviously ornamenting our persons, or by obscene gesticulations, or by
impure expressions, insidiously to attack the chastity of others. For
there is much reason in the address of Archelaus to a young man clothed in
an immoderately effeminate and delicate manner, that it was immaterial in
what part he was immodest, with respect to God, who abominates all
contamination, in whatever part it may discover itself, either of soul or
of body. And that there may be no doubt on the subject, let us remember
that God here recommends chastity. If the Lord requires chastity of us, he
condemns every thing contrary to it. Wherefore, if we aspire to obedience,
neither let our mind internally burn with depraved concupiscence, nor let
our eyes wanton into corrupt affections, nor let our body be adorned for
purposes of seduction, nor let our tongue with impure speeches allure our
mind to similar thoughts, nor let us inflame ourselves with intemperance.
For all these vices are stains, by which the purity of chastity is
defiled.



The Eighth Commandment.


    _Thou shalt not steal._


XLV. The end of this precept is, that, as injustice is an abomination to
God, every man may possess what belongs to him. The sum of it, then, is,
that we are forbidden to covet the property of others, and are therefore
enjoined faithfully to use our endeavours to preserve to every man what
justly belongs to him. For we ought to consider, that what a man possesses
has fallen to his lot, not by a fortuitous contingency, but by the
distribution of the supreme Lord of all; and that therefore no man can be
deprived of his possessions by criminal methods, without an injury being
done to the Divine dispenser of them. But the species of theft are
numerous. One consists in violence; when the property of any person is
plundered by force and predatory license. Another consists in malicious
imposture; when it is taken away in a fraudulent manner. Another consists
in more secret cunning; where any one is deprived of his property under
the mask of justice. Another consists in flatteries; where we are cheated
under the pretence of a donation. But not to dwell too long on the recital
of the different species of theft, let us remember that all artifices by
which the possessions and wealth of our neighbours are transferred to us,
whenever they deviate from sincere love into a desire of deceiving, or
doing any kind of injury, are to be esteemed acts of theft. This is the
only view in which God considers them, even though the property may be
gained by a suit at law. For he sees the tedious manœuvres with which the
designing man begins to decoy his more simple neighbour, till at length he
entangles him in his snares. He sees the cruel and inhuman laws, by which
the more powerful man oppresses and ruins him that is weaker. He sees the
baits with which the more crafty trap the imprudent. All which things are
concealed from the judgment of man, nor ever come to his knowledge. And
this kind of injury relates not only to money, or to goods, or to lands,
but to whatever each individual is justly entitled to; for we defraud our
neighbours of their property, if we deny them those kind offices, which it
is our duty to perform to them. If an idle agent or steward devour the
substance of his master, and be inattentive to the care of his domestic
affairs; if he either improperly waste, or squander with a luxurious
profusion, the property intrusted to him; if a servant deride his master,
if he divulge his secrets, if by any means he betray either his life or
his property; and if, on the other hand, a master inhumanly oppress his
family,—God holds him guilty of theft. For the property of others is
withheld and misapplied by him, who does not perform towards them those
offices which the duty of his situation requires of him.

XLVI. We shall rightly obey this commandment therefore, if, contented with
our own lot, we seek no gain but in an honest and lawful way; if we
neither desire to enrich ourselves by injustice, nor attempt to ruin the
fortune of our neighbour, in order to increase our own; if we do not
labour to accumulate wealth by cruelty, and at the expense of the blood of
others; if we do not greedily scrape together from every quarter,
regardless of right or wrong, whatever may conduce to satiate our avarice
or support our prodigality. On the contrary, it should be our constant
aim, as far as possible, faithfully to assist all by our advice and our
property in preserving what belongs to them; but if we are concerned with
perfidious and fallacious men, let us be prepared rather to recede a
little from our just right than to contend with them. Moreover, let us
communicate to the necessities, and according to our ability alleviate the
poverty, of those whom we perceive to be pressed by any embarrassment of
their circumstances. Lastly, let every man examine what obligations his
duty lays him under to others, and let him faithfully discharge the duties
which he owes them. For this reason the people should honour their
governors, patiently submit to their authority, obey their laws and
mandates, and resist nothing, to which they can submit consistently with
the Divine will. On the other hand, let governors take care of their
people, preserve the public peace, protect the good, punish the wicked,
and administer all things in such a manner, as becomes those who must
render an account of their office to God the supreme Judge. Let the
ministers of churches faithfully devote themselves to the ministry of the
word, and let them never adulterate the doctrine of salvation, but deliver
it pure and uncontaminated to the people of God. Let them teach, not only
by their doctrine, but by the example of their lives; in a word, let them
preside as good shepherds over the sheep. Let the people, on their part,
receive them as the messengers and apostles of God, render to them that
honour to which the supreme Master has exalted them, and furnish them with
the necessaries of life. Let parents undertake the support, government,
and instruction of their children, as committed by God to their care; nor
let them exasperate their minds and alienate their affections from them by
cruelty, but cherish and embrace them with the lenity and indulgence
becoming their character. And that obedience is due to them from their
children has been before observed. Let juniors revere old age, since the
Lord has designed that age to be honourable. Let old men, by their
prudence and superior experience, guide the imbecility of youth; not
teasing them with sharp and clamorous invectives, but tempering severity
with mildness and affability. Let servants show themselves obedient and
diligent in the service of their masters; and that not only in appearance,
but from the heart, as serving God himself. Neither let masters behave
morosely and perversely to their servants, harassing them with excessive
asperity, or treating them with contempt; but rather acknowledge them as
their brethren and companions in the service of the heavenly Master,
entitled to be regarded with mutual affection, and to receive kind
treatment. In this manner, I say, let every man consider what duties he
owes to his neighbours, according to the relations he sustains; and those
duties let him discharge. Moreover, our attention should always be
directed to the Legislator; to remind us that this law is ordained for our
hearts as much as for our hands, in order that men may study both to
protect the property and to promote the interests of others.



The Ninth Commandment.


    _Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour._


XLVII. The end of this precept is, that because God, who is truth itself,
execrates a lie, we ought to preserve the truth without the least
disguise. The sum of it therefore is, that we neither violate the
character of any man, either by calumnies or by false accusations, nor
distress him in his property by falsehood, nor injure him by detraction or
impertinence. This prohibition is connected with an injunction to do all
the service we can to every man, by affirming the truth for the protection
of his reputation and his property. The Lord seems to have intended the
following words as an exposition of this command: “Thou shalt not raise a
false report: put not thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous
witness.” Again: “Keep thee far from a false matter.”(895) In another
place also he not only forbids us to practise backbiting and tale‐bearing
among the people, but prohibits every man from deceiving his brother;(896)
for he cautions us against both in distinct commandments. Indeed there is
no doubt but that, as, in the preceding precepts, he has prohibited
cruelty, impurity, and avarice, so in this he forbids falsehood; of which
there are two branches, as we have before observed. For either we
transgress against the reputation of our neighbours by malignity and
perverse detraction, or by falsehood and sometimes by obloquy we injure
their interests. It is immaterial whether we suppose the testimony here
designed to be solemn and judicial, or a common one, which is delivered in
private conversations. For we must always recur to this maxim—that, of
each of the separate kinds of vices, one species is proposed as an
example, to which the rest may be referred; and that, in general, the
species selected is that in which the turpitude of the vice is most
conspicuous. It is proper, however, to extend it more generally to
calumnies and detraction, by which our neighbours are unjustly harassed;
because falsehood in a forensic testimony is always attended with perjury.
But perjury, being a profanation and violation of the name of God, has
already been sufficiently condemned in the third commandment. Wherefore
the legitimate observance of this precept is, that our tongue, by
asserting the truth, ought to serve both the reputation and the profit of
our neighbours. The equity of this is self‐evident. For if a good name be
more precious than any treasures whatever, a man sustains as great an
injury when he is deprived of the integrity of his character, as when he
is despoiled of his wealth. And in plundering his substance, there is
sometimes as much effected by false testimony, as by the hands of
violence.

XLVIII. Nevertheless, it is wonderful with what supine security this
precept is generally transgressed, so that few persons can be found, who
are not notoriously subject to this malady; we are so fascinated with the
malignant pleasure of examining and detecting the faults of others. Nor
should we suppose it to be a sufficient excuse, that in many cases we
cannot be charged with falsehood. For he who forbids the character of our
brother to be bespattered with falsehood, wills also that as far as the
truth will permit, it be preserved immaculate. For although he only guards
it against falsehood, he thereby suggests that it is committed to his
charge. But this should be sufficient to induce us to defend the fair
character of our neighbour—that God concerns himself in its protection.
Wherefore detraction is, without doubt, universally condemned. Now, by
detraction we mean, not reproof, which is given from a motive of
correction; not accusation or judicial denunciation, by which recompense
is demanded for an injury; not public reprehension, which tends to strike
terror into other offenders; not a discovery to them whose safety depends
on their being previously warned, that they may not be endangered through
ignorance; but odious crimination, which arises from malice, and a violent
propensity to detraction. This commandment also extends so far as to
forbid us to affect a pleasantry tinctured with scurrilous and bitter
sarcasms, severely lashing the faults of others under the appearance of
sport; which is the practice of some who aim at the praise of raillery, to
the prejudice of the modesty and feelings of others; for such wantonness
sometimes fixes a lasting stigma on the characters of our brethren. Now,
if we turn our eyes to the Legislator whose proper right it is to rule our
ears and our minds, as much as our tongues, it will certainly appear that
an avidity of hearing detraction, and an unreasonable propensity to
unfavourable opinions respecting others, are equally prohibited. For it
would be ridiculous for any one to suppose that God hates slander in the
tongue, and does not reprobate malice in the heart. Wherefore, if we
possess the true fear and love of God, let us make it our study, that as
far as is practicable and expedient, and consistent with charity, we
devote neither our tongues nor our ears to opprobrious and malicious
raillery, nor inadvertently attend to unfavourable suspicions; but that,
putting fair constructions on every man’s words and actions, we regulate
our hearts, our ears, and our tongues, with a view to preserve the
reputation of all around us.



The Tenth Commandment.


    _Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s house, thou shalt not covet
    thy neighbour’s wife, nor his man‐servant, nor his maid‐servant,
    nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour’s._


XLIX. The end of this precept is, that, since it is the will of God that
our whole soul should be under the influence of love, every desire
inconsistent with charity ought to be expelled from our minds. The sum,
then, will be, that no thought should obtrude itself upon us, which would
excite in our minds any desire that is noxious, and tends to the detriment
of another. To which corresponds the affirmative precept, that all our
conceptions, deliberations, resolutions, and undertakings, ought to be
consistent with the benefit and advantage of our neighbours. But here we
meet with what appears to be a great and perplexing difficulty. For if our
previous assertions be true, that the terms _adultery_ and _theft_
comprehend the licentious desire, and the injurious and criminal
intention, this may be thought to have superseded the necessity of a
separate command being afterwards introduced, forbidding us to covet the
possessions of others. But we shall easily solve this difficulty by a
distinction between intention and concupiscence. For an intention, as we
have before observed in explaining the former commandments, is a
deliberate consent of the will, when the mind has been enslaved by any
unlawful desire. Concupiscence may exist without such deliberation or
consent, when the mind is only attracted and stimulated by vain and
corrupt objects. As the Lord, therefore, has hitherto commanded our wills,
efforts, and actions to be subject to the law of love, so now he directs
that the conceptions of our minds be subject to the same regulation, lest
any of them be corrupt and perverted, and give our hearts an improper
impulse. As he has forbidden our minds to be inclined and persuaded to
anger, hatred, adultery, rapine, and falsehood, so now he prohibits them
from being instigated to these vices.

L. Nor is it without cause that he requires such consummate rectitude. For
who can deny that it is reasonable for all the powers of our souls to be
under the influence of love? But if any one deviate from the path of love,
who can deny that that soul is in an unhealthy state? Now, whence is it,
that your mind conceives desires prejudicial to your neighbour, but that,
neglecting his interest, you consult nothing but your own? For if your
heart were full of love, there would be no part of it exposed to such
imaginations. It must therefore be destitute of love, so far as it is the
seat of concupiscence. Some one will object, that it is unreasonable, that
imaginations, which without reflection flutter about in the mind, and then
vanish away, should be condemned as symptoms of concupiscence, which has
its seat in the heart. I reply, that the present question relates to that
kind of imaginations, which, when they are presented to our
understandings, at the same time strike our hearts, and inflame them with
cupidity; since the mind never entertains a wish for any thing after which
the heart is not excited to pant. Therefore God enjoins a wonderful ardour
of love, which he will not allow to be interrupted even by the smallest
degree of concupiscence. He requires a heart admirably well regulated,
which he permits not to be disturbed with the least emotion contrary to
the law of love. Do not imagine that this doctrine is unsupported by any
great authority; for I derived the first idea of it from Augustine. Now,
though the design of the Lord was to prohibit us from all corrupt desires,
yet he has exhibited, as examples, those objects which most generally
deceive us with a fallacious appearance of pleasure; that he might not
leave any thing to concupiscence, after having driven it from those
objects towards which it is most violently inclined. Behold, then, the
second table of the law, which sufficiently instructs us in the duties we
owe to men for the sake of God, on regard to whom the whole rule of love
depends. The duties taught in this second table, therefore, we shall
inculcate in vain, unless our instruction be founded on the fear and
reverence of God. To divide the prohibition of concupiscence into two
precepts, the discerning reader, without any comment of mine, will
pronounce to be a corrupt and violent separation of what is but one. Nor
is the repetition of this phrase, “Thou shalt not covet,” any objection
against us; because, having mentioned the house or family, God enumerates
the different parts of it, beginning with the wife. Hence it clearly
appears that it ought to be read, as it is correctly read by the Hebrews,
in one continued connection; and in short, that God commands, that all
that every man possesses remain safe and entire, not only from any actual
injury or fraudulent intention, but even from the least emotion of
cupidity that can solicit our hearts.

LI. But what is the tendency of the whole law, will not now be difficult
to judge: it is to a perfection of righteousness, that it may form the
life of man after the example of the Divine purity. For God has so
delineated his own character in it, that the man who exemplifies in his
actions the precepts it contains, will exhibit in his life, as it were, an
image of God. Wherefore, when Moses would recall the substance of it to
the remembrance of the Israelites, he said, “And now, Israel, what doth
the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in
all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, to keep the commandments of the Lord?”(897)
Nor did he cease to reiterate the same things to them, whenever he
intended to point out the end of the law. The tendency of the doctrine of
the law is to connect man with his God, and, as Moses elsewhere expresses
it, to make him cleave to the Lord in sanctity of life.(898) Now, the
perfection of this sanctity consists in two principal points, already
recited—“that we love the Lord our God with all our heart, and with all
our soul, and with all our strength, and with all our mind; and our
neighbour as ourselves.”(899) And the first is, that our souls be
completely filled with the love of God. From this the love of our
neighbour will naturally follow; as the Apostle signifies, when he says,
that “the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a
good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.”(900) Here we find a good
conscience and faith unfeigned, that is, in a word, true piety, stated to
be the grand source from which charity is derived. He is deceived,
therefore, who supposes that the law teaches nothing but certain rudiments
and first principles of righteousness, by which men are introduced to the
commencement, but are not directed to the true goal of good works; since
beyond the former sentence of Moses, and the latter of Paul, nothing
further can be wanted to the highest perfection. For how far will he wish
to proceed, who will not be content with this instruction, by which man is
directed to the fear of God, to the spiritual worship of him, to the
observance of his commands, to persevering rectitude in the way of the
Lord, to purity of conscience, and sincere faith and love? Hence we derive
a confirmation of the foregoing exposition of the law, which traces and
finds in its precepts all the duties of piety and love. For they who
attend merely to dry and barren elements, as though it taught them but
half of the Divine will, are declared by the Apostle to have no knowledge
of its end.

LII. But because Christ and his Apostles, in reciting the substance of the
law, sometimes omit the first table,(901) many persons are deceived in
this point, who wish to extend their expressions to both tables. In the
Gospel of Matthew, Christ calls judgment, mercy, and faith, “the weightier
matters of the law.” By the word faith it is evident to me that he intends
truth or fidelity towards men. Some, however, in order to extend the
passage to the whole law, take the word faith to mean religion towards
God. But for this there is no foundation; for Christ is treating of those
works by which man ought to prove himself to be righteous. If we attend to
this observation, we shall cease also to wonder, why, in another place, to
the inquiry of a young man, what those commandments are by the observance
of which we enter into life, he only returns the following answer: “Thou
shalt do no murder, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal,
Thou shalt not bear false witness, Honour thy father and thy mother; and,
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.”(902) For obedience to the first
table consisted chiefly either in the disposition of the heart, or in
ceremonies. The disposition of the heart was not visible, and the
ceremonies were diligently performed by hypocrites; but the works of
charity are such as enable us to give a certain evidence of righteousness.
But the same occurs in the Prophets so frequently, that it must be
familiar to the reader who is but tolerably conversant with them. For in
almost all cases when they exhort to repentance, they omit the first
table, and insist on faith, judgment, mercy, and equity. Nor do they by
this method neglect the fear of God, but require substantial proof of it
from those marks. It is well known that when they treat of the observation
of the law, they generally insist on the second table; because it is in it
that the love of righteousness and integrity is principally discovered. It
is unnecessary to quote the passages, as every person will of himself
easily remark what I have stated.

LIII. Is it, then, it will be asked, of more importance towards the
attainment of righteousness to live innocently with men, than piously
towards God? By no means. But because no man fulfils all the duties of
charity, unless he really fear God, we derive from those duties a proof of
his piety. Besides, the Lord, well knowing that he can receive no benefit
from us, which he also declares by the Psalmist,(903) requires not our
services for himself, but employs us in good works towards our neighbour.
It is not without reason, then, that the Apostle makes all the perfection
of the saints to consist in love;(904) which in another place he very
justly styles “the fulfilling of the law;” adding, that “he that loveth
another hath fulfilled the law.”(905) Again: that “all the law is
fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself.”(906) For he teaches nothing different from what is taught by
Christ himself, when he says, “All things whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the law and the
prophets.”(907) It is certain that in the law and the prophets, faith, and
all that pertains to the legitimate worship of God, hold the principal
place, and that love occupies an inferior station; but our Lord intends
that the observance of justice and equity among men is only prescribed to
us in the law, that our pious fear of him, if we really possess any, may
be proved by our actions.

LIV. Here, then, we must rest, that our life will then be governed
according to the will of God, and the prescriptions of his law, when it is
in all respects most beneficial to our brethren. But we do not find in the
whole law one syllable, that lays down any rule for a man respecting those
things which he should practise or omit for his carnal convenience. And
surely, since men are born in such a state, that they are entirely
governed by an immoderate self‐love,—a passion which, how great soever
their departure from the truth, they always retain,—there was no need of a
law which would inflame that love, already of itself too violent. Whence
it plainly appears, that the observance of the commandments consists not
in the love of ourselves, but in the love of God and of our neighbour;
that his is the best and most holy life, who lives as little as possible
to himself; and that no man leads a worse or more iniquitous life, than he
who lives exclusively to himself, and makes his own interest the sole
object of his thoughts and pursuits. Moreover, the Lord, in order to give
us the best expression of the strength of that love which we ought to
exercise towards our neighbours, has regulated it by the standard of our
self‐love, because there was no stronger or more vehement affection. And
the force of the expression must be carefully examined; for he does not,
according to the foolish dreams of some sophists, concede the first place
to self‐love, and assign the second to the love of our neighbour; but
rather transfers to others that affection of love which we naturally
restrict to ourselves. Whence the Apostle asserts that “charity seeketh
not her own.”(908) Nor is their argument, that every thing regulated by
any standard is inferior to the standard by which it is regulated, worthy
of the least attention. For God does not appoint our self‐love as the
rule, to which our love to others should be subordinate; but whereas,
through our natural depravity, our love used to terminate in ourselves, he
shows that it ought now to be diffused abroad; that we may be ready to do
any service to our neighbour with as much alacrity, ardour, and
solicitude, as to ourselves.

LV. Now, since Christ has demonstrated, in the parable of the Samaritan,
that the word “neighbour” comprehends every man, even the greatest
stranger, we have no reason to limit the commandment of love to our own
relations or friends. I do not deny, that the more closely any person is
united to us, the greater claim he has to the assistance of our kind
offices. For the condition of humanity requires, that men should perform
more acts of kindness to each other, in proportion to the closeness of the
bonds by which they are connected, whether of relationship, or
acquaintance, or vicinity; and this without any offence to God, by whose
providence we are constrained to it. But I assert, that the whole human
race, without any exception, should be comprehended in the same affection
of love, and that in this respect there is no difference between the
barbarian and the Grecian, the worthy and unworthy, the friend and the
foe; for they are to be considered in God, and not in themselves, and
whenever we deviate from this view of the subject, it is no wonder if we
fall into many errors. Wherefore, if we wish to adhere to the true law of
love, our eyes must chiefly be directed, not to man, the prospect of whom
would impress us with hatred more frequently than with love, but to God,
who commands that our love to him be diffused among all mankind; so that
this must always be a fundamental maxim with us, that whatever be the
character of a man, yet we ought to love him because we love God.

LVI. Wherefore the schoolmen have discovered either their ignorance or
their wickedness in a most pestilent manner, when, treating of the
precepts prohibiting the desire of revenge, and enjoining the love of our
enemies, which were anciently delivered to all the Jews, and afterwards
equally to all Christians, they have made them to be counsels which we are
at liberty to obey or not to obey, and have confined the necessary
observance of them to the monks, who, on account of this very
circumstance, would be more righteous than plain Christians, because they
voluntarily bound themselves to observe these counsels. The reason which
they assign for not receiving them as laws, is, that they appear too
burdensome and grievous, especially to Christians who are under the law of
grace. Do they presume in this manner to disannul the eternal law of God
respecting the love of our neighbour? Is such a distinction to be found in
any page of the law? On the contrary, does it not abound with commandments
most strictly enjoining the love of our enemies? For what is the meaning
of the injunction to feed our neighbour when he is hungry?(909) to direct
into the right way his oxen or his asses when they are going astray, and
to help them when sinking under a burden?(910) Shall we do good to his
cattle for his sake, and feel no benevolence to his person? What! is not
the word of the Lord eternal? “Vengeance is mine, I will repay:”(911)
which is expressed in another passage still more explicitly: “Thou shalt
not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people.”(912)
Let them either obliterate these passages from the law, or acknowledge
that the Lord was a Legislator, and no longer falsely pretend that he was
only a counsellor.

LVII. And what is the meaning of the following expressions, which they
have presumed to abuse by the absurdity of their comment? “Love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; that ye may
be the children of your Father which is in heaven.”(913) Here, who would
not argue with Chrysostom, that the allegation of such a necessary cause
clearly proves these to be, not exhortations, but commandments? What have
we left us, after being expunged from the number of the children of God?
But according to them, the monks will be the only sons of the heavenly
Father; they alone will venture to invoke God as their Father. What will
now become of the Church? Upon the same principle it will be confined to
heathen and publicans. For Christ says, “If ye love them which love you,
what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same?”(914) Shall not
we be in a happy situation, if they leave us the title of Christians, but
deprive us of the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven? The argument of
Augustine is equally strong. When the Lord, says he, prohibits adultery,
he forbids you to violate the wife of your enemy no less than of your
friend: when he prohibits theft, he permits you not to steal from any one,
whether he be a friend or an enemy. Now, Paul reduces these two
prohibitions of theft and adultery to the rule of love, and even teaches
that they are “briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shalt
love thy neighbour as thyself.”(915) Either, then, Paul must have been an
erroneous expositor of the law, or it necessarily follows from this, that
we are commanded to love, not only our friends, but also our enemies.
Those, therefore, who so licentiously shake off the yoke common to the
children of God, evidently betray themselves to be the sons of Satan. It
is doubtful whether they have discovered greater stupidity or impudence in
the publication of this dogma. For all the fathers decidedly pronounce
that these are mere precepts. That no doubt was entertained on the subject
in the time of Gregory, appears from his positive assertions; for he
treats them as precepts, as though it had never been controverted. And how
foolishly do they argue! They would be a burden, say they, too grievous
for Christians; as though truly any thing could be conceived more
difficult, than to love God with all our heart, with all our soul, and
with all our strength. Compared with this law, every thing must be
accounted easy, whether it be to love an enemy, or to banish from the mind
all desire of revenge. To our imbecility, indeed, every thing is arduous
and difficult, even the smallest point in the law. It is the Lord in whom
we find strength: let him give what he commands, and let him command what
he pleases. The being Christians under the law of grace consists not in
unbounded license uncontrolled by any law, but in being ingrafted into
Christ, by whose grace they are delivered from the curse of the law, and
by whose Spirit they have the law inscribed on their hearts. This grace
Paul has figuratively denominated a law, in allusion to the law of God, to
which he was comparing and contrasting it. Their dispute concerning the
word law is a dispute about nothing.

LVIII. Of the same nature is what they have called venial sin—a term which
they apply to secret impiety, which is a breach of the first table, and to
the direct transgression of the last commandment. For this is their
definition, that “it is evil desire without any deliberate assent, and
without any long continuance in the heart.” Now, I assert that evil desire
cannot enter the heart, except through a deficiency of those things which
the law requires. We are forbidden to have any strange gods. When the
mind, assaulted by mistrust, looks around to some other quarter; when it
is stimulated by a sudden desire of transferring its happiness from God to
some other being; whence proceed these emotions, however transient, but
from the existence of some vacant space in the soul to receive such
temptations? And not to protract this argument to greater length, we are
commanded to love God with all our heart, with all our mind, and with all
our soul: therefore, unless all the powers of our soul be intensely
engaged in the love of God, we have already departed from the obedience
required by the law; for that the dominion of God is not well established
in our conscience, is evident, from the enemies that there rebel against
his government, and interrupt the execution of his commands. That the last
commandment properly belongs to this point, has been already demonstrated.
Have we felt any evil desire in our heart? we are already guilty of
concupiscence, and are become at once transgressors of the law; because
the Lord forbids us, not only to plan and attempt any thing that would
prove detrimental to another, but even to be stimulated and agitated with
concupiscence. Now, the curse of God always rests on the transgression of
the law. We have no reason, therefore, to exempt even the most trivial
emotions of concupiscence from the sentence of death. “In determining the
nature of different sins,” says Augustine, “let us not use deceitful
balances, to weigh what we please and how we please, according to our own
humour, saying, This is heavy,—This is light; but let us borrow the Divine
balance from the Holy Scriptures, as from the treasury of the Lord, and
therein weigh what is heavy; or rather let us weigh nothing ourselves, but
acknowledge the weights already determined by the Lord.” And what says the
Scripture? The assertion of Paul, that “the wages of sin is death,”(916)
sufficiently demonstrates this groundless distinction to have been unknown
to him. As we have already too strong a propensity to hypocrisy, this
opiate ought by no means to have been added, to lull our consciences into
greater insensibility.

LIX. I wish these persons would consider the meaning of this declaration
of Christ: “Whosoever shall break one of these least commandments, and
shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of
heaven.”(917) Are not they of this number, who thus presume to extenuate
the transgression of the law, as though it were not worthy of death? But
they ought to consider, not merely what is commanded, but who it is that
gives the commands; because the smallest transgression of the law, which
he has given, is a derogation from his authority. Is the violation of the
Divine majesty in any case a trivial thing in their estimation? Lastly, if
God has declared his will in the law, whatever is contrary to the law
displeases him. Will they pretend that the wrath of God is so debilitated
and disarmed, that the punishment of death cannot immediately follow? He
has unequivocally declared, if they could induce themselves to listen to
his voice, rather than obscure the plain truth with their frivolous
subtleties, “The soul that sinneth, it shall die;”(918) and, which I have
before cited, “The wages of sin is death.”(919) They acknowledge it to be
sin, because it is impossible to deny it; yet they contend that it is not
_mortal_ sin. But, as they have hitherto too much resigned themselves to
infatuation, they should at length learn to return to the exercise of
their reason. If they persevere in their dreams, we will take our leave of
them. Let the children of God know that all sin is _mortal_; because it is
a rebellion against the will of God, which necessarily provokes his wrath;
because it is a transgression of the law, against which the Divine
judgment is universally denounced; and that the offences of the saints are
_venial_, not of their own nature, but because they obtain pardon through
the mercy of God.




