Chapter I. What Is Declared Concerning Christ Rendered Profitable To Us By
The Secret Operation Of The Spirit.


We are now to examine how we obtain the enjoyment of those blessings which
the Father has conferred on his only begotten Son, not for his own private
use, but to enrich the poor and needy. And first it must be remarked, that
as long as there is a separation between Christ and us, all that he
suffered and performed for the salvation of mankind is useless and
unavailing to us. To communicate to us what he received from his Father,
he must, therefore, become ours, and dwell within us. On this account he
is called our “Head,”(1389) and “the first‐born among many
brethren;”(1390) and we, on the other hand, are said to be “grafted into
him,”(1391) and to “put him on;”(1392) for, as I have observed, whatever
he possesses is nothing to us, till we are united to him. But though it be
true that we obtain this by faith, yet, since we see that the
communication of Christ, offered in the gospel, is not promiscuously
embraced by all, reason itself teaches us to proceed further, and to
inquire into the secret energy of the Spirit, by which we are introduced
to the enjoyment of Christ and all his benefits. I have already treated of
the eternal Deity and essence of the Spirit; let us now confine ourselves
to this particular point: Christ came thus by water and blood, that the
Spirit may testify concerning him, in order that the salvation procured by
him may not be lost to us. For as “there are three that bear record in
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit,” so also “there are three on
earth, the spirit, the water, and the blood.”(1393) Nor is this a useless
repetition of the testimony of the Spirit, which we perceive to be
engraven like a seal on our hearts, so that it seals the ablution and
sacrifice of Christ. For which reason Peter also says, that believers are
“elect through sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling
of the blood of Jesus Christ.”(1394) This passage suggests to us, that our
souls are purified by the secret ablution of the Spirit, that the effusion
of that sacred blood may not be in vain. For the same reason also Paul,
when speaking of purification and justification, says, we enjoy both “in
the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.”(1395) The sum
of all is this—that the Holy Spirit is the bond by which Christ
efficaciously unites us to himself. And what we have advanced in the last
book concerning his unction, tends to establish the same truth.

II. But as a further confirmation of this point, which is highly worthy of
being understood, we must remember that Christ was endued with the Holy
Spirit in a peculiar manner; in order to separate us from the world, and
introduce us into the hope of an eternal inheritance. Hence the Spirit is
called “the Spirit of holiness;”(1396) not only because he animates and
supports us by that general power which is displayed in mankind, and in
all other creatures, but because he is the seed and root of a heavenly
life within us. The principal topic, therefore, dwelt on by the prophets
in celebrating the kingdom of Christ, is, that there would then be a more
exuberant effusion of the Spirit. The most remarkable passage is that of
Joel: “I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh in those days.”(1397) For,
though the prophet seems to restrict the gifts of the Spirit to the
exercise of the prophetic function, yet he signifies, in a figurative way,
that God, by the illumination of his Spirit, will make those his
disciples, who before were total strangers to the heavenly doctrine.
Besides, as God the Father gives us his Holy Spirit for the sake of his
Son, and yet has deposited “all fulness” with his Son, that he might be
the minister and dispenser of his own goodness,—the Holy Spirit is
sometimes called the Spirit of the Father, and sometimes the Spirit of the
Son. “Ye (says Paul) are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be
that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now, if any man have not the Spirit
of Christ, he is none of his.”(1398) And thence he inspires a hope of
complete renovation, for “he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall
also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you.”(1399)
For there is no absurdity in ascribing to the Father the praise of his own
gifts, of which he is the author; and also ascribing the same glory to
Christ, with whom the gifts of the Spirit are deposited, to be given to
his people. Therefore he invites all who thirst to come to him and
drink.(1400) And Paul teaches us, that “unto every one of us is given
grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ.”(1401) And it must
be remarked, that he is called the Spirit of Christ, not only because the
eternal Word of God is united with the same Spirit as the Father, but also
with respect to his character of Mediator; for, if he had not been endued
with this power, his advent to us would have been altogether in vain. In
which sense he is called “the second Adam, the Lord from heaven, a
quickening Spirit;”(1402) where Paul compares the peculiar life with which
the Son of God inspires his people, that they may be one with him, to that
animal life which is equally common to the reprobate. So, where he wishes
to the faithful “the grace of Christ, and the love of God,” he adds also
“the communion of the Spirit,”(1403) without which there can be no
enjoyment of the paternal favour of God, or the beneficence of Christ. As
he says also in another place, “the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us.”(1404)

III. And here it will be proper to notice the titles by which the
Scripture distinguishes the Spirit, where it treats of the commencement,
progress, and completion of our salvation. First, he is called the “Spirit
of adoption,”(1405) because he witnesses to us the gratuitous benevolence
of God, with which God the Father has embraced us in his beloved and only
begotten Son, that he might be a father to us; and animates us to pray
with confidence, and even dictates expressions, so that we may boldly cry,
“Abba, Father.” For the same reason, he is said to be “the earnest” and
“seal” of our inheritance; because, while we are pilgrims and strangers in
the world, and as persons dead, he infuses into us such life from heaven,
that we are certain of our salvation being secured by the Divine
faithfulness and care.(1406) Whence he is also said to be “life,” because
of righteousness.(1407) Since by his secret showers he makes us fertile in
producing the fruits of righteousness, he is frequently called “water;” as
in Isaiah: “Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters.”(1408)
Again: “I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the
dry ground.”(1409) To which corresponds the invitation of Christ, just
quoted: “If any man thirst, let him come unto me.”(1410) He sometimes,
however, receives this appellation from his purifying and cleansing
energy; as in Ezekiel, where the Lord promises to sprinkle clean water on
his people, to cleanse them from their impurities.(1411) Because he
restores to life and vigour, and continually supports, those whom he has
anointed with the oil of his grape, he thence obtains the name of
“unction.”(1412) Because he daily consumes the vices of our concupiscence,
and inflames our hearts with the love of God and the pursuit of
piety,—from these effects he is justly called “fire.”(1413) Lastly, he is
described to us as a “fountain,” whence we receive all the emanation of
heavenly riches; and as “the hand of God,” by which he exerts his power;
because by the breath of his power he inspires us with Divine life, so
that we are not now actuated from ourselves, but directed by his agency
and influence; so that if there be any good in us, it is the fruit of his
grace, whereas our characters without him are darkness of mind and
perverseness of heart. It has, indeed, already been clearly stated, that
till our minds are fixed on the Spirit, Christ remains of no value to us;
because we look at him as an object of cold speculation without us, and
therefore at a great distance from us. But we know that he benefits none
but those who have him for their “head” and “elder brother,” and who have
“put him on.”(1414) This union alone renders his advent in the character
of a Saviour available to us. We learn the same truth from that sacred
marriage, by which we are made flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone,
and therefore one with him.(1415) It is only by his Spirit that he unites
himself with us; and by the grace and power of the same Spirit we are made
his members; that he may keep us under himself, and we may mutually enjoy
him.

IV. But faith, being his principal work, is the object principally
referred to in the most frequent expressions of his power and operation;
because it is the only medium by which he leads us into the light of the
gospel; according to the declaration of John, that “Christ gave power (or
privilege) to become the sons of God to them that believed on his name;
which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God;”(1416) where, opposing God to flesh and blood, he
asserts the reception of Christ by faith, by those who would otherwise
remain unbelievers, to be a supernatural gift. Similar to which is this
answer of Christ: “Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my
Father, which is in heaven;”(1417) which I now merely mention because I
have elsewhere treated it at large. Similar also is the assertion of Paul,
that the Ephesians “were sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise.”(1418)
For this shows, that there is an eternal teacher, by whose agency the
promise of salvation, which otherwise would only strike the air, or at
most our ears, penetrates into our minds. Similar also is his remark, that
the Thessalonians were “chosen by God through sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the truth;”(1419) by which connection, he briefly
suggests, that faith itself proceeds only from the Spirit. John expresses
this in plainer terms: “We know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which
he hath given us.”(1420) Again: “Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and
he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit.”(1421) Therefore Christ
promised to send to his disciples “the Spirit of truth, whom the world
cannot receive,”(1422) that they might be capable of attaining heavenly
wisdom. He ascribes to him the peculiar office of suggesting to their
minds all the oral instructions which he had given them. For in vain would
the light present itself to the blind, unless this Spirit of understanding
would open their mental eyes; so that he may be justly called the key with
which the treasures of the kingdom of heaven are unlocked to us; and his
illumination constitutes our mental eyes to behold them. It is therefore
that Paul so highly commends the ministry of the Spirit;(1423) because the
instructions of preachers would produce no benefit, did not Christ
himself, the internal teacher, by his Spirit, draw to him those who were
given him by the Father.(1424) Therefore, as we have stated, that complete
salvation is found in the person of Christ, so, to make us partakers of
it, he “baptizes us with the Holy Spirit and with fire,”(1425)
enlightening us into the faith of his Gospel, regenerating us so that we
become new creatures, and, purging us from profane impurities, consecrates
us as holy temples to God.




