Chapter XIV. The Union Of The Two Natures Constituting The Person Of The
Mediator.


When it is said that “the Word was made flesh,”(1170) this is not to be
understood as if the Word was transmuted into flesh, or blended with
flesh. Choosing from the womb of the Virgin a temple for his residence, he
who was the Son of God, became also the Son of man, not by a confusion of
substance, but by a unity of person. For we assert such a connection and
union of the Divinity with the humanity, that each nature retains its
properties entire, and yet both together constitute one Christ. If any
thing among men can be found to resemble so great a mystery, man himself
appears to furnish the most apposite similitude; being evidently composed
of two substances, of which, however, neither is so confounded with the
other, as not to retain its distinct nature. For the soul is not the body,
nor is the body the soul. Wherefore that is predicated separately of the
soul, which cannot be at all applied to the body. On the contrary, that is
predicated of the body, which is totally incompatible with the soul. And
that is predicated of the whole man, which cannot with propriety be
understood either of the soul or of the body alone. Lastly, the properties
of the soul are transferred to the body, and the properties of the body to
the soul; yet he that is composed of these two parts is no more than one
man. Such forms of expression signify that there is in man one person
composed of two distinct parts; and that there are two different natures
united in him to constitute that one person. The Scriptures speak in a
similar manner respecting Christ. They attribute to him, sometimes those
things which are applicable merely to his humanity; sometimes those things
which belong peculiarly to his Divinity; and not unfrequently those things
which comprehend both his natures, but are incompatible with either of
them alone. And this union of the two natures in Christ they so carefully
maintain, that they sometimes attribute to one what belongs to the other—a
mode of expression which the ancient writers called a communication of
properties.

II. These things might be liable to objection, if the Scripture did not
abound with passages, which prove that none of them is of human invention.
What Christ asserted concerning himself, “Before Abraham was, I am,”(1171)
was very inapplicable to his humanity. I am aware of the cavil with which
erroneous spirits would corrupt this passage,—that he was before all ages,
because he was even then foreknown as the Redeemer, as well in the decree
of the Father, as in the minds of the faithful. But as he clearly
distinguishes the day of his manifestation from his eternal essence, and
professedly urges his antiquity, in proof of his possessing an authority
in which he excels Abraham, there is no doubt that he challenges to
himself what is peculiar to the Deity. Paul asserts him to be “the first‐
born of every creature, that he is before all things, and that by him all
things consist:”(1172) he declares himself, that he “had a glory with the
Father before the world was,”(1173) and that he coöperates with the
Father.(1174) These things are equally incompatible with humanity. It is
certain that these, and such as these, are peculiar attributes of
Divinity. But when he is called the “servant” of the Father;(1175) when it
is stated that he “increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God
and man;”(1176) that he seeks not his own glory; that he knows not the
last day; that he speaks not of himself; that he does not his own will;
that he was seen and handled;(1177) all this belongs solely to his
humanity. For as he is God, he is incapable of any augmentation whatever;
he does all things for his own glory, and there is nothing concealed from
him; he does all things according to the decision of his own will, and is
invisible and intangible. And yet he ascribes these things not to his
human nature separately, but to himself, as though they belonged to the
person of the Mediator. But the communication of properties is exemplified
in the assertion of Paul that “God purchased the Church with his own
blood,”(1178) and that “the Lord of glory” was “crucified.”(1179) Also in
what John says, that they had “handled the Word of life.”(1180) God has no
blood; he is not capable of suffering, or of being touched with hands; but
since he, who was at once the true God and the man Christ Jesus, was
crucified and shed his blood for us, those things which were performed in
his human nature are improperly, yet not without reason, transferred to
the Divinity. There is a similar example of this, where John teaches us,
that “God laid down his life for us.”(1181) There also the property of the
humanity is transferred to the other nature. Again, when Christ, while he
still lived on the earth, said, “No man hath ascended up to heaven, but he
that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven:”(1182)
as man, and in the body which he had assumed, he certainly was not at that
time in heaven, but because he was both God and man, on account of the
union of both natures, he attributed to one what belonged to the other.

III. But the clearest of all the passages declarative of the true
substance of Christ are those which comprehend both the natures together;
such as abound in the Gospel of John. For it is not with exclusive
reference to the Deity or the humanity, but respecting the complex person
composed of both, that we find it there stated; that he has received of
the Father power to forgive sins, to raise up whom he will, to bestow
righteousness, holiness, and salvation; that he is appointed to be the
Judge of the living and the dead, that he may receive the same honour as
the Father;(1183) finally, that he is “the light of the world,” “the good
shepherd,” “the only door,” “the true vine.”(1184) For with such
prerogatives was the Son of God invested at his manifestation in the
flesh; which although he enjoyed with the Father before the creation of
the world, yet not in the same manner or on the same account; and which
could not be conferred on a mere man. In the same sense also it is
reasonable to understand the declaration of Paul, that after the last
judgment Christ “shall deliver up the kingdom to God, even the
Father.”(1185) Now, the kingdom of the Son of God, which had no beginning,
will never have any end. But as he concealed himself under the meanness of
the flesh, and humbled himself by assuming the form of a servant, and laid
aside his external majesty in obedience to the Father,(1186) and after
having undergone this humiliation, was at length crowned with glory and
honour, and exalted to supreme dominion,(1187) that before him “every knee
should bow;”(1188) so he shall then surrender to the Father that name and
crown of glory, and all that he has received from the Father, “that God
may be all in all.”(1189) For why has power and dominion been given to
him, but that the Father may rule us by his hand? In this sense he is also
said to sit at the right hand of the Father. But this is only temporary,
till we can enjoy the immediate contemplation of the Deity. And here it is
impossible to excuse the error of the ancients, who, for want of
sufficient attention to the person of the Mediator, obscure the genuine
sense of almost all the doctrine which we have in the Gospel of John, and
involve themselves in many difficulties. Let this maxim, then, serve us as
a key to the true sense, that those things which relate to the office of
the Mediator, are not spoken simply of his Divine or of his human nature.
Christ therefore will reign, till he comes to judge the world, forasmuch
as he connects us with the Father as far as is compatible with our
infirmity. But when we shall participate the glory of heaven, and see God
as he is, then, having fulfilled the office of Mediator, he will cease to
be the ambassador of the Father, and will be content with that glory which
he enjoyed before the creation of the world. Nor is the title of Lord
peculiarly applied to the person of Christ in any other respect, than as
it marks an intermediate station between God and us. This is the meaning
of that expression of Paul, “One God, of whom are all things; and one
Lord, by whom are all things;”(1190) namely, to whom the Father has
committed a temporary dominion, till we shall be admitted to the immediate
presence of his Divine majesty; which will be so far from sustaining any
diminution by his surrender of the kingdom to the Father, that it will
exhibit itself in far superior splendour. For then also God will cease to
be the head of Christ, because the Deity of Christ himself, which is still
covered with a veil, will shine forth in all its native effulgence.

IV. And this observation, if the reader make a judicious application of
it, will be of great use towards the solution of many difficulties. For it
is surprising how much ignorant persons, and even some who are not
altogether destitute of learning, are perplexed by such forms of
expression, as they find attributed to Christ, which are not exactly
appropriate either to his Divinity or to his humanity. This is for want of
considering that they are applicable to his complex person, consisting of
God and man, and to his office of Mediator. And indeed we may see the most
beautiful coherence between all these things, if they have only a sober
expositor, to examine such great mysteries with becoming reverence. But
these furious and frantic spirits throw every thing into confusion. They
lay hold of the properties of his humanity, to destroy his Divinity; on
the other hand, they catch at the attributes of his Divinity, to destroy
his humanity; and by what is spoken of both natures united, but is
applicable separately to neither, they attempt to destroy both. Now, what
is this but to contend that Christ is not man, because he is God; that he
is not God, because he is man; and that he is neither man nor God, because
he is at once both man and God? We conclude, therefore, that Christ, as he
is God and man, composed of these two natures united, yet not confounded,
is our Lord and the true Son of God, even in his humanity; though not on
account of his humanity. For we ought carefully to avoid the error of
Nestorius, who, attempting rather to divide than to distinguish the two
natures, thereby imagined a double Christ. This we find clearly
contradicted by the Scripture, where the appellation of “the Son of God”
is given to him who was born of the Virgin, and the Virgin herself is
called “the mother of our Lord.”(1191) We must also beware of the error of
Eutyches, lest while we aim to establish the unity of Christ’s person, we
destroy the distinction of his two natures. For we have already cited so
many testimonies, where his Divinity is distinguished from his humanity,
and the Scripture abounds with so many others, that they may silence even
the most contentious. I shall shortly subjoin some, in order to a more
complete refutation of that notion. At present one passage shall suffice
us; for Christ would not have styled his body “a temple,”(1192) if it had
not been the residence of the Divinity, and at the same time distinct from
it. Wherefore, as Nestorius was justly condemned in the council of
Ephesus, so also was Eutyches afterwards in the councils of Constantinople
and Chalcedon; for to confound the two natures in Christ, and to separate
them, are equally wrong.

V. But in our time also there has arisen a heretic equally pestilent,
Michael Servetus, who in the place of the Son of God has substituted an
imaginary being composed of the essence of God, spirit, flesh, and three
uncreated elements. In the first place, he denies Christ to be the Son of
God, in any other respect than as he was begotten by the Holy Spirit in
the womb of the Virgin. But his subtlety tends to subvert the distinction
of the two natures, and thereby to represent Christ as something composed
of God and man, and yet neither God nor man. For this is the principal
point which he constantly endeavours to establish, that before Christ was
manifested in the flesh, there were in God only some shadowy figures; the
truth or effect of which had no real existence till the Word, who had been
destined to this honour, actually began to be the Son of God. Now, we
confess that the Mediator, who was born of the Virgin, is properly the Son
of God. Nor indeed could the man Christ be a mirror of the inestimable
grace of God, if this dignity had not been conferred on him, to be, and to
be called, “the only begotten Son of God.” The doctrine of the Church,
however, remains unshaken, that he is accounted the Son of God, because,
being the Word begotten by the Father before all ages, he assumed the
human nature in a hypostatical union. By the “hypostatical union” the
ancients expressed the combination of two natures constituting one person.
It was invented to refute the error of Nestorius, who imagined the Son of
God to have dwelt in flesh in such a manner as, notwithstanding that, to
have had no real humanity. Servetus falsely accuses us of making two Sons
of God, when we say that the eternal Word was the Son of God, before he
was clothed with flesh; as though we affirmed any other than that he was
manifested in the flesh. For if he was God before he became man, it is not
to be inferred that he began to be a new God. There is no more absurdity
in affirming that the Son of God appeared in the flesh, who nevertheless
was always the Son of God by eternal generation. This is implied in the
words of the angel to Mary: “That holy thing which shall be born of thee
shall be called the Son of God;”(1193) as though he had said, that the
name of the Son, which had been in obscurity under the law, was about to
be celebrated and universally known. Consistent with this is the
representation of Paul; that through Christ we are the sons of God, and
may freely and confidently cry, Abba, Father.(1194) But were not the holy
patriarchs in ancient times numbered among the children of God? Yes; and
depending on this claim, they invoked God as their Father. But because,
since the introduction of the only begotten Son of God into the world, the
celestial paternity has been more clearly revealed, Paul mentions this as
the privilege of the kingdom of Christ. It must, however, be steadily
maintained, that God never was a Father, either to angels or to men, but
with reference to his only begotten Son; and especially that men, whom
their own iniquity renders odious to God, are his sons by gratuitous
adoption, because Christ is his Son by nature. Nor is there any force in
the cavil of Servetus, that this depends on the filiation which God has
decreed in himself; because we are not here treating of figures, as
expiation was represented by the blood of the sacrifices: but as they
could not be the sons of God in reality, unless their adoption were
founded on this head, it is unreasonable to detract from the head, that
which is common to all the members. I go further: since the Scripture
calls angels “the children of God,”(1195) whose enjoyment of such high
dignity depended not on the future redemption, yet it is necessary that
Christ should precede them in order, seeing it is by him that they are
connected with the Father. I will briefly repeat this observation, and
apply the same to the human race. Since angels and men were originally
created in such a condition, that God was the common Father of both, if
there be any truth in the assertion of Paul, “that Christ was before all
things, the head of the body, and the first‐born of every creature, that
in all things he might have the preëminence,”(1196) I conceive I am right
in concluding, that he was also the Son of God before the creation of the
world.

VI. But if his filiation (so to speak) commenced at the time of his
manifestation in the flesh, it will follow that he was the Son also in
respect of his human nature. Servetus and other heretics maintain that
Christ, who appeared in the flesh, was the Son of God; because out of the
flesh he could not be entitled to this appellation. Now, let them answer
me, whether he be the Son according to both natures, and in respect of
both. So indeed they idly pretend; but Paul teaches us very differently.
We confess that Christ is called “the Son” in his human nature, not as the
faithful are, merely by adoption and grace, but the true and natural, and
therefore the only Son; that by this character he may be distinguished
from all others. For we, who are regenerated to a new life, are honoured
by God with the title of sons; but the appellation of “his true and only
begotten Son” he gives to Christ alone. But among such a multitude of
brethren, how can he be the only Son, unless he possess by nature what we
have received as a gift? And we extend this honour to the whole person of
the Mediator, that he who was born of the Virgin, and offered himself on
the cross as a victim to the Father, is truly and properly the Son of God;
but nevertheless with respect to his Deity, as Paul suggests, when he says
that he was “separated unto the gospel of God, which he had promised
afore, concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the
seed of David according to the flesh, and declared to be the Son of God
with power.”(1197) When he distinctly denominates him the Son of David
according to the flesh, why should he particularly say that he was
declared to be the Son of God with power, unless he intended to suggest
that this dignity depended not on that flesh, but on something else? For
in the same sense in which he says in another place that “he was crucified
through weakness, yet that he liveth by the power of God,” so in this
passage he introduces the difference between the two natures. They
certainly must be constrained to admit, that as he has received of his
mother that which causes him to be called the Son of David, so he has from
his Father that which constitutes him the Son of God, and that this is
something distinct and different from his humanity. The Scripture
distinguishes him by two names, calling him sometimes “the Son of God,”
sometimes “the Son of man.” With respect to the latter, it cannot be
disputed that he is styled the “Son of man,” in conformity to the common
idiom of the Hebrew language, because he is one of the posterity of Adam.
I contend, on the other hand, that he is denominated “the Son of God” on
account of his Deity and eternal existence; because it is equally
reasonable that the appellation of “Son of God” should be referred to the
Divine nature, as that that of “Son of man” should be referred to the
human nature. In short, in the passage which I have cited, “that he, who
was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, was declared to be
the Son of God with power,” Paul intends the same as he teaches us in
another place, that “Christ, who as concerning the flesh came of the Jews,
is God blessed for ever.” But if the distinction of the two natures be
expressed in both these passages, by what authority will they deny that he
is the Son of God in respect of his Divine nature, who according to the
flesh is likewise the Son of man?

VII. They clamorously urge in support of their error that God is said “not
to have spared his own Son,”(1198) and that the angel directed that the
very same who was to be born of the Virgin, should be called “the Son of
the Highest.”(1199) But to prevent their glorying in so futile an
objection, let them accompany us in a brief examination of the validity of
their reasoning. For if it be rightly concluded, that he began to be the
Son of God at his conception, because he that is conceived is called his
Son, it will follow that he began to be the Word at his manifestation in
the flesh, because John tells us that “he declares that, which his hands
have handled, of the Word of life.”(1200) So when they read the following
address of the prophet, “Thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little
among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me
that is to be Ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been from of old,
from everlasting, or from the days of eternity,”(1201) what interpretation
will they be obliged to adopt, if they determine to pursue such a mode of
argumentation? For I have declared that we by no means coincide with
Nestorius, who imagined two Christs. According to our doctrine, Christ has
made us the sons of God, together with himself, by the privilege of a
fraternal union, because he is, in our nature which he assumed, the only
begotten Son of God. And Augustine judiciously apprizes us, “that it is an
illustrious mirror of the wonderful and singular grace of God, that Jesus
Christ, considered as man, obtained honour which he could not merit.” From
his very birth, therefore, was Christ adorned, even in his human nature,
with the dignity of being the Son of God. Yet in the unity of person we
must not imagine such a confusion, as to destroy that which is peculiar to
Deity. For it is no more unreasonable, that the eternal Word of God and
the man Christ Jesus, the two natures being united into one person, should
be called the Son of God in different senses, than that he should be
styled, in various respects, sometimes the Son of God, sometimes the Son
of man. Nor are we any more embarrassed with the other cavil of Servetus,
that before Christ appeared in the flesh, he is no where called the Son of
God, but in a figurative sense. For though the description of him then was
rather obscure, yet since it has now been clearly proved, that he was the
eternal God no otherwise than as he was the Word begotten of the eternal
Father, and that this name is applicable to him in the character of
Mediator which he has assumed, only because he is God manifested in the
flesh; and that God the Father would not have been thus denominated from
the beginning, unless there had even then been a mutual relation to the
Son, who is the source of all kindred or paternity in heaven and in
earth;(1202) the inference is clear, that even under the law and the
prophets he was the Son of God, before this name was commonly used in the
Church. If the contention be merely about the word, Solomon, in speaking
of the infinite sublimity of God, affirms his Son to be incomprehensible
as well as himself: “What is his name,” says he, “and what is his Son’s
name, if thou canst tell?”(1203) I am aware that this testimony will not
have sufficient weight with contentious persons, nor indeed do I lay much
stress on it, only that it fixes the charge of a malicious cavil on those
who deny that Christ is the Son of God, any otherwise than because he has
become man. It must also be remarked that all the most ancient writers
have with one accord so unequivocally asserted the same doctrine, that it
argues impudence equally ridiculous and detestable in those who dare to
represent us as opposing Irenæus and Tertullian, who both acknowledge that
Jesus Christ, who at length made a visible appearance, was always the
invisible Son of God.

VIII. But although Servetus has accumulated many horrible and monstrous
notions, to which some of his brethren, perhaps, would refuse to
subscribe, yet, whoever they are that acknowledge not Christ to be the Son
of God, except in the human nature, if we press them closely, we shall
find that this title is admitted by them on no other ground than because
he was conceived of the Holy Spirit in the womb of the Virgin; as the
Manichæans formerly pretended that man received his soul by emanation from
God, because it is said that God breathed into Adam the breath of
life.(1204) For they lay such stress on the name of Son, that they leave
no difference between the two natures, but tell us, in a confused manner,
that Christ is the Son of God, considered as man, because his human nature
was begotten by God. Thus the eternal generation of Wisdom, of which
Solomon speaks,(1205) is destroyed, and no notice is taken of the Deity in
the Mediator, or a phantom is substituted instead of his humanity. It
might indeed be useful to refute the grosser fallacies of Servetus, with
which he has fascinated himself and others, that the pious reader,
admonished by this example, may preserve himself within the bounds of
sobriety and modesty; yet I conceive this will be unnecessary here, as I
have already done it in a separate treatise. The substance of them all is,
that the Son of God was from the beginning an ideal existence, and that
even then he was predestinated to be a man who was to be the essential
image of God. Nor does he acknowledge any other word of God than what
consists in an external splendour. His generation he explains thus: that
there existed in God from the beginning a will to beget a Son, which was
carried into effect by his actual formation. He likewise confounds the
Spirit with the Word, by asserting that God distributed the invisible Word
and Spirit into body and soul. In short, he puts the prefiguration of
Christ in the place of his generation; and affirms that he who was then in
external appearance a shadowy Son, was at length begotten by the Word, to
which he attributes the properties of seed. Whence it will follow, that
the meanest animals are equally the children of God, because they were
created of the original seed of the Word of God. For though he compounds
Christ of three uncreated elements, to countenance the assertion that he
is begotten of the essence of God, yet he pretends him to have been the
first‐born among creatures in such a sense, that even inanimate
substances, according to their rank, possess the same essential Divinity.
And that he may not seem to despoil Christ of his Deity, he asserts that
his flesh is coëssential with God, and that the Word was made flesh by a
conversion of the humanity into Deity. Thus, while he cannot conceive
Christ to be the Son of God, unless his flesh proceeded from the essence
of God, and were reconverted into Deity, he annihilates the eternal
hypostasis of the Word, and deprives us of the Son of David, the promised
Redeemer. He frequently indeed repeats this, that the Son was begotten of
God by knowledge and predestination, but that at length he was made man of
those materials, which in the beginning appeared with God in the three
elements, and which afterwards appeared in the first light of the world,
in the cloud, and in the pillar of fire. Now, how shamefully he
contradicts himself, it would be too tedious to relate. From this summary
the judicious reader will conclude, that by the subtle fallacies of this
heretic, the hope of salvation is completely extinguished. For if the body
were the Deity itself, it would no longer be the temple of it. Now, we can
have no Redeemer, except him who became man, by being really begotten of
the seed of Abraham and David according to the flesh. Servetus makes a
very improper use of the language of John, that “the word was made flesh;”
for while it opposes the error of Nestorius, it is as far from affording
the least countenance to this impious notion, which originated with
Eutyches. The sole design of the evangelist was, to assert the union of
the two natures in one person.




