Chapter II. Man, In His Present State, Despoiled Of Freedom Of Will, And
Subjected To A Miserable Slavery.


Since we have seen that the domination of sin, from the time of its
subjugation of the first man, not only extends over the whole race, but
also exclusively possesses every soul, it now remains to be more closely
investigated, whether we are despoiled of all freedom, and, if any
particle of it yet remain, how far its power extends. But, that we may the
more easily discover the truth of this question, I will first set up by
the way a mark, by which our whole course must be regulated. The best
method of guarding against error is to consider the dangers which threaten
us on every side. For when man is declared to be destitute of all
rectitude, he immediately makes it an occasion of slothfulness; and
because he is said to have no power of himself for the pursuit of
righteousness, he totally neglects it, as though it did not at all concern
him. On the other hand, he cannot arrogate any thing to himself, be it
ever so little, without God being robbed of his honour, and himself being
endangered by presumptuous temerity. Therefore, to avoid striking on
either of these rocks, this will be the course to be pursued—that man,
being taught that he has nothing good left in his possession, and being
surrounded on every side with the most miserable necessity, should,
nevertheless, be instructed to aspire to the good of which he is
destitute, and to the liberty of which he is deprived; and should be
roused from indolence with more earnestness, than if he were supposed to
be possessed of the greatest strength. The necessity of the latter is
obvious to every one. The former, I perceive, is doubted by more than it
ought to be. For this being placed beyond all controversy, that man must
not be deprived of any thing that properly belongs to him, it ought also
to be manifest how important it is that he should be prevented from false
boasting. For if he was not even then permitted to glory in himself, when
by the Divine beneficence he was decorated with the noblest ornaments, how
much ought he now to be humbled, when, on account of his ingratitude, he
has been hurled from the summit of glory to the abyss of ignominy! At that
time, I say, when he was exalted to the most honourable eminence, the
Scripture attributes nothing to him, but that he was created after the
image of God; which certainly implies that his happiness consisted not in
any goodness of his own, but in a participation of God. What, then,
remains for him now, deprived of all glory, but that he acknowledge God,
to whose beneficence he could not be thankful, when he abounded in the
riches of his favour? and that he now, at least, by a confession of his
poverty, glorify him, whom he glorified not by an acknowledgment of his
blessings? It is also no less conducive to our interests than to the
Divine glory, that all the praise of wisdom and strength be taken away
from us; so that they join sacrilege to our fall, who ascribe to us any
thing more than truly belongs to us. For what else is the consequence,
when we are taught to contend in our own strength, but that we are lifted
into the air on a reed, which being soon broken, we fall to the ground.
Though our strength is placed in too favourable a point of view, when it
is compared to a reed. For it is nothing but smoke, whatever vain men have
imagined and pretend concerning it. Wherefore it is not without reason,
that that remarkable sentence is so frequently repeated by Augustine, that
free will is rather overthrown than established even by its own advocates.
It was necessary to premise these things for the sake of some, who, when
they hear that human power is completely subverted in order that the power
of God may be established in man, inveterately hate this whole argument,
as dangerous and unprofitable; which yet appears to be highly useful to
us, and essential to true religion.

II. As we have just before said that the faculties of the soul consist in
the mind and the heart, let us now consider the ability of each. The
philosophers, indeed, with general consent, pretend, that in the mind
presides Reason, which like a lamp illuminates with its counsels, and like
a queen governs the will; for that it is so irradiated with Divine light
as to be able to give the best counsels, and endued with such vigour as to
be qualified to govern in the most excellent manner; that Sense, on the
contrary, is torpid and afflicted with weakness of sight, so that it
always creeps on the ground, and is absorbed in the grossest objects, nor
ever elevates itself to a view of the truth; that Appetite, if it can
submit to the obedience of reason, and resist the attractions of sense, is
inclined to the practice of virtues, travels the path of rectitude, and is
formed into will; but that, if it be devoted to the servitude of sense, it
is thereby so corrupted and depraved as to degenerate into lust. And as,
according to their opinion, there reside in the soul those faculties which
I have before mentioned, understanding, sense, and appetite, or
will,—which appellation is now more commonly used,—they assert that the
understanding is endued with reason, that most excellent guide to a good
and a happy life, provided it only maintains itself in its own excellence,
and exerts its innate power; but that the inferior affection of the soul,
which is called _sense_, and by which it is seduced into error, is of such
a nature that it may be tamed and gradually conquered by the rod of
reason. They place the will in the middle station between reason and
sense, as perfectly at liberty, whether it chooses to obey reason, or to
submit to the violence of sense.

III. Sometimes, indeed, being convinced by the testimony of experience,
they admit how extremely difficult it is for a man to establish within him
the kingdom of reason; while he is exposed at one time to the
solicitations of alluring pleasures, at another to the delusions of
pretended blessings, and at others to the violent agitations of immoderate
passions, compared by Plato to so many cords dragging him in various
directions. For which reason Cicero says that the sparks kindled by nature
are soon extinguished by corrupt opinions and evil manners. But when such
maladies have once taken possession of the human mind, they acknowledge
their progress to be too violent to be easily restrained; nor do they
hesitate to compare them to fierce horses, who, having rejected reason,
like horses that have thrown off the charioteer, indulge themselves in
every extravagance, without the least restraint. But they consider it as
beyond all controversy, that virtue and vice are in our own power; for if
it be at our election, they say, to do this or that, therefore it must
also be, to abstain from doing it. And, on the other hand, if we are free
to abstain from it, we must also be free to do it. But we appear freely
and voluntarily to do those things which we do, and to abstain from those
things from which we abstain; therefore, if we do any good action, when we
please we may omit it; if we perpetrate any evil, that also we may avoid.
Moreover, some of them have advanced to such a degree of presumption, as
to boast, that we are indebted to the gods for our life, but for a
virtuous and religious one to ourselves; whence also that assertion of
Cicero, in the person of Cotta, that, since every man acquires virtue for
himself, none of the wise men have ever thanked God for it. “For,” says
he, “we are praised for virtue, and in virtue we glory; which would not be
the case, if it were a gift of God, and did not originate from ourselves.”
And a little after: “This is the judgment of all men, that fortune must be
asked of God, but that wisdom must be derived from ourselves.” This, then,
is the substance of the opinion of all the philosophers, that the reason
of the human understanding is sufficient for its proper government; that
the will, being subject to it, is indeed solicited by sense to evil
objects, but, as it has a free choice, there can be no impediment to its
following reason as its guide in all things.

IV. Among the ecclesiastical writers, though there has not been one who
would not acknowledge both that human reason is grievously wounded by sin,
and that the will is very much embarrassed by corrupt affections, yet many
of them have followed the philosophers far beyond what is right. The early
fathers appear to me to have thus extolled human power from a fear lest,
if they openly confessed its impotence, they might, in the first place,
incur the derision of the philosophers, with whom they were then
contending; and, in the next place, might administer to the flesh, of
itself naturally too torpid to all that is good, a fresh occasion of
slothfulness. To avoid delivering any principle deemed absurd in the
common opinion of mankind, they made it their study, therefore, to
compromise between the doctrine of the Scripture and the dogmas of the
philosophers. Yet it appears from their language, that they principally
regarded the latter consideration, that they might leave no room for
slothfulness. Chrysostom says, “Since God has placed good and evil things
in our power, he has given us freedom of choice; and he constrains not the
unwilling, but embraces the willing.” Again: “Oftentimes a bad man, if he
will, is changed into a good one; and a good one falls into inactivity,
and becomes bad; because God has given us naturally a free will, and
imposes no necessity upon us, but, having provided suitable remedies,
permits the event to depend entirely on the mind of the patient.” Again:
“As without the assistance of Divine grace we can never do any thing
aright, so unless we bring what is our own, we shall never be able to gain
the favour of heaven.” He had before said, “That it may not be entirely of
the Divine assistance, it behoves us also to bring something.” And this is
an expression very familiar with him: “Let us bring what is ours; God will
supply the rest.” Agreeably to which Jerome says, “That it belongs to us
to begin, and to God to complete; that it is ours to offer what we can,
but his to supply our deficiencies.” In these sentences you see they
certainly attributed to man more than could justly be attributed to him
towards the pursuit of virtue; because they supposed it impossible to
awaken our innate torpor, otherwise than by arguing that this alone
constitutes our guilt; but with what great dexterity they did it, we shall
see in the course of our work. That the passages which we have recited are
exceedingly erroneous, will be shortly proved. Although the Greeks, beyond
all others, and among them particularly Chrysostom, have exceeded all
bounds in extolling the ability of the human will, yet such are the
variations, fluctuations, or obscurities of all the fathers, except
Augustine, on this subject, that scarcely any thing certain can be
concluded from their writings. Therefore we shall not scrupulously
enumerate the particular opinions of them all, but shall at times select
from one and another so much as the explication of the argument shall
appear to require. Succeeding writers, being every one for himself
ambitious of the praise of subtlety in the defence of human nature,
gradually and successively fell into opinions more and more erroneous;
till at length man was commonly supposed to be corrupted only in his
sensual part, but to have his will in a great measure, and his reason
entirely, unimpaired. In the mean time, it was proclaimed by every tongue,
that the natural talents in men were corrupted, but the supernatural taken
away—an expression of Augustine, of the import of which scarcely one man
in a hundred had the slightest idea. For myself, if I meant clearly to
state wherein the corruption of nature consists, I could easily content
myself with this language. But it is of great importance to examine with
attention what ability is retained by man in his present state, corrupted
in all the parts of his nature, and deprived of supernatural gifts. This
subject, therefore, has been treated in too philosophical a manner by
those who gloried in being the disciples of Christ. For the Latins have
always retained the term _free will_, as though man still remained in his
primitive integrity. And the Greeks have not been ashamed to use an
expression much more arrogant; for they called it αυτεξουσιον, denoting
that man possesses sovereign power over himself. Since all men, therefore,
even the vulgar, are tinctured with this principle, that man is endued
with free will, and some of those who would be thought intelligent know
not how far this freedom extends,—let us first examine the meaning of the
term, and then let us describe, according to the simplicity of the
Scripture, the power which man naturally possesses to do either good or
evil. What _free will_ is, though the expression frequently occurs in all
writers, few have defined. Yet Origen appears to have advanced a position
to which they all assented, when he calls it a power of _reason_ to
discern good and evil, of _will_ to choose either. Nor does Augustine
differ from him, when he teaches that it is a power of reason and will, by
which good is chosen when grace assists; and evil, when grace is wanting.
Bernard, while he affects greater subtlety, has expressed himself with
more obscurity: he says, it is a consent on account of the liberty of
will, which cannot be lost, and the judgment of reason, which cannot be
avoided. The definition of Anselm is not sufficiently plain, who states it
to be a power of preserving rectitude for its own sake. Therefore Peter
Lombard and the schoolmen have rather adopted the definition of Augustine,
because it was more explicit, and did not exclude the grace of God,
without which they perceived that the will had no power of itself. But
they also make such additions of their own, as they conceived to be either
better, or conducive to further explication. First, they agree that the
word _arbitrium_, _will_ or _choice_, should rather be referred to reason,
whose office it is to discern between good and evil; and that the epithet
_free_ belongs properly to the faculty of the will, which is capable of
being inclined to either. Wherefore, since liberty belongs properly to the
will, Thomas Aquinas says, that it would be a very good definition, if
free will were called _an elective power_, which, being composed of
understanding and appetite, inclines rather to appetite. We see where they
represent the power of free will to be placed; that is, in the reason and
will. It now remains briefly to inquire how much they attribute
respectively to each.

V. Common and external things, which do not pertain to the kingdom of God,
they generally consider as subject to the free determination of man; but
true righteousness they refer to the special grace of God and spiritual
regeneration. With a view to support this notion, the author of the
treatise “On the Vocation of the Gentiles” enumerates three kinds of
will—the first a sensitive, the second an animal, and the third a
spiritual one; the two former of which he states to be freely exercised by
us, and the last to be the work of the Holy Spirit in us. The truth or
falsehood of this shall be discussed in the proper place; for my design at
present is briefly to recite the opinions of others, not to refute them.
Hence, when writers treat of free will, their first inquiry respects not
its ability in civil or external actions, but its power to obey the Divine
law. Though I confess the latter to be the principal question, yet I think
the other ought not to be wholly neglected; and for this opinion I hope to
give a very good reason. But a distinction has prevailed in the schools,
which enumerates three kinds of liberty—the first, freedom from necessity,
the second, freedom from sin, the third, freedom from misery; of which the
first is naturally inherent in man, so that nothing can ever deprive him
of it: the other two are lost by sin. This distinction I readily admit,
except that it improperly confounds necessity with coaction. And the wide
difference between these things, with the necessity of its being
considered, will appear in another place.

VI. This being admitted will place it beyond all doubt, that man is not
possessed of free will for good works, unless he be assisted by grace, and
that special grace which is bestowed on the elect alone in regeneration.
For I stop not to notice those fanatics, who pretend that grace is offered
equally and promiscuously to all. But it does not yet appear, whether he
is altogether deprived of power to do good, or whether he yet possesses
some power, though small and feeble; which of itself can do nothing, but
by the assistance of grace does also perform its part. Lombard, in order
to establish this notion, informs us that two sorts of grace are necessary
to qualify us for the performance of good works. One he calls operative,
by which we efficaciously will what is good; the other coöperative, which
attends as auxiliary to a good will. This division I dislike, because,
while he attributes an efficacious desire of what is good to the grace of
God, he insinuates that man has of his own nature antecedent, though
ineffectual, desires after what is good; as Bernard asserts that a good
will is the work of God, but yet allows that man is self‐impelled to
desire such a good will. But this is very remote from the meaning of
Augustine, from whom, however, Lombard would be thought to have borrowed
this division. The second part of it offends me by its ambiguity, which
has produced a very erroneous interpretation. For they have supposed that
we coöperate with the second sort of Divine grace, because we have it in
our power either to frustrate the first sort by rejecting it, or to
confirm it by our obedience to it. The author of the treatise “On the
Vocation of the Gentiles” expresses it thus—that those who have the use of
reason and judgment are at liberty to depart from grace, that they may be
rewarded for not having departed, and that what is impossible without the
coöperation of the Spirit, may be imputed to their merits, by whose will
it might have been prevented. These two things I have thought proper to
notice as I proceed, that the reader may perceive how much I dissent from
the sounder schoolmen. For I differ considerably more from the later
sophists, as they have departed much further from the judgment of
antiquity. However, we understand from this division, in what sense they
have ascribed free will to man. For Lombard at length pronounces, that we
are not therefore possessed of free will, because we have an equal power
to do or to think either good or evil, but only because we are free from
constraint. And this liberty is not diminished, although we are corrupt,
and the slaves of sin, and capable of doing nothing but sin.

VII. Then man will be said to possess free will in this sense, not that he
has an equally free election of good and evil, but because he does evil
voluntarily, and not by constraint. That, indeed, is very true; but what
end could it answer to decorate a thing so diminutive with a title so
superb? Egregious liberty indeed, if man be not compelled to serve sin,
but yet is such a willing slave, that his will is held in bondage by the
fetters of sin. I really abominate contentions about words, which disturb
the Church without producing any good effect; but I think that we ought
religiously to avoid words which signify any absurdity, particularly when
they lead to a pernicious error. How few are there, pray, who, when they
hear free will attributed to man, do not immediately conceive, that he has
the sovereignty over his own mind and will, and is able by his innate
power to incline himself to whatever he pleases? But it will be said, all
danger from these expressions will be removed, if the people are carefully
apprized of their signification. But, on the contrary, the human mind is
naturally so prone to falsehood, that it will sooner imbibe error from one
single expression, than truth from a prolix oration; of which we have a
more certain experiment than could be wished in this very word. For
neglecting that explanation of the fathers, almost all their successors
have been drawn into a fatal self‐confidence, by adhering to the original
and proper signification of the word.

VIII. But if we regard the authority of the fathers—though they have the
term continually in their mouths, they at the same time declare with what
extent of signification they use it. First of all, Augustine, who
hesitates not to call the will a slave. He expresses his displeasure in
one place against those who deny free will; but he declares the principal
reason for it, when he says, “Only let no man dare so to deny the freedom
of the will, as to desire to excuse sin.” Elsewhere he plainly confesses,
that the human will is not free without the Spirit, since it is subject to
its lusts, by which it is conquered and bound. Again: that when the will
was overcome by the sin into which it fell, nature began to be destitute
of liberty. Again: that man, having made a wrong use of his free will,
lost both it and himself. Again: that free will is in a state of
captivity, so that it can do nothing towards righteousness. Again: that
the will cannot be free, which has not been liberated by Divine grace.
Again: that the Divine justice is not fulfilled, while the law commands,
and man acts from his own strength; but when the Spirit assists, and the
human will obeys, not as being free, but as liberated by God. And he
briefly assigns the cause of all this, when, in another place, he tells
us, that man at his creation received great strength of free will, but
lost it by sin. Therefore, having shown that free will is the result of
grace, he sharply inveighs against those who arrogate it to themselves
without grace. “How, then,” says he, “do miserable men dare to be proud of
free will, before they are liberated, or of their own strength, if they
have been liberated?” Nor do they consider that the term _free will_
signifies liberty. But “where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty.”(560) If, therefore, they are the slaves of sin, why do they
boast of free will? “For of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he
brought in bondage.”(561) But if they have been liberated, why do they
boast as of their own work? Are they so much at liberty as to refuse to be
the servants of him who says, “Without me ye can do nothing”?(562)
Besides, in another place, also, he seems to discountenance the use of
that expression, when he says that the will is free, but not liberated;
free from righteousness, enslaved to sin. This sentiment he also repeats
and applies in another place, where he maintains that man is not free from
righteousness, but by the choice of his will, and that he is not made free
from sin, but by the grace of the Saviour. He who declares that human
liberty is nothing but an emancipation or manumission from righteousness,
evidently exposes it to ridicule as an unmeaning term. Therefore, if any
man allows himself the use of this term without any erroneous
signification, he will not be troubled by me on that account: but because
I think that it cannot be retained without great danger, and that, on the
contrary, its abolition would be very beneficial to the Church, I would
neither use it myself, nor wish it to be used by others who may consult my
opinion.

IX. Perhaps I may be thought to have raised a great prejudice against
myself, by confessing that all the ecclesiastical writers, except
Augustine, have treated this subject with such ambiguities or variations,
that nothing certain can be learned from their writings. For some will
interpret this, as though I intended to deprive them of the right of
giving their suffrages, because their opinions are all adverse to mine.
But I have had no other object in view than simply and faithfully to
consult the benefit of pious minds, who, if they wait to discover the
sentiments of the fathers on this subject, will fluctuate in perpetual
uncertainty. At one time they teach man, despoiled of all strength of free
will, to have recourse to grace alone; at another, they either furnish, or
appear to furnish, him with armour naturally his own. Yet that, amidst all
this ambiguity of expression, esteeming the strength of man as little or
nothing, they have ascribed the praise of every thing that is good
entirely to the Holy Spirit, is not difficult to prove, if I introduce
some passages from them, in which this sentiment is clearly maintained.
For what is the meaning of that assertion of Cyprian, so frequently
celebrated by Augustine, “That we ought to glory in nothing, because we
have nothing of our own;” but that man, completely impoverished in
himself, should learn to depend entirely on God? What is the meaning of
that observation of Augustine and Eucherius, when they represent Christ as
the tree of life, to whom whosoever shall have stretched forth his hand
shall live; and free will as the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and
say that whosoever forsakes the grace of God and tastes of it shall die?
What is the meaning of that assertion of Chrysostom, that every man by
nature is not only a sinner, but altogether sin? If we have not one good
quality, if from his head to his feet man be entirely sin, if it be wrong
even to try how far the power of the will extends,—how, then, can it be
right to divide the praise of a good work between God and man? I could
introduce many such passages from other fathers; but lest any one should
cavil, that I select only those things which favour my own cause, but
artfully omit those which oppose it, I refrain from such a recital. I
venture to affirm, however, that though they sometimes too highly extol
free will, yet their design was to teach man to discard all reliance on
his own power, and to consider all his strength as residing in God alone.
I now proceed to a simple explication of the truth in considering the
nature of man.

X. But I am obliged to repeat here, what I premised in the beginning of
this chapter—that he who feels the most consternation, from a
consciousness of his own calamity, poverty, nakedness, and ignominy, has
made the greatest proficiency in the knowledge of himself. For there is no
danger that man will divest himself of too much, provided he learns that
what is wanting in him may be recovered in God. But he cannot assume to
himself even the least particle beyond his just right, without ruining
himself with vain confidence, and incurring the guilt of enormous
sacrilege, by transferring to himself the honour which belongs to God. And
whenever our minds are pestered with this cupidity, to desire to have
something of our own, which may reside in ourselves rather than in God, we
may know that this idea is suggested by the same counsellor, who excited
in our first parents the desire of resembling “gods, knowing good and
evil.”(563) If that term be diabolical, which exalts man in his own
opinion, let us not admit it, unless we wish to take the counsel of an
enemy. It is pleasant, indeed, to have so much innate strength as to
confide in and be satisfied with ourselves. But from being allured into
this vain confidence, let us be deterred by the many awful sentences which
severely humble us to the dust; such as “Cursed be the man that trusteth
in man, and maketh flesh his arm.”(564) Again: “God delighteth not in the
strength of the horse; he taketh not pleasure in the legs of a man. The
Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his
mercy.”(565) Again: “He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have
no might he increaseth strength. Even the youths shall faint and be weary,
and the young men shall utterly fall; but they that wait upon the Lord
shall renew their strength.”(566) The tendency of all which is to prevent
us from depending, in the smallest degree, on our own strength, if we wish
God to be propitious to us, who “resisteth the proud, but giveth grace
unto the humble.”(567) Then let us remember these promises; “I will pour
water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground:”(568)
again; “Ho! every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters:”(569) which
declare, that none are admitted to a participation of the blessings of
God, but those who are pining away with a sense of their own poverty. Nor
should such promises as this of Isaiah be overlooked: “The sun shall be no
more thy light by day; neither for brightness shall the moon give light
unto thee; but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light.”(570) The
Lord certainly does not deprive his servants of the splendour of the sun
or of the moon; but because he will appear exclusively glorious in them,
he calls off their confidence to a great distance, even from those things
which in their opinion are the most excellent.

XI. I have always, indeed, been exceedingly pleased with this observation
of Chrysostom, that humility is the foundation of our philosophy; but
still more with this of Augustine: “As a rhetorician,” says he, “on being
interrogated what was the first thing in the rules of eloquence, replied,
‘Pronunciation;’ and on being separately interrogated what was the second,
and what was the third, gave the same reply; so, should any one
interrogate me concerning the rules of the Christian religion, the first,
second, and third, I would always reply, Humility.” Now, he does not
consider it as humility, when a man, conscious to himself of some little
power, abstains from pride and haughtiness; but when he truly feels his
condition to be such that he has no refuge but in humility, as he
elsewhere declares. “Let no man,” says he, “flatter himself: of himself he
is a devil: every blessing he enjoys is only from God. For what have you
that is your own, but sin? Take to yourself sin, which is your own; for
righteousness belongs to God.” Again: “Why do men so presume on the
ability of nature? It is wounded, maimed, distressed, and ruined. It needs
a true confession, not a false defence.” Again: “When every one knows,
that in himself he is nothing, and that he cannot assist himself, the arms
are broken within him, and the contentions are subsided.” But it is
necessary that all the weapons of impiety should be broken in pieces and
consumed, that you may remain unarmed, and have no help in yourself. The
greater your weakness is in yourself, so much the more the Lord assists
you. So in the seventieth Psalm he forbids us to remember our own
righteousness, that we may know the righteousness of God; and shows that
God so recommends his grace to us, that we may know that we are nothing,
and are solely dependent on the Divine mercy, being of ourselves
altogether evil. Here, then, let us not contend with God concerning our
right, as though what is attributed to him were deducted from our welfare.
For as our humility is his exaltation, so the confession of our humility
has an immediate remedy in his commiseration. Now, I do not expect that a
man unconvinced should voluntarily submit, and, if he has any strength,
withdraw his attention from it to be reduced to true humility; but I
require, that, discarding the malady of self‐love and love of strife,
which blinds him, and leads him to entertain too high an opinion of
himself, he should seriously contemplate himself in the faithful mirror of
the Scripture.

XII. And, indeed, I much approve of that common observation which has been
borrowed from Augustine, that the natural talents in man have been
corrupted by sin, but that of the supernatural ones he has been wholly
deprived. For by the latter are intended, both the light of faith and
righteousness, which would be sufficient for the attainment of a heavenly
life and eternal felicity. Therefore, when he revolted from the Divine
government, he was at the same time deprived of those supernatural
endowments, which had been given him for the hope of eternal salvation.
Hence it follows, that he is exiled from the kingdom of God, in such a
manner, that all the affections relating to the happy life of the soul,
are also extinguished in him, till he recovers them by the grace of
regeneration. Such are faith, love to God, charity towards our neighbours,
and an attachment to holiness and righteousness. All these things, being
restored by Christ, are esteemed adventitious and preternatural; and
therefore we conclude that they had been lost. Again, soundness of mind
and rectitude of heart were also destroyed; and this is the corruption of
the natural talents. For although we retain some portion of understanding
and judgment together with the will, yet we cannot say that our mind is
perfect and sound, which is oppressed with debility and immersed in
profound darkness; and the depravity of our will is sufficiently known.
Reason, therefore, by which man distinguishes between good and evil, by
which he understands and judges, being a natural talent, could not be
totally destroyed, but is partly debilitated, partly vitiated, so that it
exhibits nothing but deformity and ruin. In this sense John says, that
“the light” still “shineth in darkness,” but that “the darkness
comprehendeth it not.”(571) In this passage both these ideas are clearly
expressed—that some sparks continue to shine in the nature of man, even in
its corrupt and degenerate state, which prove him to be a rational
creature, and different from the brutes, because he is endued with
understanding; and yet that this light is smothered by so much ignorance,
that it cannot act with any degree of efficacy. So the will, being
inseparable from the nature of man, is not annihilated; but it is fettered
by depraved and inordinate desires, so that it cannot aspire after any
thing that is good. This, indeed, is a complete definition, but requires
more diffuse explication. Therefore, that the order of our discourse may
proceed according to the distinction we have stated, in which we divided
the soul into understanding and will, let us first examine the power of
the understanding. To condemn it to perpetual blindness, so as to leave it
no intelligence in any thing, is repugnant, not only to the Divine word,
but also to the experience of common sense. For we perceive in the mind of
man some desire of investigating truth, towards which he would have no
inclination, but from some relish of it previously possessed. It therefore
indicates some perspicuity in the human understanding, that it is
attracted with a love of truth; the neglect of which in the brutes argues
gross sense without reason; although this desire, small as it is, faints
even before its entrance on its course, because it immediately terminates
in vanity. For the dulness of the human mind renders it incapable of
pursuing the right way of investigating the truth; it wanders through a
variety of errors, and groping, as it were, in the shades of darkness,
often stumbles, till at length it is lost in its wanderings; thus, in its
search after truth, it betrays its incapacity to seek and find it. It also
labours under another grievous malady, frequently not discerning what
those things are, the true knowledge of which it would be proper to
attain, and therefore torments itself with a ridiculous curiosity in
fruitless and unimportant inquiries. To things most necessary to be known
it either never adverts, or contemptuously and rarely digresses; but
scarcely ever studies them with serious application. This depravity being
a common subject of complaint with heathen writers, all men are clearly
proved to have been implicated in it. Wherefore Solomon, in his
Ecclesiastes, after having enumerated those pursuits in which men consider
themselves as displaying superior wisdom, concludes with pronouncing them
to be vain and frivolous.

XIII. Yet its attempts are not always so fruitless, but that it makes some
discoveries, particularly when it applies itself to inferior things. Nor
is it so stupid, as to be without some slender notion also of superior
ones, however negligently it attends to the investigation of them; but it
possesses not an equal ability for both. For it is when it goes beyond the
limits of the present life, that it is chiefly convinced of its own
imbecility. Wherefore, that we may better perceive how far it proceeds in
every case according to the degrees of its ability, it will be useful for
us to propose the following distinction; that there is one understanding
for terrestrial things, and another for celestial ones. I call those
things terrestrial which do not pertain to God and his kingdom, to true
righteousness, or to the blessedness of a future life; but which relate
entirely to the present life, and are in some sense confined within the
limits of it. Celestial things are the pure knowledge of God, the method
of true righteousness, and the mysteries of the heavenly kingdom. In the
first class are included civil polity, domestic economy, all the
mechanical arts and liberal sciences; in the second, the knowledge of God
and of the Divine will, and the rule for conformity to it in our lives.
Now, in regard to the first class, it must be confessed, that as man is
naturally a creature inclined to society, he has also by nature an
instinctive propensity to cherish and preserve that society; and therefore
we perceive in the minds of all men general impressions of civil probity
and order. Hence it is that not a person can be found who does not
understand, that all associations of men ought to be governed by laws, or
who does not conceive in his mind the principles of those laws. Hence that
perpetual consent of all nations, as well as all individuals, to the laws,
because the seeds of them are innate in all mankind, without any
instructor or legislator. I regard not the dissensions and contests which
afterwards arise, while some desire to invert all justice and propriety,
to break down the barriers of the laws, and to substitute mere cupidity in
the room of justice, as is the case with thieves and robbers. Others—which
is a fault more common—think that unjust which legislators have sanctioned
as just; and, on the contrary, pronounce that to be laudable which they
have forbidden. For the former of these hate not the laws from an
ignorance that they are good and sacred; but, inflamed with the violence
of their passions, manifestly contend against reason, and under the
influence of their lawless desires, execrate that which their judgments
approve. The controversy of the latter of these is by no means repugnant
to that original idea of equity which we have mentioned; for when men
dispute with each other on the comparative merits of different laws, it
implies their consent to some general rule of equity. This clearly argues
the debility of the human mind, which halts and staggers even when it
appears to follow the right way. Yet it is certainly true, that some seeds
of political order are sown in the minds of all. And this is a powerful
argument, that in the constitution of this life no man is destitute of the
light of reason.

XIV. Next follow the arts, both liberal and manual; for learning which, as
there is in all of us a certain aptitude, they also discover the strength
of human ingenuity. But though all men are not capable of learning every
art, yet it is a very sufficient proof of the common energy, that scarcely
an individual can be found, whose sagacity does not exert itself in some
particular art. Nor have they an energy and facility only in learning, but
also in inventing something new in every art, or in amplifying and
improving what they have learned from their predecessors. Though this
excited Plato erroneously to assert that such an apprehension is only a
recollection of what the soul knew in its preëxistent state, before it
came into the body, it constrains us, by the most cogent reasons, to
acknowledge that the principle of it is innate in the human mind. These
instances, therefore, plainly prove, that men are endued with a general
apprehension of reason and understanding. Yet it is such a universal
blessing, that every one for himself ought to acknowledge it as the
peculiar favour of God. To this gratitude the Author of nature himself
abundantly excites us, by his creation of idiots, in whom he represents
the state of the human soul without his illumination, which, though
natural to all, is nevertheless a gratuitous gift of his beneficence
towards every individual. But the invention and methodical teaching of
these arts, and the more intimate and excellent knowledge of them, which
is peculiar to a few, are no solid argument of general perspicacity; yet,
belonging to both the pious and the impious, they are justly numbered
among the natural talents.

XV. Whenever, therefore, we meet with heathen writers, let us learn from
that light of truth which is admirably displayed in their works, that the
human mind, fallen as it is, and corrupted from its integrity, is yet
invested and adorned by God with excellent talents. If we believe that the
Spirit of God is the only fountain of truth, we shall neither reject nor
despise the truth itself, wherever it shall appear, unless we wish to
insult the Spirit of God; for the gifts of the Spirit cannot be
undervalued without offering contempt and reproach to the Spirit himself.
Now, shall we deny the light of truth to the ancient lawyers, who have
delivered such just principles of civil order and polity? Shall we say
that the philosophers were blind in their exquisite contemplation and in
their scientific description of nature? Shall we say that those, who by
the art of logic have taught us to speak in a manner consistent with
reason, were destitute of understanding themselves? Shall we accuse those
of insanity, who by the study of medicine have been exercising their
industry for our advantage? What shall we say of all the mathematics?
Shall we esteem them the delirious ravings of madmen? On the contrary, we
shall not be able even to read the writings of the ancients on these
subjects without great admiration; we shall admire them, because we shall
be constrained to acknowledge them to be truly excellent. And shall we
esteem any thing laudable or excellent, which we do not recognize as
proceeding from God? Let us, then, be ashamed of such great ingratitude,
which was not to be charged on the heathen poets, who confessed that
philosophy, and legislation, and useful arts, were the inventions of their
gods. Therefore, since it appears that those whom the Scripture styles
“natural men,” ψυχικους, have discovered such acuteness and perspicacity
in the investigation of sublunary things, let us learn from such examples,
how many good qualities the Lord has left to the nature of man, since it
has been despoiled of what is truly good.

XVI. Yet let us not forget that these are most excellent gifts of the
Divine Spirit, which for the common benefit of mankind he dispenses to
whomsoever he pleases. For if it was necessary that the Spirit of God
should infuse into Bezaleel and Aholiab the understanding and skill
requisite for the construction of the tabernacle,(572) we need not wonder
if the knowledge of those things, which are most excellent in human life,
is said to be communicated to us by the Spirit of God. Nor is there any
reason for inquiring, what intercourse with the Spirit is enjoyed by the
impious who are entirely alienated from God. For when the Spirit of God is
said to dwell only in the faithful, that is to be understood of the Spirit
of sanctification, by whom we are consecrated as temples to God himself.
Yet it is equally by the energy of the same Spirit, that God replenishes,
actuates, and quickens all creatures, and that, according to the property
of each species which he has given it by the law of creation. Now, if it
has pleased the Lord that we should be assisted in physics, logic,
mathematics, and other arts and sciences, by the labour and ministry of
the impious, let us make use of them; lest, if we neglect to use the
blessings therein freely offered to us by God, we suffer the just
punishment of our negligence. But, lest any one should suppose a man to be
truly happy, when he is admitted to possess such powerful energies for the
discovery of truth relating to the elements of this world, it must
likewise be added, that all that faculty of understanding, and the
understanding which is the consequence of it, is, in the sight of God, a
fleeting and transitory thing, where there is not a solid foundation of
truth. For the sentiment of Augustine, with whom, as we have observed, the
Master of the Sentences and the Schoolmen have been constrained to
coincide, is strictly true—that as the gratuitous or supernatural gifts
were taken away from man after the fall, so these natural ones which
remained have been corrupted; not that they can be defiled in themselves
as proceeding from God, but because they have ceased to be pure to
polluted man, so that he can obtain no praise from them.

XVII. Let us conclude, therefore, that it is evident in all mankind, that
reason is a peculiar property of our nature, which distinguishes us from
the brute animals, as sense constitutes the difference between them and
things inanimate. For whereas some are born fools and idiots, that defect
obscures not the general goodness of God. Such a spectacle should rather
teach us that what we retain ought justly to be ascribed to his
indulgence; because, had it not been for his mercy to us, our defection
would have been followed by the total destruction of our nature. But
whereas some excel in penetration, others possess superior judgment, and
others have a greater aptitude to learn this or that art, in this variety
God displays his goodness to us, that no one may arrogate to himself as
his own what proceeds merely from the Divine liberality. For whence is it
that one is more excellent than another, unless it be to exalt in our
common nature the special goodness of God, which in the preterition of
many, proclaims that it is under an obligation to none? Moreover, God
inspires particular motions according to the vocation of each individual;
of which many examples occur in the book of the Judges, where the Spirit
of the Lord is said to “come upon” those whom he called to govern the
people.(573) Finally, in all important actions there is a special
instinct; for which reason it is said that Saul was followed by valiant
men, “whose hearts God had touched.”(574) And Samuel, when he predicts his
inauguration into the kingdom, thus expresses himself: “The Spirit of the
Lord will come upon thee, and thou shalt be turned into another man.”(575)
And this is extended to the whole course of his government; as it is
afterwards narrated concerning David, that “the Spirit of the Lord came
upon him from that day forward.”(576) But the same expression is used in
other places in reference to particular impulses. Even in Homer, men are
said to excel in abilities, not only as Jupiter has distributed to every
one, but according as he guides him from day to day. And experience
clearly shows, since the most ingenious and sagacious of mankind
frequently stand still in profound astonishment, that the minds of men are
subject to the power and will of God to govern them every moment; for
which reason it is said, that “he taketh away the heart of the chief
people of the earth, and causeth them to wander in a wilderness where
there is no way.”(577) Yet in this diversity we perceive some remaining
marks of the Divine image, which distinguish the human race in general
from all the other creatures.

XVIII. We now proceed to show what human reason can discover, when it
comes to the kingdom of God, and to that spiritual wisdom, which consists
chiefly in three things—to know God, his paternal favour towards us, on
which depends our salvation, and the method of regulating our lives
according to the rule of the law. In the two first points, but especially
in the second, the most sagacious of mankind are blinder than moles. I do
not deny that some judicious and apposite observations concerning God may
be found scattered in the writings of the philosophers; but they always
betray a confused imagination. The Lord afforded them, as we have before
observed, some slight sense of his Divinity, that they might not be able
to plead ignorance as an excuse for impiety, and sometimes impelled them
to utter things, by the confession of which they might themselves be
convinced. But they saw the objects presented to their view in such a
manner, that by the sight they were not even directed to the truth, much
less did they arrive at it; just as a man, who is travelling by night
across a field, sees the coruscations of lightning extending for a moment
far and wide, but with such an evanescent view, that so far from being
assisted by them in proceeding on his journey, he is re‐absorbed in the
darkness of the night before he can advance a single step. Besides, those
few truths, with which they, as it were, fortuitously besprinkle their
books, with what numerous and monstrous falsehoods are they defiled!
Lastly, they never had the smallest idea of that certainty of the Divine
benevolence towards us, without which the human understanding must
necessarily be full of immense confusion. Human reason, then, neither
approaches, nor tends, nor directs its views towards this truth, to
understand who is the true God, or in what character he will manifest
himself to us.

XIX. But because, from our being intoxicated with a false opinion of our
own perspicacity, we do not without great difficulty suffer ourselves to
be persuaded, that in Divine things our reason is totally blind and
stupid, it will be better, I think, to confirm it by testimonies of
Scripture, than to support it by arguments. This is beautifully taught by
John, in that passage which I lately cited, where he says that, from the
beginning, “in God was life, and the life was the light of men. And the
light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not.”(578) He
indicates, indeed, that the soul of man is irradiated with a beam of
Divine light, so that it is never wholly destitute either of some little
flame, or at least of a spark of it; but he likewise suggests that it
cannot comprehend God by that illumination. And this because all his
sagacity, as far as respects the knowledge of God, is mere blindness. For
when the Spirit calls men “darkness,” he at once totally despoils them of
the faculty of spiritual understanding. Wherefore he asserts that
believers, who receive Christ, are “born not of blood, nor of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God;”(579) as though he had said
that the flesh is not capable of such sublime wisdom as to conceive of God
and Divine things, without being illuminated by the Spirit of God; as
Christ testified that his being known by Peter was owing to a special
revelation of the Father.(580)

XX. If we were firmly persuaded of what, indeed, ought not to be
questioned, that our nature is destitute of all those things which our
heavenly Father confers on his elect through the Spirit of regeneration,
here would be no cause of hesitation. For this is the language of the
faithful by the mouth of the Prophet: “With thee is the fountain of life;
in thy light we shall see light.”(581) The Apostle confirms the same, when
he says that “no man can say that Jesus is Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost.”(582) And John the Baptist, perceiving the stupidity of his
disciples, exclaims, that “a man can receive nothing except it be given
him from above.”(583) That by “gift” he intends a special illumination,
not a common faculty of nature, is evident from the complaint which he
makes of the inefficacy of the many discourses in which he had recommended
Christ to his disciples. “I see that words are unavailing to instruct the
minds of men in Divine things, unless God give them understanding by his
Spirit.” And Moses also, when he reproaches the people for their
forgetfulness, yet at the same time remarks, that they cannot be wise in
the mysteries of God but by the Divine favour. He says, “Thine eyes have
seen the signs and those great miracles; yet the Lord hath not given you a
heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear.”(584) What more
would he express, if he had called them blockheads, destitute of all
understanding in the consideration of the works of God? Whence the Lord,
by the Prophet, promises, as an instance of peculiar grace, that he will
give the Israelites “a heart to know” him;(585) plainly suggesting that
the mind of man has no spiritual wisdom any further than as it is
enlightened by him. Christ also has clearly confirmed this by his own
declaration, that no man can come to him, except the Father draw him.(586)
What! is he not himself the lively image of the Father, representing to us
all “the brightness of his glory”?(587) Therefore, he could not better
manifest the extent of our capacity for the knowledge of God, than when he
affirms that we have no eyes to behold his image where it is so plainly
exhibited. What! did he not descend to the earth in order to discover to
men the will of the Father? And did he not faithfully fulfil the object of
his mission? He certainly did; but his preaching is not at all
efficacious, unless the way to the heart be laid open by the internal
teaching of the Spirit. Therefore, none come to him but they who have
heard and learned of the Father. What is the nature of this hearing and
learning? It is when the Spirit, by a wonderful and peculiar power, forms
the ears to hear and the mind to understand. And lest this should appear
strange, he cites the prophecy of Isaiah, where, predicting the
restoration of the Church, he says, that all those who shall be saved
“shall be taught of the Lord.” If God there predicts something peculiar
concerning his elect, it is evident that he speaks not of that kind of
instruction which is common also to the impious and profane. It must be
concluded, therefore, that there is no admission into the kingdom of God,
but for him whose mind has been renewed by the illumination of the Holy
Spirit. But Paul expresses himself more clearly than all the others.
Having professedly entered upon this argument, after he has condemned all
human wisdom as folly and vanity, and even reduced it to nothing, he comes
to this conclusion: “The natural man receiveth not the things of the
Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned.”(588) Whom does he call the
natural man? him who depends on the light of nature. He, I say, has no
apprehension of the mysteries of God. Why so? because through slothfulness
he neglects them? Nay, even his utmost endeavours can avail nothing,
“because they are spiritually discerned.” This implies, that being
entirely concealed from human perspicacity, they are discovered only by
the revelation of the Spirit; so that where the illumination of the Spirit
is not enjoyed, they are deemed foolishness itself. He had before extolled
“the things which God hath prepared for them that love him”(589) above the
capacity of our eyes, our ears, and our minds; he had even asserted that
human wisdom was a kind of veil, by which the mind is prevented from a
discovery of God. What do we want more? The Apostle pronounces that “God
hath made foolish the wisdom of this world;”(590) and shall we ascribe to
it such a degree of sagacity, as would enable it to penetrate to God, and
to the most secret recesses of the heavenly kingdom? Far be from us such
extreme stupidity.

XXI. That which he here detracts from men, he in another place ascribes
exclusively to God. Praying for the Ephesians, he says, “May God, the
Father of glory, give unto you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation.”(591)
You hear now that all wisdom and revelation is the gift of God. What
follows? “The eyes of your understanding being enlightened.” If they need
a new revelation, they are certainly blind of themselves. It follows,
“that ye may know what is the hope of your calling,” &c. He confesses,
then, that the minds of men are not naturally capable of so great
knowledge, as to know their own calling. Nor let any Pelagian here object,
that God assists this stupidity or ignorance, when, by the teaching of his
word, he directs the human understanding to that which, without a guide,
it never could have attained. For David had the law, in which all
desirable wisdom was comprised: yet, not content with this, he requested
that his eyes might be opened to consider the mysteries of that law.(592)
By this expression he clearly signifies, that the sun arises on the earth,
where the word of God shines on mankind; but that they derive little
advantage from it, till he himself either gives them eyes or opens them,
who is therefore called “the Father of lights;”(593) because wherever he
shines not by his Spirit, every thing is covered with darkness. Thus also
the Apostles were rightly and abundantly taught by the best of all
teachers: yet, if they had not needed the Spirit of truth(594) to instruct
their minds in that very doctrine which they had previously heard, they
would not have been commanded to expect him. If, in imploring any favour
of God, we confess our need, and if his promising it argues our poverty,
let no man hesitate to acknowledge, that he is incapable of understanding
the mysteries of God, any further than he has been illuminated by Divine
grace. He who attributes to himself more understanding, is so much the
blinder, because he does not perceive and acknowledge his blindness.

XXII. It remains for us to notice the third branch of knowledge, relating
to the rule for the proper regulation of our life, which we truly
denominate the knowledge of works of righteousness; in which the human
mind discovers somewhat more acuteness than in the two former particulars.
For the Apostle declares, that “when the Gentiles, which have not the law,
do by nature the things contained in the law, these, having not the law,
are a law unto themselves; which show the work of the law written in their
hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean
while accusing or else excusing one another.”(595) If the Gentiles have
naturally the righteousness of the law engraven on their minds, we
certainly cannot say that they are altogether ignorant how they ought to
live. And no sentiment is more commonly admitted, than that man is
sufficiently instructed in a right rule of life by that natural law of
which the Apostle there speaks. But let us examine for what purpose this
knowledge of the law was given to men; and then it will appear how far it
can conduct them towards the mark of reason and truth. This is evident
also from the words of Paul, if we observe the connection of the passage.
He had just before said, “As many as have sinned without law, shall also
perish without law; and as many as have sinned in the law, shall be judged
by the law.” Because it might appear absurd that the Gentiles should
perish without any previous knowledge, he immediately subjoins that their
conscience supplies the place of a law to them, and is therefore
sufficient for their just condemnation. The end of the law of nature,
therefore, is, that man may be rendered inexcusable. Nor will it be
improperly defined in this manner—That it is a sentiment of the conscience
sufficiently discerning between good and evil, to deprive men of the
pretext of ignorance, while they are convicted even by their own
testimony. Such is the indulgence of man to himself, that in the
perpetration of evil actions he always gladly diverts his mind as much as
he possibly can from all sense of sin; which seems to have induced Plato
to suppose, that no sin is committed but through ignorance. This remark of
his would be correct, if the hypocrisy of men could go so far in the
concealment of their vices, as that the mind would have no consciousness
of its guilt before God. But since the sinner, though he endeavours to
evade the knowledge of good and evil imprinted on his mind, is frequently
brought back to it, and so is not permitted to shut his eyes, but
compelled, whether he will or not, sometimes to open them, there is no
truth in the assertion, that he sins only through ignorance.

XXIII. Themistius, another philosopher, with more truth, teaches that the
human understanding is very rarely deceived in the universal definition,
or in the essence of a thing; but that it falls into error, when it
proceeds further, and descends to the consideration of particular cases.
There is no man, who, if he be interrogated in a general way, will not
affirm homicide to be criminal; but he who conspires the death of his
enemy, deliberates on it as a good action. The adulterer will condemn
adultery in general; but will privately flatter himself in his own. Here
lies the ignorance—when a man, proceeding to a particular case, forgets
the rule which he had just fixed as a general position. This subject is
very excellently treated by Augustine, in his exposition of the first
verse of the fifty‐seventh Psalm. The observation of Themistius, however,
is not applicable to all cases; for sometimes the turpitude of the crime
so oppresses the conscience of the sinner, that, no longer imposing on
himself under the false image of virtue, he rushes into evil with the
knowledge of his mind and the consent of his will. This state of mind
produced these expressions, which we find in a heathen poet: “I see the
better path, and approve it; I pursue the worse.” Wherefore the
distinction of Aristotle between incontinence and intemperance appears to
me to be highly judicious. Where incontinence predominates, he says, that
by the perturbation of the affections or passions, the mind is deprived of
particular knowledge, so that in its own evil actions it observes not that
criminality which it generally discovers in similar actions committed by
other persons; and that when the perturbation has subsided, penitence
immediately succeeds; that intemperance is not extinguished or broken by a
sense of sin, but, on the contrary, obstinately persists in the choice of
evil which it has made.

XXIV. Now, when you hear of a universal judgment in man to discriminate
between good and evil, you must not imagine that it is every where sound
and perfect. For if the hearts of men be furnished with a capacity of
discriminating what is just and unjust, only that they may not excuse
themselves with the plea of ignorance, it is not at all necessary for them
to discover the truth in every point; it is quite sufficient if they
understand so much that they can avail themselves of no subterfuge, but
being convicted by the testimony of their own conscience, even now begin
to tremble at the tribunal of God. And if we will examine our reason by
the Divine law, which is the rule of perfect righteousness, we shall find
in how many respects it is blind. It certainly is far from reaching the
principal points in the first table; such as relate to trust in God,
ascribing to him the praise of goodness and righteousness, the invocation
of his name, and the true observation of the Sabbath. What mind, relying
on its natural powers, ever imagined that the legitimate worship of God
consisted in these and similar things? For when profane men intend to
worship God, though they are recalled a hundred times from their vain and
nugatory fancies, yet they are always relapsing into them again. They deny
that sacrifices are pleasing to God, unaccompanied with sincerity of
heart; thereby testifying that they have some ideas concerning the
spiritual worship of God, which, nevertheless, they immediately corrupt by
their false inventions. For it is impossible ever to persuade them that
every thing is true which the law prescribes concerning it. Shall I say
that the mind of man excels in discernment, which can neither understand
of itself, nor hearken to good instructions? Of the precepts of the second
table it has a little clearer understanding, since they are more
intimately connected with the preservation of civil society among men.
Though even here it is sometimes found to be deficient; for to every noble
mind it appears very absurd to submit to an unjust and imperious
despotism, if it be possible by any means to resist it. A uniform decision
of human reason is, that it is the mark of a servile and abject
disposition patiently to bear it, and of an honest and ingenuous mind to
shake it off. Nor is the revenging of injuries esteemed a vice among the
philosophers. But the Lord, condemning such excessive haughtiness of mind,
prescribes to his people that patience which is deemed dishonourable among
men. But in the universal observation of the law, the censure of
concupiscence wholly escapes our notice. For the natural man cannot be
brought to acknowledge the disorders of his inward affections. The light
of nature is smothered, before it approaches the first entrance of this
abyss. For when the philosophers represent the inordinate affections of
the mind as vices, they intend those which appear and manifest themselves
in the grosser external actions; but those corrupt desires which more
secretly stimulate the mind, they consider as nothing.

XXV. Wherefore, as Plato has before been deservedly censured for imputing
all sins to ignorance, so also we must reject the opinion of those who
maintain that all sins proceed from deliberate malice and pravity. For we
too much experience how frequently we fall into error even when our
intention is good. Our reason is overwhelmed with deceptions in so many
forms, is obnoxious to so many errors, stumbles at so many impediments,
and is embarrassed in so many difficulties, that it is very far from being
a certain guide. Paul shows its deficiency in the sight of the Lord in
every part of our life, when he denies “that we are sufficient of
ourselves to think any thing as of ourselves.”(596) He does not speak of
the will or of the affections, but he also divests us of every good
thought, that we may not suppose it possible for our minds to conceive how
any action may be rightly performed. Are all our industry, perspicacity,
understanding, and care so depraved, that we cannot conceive or meditate
any thing that is right in the sight of God? To us, who do not contentedly
submit to be stripped of the acuteness of our reason, which we esteem our
most valuable endowment, this appears too harsh; but in the estimation of
the Holy Spirit, who knows that all the thoughts of the wisest of men are
vain,(597) and who plainly pronounces every imagination of the human heart
to be only evil,(598) such a representation is consistent with the
strictest truth. If whatever our mind conceives, agitates, undertakes, and
performs, be invariably evil, how can we entertain a thought of
undertaking any thing acceptable to God, by whom nothing is accepted but
holiness and righteousness? Thus it is evident that the reason of our
mind, whithersoever it turns, is unhappily obnoxious to vanity. David was
conscious to himself of this imbecility, when he prayed that understanding
might be given him, to enable him rightly to learn the commandments of the
Lord.(599) For his desire to obtain a new understanding implies the total
insufficiency of his own. And this he does not once, but almost ten times
in one Psalm he repeats the same petition—a repetition indicating the
greatness of the necessity which urges him thus to pray. What David
requests for himself alone, Paul frequently supplicates for the churches
at large. “We do not cease to pray for you,” says he, “and to desire, that
ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding; that ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all
pleasing.”(600) Whenever he represents that as a blessing of God, we
should remember that he thereby testifies it to be placed beyond the
ability of man. Augustine so far acknowledges this defect of reason in
understanding the things of God, that he thinks the grace of illumination
no less necessary to our minds than the light of the sun to our eyes. And
not content with this, he subjoins the following correction—that we
ourselves open our eyes to behold the light, but that the eyes of our
minds remain shut, unless they are opened by the Lord. Nor does the
Scripture teach us that our minds are illuminated only on one day, so as
to enable them to see afterwards without further assistance; for the
passage just quoted from Paul(601) relates to continual advances and
improvements. And this is clearly expressed by David in these words: “With
my whole heart have I sought thee; O let me not wander from thy
commandments.” For after having been regenerated, and made a more than
common progress in true piety, he still confesses his need of perpetual
direction every moment, lest he should decline from that knowledge which
he possessed. Therefore, in another place, he prays for the renewal of a
right spirit, which he had lost by his sin;(602) because it belongs to the
same God to restore that which he originally bestowed, but of which we
have been for a time deprived.

XXVI. We must now proceed to the examination of the will, to which
principally belongs the liberty of choice; for we have before seen that
election belongs rather to the will than to the understanding. In the
first place, that the opinion advanced by philosophers, and received by
general consent, that all things, by a natural instinct, desire what is
good, may not be supposed to prove the rectitude of the human will, let us
observe, that the power of free choice is not to be contemplated in that
kind of appetite, which proceeds rather from the inclination of the nature
than from the deliberation of the mind. For even the schoolmen confess
that there is no action of free choice, but when reason sees and considers
the rival objects presented to it; meaning that the object of appetite
must be such as is the subject of choice, and that deliberation precedes
and introduces choice. And in fact, if you examine the desire of good
which is natural to man, you will find that he has it in common with the
brutes. For they also desire to be happy, and pursue every agreeable
appearance which attracts their senses. But man neither rationally chooses
as the object of his pursuit that which is truly good for him, according
to the excellency of his immortal nature, nor takes the advice of reason,
nor duly exerts his understanding; but without reason, without reflection,
follows his natural inclination, like the herds of the field. It is
therefore no argument for the liberty of the will, that man is led by
natural instinct to desire that which is good; but it is necessary that he
discern what is good according to right reason; that as soon as he knows
it, he choose it; and as soon as he has chosen it, he pursue it. To remove
every difficulty, we must advert to two instances of false argumentation.
For the desire here intended is not a proper motion of the will, but a
natural inclination; and the good in question relates not to virtue or
righteousness, but to condition; as when we say a man is well or in good
health. Lastly, though man has the strongest desire after what is good,
yet he does not pursue it. There is no man to whom eternal felicity is
unwelcome, yet no man aspires to it without the influence of the Spirit.
Since, therefore, the desire of happiness natural to man furnishes no
argument for the liberty of the will, any more than a tendency in metals
and stones towards the perfection of their nature argues liberty in them,
let us consider, in some other particulars, whether the will be in every
part so entirely vitiated and depraved that it can produce nothing but
what is evil; or whether it retain any small part uninjured which may be
the source of good desires.

XXVII. Those who attribute it to the first grace of God, that we are able
to will effectually, seem, on the contrary, to imply that the soul has a
faculty of spontaneously aspiring to what is good, but that it is too weak
to rise into a solid affection, or to excite any endeavour. And there is
no doubt that the schoolmen have in general embraced this opinion, which
was borrowed from Origen and some of the fathers, since they frequently
consider man in things purely natural, as they express themselves,
according to the description given by the Apostle in these words: “The
good that I would, I do not; but the evil which I would not, that I do. To
will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good, I find
not.”(603) But this is a miserable and complete perversion of the argument
which Paul is pursuing in that passage. For he is treating of the
Christian conflict, which he more briefly hints at to the Galatians; the
conflict which the faithful perpetually experience within themselves in
the contention between the flesh and the spirit. Now, the spirit is not
from nature, but from regeneration. But that the Apostle speaks concerning
the regenerate, is evident from his assertion, that in himself dwelt
nothing good, being immediately followed by an explanation that he meant
it of his flesh. And therefore he affirms that it is not he that does
evil, but sin that dwells in him. What is the meaning of this correction,
“in me, that is, in my flesh?” It is as if he had expressed himself in the
following manner: No good resides in me originating from myself, for in my
flesh can be found nothing that is good. Hence follows that form of
exculpation: “I do no evil, but sin that dwelleth in me;”(604) which is
inapplicable to any but the regenerate, who, with the prevailing bias of
their souls, aim at what is good. Now, the conclusion which is subjoined
places all this in a clear point of view: “I delight,” says he, “in the
law of God after the inward man; but I see another law in my members,
warring against the law of my mind.”(605) Who has such a dissension in
himself, but he who, being regenerated by the Divine Spirit, carries about
with him the relics of his flesh? Therefore Augustine, though he had at
one time supposed that discourse to relate to the natural state of man,
retracted his interpretation, as false and inconsistent. And, indeed, if
we allow that men destitute of grace have some motions towards true
goodness, though ever so feeble, what answer shall we give to the Apostle,
who denies that we are sufficient of ourselves to entertain even a good
thought?(606) What reply shall we make to the Lord, who pronounces, by the
mouth of Moses, that every imagination of the human heart is only
evil?(607) Since they have stumbled on a false interpretation of one
passage, therefore, there is no reason why we should dwell on their
opinion. Rather let us receive this declaration of Christ, “Whosoever
committeth sin is the servant of sin.”(608) We are all sinners by nature;
therefore we are all held under the yoke of sin. Now, if the whole man be
subject to the dominion of sin, the will, which is the principal seat of
it, must necessarily be bound with the firmest bonds. Nor would there
otherwise be any consistency in the assertion of Paul, “that it is God
that worketh in us to will,”(609) if any will preceded the grace of the
Spirit. Farewell, then, all the idle observations of many writers
concerning preparation; for although the faithful sometimes petition that
their hearts may be conformed to the Divine law, as David does in many
places,(610) yet it should be remarked that even this desire of praying
originates from God. This we may gather from the language of David; for
when he wishes a clean heart to be created within him,(611) he certainly
does not arrogate to himself the beginning of such a creation. Let us
rather, therefore, attend to this advice of Augustine: “God will prevent
you in all things: do you also sometimes prevent his wrath.” How? “Confess
that you have all those things from God; that whatever good you have, it
is from him; but whatever evil, from yourself.” And a little after,
“Nothing is ours, but sin.”




