Chapter XV. The Consideration Of Christ’s Three Offices, Prophetical,
Regal, And Sacerdotal, Necessary To Our Knowing The End Of His Mission
From The Father, And The Benefits Which He Confers On Us.


It is a just observation of Augustine, that although heretics profess the
name of Christ, yet he is not a foundation to them in common with the
pious, but remains exclusively the foundation of the Church; because, on a
diligent consideration of what belongs to Christ, Christ will be found
among them only in name, not in reality. Thus the Papists in the present
age, although the name of the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world, be
frequently in their mouths, yet since they are contented with the mere
name, and despoil him of his power and dignity, these words of Paul, “not
holding the head,”(1206) are truly applicable to them. Therefore, that
faith may find in Christ a solid ground of salvation, and so may rely on
him, it is proper for us to establish this principle, that the office
which was assigned to him by the Father consists of three parts. For he
was given as a Prophet, a King, and a Priest; though we should derive but
little benefit from an acquaintance with these names, unaccompanied with a
knowledge of their end and use. For they are likewise pronounced among the
Papists, but in a frigid and unprofitable manner, while they are ignorant
of what is included in each of these titles. We have before observed, that
although God sent prophets one after another in a continual succession,
and never left his people destitute of useful instruction, such as was
sufficient for salvation, yet the minds of the pious were always
persuaded, that the full light of understanding was not to be expected
till the advent of the Messiah. And that this opinion had even reached the
Samaritans, notwithstanding they had never been acquainted with the true
religion, appears from the speech of the woman: “When Messias is come, he
will tell us all things.”(1207) Nor had the Jews entertained this
sentiment without sufficient ground, but believed as they had been taught
by infallible oracles. One of the most remarkable is this passage of
Isaiah: “Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader
and commander to the people;”(1208) just as he had before styled him “the
Wonderful Counsellor.”(1209) In the same manner the apostle, with a view
to display the perfection of the evangelical doctrine, after having said,
that “God at sundry times and in divers manners spake unto the fathers by
the prophets,” adds, that he “hath in these last days spoken unto us by
his Son.”(1210) But because it was the office of all the prophets to keep
the Church in a state of suspense and expectation, and also to support it
till the advent of the Mediator, we therefore find the faithful
complaining, in their dispersion, that they were deprived of this ordinary
blessing: “We see not our signs: there is no more any prophet: neither is
there among us any that knoweth how long.”(1211) At length, when Christ
was at no great distance, a time was prefixed for Daniel to seal up the
vision and prophecy, not only to authenticate the prediction it contained,
but in order that the faithful might patiently bear for a time the want of
prophets, because the plenitude and conclusion of all revelations was near
at hand.(1212)

II. Now, it is to be observed, that the appellation of “Christ” belongs to
these three offices. For we know that under the law not only priests and
kings, but prophets also, were anointed with holy oil. Hence the
celebrated title of “Messiah” was given to the promised Mediator. But
though I confess that he was called the Messiah with particular reference
to his kingdom, as I have already shown, yet the prophetical and
sacerdotal unctions have their respective places, and must not be
neglected by us. The former is expressly mentioned by Isaiah in these
words: “The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath
anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind
up the broken‐hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, to proclaim
the acceptable year of the Lord.”(1213) We see that he was anointed by the
Spirit, to be a preacher and witness of the grace of the Father; and that
not in a common manner; for he is distinguished from other teachers, who
held a similar office. And here again it must be remarked, that he
received this unction, not only for himself, that he might perform the
office of a teacher, but for his whole body, that the preaching of the
gospel might continually be attended with the power of the Spirit. But it
remains beyond all doubt, that by this perfection of doctrine which he has
introduced, he has put an end to all prophecies; so that they who, not
contented with the gospel, make any extraneous addition to it, are guilty
of derogating from his authority. For that voice, which thundered from
heaven, “This is my beloved Son; hear ye him,”(1214) has exalted him by a
peculiar privilege above all others. From the head this unction is
afterwards diffused over the members, according to the prediction of Joel:
“Your sons and your daughters shall prophesy and see visions.”(1215) But
the declarations of Paul, that “he is made unto us wisdom,”(1216) and that
“in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,”(1217) have
rather a different meaning; namely, that beside him there is nothing
useful to be known, and that they who by faith apprehend him as he is,
have embraced the whole infinitude of celestial blessings. For which
reason he writes in another place, “I determined not to know any thing
among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified;”(1218) which is perfectly
just, because it is unlawful to go beyond the simplicity of the gospel.
And the tendency of the prophetic dignity in Christ is, to assure us that
all the branches of perfect wisdom are included in the system of doctrine
which he has given us.

III. I come now to his kingdom, of which it would be useless to speak,
without first apprizing the reader, that it is of a spiritual nature;
because thence we may gather what is its use, and what advantage it
confers upon us, and in short all its power and eternity. The eternity,
which the angel in Daniel ascribes to the person of Christ, the angel in
Luke justly applies to the salvation of the people. But this also is
twofold, or is to be considered in two points of view; one extending to
the whole body of the Church, the other belonging to every individual
member. To the former must be referred the following passage in the
Psalms: “Once have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David.
His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me. It
shall be established for ever as the moon, and as a faithful witness in
heaven.”(1219) There is no doubt that God here promises to be the
everlasting Governor and Defender of his Church, through the medium of his
Son. For the truth of this prophecy will only be found in Christ; since
immediately after the death of Solomon, the dignity of the kingdom
sustained a considerable degradation, the greater part of it, to the
disgrace of the family of David, being transferred to a private man, and
afterwards was diminished more and more, till at length it fell in a
melancholy and total ruin. The same sentiment is conveyed in this
exclamation of Isaiah: “Who shall declare his generation?”(1220) For when
he pronounces that Christ will survive after his death, he connects his
members with him. Therefore, whenever we hear that Christ is armed with
eternal power, let us remember, that this is the bulwark which supports
the perpetuity of the Church; that amidst the turbulent agitations with
which it is incessantly harassed, and amidst the painful and formidable
commotions which menace it with innumerable calamities, it may still be
preserved in safety. Thus, when David derides the presumption of the
enemies who attempt to break the yoke of God and of his Christ, and says,
that the kings and the people rage in vain, since he that dwelleth in the
heavens is sufficiently powerful to repel their violence,—he assures the
faithful of the perpetual preservation of the Church, and animates them to
entertain a cheerful hope, whenever it happens to be oppressed.(1221) So,
in another place, when, speaking in the name of God, he says, “Sit thou at
my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool,”(1222) he
apprizes us that though numerous and powerful enemies conspire to assault
the Church, yet they are not strong enough to prevail against that
immutable decree of God, by which he has constituted his Son an eternal
King. Whence it follows that it is impossible for the devil, with all the
assistance of the world, ever to destroy the Church, which is founded on
the eternal throne of Christ. Now, with respect to its particular use to
each individual, this same eternity ought to encourage our hope of a
blessed immortality; for we see that whatever is terrestrial and worldly
is temporary and perishable. Therefore, to raise our hope towards heaven,
Christ declares that his “kingdom is not of this world.”(1223) In a word,
whenever we hear that the kingdom of Christ is spiritual, excited by this
declaration, we ought to penetrate to the hope of a better life, and as we
are now protected by the power of Christ, let us expect the full benefit
of this grace in the world to come.

IV. The truth of our observation, that it is impossible to perceive the
nature and advantages of the kingdom of Christ, unless we know it to be
spiritual, is sufficiently evident from a consideration of the hardship
and misery of our condition in the state of warfare under the cross, in
which we have to continue as long as we live. What advantage, then, could
accrue to us from being collected under the government of the heavenly
King, if the benefit of it were not to extend beyond the present state? It
ought therefore to be known, that whatever felicity is promised us in
Christ, consists not in external accommodations, such as a life of joy and
tranquillity, abundant wealth, security from every injury, and numerous
delights suited to our carnal desires, but that it is peculiar to the
heavenly state. As in the world the prosperous and desirable state of a
nation consists partly in domestic peace, and an abundance of all
blessings, and every good, and partly in strong bulwarks to secure it from
external violence, so Christ enriches his people with every thing
necessary to the eternal salvation of their souls, and arms them with
strength to enable them to stand invincible against all the assaults of
their spiritual foes. Whence we infer that he reigns rather for us than
for himself, and that both internally and externally; that being
replenished, as far as God knows to be necessary for us, with the gifts of
the Spirit, of which we are naturally destitute, we may perceive from
these first‐fruits that we are truly united to God, in order to our
perfect happiness; and in the next place, that, depending on the power of
the same Spirit, we may not doubt of being always victorious over the
devil, the world, and every kind of evil. This is implied in the answer of
Christ to the Pharisees, that as “the kingdom of God is within” us, it
“cometh not with observation.”(1224) For it is probable, that in
consequence of his having professed himself to be that King, under whom
the highest blessing of God was to be expected, they ludicrously desired
him to display the insignia of his dignity. But to prevent them, who had
otherwise too great a propensity to the world, from directing all their
attention to external pomp, he commands them to enter into their own
consciences, “for the kingdom of God is righteousness, peace, and joy in
the Holy Ghost.”(1225) Here we are briefly taught what advantage results
to us from the kingdom of Christ. For since it is not terrestrial or
carnal, so as to be liable to corruption, but spiritual, it elevates us
even to eternal life, that we may patiently pass through this life in
afflictions, hunger, cold, contempt, reproaches, and other disagreeable
circumstances; contented with this single assurance, that our King will
never desert us, but will assist our necessities, till having completed
the term of our warfare, we shall be called to the triumph; for the rule
of his government is, to communicate to us whatever he has received of the
Father. Now, since he furnishes and arms us with his power, adorns us with
his beauty and magnificence, and enriches us with his wealth, hence we
derive most abundant cause for glorying, and even confidence, to enable us
to contend with intrepidity against the devil, sin, and death. In the last
place, since we are clothed with his righteousness, we may boldly rise
superior to all the reproaches of the world; and as he liberally
replenishes us with his favours, so we ought on our part to bring forth
fruit to his glory.

V. His regal unction, therefore, is not represented to us as composed of
oil and aromatic perfumes; but he is called “the Christ of God,”(1226)
because “the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and
might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord,”(1227) rested
upon him. This is the “oil of gladness,” with which the Psalmist declares
him to have been “anointed above” his “fellows;”(1228) because, if he were
not possessed of such excellence, we should be all oppressed with poverty
and famine. And, as we have observed, he was not enriched on his own
private account, but that he might communicate his abundance to them who
are hungry and thirsty. For as it is said that the Father “giveth not the
Spirit by measure unto him,”(1229) so another passage expresses the
reason—“that of his fulness we might all receive, and grace for
grace.”(1230) From this source proceeds the munificence mentioned by Paul,
by which grace is variously distributed to the faithful, “according to the
measure of the gift of Christ.”(1231) These passages abundantly confirm
what I have said—that the kingdom of Christ consists in the Spirit, not in
terrestrial pleasures or pomps; and that, therefore, in order to be
partakers of it, we must renounce the world. A visible emblem of this
unction was displayed at the baptism of Christ, when the Holy Spirit
rested on him in the form of a dove. That the Holy Spirit and his gifts
are designated by the word unction, ought not to be esteemed either novel
or absurd, because we have no other support even for our animal life; but
especially as it respects the heavenly life, we have not a particle of
vigour in us, but what we have received from the Holy Spirit, who has
chosen his residence in Christ, that those heavenly riches, which we so
greatly need, may from him be copiously distributed to us. Now, as the
faithful stand invincible in the strength of their King, and are enriched
with his spiritual blessings, they are justly denominated Christians. But
to this eternity, of which we have spoken, there is nothing repugnant in
these expressions of Paul: “Then he shall deliver up the kingdom to God,
even the Father,” and “Then shall the Son himself be subject, that God may
be all in all.”(1232) He only intends, that in that perfect glory the
administration of the kingdom will not be the same as it is at present.
For the Father has given all power to the Son, that he may guide, nourish,
and sustain us by his hand, may guard us by his protection, and aid us in
all our necessities. Thus, during the period of our pilgrimage, while we
are absent from God, Christ interposes between us, to bring us by degrees
to a perfect union with him. His being said to sit at the right hand of
the Father, is equivalent to his being called the Father’s vicegerent,
intrusted with all the power of the government; because it is the will of
God to govern and defend his Church through the mediation of his Son. This
is the explanation given by Paul to the Ephesians, that he was “set at the
right hand of the Father, to be the head over all things to the Church,
which is his body.”(1233) To the same purpose is what he states in another
place, that there has been “given him a name which is above every name;
that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow; and that every tongue
should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the
Father.”(1234) For even in these words he displays the order in the
kingdom of Christ necessary for our present infirmity. Thus Paul rightly
concludes, that God himself will then be the only head of the Church,
because the functions of Christ in the preservation and salvation of the
Church will be fully discharged. For the same reason the Scripture often
styles him Lord, because the Father has given him authority over us, that
he may exercise his own dominion by the agency of his Son. “For though
there be” many authorities celebrated in the world, “to us there is but
one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him,”(1235) says Paul.
Whence it may justly be concluded, that he is the same God, who by the
mouth of Isaiah has asserted himself to be the King and Lawgiver of his
Church.(1236) For though he every where ascribes all the authority he
possesses to the free gift of the Father, yet he only signifies that he
reigns in the majesty and power of God; because he assumed the character
of Mediator, in order to approach to us by descending from the bosom and
incomprehensible glory of his Father. Wherefore it is the more reasonable
that we should all with one consent be ready to obey him, and with the
greatest alacrity conform all our services to his will. For as he combines
the offices of a King and a Shepherd towards the faithful who yield a
voluntary obedience, so, on the contrary, we are informed, that he bears
“a rod of iron” to “break” all the stubborn and rebellious, and to “dash
them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.”(1237) It is likewise predicted
that “he shall judge among the heathen; he shall fill the places with the
dead bodies; he shall wound the heads over many countries.”(1238) Of this
there are some instances to be seen in the present state, but the complete
accomplishment of it will be at the last judgment, which may also with
propriety be considered as the last act of his reign.

VI. Concerning his priesthood, we have briefly to remark, that the end and
use of it is, that he may be a Mediator pure from every stain, and by his
holiness may render us acceptable to God. But because the righteous curse
prevents our access to him, and God in his character of Judge is offended
with us,—in order that our Priest may appease the wrath of God, and
procure his favour for us, there is a necessity for the intervention of an
atonement. Wherefore, that Christ might perform this office, it was
necessary for him to appear with a sacrifice. For even under the law the
priest was not permitted to enter the sanctuary without blood; that the
faithful might know, that notwithstanding the interposition of the Priest
as an intercessor, yet it was impossible for God to be propitiated without
the expiation of sins. This subject the apostle discusses at large in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, from the seventh chapter almost to the end of the
tenth. But the sum of the whole is this—that the sacerdotal dignity
belongs exclusively to Christ, because, by the sacrifice of his death, he
has abolished our guilt, and made satisfaction for our sins. The vast
importance of this we are taught by that solemn oath which “the Lord hath
sworn, and will not repent; Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedec.”(1239) For there is no doubt that God intended to establish
that capital point, which he knew to be the principal hinge on which our
salvation turns. And as we have observed, there is no access to God,
either for ourselves or our prayers, unless our Priest sanctify us by
taking away our sins, and obtain for us that grace from which we are
excluded by the pollution of our vices and crimes. Thus, we see, it is
necessary to begin with the death of Christ, in order to experience the
efficacy and utility of his priesthood. Hence it follows, that he is an
eternal intercessor, and that it is by his intervention we obtain favour
with God. Hence proceeds not only confidence in prayer, but also
tranquillity to the consciences of the faithful; while they recline in
safety on the paternal indulgence of God, and are certainly persuaded,
that he is pleased with whatever is consecrated to him through the
Mediator. Now, as under the law God commanded victims to be offered to him
from the flock and the herd, a new and different method has been adopted
in the case of Christ, that the sacrifice should be the same with the
priest; because it was impossible to find any other adequate satisfaction
for sins, or any one worthy of so great an honour as to offer to God his
only begotten Son. Besides, Christ sustains the character of a Priest, not
only to render the Father favourable and propitious to us by an eternal
law of reconciliation, but also to associate us with himself in so great
an honour. For we, who are polluted in ourselves, being “made
priests”(1240) in him, offer ourselves and all our services to God, and
enter boldly into the heavenly sanctuary, so that the sacrifices of
prayers and praise, which proceed from us, are “acceptable,” and “a sweet‐
smelling savour”(1241) in the Divine presence. This is included in the
declaration of Christ, “For their sakes I sanctify myself;”(1242) for
being arrayed in his holiness, he having dedicated us, together with
himself, to the Father, we, who are otherwise offensive in his sight,
become acceptable to him, as pure, unpolluted, and holy. This is the
meaning of the “anointing of the Most Holy,”(1243) which is mentioned in
Daniel. For we must observe the contrast between this unction and that
shadowy unction which was then in use; as though the angel had said, that
the shadows would be dissipated, and that there would be a real priesthood
in the person of Christ. So much the more detestable is the invention of
those, who, not content with the priesthood of Christ, have presumed to
take upon themselves the office of sacrificing him; which is daily
attempted among the Papists, where the mass is considered as an immolation
of Christ.




