Chapter XI. The Difference Of The Two Testaments.


What, then, it will be said, will there be no difference left between the
Old Testament and the New? and what becomes of all those passages of
Scripture, where they are compared together as things that are very
different? I readily admit the differences which are mentioned in the
Scripture, but I maintain that they derogate nothing from the unity
already established; as will be seen when we have discussed them in proper
order. But the principal differences, as far as my observation or memory
extends, are four in number; to which if any one choose to add a fifth, I
shall not make the least objection. I assert, and engage to demonstrate,
that all these are such as pertain rather to the mode of administration,
than to the substance. In this view, they will not prevent the promises of
the Old and New Testament from remaining the same, and the promises of
both Testaments from having in Christ the same foundation. Now, the first
difference is, that although it was always the will of the Lord that the
minds of his people should be directed, and their hearts elevated, towards
the celestial inheritance, yet, in order that they might be the better
encouraged to hope for it, he anciently exhibited it for their
contemplation and partial enjoyment under the figures of terrestrial
blessings. Now, having by the gospel more clearly and explicitly revealed
the grace of the future life, he leaves the inferior mode of instruction
which he used with the Israelites, and directs our minds to the immediate
contemplation of it. Those who overlook this design of God, suppose that
the ancients ascended no higher than the corporeal blessings which were
promised them; they so frequently hear the land of Canaan mentioned as the
eminent, and indeed the only, reward for the observers of the Divine law.
They hear that God threatens the transgressors of this law with nothing
more severe than being expelled from the possession of that country, and
dispersed into foreign lands. They see this to be nearly the whole
substance of all the blessings and of all the curses pronounced by Moses.
Hence they confidently conclude, that the Jews were separated from other
nations, not for their own sakes, but for ours, that the Christian Church
might have an image, in whose external form they could discern examples of
spiritual things. But since the Scripture frequently shows, that God
himself appointed the terrestrial advantages with which he favoured them
for the express purpose of leading them to the hope of celestial
blessings, it argued extreme inexperience, not to say stupidity, not to
consider such a dispensation. The point of controversy between us and
these persons, is this: they maintain that the possession of the land of
Canaan was accounted by the Israelites their supreme and ultimate
blessedness, but that to us, since the revelation of Christ, it is a
figure of the heavenly inheritance. We, on the contrary, contend, that in
the earthly possession which they enjoyed, they contemplated, as in a
mirror, the future inheritance which they believed to be prepared for them
in heaven.

II. This will more fully appear from the similitude which Paul has used in
his Epistle to the Galatians.(1050) He compares the Jewish nation to a
young heir, who, being yet incapable of governing himself, follows the
dictates of a tutor or a governor, to whose charge he has been committed.
His application of this similitude chiefly to the ceremonies, is no
objection against the propriety of its application to our present purpose.
The same inheritance was destined for them as for us; but they were not of
a sufficient age to be capable of entering on the possession and
management of it. The Church among them was the same as among us; but it
was yet in a state of childhood. Therefore the Lord kept them under this
tuition, that he might give them the spiritual promises, not open and
unconcealed, but veiled under terrestrial figures. Therefore, when he
admitted Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with their posterity, to the hope of
immortality, he promised them the land of Canaan as their inheritance; not
that their hopes might terminate in that land, but that in the prospect of
it they might exercise and confirm themselves in the hope of that true
inheritance which was not yet visible. And that they might not be
deceived, a superior promise was given them, which proved that country not
to be the highest blessing which God would bestow. Thus Abraham is not
permitted to grow indolent after having received a promise of the land,
but a greater promise elevates his mind to the Lord. For he hears him
saying, “Abram, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward.”(1051)
Here we see that the Lord proposes himself to Abraham as his ultimate
reward, that he may not seek an uncertain and transitory one in the
elements of this world, but may consider that which can never fade away.
God afterwards annexes a promise of the land, merely as a symbol of his
benevolence, and a type of the heavenly inheritance. And that this was the
opinion of the saints, is plain from their own language. Thus David rises
from temporary blessings to that consummate and ultimate felicity. “My
soul longeth, yea, even fainteth, for the courts of the Lord.”(1052) “God
is my portion for ever.”(1053) Again: “The Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance and of my cup: thou maintainest my lot.”(1054) Again: “I cried
unto thee, O Lord: I said, Thou art my refuge and my portion in the land
of the living.”(1055) Persons who venture to express themselves thus,
certainly profess that in their hopes they rise above the world and all
present blessings. Nevertheless the prophets frequently describe this
blessedness of the future world under the type which the Lord had given
them. In this sense we must understand the following passages: “The
righteous shall inherit the land;”(1056) “But the wicked shall be cut off
from the earth;”(1057) and various predictions of Isaiah, which foretell
the future prosperity of Jerusalem, and the abundance that will be enjoyed
in Zion. We see that all these things are inapplicable to the land of our
pilgrimage, or to the earthly Jerusalem, but that they belong to the true
country of the faithful, and to that celestial city, where “the Lord
commanded the blessing, even life for evermore.”(1058)

III. This is the reason why the saints, under the Old Testament, are
represented as holding this mortal life with its blessings in higher
estimation than becomes us now. For although they well knew that they
ought not to rest in it as the end of their course, yet when they
recollected what characters of his grace the Lord had impressed on it, in
order to instruct them in a manner suitable to their tender state, they
felt a greater degree of pleasure in it than if they had considered it
merely in itself. But as the Lord, in declaring his benevolence to the
faithful by present blessings, gave them, under these types and symbols, a
figurative exhibition of spiritual felicity, so, on the other hand, in
corporal punishments he exemplified his judgment against the reprobate.
Therefore, as the favours of God were more conspicuous in earthly things,
so also were his punishments. Injudicious persons, not considering this
analogy and harmony (so to speak) between the punishments and rewards,
wonder at so great a variety in God, that in ancient times he was ready to
avenge all the transgressions of men by the immediate infliction of severe
and dreadful punishments, but now, as if he had laid aside his ancient
wrath, punishes with far less severity and frequency; and on this account
they almost adopt the notion of the Manichæans, that the God of the Old
Testament is a different being from the God of the New. But we shall
easily get rid of such difficulties, if we direct our attention to that
dispensation of God, which I have observed; namely, that during that
period, in which he gave the Israelites his covenant involved in some
degree of obscurity, he intended to signify and prefigure the grace of
future and eternal felicity by terrestrial blessings, and the grievousness
of spiritual death by corporal punishments.

IV. Another difference between the Old Testament and the New consists in
figures, because the former, in the absence of the truth, displayed merely
an image and shadow instead of the body; but the latter exhibits the
present truth and the substantial body.(1059) And this is generally
mentioned wherever the New Testament is opposed to the Old, but is treated
more at large in the Epistle to the Hebrews than in any other place.(1060)
The apostle is there disputing against those who supposed that the
observance of the Mosaic law could not be abolished, without being
followed by the total ruin of religion. To refute this error, he adduces
the prediction of the psalmist concerning the priesthood of Christ;(1061)
for since he has an eternal priesthood committed to him, we may argue the
certain abolition of that priesthood, in which new priests daily succeeded
each other.(1062) But he proves the superiority of the appointment of this
new Priest, because it is confirmed with an oath.(1063) He afterwards adds
that this transfer of the priesthood implies also a change of the
covenant.(1064) And he proves that this change was necessary, because such
was the imbecility of the law, that it could bring nothing to
perfection.(1065) Then he proceeds to state the nature of this imbecility;
namely, that the law prescribed external righteousnesses, consisting in
carnal ordinances, which could not make the observers of them “perfect as
pertaining to the conscience,” that by animal victims it could neither
expiate sins nor procure true holiness.(1066) He concludes, therefore,
that it contained “a shadow of good things to come, but not the very image
of the things;”(1067) and that consequently it had no other office, but to
serve as an introduction to “a better hope,”(1068) which is exhibited in
the gospel. Here we have to inquire in what respect the Legal covenant is
compared with the Evangelical, the ministry of Christ with the ministry of
Moses. For if the comparison related to the substance of the promises,
there would be a great discordance between the two testaments; but as the
state of the question leads us to a different point, we must attend to the
scope of the apostle, in order to discover the truth. Let us, then, bring
forward the covenant, which God has once made, which is eternal, and never
to be abolished. The accomplishment, whence it derives its establishment
and ratification, is Christ. While such a confirmation was waited for, the
Lord by Moses prescribed ceremonies, to serve as solemn symbols of the
confirmation. It came to be a subject of contention, whether the
ceremonies ordained in the law ought to cease and give place to Christ.
Now, though these ceremonies were only accidents or concomitants of the
covenant, yet being the instruments of its administration, they bear the
name of the covenant; as it is common to give to other sacraments the
names of the things they represent. In a word, therefore, what is here
called the Old Testament is a solemn method of confirming the covenant,
consisting of ceremonies and sacrifices. Since it contains nothing
substantial, unless we proceed further, the apostle contends that it ought
to be repealed and abrogated, in order to make way for Christ, the Surety
and Mediator of a better testament,(1069) by whom eternal sanctification
has been at once procured for the elect, and those transgressions
obliterated, which remained under the law. Or, if you prefer it, take the
following statement of it; that the Old Testament of the Lord was that
which was delivered to the Jews, involved in a shadowy and inefficacious
observance of ceremonies, and that it was therefore temporary, because it
remained as it were in suspense, till it was supported by a firm and
substantial confirmation; but that it was made new and eternal, when it
was consecrated and established by the blood of Christ. Whence Christ
calls the cup which he gives to his disciples in the supper, “the cup of
the New Testament in his blood;”(1070) to signify that when the testament
of God is sealed with his blood, the truth of it is then accomplished, and
thus it is made new and eternal.

V. Hence it appears in what sense the apostle said, that the Jews were
conducted to Christ by the tuition of the law, before he was manifested in
the flesh.(1071) He confesses also that they were children and heirs of
God, but such as, on account of their age, required to be kept under the
care of a tutor.(1072) For it was reasonable that before the Sun of
Righteousness was risen, there should be neither such a full blaze of
revelation, nor such great clearness of understanding. Therefore the Lord
dispensed the light of his word to them in such a manner, that they had
yet only a distant and obscure prospect of it. Paul describes this
slenderness of understanding as a state of childhood, which it was the
Lord’s will to exercise in the elements of this world and in external
observances, as rules of puerile discipline, till the manifestation of
Christ, by whom the knowledge of the faithful was to grow to maturity.
Christ himself alluded to this distinction, when he said, “The law and the
prophets were until John: since that time the kingdom of God is
preached.”(1073) What discoveries did Moses and the prophets make to their
contemporaries? They afforded them some taste of that wisdom which was in
after times to be clearly manifested, and gave them a distant prospect of
its future splendour. But when Christ could be plainly pointed out, the
kingdom of God was revealed. For in him are discovered “all the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge,”(1074) by which we penetrate almost into the
furthest recesses of heaven.

VI. Nor is it any objection to our argument, that scarcely a person can be
found in the Christian Church, who is to be compared with Abraham in the
excellency of his faith; or that the prophets were distinguished by such
energy of the Spirit as, even at this day, is sufficient to illuminate the
whole world. For our present inquiry is, not what grace the Lord has
conferred on a few, but what is the ordinary method which he has pursued
in the instruction of his people; such as is found even among the prophets
themselves, who were endued with peculiar knowledge above others. For
their preaching is obscure, as relating to things very distant, and is
comprehended in types. Besides, notwithstanding their wonderful eminence
in knowledge, yet because they were under a necessity of submitting to the
same tuition as the rest of the people, they are considered as sustaining
the character of children as well as others. Finally, none of them
possessed knowledge so clear as not to partake more or less of the
obscurity of the age. Whence this observation of Christ: “Many prophets
and kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen
them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard
them.”(1075) “Blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they
hear.”(1076) And, indeed, it is reasonable that the presence of Christ
should be distinguished by the prerogative of introducing a clearer
revelation of the mysteries of heaven. To the same purpose also is the
passage, which we have before cited from the First Epistle of Peter, that
it was revealed to them, that the principal advantage of their labours
would be experienced in our times.(1077)

VII. I come now to the third difference, which is taken from Jeremiah,
whose words are these: “Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will
make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah;
not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day
that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which
my covenant they brake, although I was a husband to them, saith the Lord;
but this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel.
After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts,
and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my
people. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every
man his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from
the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord; for I will
forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.”(1078) From
this passage the apostle took occasion to institute the following
comparison between the law and the gospel: he calls the former a literal,
the latter a spiritual doctrine; the former, he says, was engraven on
tables of stone, but the latter is inscribed on the heart;(1079) the
former was the preaching of death, but the latter of life; the former was
the ministration of condemnation, but the latter of righteousness; the
former is abolished, but the latter remains. As the design of the apostle
was to express the sense of the prophet, it will be sufficient for us to
consider the language of one of them, in order to discover the meaning of
both. There is, however, some difference between them. For the apostle
speaks of the law in less honourable terms than the prophet does; and that
not simply with respect to the law itself, but, because there were some
disturbers, who were full of improper zeal for the law, and by their
perverse attachment to the ceremonies obscured the glory of the gospel, he
disputes concerning the nature of the law with reference to their error
and foolish affection for it. This peculiarity in Paul, therefore, will be
worthy of our observation. Both of them, as they contrast the Old and New
Testaments with each other, consider nothing in the law, but what properly
belongs to it. For example, the law contains frequent promises of mercy;
but as they are borrowed from another dispensation, they are not
considered as part of the law, when the mere nature of the law is the
subject of discussion. All that they attribute to it is, that it enjoins
what is right, and prohibits crimes; that it proclaims a reward for the
followers of righteousness, and denounces punishments against
transgressors; but that it neither changes nor corrects the depravity of
heart which is natural to all men.

VIII. Now, let us explain the comparison of the apostle in all its
branches. In the first place, the Old Testament is literal, because it was
promulgated without the efficacy of the Spirit; the New is spiritual,
because the Lord has engraven it in a spiritual manner on the hearts of
men. The second contrast, therefore, serves as an elucidation of the
first. The Old Testament is the revelation of death, because it can only
involve all mankind in a curse; the New is the instrument of life, because
it delivers us from the curse, and restores us to favour with God. The
former is the ministry of condemnation, because it convicts all the
children of Adam of unrighteousness; the latter is the ministry of
righteousness, because it reveals the mercy of God, by which we are made
righteous. The last contrast must be referred to the legal ceremonies. The
law having an image of things that were at a distance, it was necessary
that in time it should be abolished and disappear. The gospel, exhibiting
the body itself, retains a firm and perpetual stability. Jeremiah calls
even the moral law a weak and frail covenant, but for another reason;
namely, because it was soon broken by the sudden defection of an
ungrateful people. But as such a violation arises from the fault of the
people, it cannot be properly attributed to the Testament. The ceremonies,
however, which at the advent of Christ were abolished by their own
weakness, contained in themselves the cause of their abrogation. Now, this
difference between the “letter” and the “spirit” is not to be understood
as if the Lord had given his law to the Jews without any beneficial
result, without one of them being converted to him; but it is used in a
way of comparison, to display the plenitude of grace with which the same
Legislator, assuming as it were a new character, has honoured the
preaching of the gospel. For if we survey the multitude of those, from
among all nations, whom, by the influence of his Spirit in the preaching
of the gospel, the Lord has regenerated and gathered into communion with
his Church, we shall say that those of the ancient Israelites, who
cordially and sincerely embraced the covenant of the Lord, were extremely
few; though, if estimated by themselves without any comparison, they
amounted to a considerable number.

IX. The fourth difference arises out of the third. For the Scripture calls
the Old Testament a covenant of bondage, because it produces fear in the
mind; but the New it describes as a covenant of liberty, because it leads
the heart to confidence and security. Thus Paul, in the eighth chapter of
his Epistle to the Romans, says, “Ye have not received the spirit of
bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba, Father.”(1080) To the same purpose is that passage
in the Epistle to the Hebrews, that the faithful now “are not come unto
the mount that might be touched, and that burned with fire, nor unto
blackness, and darkness, and tempest,” where nothing can be either heard
or seen, but what must strike terror into the mind; so that even Moses
himself is exceedingly afraid at the sound of the terrible voice, which
they all pray that they may hear no more; but that now the faithful “are
come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem,”(1081) &c. What Paul briefly touches in the passage which we
have adduced from the Epistle to the Romans, he explains more at large in
his Epistle to the Galatians, when he allegorizes the two sons of Abraham
in the following manner—that Agar, the bond‐woman, is a type of mount
Sinai, where the people of Israel received the law; that Sarah, the free‐
woman, is a figure of the celestial Jerusalem, whence proceeds the gospel.
That as the son of Agar is born in bondage, and can never attain to the
inheritance, and the son of Sarah is born free, and has a right to the
inheritance,(1082) so by the law we were devoted to slavery, but by the
gospel alone are regenerated to liberty. Now, the whole may be summed up
thus—that the Old Testament filled men’s consciences with fear and
trembling; but that by the benefit of the New Testament, they are
delivered, and enabled to rejoice. The former kept their consciences under
a yoke of severe bondage; but by the liberality of the latter they are
emancipated and admitted to liberty. If any one object to us the case of
the holy fathers of the Israelitish people, that as they were clearly
possessed of the same spirit of faith as we are, they must consequently
have been partakers of the same liberty and joy, we reply, that neither of
these originated from the law; but that, when they felt themselves, by
means of the law, oppressed with their servile condition, and wearied with
disquietude of conscience, they fled for refuge to the gospel; and that
therefore it was a peculiar advantage of the New Testament, that they
enjoyed an exception from the common law of the Old Testament, and were
exempted from those evils. Besides, we shall deny that they were favoured
with the spirit of liberty and security, to such a degree as not to
experience from the law some measure both of fear and of servitude. For
notwithstanding their enjoyment of that privilege, which they obtained by
the grace of the gospel, yet they were subject to the same observances and
burdens as the people in general. As they were obliged, therefore, to a
diligent observance of these ceremonies, which were emblems of the state
of pupilage similar to bondage, and the hand‐writing, by which they
confessed themselves guilty of sin, did not release them from the
obligation, they may justly be said, in comparison with us, to have been
under a testament of bondage and fear, when we consider the common mode of
procedure which the Lord then pursued with the Israelitish nation.

X. The three last comparisons which we have mentioned are between the law
and the gospel. In these, therefore, “the Old Testament” denotes _the
law_; and “the New Testament,” _the gospel_. The first comparison extends
further, for it comprehends also the promises, which were given before the
law. When Augustine denied that they ought to be considered as part of the
Old Testament, he gave a very proper opinion, and intended the same that
we now teach; for he had in view those passages of Jeremiah and Paul, in
which the Old Testament is distinguished from the word of grace and mercy.
He very judiciously adds also in the same place, that the children of the
promise, from the beginning of the world, who have been regenerated by
God, and, under the influence of faith working by love, have obeyed his
commands, belong to the New Testament; and _that_, in hope, not of carnal,
terrestrial, and temporal things, but of spiritual, celestial, and eternal
blessings; especially believing in the Mediator, through whom they doubted
not that the Spirit was dispensed to them to enable them to do their duty,
and that whenever they sinned they were pardoned. For this is the very
same thing which I meant to assert: That all the saints, whom, from the
beginning of the world, the Scripture mentions as having been peculiarly
chosen by God, have been partakers of the same blessing with us to eternal
salvation. Between our distinction and that of Augustine there is this
difference—that ours (according to this declaration of Christ, “the law
and the prophets were until John; since that time the kingdom of God is
preached;”)(1083) distinguishes between the clearness of the gospel and
the more obscure dispensation of the word which preceded it; whilst the
other merely discriminates the weakness of the law from the stability of
the gospel. Here it must also be remarked concerning the holy fathers,
that though they lived under the Old Testament, they did not rest
satisfied with it, but always aspired after the New, and thus enjoyed a
certain participation of it. For all those who contented themselves with
present shadows, and did not extend their views to Christ, are condemned
by the apostle as blind and under the curse. For, to say nothing on other
points, what greater ignorance can be imagined than to hope for an
expiation of sin by the sacrifice of an animal? than to seek for the
purification of the soul by an external ablution with water? than to wish
to appease God with frigid ceremonies, as though they afforded him great
pleasure? For all these absurdities are chargeable on those who adhere to
the observances of the law, without any reference to Christ.

XI. The fifth difference, which we may add, consists in this—that till the
advent of Christ, the Lord selected one nation, to which he would limit
the covenant of his grace. Moses says, “When the Most High divided to the
nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam,—the Lord’s
portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.”(1084) In
another place he thus addresses the people: “Behold, the heaven, and the
heaven of heavens is the Lord’s thy God, the earth also, with all that
therein is. Only the Lord had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and
he chose their seed after them, even you above all people.”(1085)
Therefore he favoured that people with the exclusive knowledge of his
name, as though they alone of all mankind belonged to him; he deposited
his covenant as it were in their bosom; to them he manifested the presence
of his power; he honoured them with every privilege. But to omit the rest
of his benefits, the only one that relates to our present argument is,
that he united them to himself by the communication of his word, in order
that he might be denominated and esteemed their God. In the mean time he
suffered other nations, as though they had no business or intercourse with
him, to walk in vanity;(1086) nor did he employ means to prevent their
destruction by sending them the only remedy—the preaching of his word. The
Israelitish nation, therefore, were then as darling sons; others were
strangers: they were known to him, and received under his faithful
protection; others were left to their own darkness: they were sanctified
by God; others were profane: they were honoured with the Divine presence;
others were excluded from approaching it. But when the fulness of the time
was come,(1087) appointed for the restoration of all things,(1088) and the
Reconciler of God and men was manifested,(1089) the barrier was
demolished, which had so long confined the Divine mercy within the limits
of the Jewish church, and peace was announced to them who were at a
distance, and to them who were near, that being both reconciled to God,
they might coalesce into one people. Wherefore “there is neither Greek nor
Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, but Christ is all and in all;”(1090)
“to whom the heathen are given for his inheritance, and the uttermost
parts of the earth for his possession;”(1091) that he may have a universal
“dominion from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the
earth.”(1092)

XII. The vocation of the Gentiles, therefore, is an eminent illustration
of the superior excellence of the New Testament above the Old. It had,
indeed, before been most explicitly announced in numerous predictions of
the prophets; but so as that the completion of it was deferred to the
kingdom of the Messiah. And even Christ himself made no advances towards
it at the first commencement of his preaching, but deferred it till he
should have completed all the parts of our redemption, finished the time
of his humiliation, and received from the Father “a name which is above
every name, before which every knee shall bow.”(1093) Wherefore, when this
season was not yet arrived, he said to a Canaanitish woman, “I am not sent
but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel:”(1094) nor did he permit
the apostles, in his first mission of them, to exceed these limits. “Go
not,” says he, “into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the
Samaritans enter ye not; but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel.”(1095) And though this calling of the Gentiles was announced by so
many testimonies, yet when the apostles were about to enter upon it, it
appeared to them so novel and strange, that they dreaded it, as if it had
been a prodigy: indeed it was with trepidation and reluctance that they at
length engaged in it. Nor is this surprising; for it seemed not at all
reasonable, that the Lord, who for so many ages had separated the
Israelites from the rest of the nations, should, as it were, suddenly
change his design, and annihilate this distinction. It had indeed been
predicted in the prophecies; but they could not pay such great attention
to the prophecies, as to be wholly unmoved with the novelty of the
circumstance, which forced itself on their observation. Nor were the
specimens, which the Lord had formerly given, of the future vocation of
the Gentiles, sufficient to influence them. For besides his having called
only very few of them, he had even incorporated them into the family of
Abraham, that they might be added to his people; but by that public
vocation, the Gentiles were not only raised to an equality with the Jews,
but appeared to succeed to their places as though they had been dead.
Besides, of all the strangers whom God had before incorporated into the
Church, none were ever placed on an equality with the Jews. Therefore it
is not without reason that Paul so celebrates this “mystery which was
hidden from ages and from generations,”(1096) and which he represents as
an object of admiration even to angels.(1097)

XIII. In these four or five points, I think I have given a correct and
faithful statement of the whole of the difference between the Old and the
New Testament, as far as is sufficient for a simple system of doctrine.
But because some persons represent this variety in the government of the
Church, these different modes of instruction, and such a considerable
alteration of rites and ceremonies, as a great absurdity, we must reply to
them, before we proceed to other subjects. And this may be done in a brief
manner, since the objections are not so strong as to require a laborious
refutation. It is not reasonable, they say, that God, who is perpetually
consistent with himself, should undergo so great a change as afterwards to
disallow what he had once enjoined and commanded. I reply, that God ought
not therefore to be deemed mutable, because he has accommodated different
forms to different ages, as he knew would be suitable for each. If the
husbandman prescribes different employments to his family in the winter,
from those which he allots them in the summer, we must not therefore
accuse him of inconstancy, or impute to him a deviation from the proper
rules of agriculture, which are connected with the perpetual course of
nature. Thus, also, if a father instructs, governs, and manages his
children one way in infancy, another in childhood, and another in youth,
we must not therefore charge him with being inconstant, or forsaking his
own designs. Why, then, do we stigmatize God with the character of
inconstancy, because he has made an apt and suitable distinction between
different times? The last similitude ought fully to satisfy us. Paul
compares the Jews to children, and Christians to youths.(1098) What
impropriety is there in this part of the government of God, that he
detained them in the rudiments which were suitable to them on account of
their age, but has placed us under a stronger and more manly discipline?
It is a proof, therefore, of the constancy of God, that he has delivered
the same doctrine in all ages, and perseveres in requiring the same
worship of his name which he commanded from the beginning. By changing the
external form and mode, he has discovered no mutability in himself, but
has so far accommodated himself to the capacity of men, which is various
and mutable.

XIV. But they inquire whence this diversity proceeded, except from the
will of God. Could he not, as well from the beginning as since the advent
of Christ, give a revelation of eternal life in clear language without any
figures, instruct his people by a few plain sacraments, bestow his Holy
Spirit, and diffuse his grace through all the world? This is just the same
as if they were to quarrel with God, because he created the world at so
late a period, whereas he might have done it before; or because he has
appointed the alternate vicissitudes of summer and winter, of day and
night. But let us not doubt what ought to be believed by all pious men,
that whatever is done by God is done wisely and righteously; although we
frequently know nothing of the causes which render such transactions
necessary. For it would be arrogating too much to ourselves, not to permit
God to keep the reasons of his decrees concealed from us. But it is
surprising, say they, that he now rejects and abominates the sacrifices of
cattle, and all the apparatus of the Levitical priesthood, with which he
used to be delighted; as though truly these external and transitory things
could afford pleasure to God, or affect him in any way whatever. It has
already been observed, that he did none of these things on his own
account, but appointed them all for the salvation of men. If a physician
cure a young man of any disease by a very excellent method, and afterwards
adopt a different mode of cure with the same person when advanced in
years, shall we therefore say that he rejects the method of cure which he
before approved? We will rather say, that he perseveres in the same
system, and considers the difference of age. Thus it was necessary, before
the appearance of Christ, that he should be prefigured, and his future
advent announced by one kind of emblems; since he has been manifested, it
is right that he should be represented by others. But with respect to the
Divine vocation, now more widely extended among all nations since the
advent of Christ than it was before, and with regard to the more copious
effusion of the graces of the Spirit, who can deny, that it is reasonable
and just for God to retain under his own power and will the free
dispensation of his favours; that he may illuminate what nations he
pleases; that wherever he pleases he may introduce the preaching of his
word; that he may give to his instruction whatever kind and degree of
profit and success he pleases; that wherever he pleases, in any age, he
may punish the ingratitude of the world by depriving them of the knowledge
of his name, and when he pleases restore it on account of his mercy? We
see, therefore, the absurdity of the cavils with which impious men disturb
the minds of the simple on this subject, to call in question either the
righteousness of God or the truth of the Scripture.




