Chapter XVII. Christ Truly And Properly Said To Have Merited The Grace Of
God And Salvation For Us.


We must devote an additional Chapter to the solution of this question. For
there are some men, more subtle than orthodox, who, though they confess
that Christ obtained salvation for us, yet cannot bear the word _merit_,
by which they suppose the grace of God is obscured. So they maintain that
Christ is only the instrument or minister, not, as he is called by Peter,
the Author, or Leader, and “Prince of life.”(1340) I grant, indeed, if any
man would oppose Christ simply and alone to the judgment of God, there
would be no room for merit; because it is impossible to find in man any
excellence which can merit the favour of God; nay, as Augustine most truly
observes, “The brightest illustration of predestination and grace is the
Saviour himself, the man Christ Jesus, who has acquired this character in
his human nature, without any previous merit either of works or of faith.
Let any one tell me, how that man merited the honour of being assumed into
one person with the Word, who is coëternal with the Father, and so
becoming the only begotten Son of God. Thus the fountain of grace appears
in our Head, and from him diffuses its streams through all his members
according to their respective capacities. Every one, from the commencement
of his faith, is made a Christian, by the same grace, by which this man,
from the commencement of his existence, was made the Christ.” Again, in
another treatise, Augustine says, “There is not a more illustrious example
of predestination than the Mediator himself. For he who made of the seed
of David this righteous man, so that he never was unrighteous, without any
previous merit of his will, converts unrighteous persons into righteous
ones, and makes them members of that Head,” &c. When we speak of the merit
of Christ, therefore, we do not consider him as the origin of it, but we
ascend to the ordination of God, which is the first cause; because it was
of his mere good pleasure, that God appointed him Mediator to procure
salvation for us. And thus it betrays ignorance to oppose the merit of
Christ to the mercy of God. For it is a common maxim, that between two
things, of which one succeeds or is subordinate to the other, there can be
no opposition. There is no reason, therefore, why the justification of men
should not be gratuitous from the mere mercy of God, and why at the same
time the merit of Christ should not intervene, which is subservient to the
mercy of God. But to our works are directly and equally opposed the
gratuitous favour of God and the obedience of Christ, each in its
respective place. For Christ could merit nothing except by the good
pleasure of God, by which he had been predestinated to appease the Divine
wrath by his sacrifice, and to abolish our transgressions by his
obedience. To conclude, since the merit of Christ depends solely on the
grace of God, which appointed this method of salvation for us, therefore
his merit and that grace are with equal propriety opposed to all the
righteousnesses of men.

II. This distinction is gathered from numerous passages of Scripture. “God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believeth in him should not perish.”(1341) We see that the love of God
holds the first place, as the supreme and original cause, and that faith
in Christ follows as the second and proximate cause. If it be objected,
that Christ is only the formal cause, this diminishes his merit more than
the words now quoted will bear. For if we obtain righteousness by a faith
which relies on him, it is in him we are to seek the cause of our
salvation. This is evident from many passages. “Not that we loved God, but
that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our
sins.”(1342) These words clearly demonstrate, that to remove every
obstacle in the way of his love towards us, God appointed a method of
reconciliation in Christ. And there is much contained in the word
“propitiation;” for God, in a certain ineffable manner, at the same time
that he loved us, was nevertheless angry with us, till he was reconciled
in Christ. This is implied in the following passages: “He is the
propitiation for our sins.”(1343) Again: “It pleased the Father, having
made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things
unto himself.”(1344) Again: “God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them.”(1345) Again: “He hath
made us accepted in the Beloved.”(1346) Again: “That he might reconcile
both unto God in one body by the cross.”(1347) The reason of this mystery
may be learned from the first chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians,
where Paul, having taught that we are chosen in Christ, adds at the same
time, that we are accepted in him. How did God begin to favour those whom
he had loved before the creation of the world, but by the manifestation
which he made of his love when he was reconciled by the blood of Christ?
For since God is the fountain of all righteousness, he must necessarily be
the enemy and judge of every sinner. Wherefore the beginning of his love
is the righteousness described by Paul: “He hath made him to be sin for
us, who knew no sin; that we may be made the righteousness of God in
him.”(1348) For his meaning is, that by the sacrifice of Christ we obtain
gratuitous righteousness, so as to be acceptable to God, though by nature
we are the children of wrath, and alienated from him by sin. This
distinction is indicated also wherever the grace of Christ is connected
with the love of God; whence it follows that our Saviour bestows on us
what he has purchased; for otherwise it would be inconsistent to ascribe
this praise to him distinctly from the Father, that grace is his, and
proceeds from him.

III. Now, that Christ by his obedience has really procured and merited
grace from the Father for us, is certainly and justly concluded from
various passages of Scripture. For I assume this as granted: if Christ has
satisfied for our sins; if he has sustained the punishment due to us; if
he has appeased God by his obedience; in a word, if he has suffered, the
just for the unjust,—then salvation has been obtained for us by his
righteousness, which is the same as being merited. But according to the
testimony of Paul, “We were reconciled by his death, by whom we have
received the atonement,” or reconciliation.(1349) Now, there is no room
for reconciliation without a previous offence. The sense therefore is,
that God, to whom our sins had rendered us odious, has been appeased by
the death of his Son, so as to be propitious to us. And the antithesis,
which follows just after, is worthy of careful observation: “As by one
man’s disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one
shall many be made righteous.”(1350) For the meaning is, that as by the
sin of Adam we were alienated from God and devoted to destruction, so by
the obedience of Christ we are received into favour, as righteous persons.
Nor does the future tense of the verb exclude present righteousness; as
appears from the context. For he had before said, “The free gift is of
many offences unto justification.”(1351)

IV. But when we say that grace is procured for us by the merit of Christ,
we intend, that we have been purified by his blood, and that his death was
an expiation for sins. “The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all
sin.”(1352) “This blood is shed for the remission of sins.”(1353) If the
non‐imputation of our sins to us be the effect of the blood which he shed,
it follows that this was the price of satisfaction to the justice of God.
This is confirmed by the declaration of the Baptist: “Behold the Lamb of
God, which taketh away the sin of the world.”(1354) For he opposes Christ
to all the sacrifices of the law, to show that what they prefigured was
accomplished in him alone. Now we know what Moses frequently says—that an
atonement shall be made for sin, and it shall be forgiven. In short, the
ancient figures give us a fine exhibition of the power and efficacy of the
death of Christ. And the apostle copiously discusses this subject in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, judiciously assuming this as a fundamental
principle, that “without shedding of blood there is no remission.” Whence
he infers, that Christ has “once appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice
of himself;” and that “he was offered to bear the sins of many.”(1355) He
had already said, that “Not by the blood of goats and calves, but by his
own blood; he entered once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption.”(1356) Now, when he argues in this manner, “If the blood of
bulls and of goats, and the ashes of a heifer sprinkling the unclean,
sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the blood
of Christ purge your conscience from dead works!”(1357) it evidently
appears that we too much undervalue the grace of Christ, unless we
attribute to his sacrifice an expiatory, placatory, and satisfactory
efficacy. Therefore it is immediately added, “He is the mediator of the
New Testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the
transgressions that were under the first testament, they which are called
might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.”(1358) But we ought
particularly to consider the relation described by Paul, that he was “made
a curse for us.”(1359) For it would be unnecessary, and consequently
absurd, for Christ to be loaded with a curse, except in order to discharge
the debts due from others, and thereby to obtain a righteousness for them.
The testimony of Isaiah likewise is clear, that “the chastisement of our
peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed.”(1360) For if
Christ had not made a satisfaction for our sins, he could not be said to
have appeased God by suffering the punishment to which we were exposed.
This is confirmed by a subsequent clause: “For the transgression of my
people was he stricken.”(1361) Let us add the interpretation of Peter,
which will remove all difficulty, that “he bare our sins in his own body
on the tree;”(1362) which imports that the burden of condemnation, from
which we have been relieved, was laid upon Christ.

V. The apostles explicitly declare, that he paid a price to redeem us from
the sentence of death: “Being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus; whom God hath set forth to be a
propitiation, through faith in his blood.”(1363) Here Paul celebrates the
grace of God, because he has given the price of our redemption in the
death of Christ; and then enjoins us to betake ourselves to his blood,
that we may obtain righteousness, and may stand secure before the judgment
of God. Peter confirms the same when he says, “Ye were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of
Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot.”(1364) For there
would be no propriety in the comparison, unless this blood had been the
price of satisfaction for sin; for which reason Paul says, “Ye are bought
with a price.”(1365) Nor would there be any truth in his other assertion,
that “there is one Mediator, who gave himself a ransom,”(1366) unless the
punishment due to our demerits had been transferred to him. Therefore the
same apostle defines “redemption through his blood” to be “the forgiveness
of sins;”(1367) as though he had said, We are justified or acquitted
before God, because that blood is a complete satisfaction for us. This is
consonant with the following passage, that “he blotted out the hand‐
writing, which was contrary to us, nailing it to his cross.”(1368) For
these words signify the payment or compensation which absolves us from
guilt. There is great weight also in these words of Paul: “If
righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead in vain.”(1369) For
hence we conclude, that we must seek from Christ what the law would confer
upon any one who fulfilled it; or, which is the same, that we obtain by
the grace of Christ what God promised in the law to our works; “which”
commandments “if a man do, he shall live in them.”(1370) This the apostle
confirms with equal perspicuity in his sermon at Antioch, asserting that
“by Christ all that believe are justified from all things, from which they
could not be justified by the law of Moses.”(1371) For if righteousness
consist in an observance of the law, who can deny that Christ merited
favour for us, when, by bearing this burden himself, he reconciles us to
God, just as though we were complete observers of the law ourselves? The
same idea is conveyed in what he afterwards writes to the Galatians, that
“God sent forth his Son, made under the law, to redeem them that were
under the law.”(1372) For what was the design of that subjection to the
law, but to procure a righteousness for us, by undertaking to perform that
which we were not able to do? Hence that imputation of righteousness
without works, of which Paul treats;(1373) because that righteousness
which is found in Christ alone is accepted as ours. Nor indeed is the
“flesh” of Christ called our “food”(1374) for any other reason but because
we find in it the substance of life. Now, this virtue proceeds solely from
the crucifixion of the Son of God, as the price of our righteousness. Thus
Paul says, “Christ hath given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice
to God for a sweet‐smelling savour.”(1375) And in another place, “He was
delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our
justification.”(1376) Hence it is inferred, not only that salvation is
given us through Christ, but that the Father is now propitious to us for
his sake. For it cannot be doubted, but this, which God declares in a
figurative way by Isaiah, is perfectly fulfilled in him: “I will” do it
“for mine own sake, and for my servant David’s sake.”(1377) Of this the
apostle is a sufficient witness, when he says, “Your sins are forgiven you
for his name’s sake.”(1378) For although the name of Christ is not
expressed, yet John, in his usual manner, designates him by the pronoun
αὐτος, _he_. In this sense the Lord declares, “As I live by the Father, so
he that eateth me, even he shall live by me.”(1379) With which corresponds
the following declaration of Paul: “Unto you it is given for the love of
Christ (ὑπερ Χριστου) not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for
his sake.”(1380)

VI. But the inquiry made by Lombard and the schoolmen, whether Christ
merited for himself, discovers as much foolish curiosity, as the assertion
does presumption when they affirm it. For what necessity was there for the
only begotten Son of God to descend, in order to make any new acquisition
for himself? And God by the publication of his own counsel removes every
doubt. For it is said, not that the Father consulted the benefit of the
Son in his merits, but that he “delivered him to death, and spared him
not,”(1381) “because he loved the world.”(1382) And the language of the
prophets is worthy of observation: “Unto us a Child is born.”(1383) Again:
“Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; behold, thy King cometh unto
thee.”(1384) There would otherwise be no force in that confirmation of his
love, which Paul celebrates, that he “died for us, while we were
enemies.”(1385) For we infer from this, that he had no regard to himself;
and this he clearly affirms himself, when he says, “For their sakes I
sanctify myself.”(1386) For by transferring the benefit of his sanctity to
others, he declares that he makes no acquisition for himself. And it is
highly worthy of our observation, that in order to devote himself wholly
to our salvation, Christ in a manner forgot himself. To support this
notion of theirs, the schoolmen preposterously pervert the following
passage of Paul: “Wherefore also God hath highly exalted him, and given
him a name which is above every name.”(1387) For, considered as a man, by
what merits could he obtain such dignity as to be the Judge of the world
and the Head of angels, to enjoy the supreme dominion of God, and to be
the residence of that majesty, the thousandth part of which can never be
approached by all the abilities of men and of angels? But the solution is
easy and complete, that Paul, in that passage, is not treating of the
cause of the exaltation of Christ, but only showing the consequence of it,
that he might be an example to us; nor did he mean any other than what is
declared in another place, that “Christ ought to have suffered, and to
enter into his glory.”(1388)





BOOK III. ON THE MANNER OF RECEIVING THE GRACE OF CHRIST, THE BENEFITS
WHICH WE DERIVE FROM IT, AND THE EFFECTS WHICH FOLLOW IT.




Argument.


The two former books relate to God the Creator and Redeemer. This treats
of God the Sanctifier, or of the operations of the Holy Spirit towards our
salvation, being an accurate exposition of the third part of the Apostles’
Creed.

The principal topics of this are seven, relating chiefly to one object,
the doctrine of faith.

First. Since our enjoyment of Christ and all his benefits depends on the
secret and special operation of the Holy Spirit, it discusses this
operation, which is the foundation of faith, of newness of life, and of
all holy exercises—Chap. I.

Secondly. Faith being as it were the hand by which we embrace Christ the
Redeemer, as offered to us by the Holy Spirit, it next adds a complete
description of faith—Chap. II.

Thirdly. To improve our knowledge of this salutary faith, it proceeds to
show the effects which necessarily result from it; and contends that true
penitence is always the consequence of true faith. But first it proposes
the doctrine of repentance in general—Chap. III.; and then treats of
Popish penance and its constituent parts—Chap. IV.—of indulgences and
purgatorial fire—Chap. V. But institutes a particular discussion of the
two branches of true penitence, the mortification of the flesh, and the
vivification of the spirit, or the life of a Christian, which is
excellently described—Chap. VI. VII. VIII. IX. X.

Fourthly. In order to a clearer display of the advantages and consequences
of this faith, it first treats of justification by faith—Chap. XI.—then
explains the questions which arise from it—Chap. XII. XIII. XIV. XV. XVI.
XVII. XVIII.—and, lastly, proceeds to a dissertation on Christian liberty,
which is an appendage to justification—Chap. XIX.

Fifthly. Next follows prayer, the principal exercise of faith, and the
medium or instrument by which we daily receive blessings from God—Chap.
XX.

Sixthly. But since the communication of Christ offered in the gospel is
not embraced by men in general, but only by those whom the Lord has
favoured with the efficacy and peculiar grace of his Spirit, it obviates
any supposition of absurdity, by subjoining a necessary and appropriate
dissertation on the doctrine of Divine election—Chap. XXI. XXII. XXIII.
XXIV.

Lastly. Since we are liable to various difficulties and troubles while
exercised in the severe warfare which always attends the life of a
Christian, it contends that this may be alleviated by meditating on the
final resurrection; and therefore adds a discourse on that subject—Chap.
XXV.




