Chapter XVI. Christ’s Execution Of The Office Of A Redeemer To Procure Our
Salvation. His Death, Resurrection, And Ascension To Heaven.


All that we have hitherto advanced concerning Christ is to be referred to
this point, that being condemned, dead, and ruined in ourselves, we should
seek righteousness, deliverance, life, and salvation in him; as we are
taught by this remarkable declaration of Peter, that “there is none other
name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.”(1244) The
name of JESUS was given him, not rashly or by a fortuitous accident, or by
the will of men, but was brought from heaven by the angel, the herald of
the supreme decree, and also with this reason annexed to it: “for he shall
save his people from their sins;”(1245) in which words may be remarked,
what we have before hinted, that the office of a Redeemer was assigned to
him in order that he might be our Saviour. Nevertheless, the redemption
would be incomplete, if he did not by continual advances carry us forward
to the ultimate end of salvation. Therefore, as soon as we deviate from
him, though but in the smallest degree, we gradually lose sight of
salvation, which resides entirely in him; so that those who are not
satisfied with him, voluntarily deprive themselves of all grace. And the
following observation of Bernard is worthy of recital: “that the name of
Jesus is not only light, but also food; that it is likewise oil, without
which all the food of the soul is dry; that it is salt, unseasoned by
which, whatever is presented to us is insipid; finally, that it is honey
in the mouth, melody in the ear, joy in the heart, and medicine to the
soul; and that there are no charms in any discourse where his name is not
heard.” But here we ought diligently to examine how he has procured
salvation for us; that we may not only know him to be the author of it,
but, embracing those things which are sufficient for the establishment of
our faith, may reject every thing capable of drawing us aside to the right
hand or to the left. For since no man can descend into himself and
seriously consider his own character, without perceiving that God is angry
with him and hostile to him, and consequently he must find himself under a
necessity of anxiously seeking some way to appease him, which can never be
done without a satisfaction,—this is a case in which the strongest
assurance is required. For sinners, till they be delivered from guilt, are
always subject to the wrath and malediction of God, who, being a righteous
Judge, never suffers his law to be violated with impunity, but stands
prepared to avenge it.

II. Before we proceed any further, let us examine, by the way, how it
could be consistent, that God, who prevents us with his mercy, should be
our enemy, till he was reconciled to us by Christ. For how could he have
given us a special pledge of his love in his only begotten Son, if he had
not previously embraced us in his gratuitous favour? As there is some
appearance of contradiction, therefore, in this representation, I shall
solve the difficulty. The Spirit speaks in the Scriptures nearly in this
manner—That God was an enemy to men, till by the death of Christ they were
restored to his favour;(1246) that they were under the curse till their
iniquity was expiated by his sacrifice;(1247) that they were separated
from God, till they were restored to union with him by the body of
Christ.(1248) Such modes of expression are accommodated to our capacity,
that we may better understand how miserable and calamitous our condition
is, out of Christ. For if it were not clearly expressed, that we are
obnoxious to the wrath and vengeance of God, and to eternal death, we
should not so fully discover how miserable we must be without the Divine
mercy, nor should we so highly estimate the blessing of deliverance. For
example; let any man be addressed in the following manner: “If, while you
remained a sinner, God had hated you, and rejected you according to your
demerits, horrible destruction would have befallen you; but because he has
voluntarily, and of his own gratuitous kindness, retained you in his
favour, and not permitted you to be alienated from him, he has thus
delivered you from that danger;” he will be affected, and will in some
measure perceive how much he is indebted to the Divine mercy. But if, on
the contrary, he be told, what the Scripture teaches, “that he was
alienated from God by sin, an heir of wrath, obnoxious to the punishment
of eternal death, excluded from all hope of salvation, a total stranger to
the Divine blessing, a slave to Satan, a captive under the yoke of sin,
and, in a word, condemned to, and already involved in, a horrible
destruction; that in this situation, Christ interposed as an intercessor;
that he has taken upon himself and suffered the punishment which by the
righteous judgment of God impended over all sinners; that by his blood he
has expiated those crimes which render them odious to God; that by this
expiation God the Father has been satisfied and duly atoned; that by this
intercessor his wrath has been appeased; that this is the foundation of
peace between God and men; that this is the bond of his benevolence
towards them;” will he not be the more affected by these things in
proportion to the more correct and lively representation of the depth of
calamity from which he has been delivered? In short, since it is
impossible for the life which is presented by the mercy of God, to be
embraced by our hearts with sufficient ardour, or received with becoming
gratitude, unless we have been previously terrified and distressed with
the fear of the Divine wrath, and the horror of eternal death, we are
instructed by the sacred doctrine, that irrespective of Christ we may
contemplate God as in some measure incensed against us, and his hand armed
for our destruction, and that we may embrace his benevolence and paternal
love only in Christ.

III. Now, though this is expressed according to the weakness of our
capacity, yet it is strictly true. For God, who is the perfection of
righteousness, cannot love iniquity, which he beholds in us all. We all,
therefore, have in us that which deserves God’s hatred. Wherefore, in
respect of our corrupt nature, and the succeeding depravity of our lives,
we are all really offensive to God, guilty in his sight, and born to the
damnation of hell. But because the Lord will not lose in us that which is
his own, he yet discovers something that his goodness may love. For
notwithstanding we are sinners through our own fault, yet we are still his
creatures; notwithstanding we have brought death upon ourselves, yet he
had created us for life. Thus, by a pure and gratuitous love towards us,
he is excited to receive us into favour. But if there is a perpetual and
irreconcilable opposition between righteousness and iniquity, he cannot
receive us entirely, as long as we remain sinners. Therefore, to remove
all occasion of enmity, and to reconcile us completely to himself, he
abolishes all our guilt, by the expiation exhibited in the death of
Christ, that we, who before were polluted and impure, may appear righteous
and holy in his sight. The love of God the Father therefore precedes our
reconciliation in Christ; or rather it is because he first loves, that he
afterwards reconciles us to himself.(1249) But because, till Christ
relieves us by his death, we are not freed from that iniquity which
deserves the indignation of God, and is accursed and condemned in his
sight; we have not a complete and solid union with God, before we are
united to him by Christ. And therefore, if we would assure ourselves that
God is pacified and propitious to us, we must fix our eyes and hearts on
Christ alone, since it is by him only that we really obtain the non‐
imputation of sins, the imputation of which is connected with the Divine
wrath.

IV. For this reason Paul says, that the love which God had for us before
the creation of the world, was founded on Christ.(1250) This doctrine is
clear, and consistent with the Scripture, and admirably reconciles the
different passages, where it is said, that God manifested his love to us
by the gift of his only begotten Son,(1251) and yet that he was our enemy
till he was reconciled by the death of Christ.(1252) But for a further
confirmation of it, to such as require the testimony of the ancient
Church, I will cite a passage from Augustine, which expressly maintains
the same. “The love of God,” says he, “is incomprehensible and immutable.
For he did not begin to love us when we were reconciled to him by the
blood of his Son, but he loved us before the creation of the world, that
we might be his children, together with his only begotten Son, even before
we had any existence. Therefore our reconciliation by the death of Christ
must not be understood as if he reconciled us to God, that God might begin
to love those whom he had before hated; but we are reconciled to him who
already loved us, but with whom we were at enmity on account of sin. And
whether my assertion be true, let the apostle attest. ‘God,’ says he,
‘commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us.’(1253) He loved us, therefore, even when we were in the
exercise of enmity against him, and engaged in the practice of iniquity.
Wherefore, in a wonderful and Divine manner, he both hated and loved us at
the same time. He hated us, as being different from what he had made us;
but as our iniquity had not entirely destroyed his work in us, he could at
the same time in every one of us hate what we had done, and love what
proceeded from himself.” This is the language of Augustine.

V. Now, in answer to the inquiry, how Christ, by the abolition of our
sins, has destroyed the enmity between God and us, and procured a
righteousness to render him favourable and propitious to us, it may be
replied in general, that he accomplished it for us by the whole course of
his obedience. This is proved by the testimony of Paul. “As by one man’s
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many
be made righteous.”(1254) And indeed in another place he extends the cause
of the pardon, which exempts us from the malediction of the law, to the
whole life of Christ. “When the fulness of the time was come, God sent
forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that
were under the law.”(1255) Thus he himself affirmed even his baptism to be
a branch of his righteousness, because he acted in obedience to the
command of the Father.(1256) In short, from the time of his assuming the
character of a servant, he began to pay the price of our deliverance in
order to redeem us. Yet more precisely to define the means of our
salvation, the Scripture ascribes this in a peculiar manner to the death
of Christ. He himself announces, that he “gives his life a ransom for
many.”(1257) Paul teaches that “he died for our sins.”(1258) John the
Baptist exclaims, “Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of
the world!”(1259) Paul in another place declares, that we are “justified
freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus; whom
God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood.”(1260)
Also that we are “justified by his blood,” and “reconciled by his
death.”(1261) Again: “He hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin;
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.”(1262) I shall not
proceed with all the proofs, because the catalogue would be immense, and
many of them must hereafter be cited in their proper order. Wherefore, in
what is called the Apostles’ Creed, there is very properly an immediate
transition from the birth of Christ to his death and resurrection, in
which the sum of perfect salvation consists. Yet there is no exclusion of
the rest of the obedience which he performed in his life; as Paul
comprehends the whole of it, from the beginning to the end, when he says,
that “he made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross.”(1263) And indeed his voluntary submission is the principal
circumstance even in his death; because the sacrifice, unless freely
offered, would have been unavailable to the acquisition of righteousness.
Therefore our Lord, after having declared, “I lay down my life for the
sheep,” expressly adds, “No man taketh it from me.”(1264) In which sense
Isaiah says, “As a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not
his mouth.”(1265) And the evangelical history relates, that he went forth
to meet the soldiers,(1266) and that before Pilate he neglected making any
defence, and waited to submit to the sentence.(1267) Nor was this without
inward conflict, because he had taken our infirmities, and it was
necessary to give this proof of his obedience to his Father. And it was no
mean specimen of his incomparable love to us, to contend with horrible
fear, and amid those dreadful torments to neglect all care of himself,
that he might promote our benefit. Indeed we must admit, that it was
impossible for God to be truly appeased in any other way, than by Christ
renouncing all concern for himself, and submitting and devoting himself
entirely to his will. On this subject the apostle appositely cites the
testimony of the Psalmist: “Then said I, Lo, I come; in the volume of the
book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy law
is within my heart.”(1268) But since terrified consciences find no rest
but in a sacrifice and ablution to expiate their sins, we are properly
directed thither, and the death of Christ is exhibited to us as the source
of life. Now, because our guilt rendered us liable to a curse at the
heavenly tribunal of God, the condemnation of Christ before Pontius
Pilate, the governor of Judea, is stated in the first place, that we may
know that on this righteous person was inflicted the punishment which
belonged to us. We could not escape the terrible judgment of God; to
deliver us from it, Christ submitted to be condemned even before a wicked
and profane mortal. For the name of the governor is mentioned, not only to
establish the credit of the history, but that we may learn, what is taught
by Isaiah, that “the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his
stripes we are healed.”(1269) For to supersede our condemnation it was not
sufficient for him to suffer any kind of death; but, to accomplish our
redemption, that kind of death was to be chosen, by which, both sustaining
our condemnation and atoning for our sins, he might deliver us from both.
Had he been assassinated by robbers, or murdered in a popular tumult, in
such a death there would have been no appearance of satisfaction. But when
he is placed as a criminal before the tribunal,—when he is accused and
overpowered by the testimony of witnesses, and by the mouth of the judge
is condemned to die,—we understand from these circumstances, that he
sustained the character of a malefactor. And we shall remark two things
which were foretold in the predictions of the prophets, and afford
peculiar consolation and confirmation to our faith. For when we are told,
that Christ was sent from the tribunal of the judge to the place of
execution, and suspended between two thieves, we see the completion of
that prophecy, which is cited by the Evangelist, “He was numbered with the
transgressors.”(1270) For what reason? to sustain the character of a
sinner, not of a righteous or innocent person. For he died, not for his
innocence, but on account of sin. On the contrary, when we hear him
absolved by the same mouth by which he was condemned, (for Pilate was
constrained repeatedly to give a public testimony of his innocence,)(1271)
let it remind us of what we read in another prophet: “I restored that
which I took not away.”(1272) Thus we shall behold Christ sustaining the
character of a sinner and malefactor, while from the lustre of his
innocence it will at the same time evidently appear, that he was loaded
with the guilt of others, but had none of his own. He suffered, then,
under Pontius Pilate, after having been condemned as a criminal by the
solemn sentence of the governor; yet not in such a manner, but that he was
at the same time pronounced to be righteous, by the declaration of the
same judge, that he found in him no cause of accusation. This is our
absolution, that the guilt, which made us obnoxious to punishment, is
transferred to the person of the Son of God. For we ought particularly to
remember this satisfaction, that we may not spend our whole lives in
terror and anxiety, as though we were pursued by the righteous vengeance
of God, which the Son of God has transferred to himself.

VI. Moreover, the species of death which he suffered, is fraught with a
peculiar mystery. The cross was accursed, not only in the opinion of men,
but by the decree of the Divine law. Therefore, when Christ is lifted up
upon it, he renders himself obnoxious to the curse. And this was necessary
to be done, that by this transfer we might be delivered from every curse
which awaited us, or rather was already inflicted upon us, on account of
our iniquities. This was also prefigured in the law. For the victims and
expiations offered for sins were called אשמות, a word which properly
signifies sin itself. By this appellation the Spirit intended to suggest
that they were vicarious sacrifices, to receive and sustain the curse due
to sin. But that which was figuratively represented in the Mosaic
sacrifices, is actually exhibited in Christ, the archetype of the figures.
Wherefore, in order to effect a complete expiation, he gave his soul אשם,
that is, _an atoning sacrifice for sin_,(1273) as the prophet says; so
that our guilt and punishment being as it were transferred to him, they
must cease to be imputed to us. The apostle more explicitly testifies the
same, when he says, “He hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin;
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.”(1274) For the Son
of God, though perfectly free from all sin, nevertheless assumed the
disgrace and ignominy of our iniquities, and, on the other hand, arrayed
us in his purity. He appears to have intended the same, when he says
concerning sin, that it was “condemned in the flesh,”(1275) that is, in
Christ. For the Father destroyed the power of sin, when the curse of it
was transferred to the body of Christ. This expression therefore
indicates, that Christ at his death was offered to the Father as an
expiatory sacrifice, in order that, a complete atonement being made by his
oblation, we may no longer dread the Divine wrath. Now, it is evident what
the prophet meant, when he said, “The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity
of us all;”(1276) namely, that when he was about to expiate our sins, they
were transferred to him by imputation. The cross, to which he was fixed,
was a symbol of this, as the apostle informs us: “Christ hath redeemed us
from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us; for it is written,
Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree; that the blessing of Abraham
might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ.”(1277) Peter alluded to
the same, where he said, “He bare our sins in his own body on the
tree;”(1278) because from the visible symbol of the curse, we more clearly
apprehend, that the burden, with which we were oppressed, was imposed on
him. Nor must we conceive that he submitted to a curse which overwhelmed
him, but, on the contrary, that by sustaining it, he depressed, broke, and
destroyed all its power. Wherefore faith apprehends an absolution in the
condemnation of Christ, and a benediction in his curse. It is not without
reason, therefore, that Paul magnificently proclaims the triumph which
Christ gained for himself on the cross; as though the cross, which was
full of ignominy, had been converted into a triumphal chariot. For he
says, that “he nailed to his cross the hand‐writing, which was contrary to
us, and having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of them
openly.”(1279) Nor should this surprise us; for, according to the
testimony of another apostle, “Christ offered himself through the eternal
Spirit.”(1280) Hence arose that change of the nature of things. But that
these things may be deeply rooted and firmly fixed in our hearts, let us
always remember his sacrifice and ablution. For we certainly could have no
confidence that Christ was our (απολυτρωσις,(1281) και αντιλυτρον,(1282)
και ἱλαστηριον,)(1283) redemption, ransom, and propitiation, if he had not
been a slaughtered victim. And for this reason it is, that when the
Scripture exhibits the method of redemption, it so often makes mention of
blood; though the blood shed by Christ has not only served as an atonement
to God, but likewise as a laver to purge away our pollutions.

VII. It follows in the Creed, “that he died and was buried;” in which may
be further seen, how in every respect he substituted himself in our room
to pay the price of our redemption. Death held us in bondage under his
yoke; Christ, to deliver us from it, surrendered himself to his power in
our stead. This is the meaning of the apostle, when he says, that “he
tasted death for every man.”(1284) For by his death he prevented us from
dying, or, which comes to the same thing, by his death recovered life for
us. But in this respect he differed from us—he surrendered himself to
death to be, as it were, overcome by it, not that he might be absorbed in
its abysses, but rather that he might destroy that, by which we should
have been at length devoured; he surrendered himself to death to be
subdued, not that he might be overwhelmed by its power, but rather that he
might overthrow that which threatened us, which indeed had already
overcome us, and was triumphing over us. Lastly, he died, “that he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil; and deliver
them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to
bondage.”(1285) This is the first benefit we have received from his death.
The second is, that, by a communication of himself, he “mortifies” our
“members which are upon the earth,”(1286) that they may no longer perform
their own actions; and slays our old man, that it may not flourish and
bear fruit any more. The burial of Christ has the same tendency, namely,
that being made partakers of it, we may be buried to sin. For when the
apostle teaches us that “we have been planted in the likeness of the death
of Christ, and buried with him,”(1287) to the death of sin; that “by his
cross the world is crucified” unto us, and we “unto the world;”(1288) and
that we “are dead with him;”(1289) he not only exhorts us to imitate the
example of his death, but declares that it contains such an efficacy, as
ought to be conspicuous in all Christians, unless they wish to render that
death ineffectual and useless. In the death and burial of Christ,
therefore, we have a twofold benefit proposed to our enjoyment—deliverance
from the thraldom of death, and the mortification of our flesh.

VIII. But it is not right to omit his “descent into hell,” which is of no
small importance towards the accomplishment of redemption. For though it
appears from the writings of the ancients, that this article of the Creed
was not always in common use in the churches, yet in discussing a system
of doctrine, it is necessary to introduce it, as containing a mystery
highly useful, and by no means to be despised. Indeed, there are some of
the ancients who do not omit it. Hence we may conjecture that it was
inserted a little after the days of the apostles, and was not immediately
but gradually received in the churches. This at least cannot be
controverted, that it was agreeable to the general opinion of all the
faithful; since there is not one of the fathers, who does not mention in
his writings the descent of Christ into hell, though they explain it in
different senses. But by whom, or at what period, it was first inserted,
is of little consequence; it is of more importance that the Creed should
present us a full and complete summary of faith, into which nothing should
be inserted, but what is taken from God’s most holy word. Yet if any
morosely refuse to admit it into the Creed, it shall presently be proved
to be so necessary to the perfection of our redemption, that the omission
of it considerably lessens the benefit of the death of Christ. Some,
again, are of opinion, that this clause contains nothing new, but is only
a repetition, in other words, of what had before been said respecting his
burial; because the word here rendered “hell” is frequently used in the
Scriptures to signify the grave. I admit the truth of their observation
respecting the signification of this word, that it is frequently to be
understood of the “grave;” but their opinion is opposed by two reasons,
which easily induce me to dissent from them. For what extreme carelessness
it would betray, after a plain fact had been stated in the most explicit
and familiar manner, to assert it a second time in an obscure combination
of words calculated rather to perplex than to elucidate it! For when two
phrases expressive of the same thing are connected together, the latter
ought to be an explanation of the former. But what an explanation would
this be, if one were to express it thus: “When Christ is said to have been
buried, the meaning is, that he descended into hell!” Besides, it is not
probable that such a superfluous tautology could have found its way into
this compendium, in which the principal articles of faith are summarily
expressed with the utmost possible brevity. And I doubt not, that all who
have considered this point with any attention will easily assent to what I
have advanced.

IX. Others give a different interpretation; that Christ descended to the
souls of the fathers who had died under the law, for the purpose of
announcing the accomplishment of redemption, and liberating them from the
prison in which they were confined. To this purpose they pervert a passage
in the psalms, that “he hath broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars
of iron in sunder;”(1290) and another in Zechariah, “I have sent forth thy
prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water.”(1291) But since the
Psalmist celebrates the liberation of those who are suffering captivity
and imprisonment in distant countries; and Zechariah compares the
destruction in which the people had been overwhelmed in Babylon, to a dry
pit or abyss; and at the same time suggests, that the salvation of the
whole Church is a deliverance from the abysses of hell; I know not how it
came to pass, that posterity should imagine a subterraneous cavern, to
which they have given the name of Limbus. But this fable, although it is
maintained by great authors, and even in the present age is by many
seriously defended as a truth, is after all nothing but a fable. For to
confine the souls of the dead in a prison, is quite puerile; but what
necessity was there for Christ to descend thither in order to liberate
them? I freely confess, indeed, that Christ illuminated them by the power
of his Spirit; that they might know that the grace, which they had only
tasted by hope, was then exhibited to the world. And probably to this we
may accommodate that passage of Peter, where he says, that Christ “went
and preached unto the spirits who were keeping watch as in a tower.”(1292)
This is generally rendered “the spirits in prison,” but I conceive
improperly. The context also gives us to understand, that the faithful who
had died before that time, were partakers of the same grace with us. For
the apostle amplifies the efficacy of the death of Christ from this
consideration, that it penetrated even to the dead; when the souls of the
faithful enjoyed the present view of that visitation which they had been
anxiously expecting; whilst, on the contrary, it was more clearly
discovered to the reprobate, that they were excluded from all salvation.
But since Peter has not spoken in this distinct manner of the pious and
the impious, we must not understand him as confounding them all together,
without any discrimination. He only designs to inform us, that the
knowledge of the death of Christ was common to them both.

X. But laying aside all consideration of the Creed, we have to seek for a
more certain explanation of the descent of Christ into hell; and we find
one in the Divine word, not only holy and pious, but likewise replete with
singular consolation. If Christ had merely died a corporeal death, no end
would have been accomplished by it; it was requisite, also, that he should
feel the severity of the Divine vengeance, in order to appease the wrath
of God, and satisfy his justice. Hence it was necessary for him to contend
with the powers of hell and the horror of eternal death. We have already
stated from the prophet, that “the chastisement of our peace was upon
him,” that “he was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our
iniquities;”(1293) the meaning of which is, that he was made a substitute
and surety for transgressors, and even treated as a criminal himself, to
sustain all the punishments which would have been inflicted on them; only
with this exception, that “it was not possible that he should be holden of
the pains of death.”(1294) Therefore it is no wonder, if he be said to
have descended into hell, since he suffered that death which the wrath of
God inflicts on transgressors. It is a very frivolous and even ridiculous
objection to say that by this explanation the order of things is
perverted, because it is absurd to make that subsequent to his burial,
which really preceded it. For the relation of those sufferings of Christ,
which were visible to men, is very properly followed by that invisible and
incomprehensible vengeance which he suffered from the hand of God; in
order to assure us that not only the body of Christ was given as the price
of our redemption, but that there was another greater and more excellent
ransom, since he suffered in his soul the dreadful torments of a person
condemned and irretrievably lost.

XI. In this sense Peter says, that “God raised him up, having loosed the
pains of death; because it was not possible that he should be holden of
it.”(1295) He does not say simply “death;” but tells us, that the Son of
God was involved in “the pains of death,” which proceed from the Divine
wrath and malediction, which is the origin of death. For what a little
thing it would have been for Christ to appear in order to suffer death,
without any distress or perplexity, and even with pleasure! But this was a
true specimen of his infinite mercy, not to evade that death which he so
much dreaded. Nor can it be doubted, but the apostle means to suggest the
same in the Epistle to the Hebrews, when he says, that Christ “was heard
in that he feared.”(1296) Some, instead of fear, translate it reverence or
piety; but how improperly, is evident from the subject itself, and also
from the form of expression. Christ, therefore, “when he offered up
prayers with strong crying and tears, was heard in that he feared;” not
that he might obtain an exemption from death, but that he might not be
swallowed up by it as a sinner; for he was then sustaining our character.
And it is certainly impossible to imagine any more formidable abyss, than
to perceive ourselves forsaken and abandoned by God, and not to be heard
when we call upon him, as though he had conspired to destroy us. Now, we
see Christ was so deeply dejected, that in the urgency of distress, he was
constrained to exclaim, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?”(1297)
For the idea of some, that he spoke rather according to the opinion of
others than from his own feelings, is utterly improbable; since he
evidently appears to have spoken from the anguish of his inmost soul. We
do not admit that God was ever hostile to him, or angry with him. For how
could he be angry with his beloved Son, “in whom his soul
delighted?”(1298) or how could Christ, by his intercession, appease the
Father for others, if the Father were incensed against him? But we affirm,
that he sustained the weight of the Divine severity; since, being “smitten
and afflicted of God,”(1299) he experienced from God all the tokens of
wrath and vengeance. Wherefore, Hilary argues, that by this descent we
have obtained the destruction of death. And in other places he accords
with our opinion; as when he says, “The cross, death, and hell, are our
life.” Again, in another place, “The Son of God is in hell, but man is
raised to heaven.” But why do I cite the testimony of a private person,
when the apostle asserts the same thing, mentioning, as the reward of
Christ’s victory, the deliverance of them “who, through fear of death,
were all their lifetime subject to bondage?”(1300) It was necessary,
therefore, that he should overcome that fear, which naturally and
incessantly harasses all men; which he could not do without contending
with it. Now, that his was not a common or trivial sorrow, will soon be
more clearly evinced. Thus, by contending with the power of the devil,
with the dread of death, and with the pains of hell, he obtained the
victory, and triumphed over them, that in death we may no longer dread
those things which our Prince has destroyed.

XII. Here some contentious, though illiterate men, impelled rather by
malice than by ignorance, exclaim against me, that I am guilty of an
atrocious injury to Christ; because it is utterly unreasonable that he
should have any fear concerning the salvation of his soul. And then they
aggravate the cavil, by pretending that I attribute despair to the Son of
God, which is contrary to faith. In the first place, it is presumptuous in
them to raise a controversy concerning the fear and consternation of
Christ, which is so expressly asserted by the evangelists. For, before the
approach of his death, he experienced a perturbation of spirit and
depression of mind; but, in the actual struggle with it, he began to feel
a greater degree of consternation. If they say that this was only
pretence, it is a most paltry subterfuge. We ought, therefore, as Ambrose
justly advises, fearlessly to acknowledge the sorrow of Christ, unless we
are ashamed of his cross. And, indeed, if his soul had experienced no
punishment, he would have been only a Redeemer for the body. It was
necessary for him to combat, in order to raise up those who lay prostrate
on the earth; and his heavenly glory is so far from being diminished by
this, that his goodness, which is never sufficiently celebrated, is
conspicuous in his voluntary and unreluctant assumption of our
infirmities. Hence that consolation which the apostle offers us under our
anxieties and sorrows, that this Mediator has experienced our infirmities,
in order that he might be the more ready to succour the wretched.(1301)
They pretend, that what is intrinsically bad cannot be justly attributed
to Christ; as though they were wiser than the Spirit of God, who connects
these two things together, that Christ “was in all points tempted like as
we are, yet without sin.” We have no reason, therefore, to be alarmed by
the infirmity of Christ, to which he was not compelled by violence or
necessity, but induced merely by his mercy and love for us voluntarily to
submit himself. But none of his voluntary sufferings for us have been any
diminution of his power. These captious objectors, however, are deceived
in one point; they do not perceive that this infirmity in Christ was
perfectly free from every stain of guilt, because he always kept himself
within the limits of obedience. For, because no moderation can be
discovered in the corruption of our nature, where all our passions
transgress all bounds with impetuous violence, they erroneously measure
the Son of God by this standard. But he being innocent, and free from
every defect, all his affections were governed by a moderation which
admitted of no excess. Whence it was very possible for him to resemble us
in sorrow, fear, and dread, and yet, in this respect, to be very different
from us. Refuted here, they proceed to another cavil; that, although
Christ was afraid of death, yet he was not afraid of the malediction and
wrath of God, from which he knew himself to be safe. But let the pious
reader consider how much honour it reflects on Christ, that he was more
delicate and timorous than the generality of mankind. Robbers and other
malefactors obstinately rush forward to death; many men nobly despise it;
others calmly submit to it. But what constancy or magnanimity would the
Son of God have discovered, in being astonished and almost struck dead
with the fear of it? For it is related of him, what might generally be
accounted a prodigy, that through the vehemence of his agonies, drops of
blood flowed from his face. Nor did he exhibit this spectacle to the eyes
of others; he sent up his groans to his Father, in the secrecy of
retirement. And every doubt is removed by the necessity that there was for
angels to descend from heaven, to support him with unusual consolation.
What disgraceful effeminacy, as I have suggested, would this have been, to
be so distressed by the fear of a common death, as to be in a bloody
sweat, and incapable of being comforted without the presence of angels!
What! does not this prayer, which he repeated three times, “O my Father,
if it be possible, let this cup pass from me,”(1302) proceeding from an
incredible bitterness of soul, demonstrate that Christ had a more severe
and arduous conflict than with a common death? Whence it appears, that
those triflers, with whom I am now disputing, presumptuously chatter about
things which they know not; because they never seriously considered the
nature or the importance of our redemption from the Divine judgment. But
it is our wisdom to have a clear understanding how much our salvation cost
the Son of God. If any one inquire whether Christ was then descending to
hell, when he deprecated death, I reply, that this was the prelude to it;
whence we may conclude what dreadful and horrible agonies he must have
suffered, while he was conscious of standing at the tribunal of God
accused as a criminal on our account. But, although the Divine power of
the Spirit concealed itself for a moment, to give place to the infirmity
of the flesh, yet we know, that the temptation arising from a sense of
grief and fear was such as was not repugnant to faith. And thus was
fulfilled what we find in the sermon of Peter, “that it was not possible
that he should be holden of the pains of death;”(1303) because, when he
perceived himself, as it were, deserted by God, still he relaxed not in
the least from his confidence in his Father’s goodness. This is evident
from his celebrated invocation, when, through the vehemence of grief, he
exclaimed, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?”(1304) For
notwithstanding his extreme agony, yet he continues to call God _his_ God,
even when he complains that he is forsaken by him. Now, this serves to
refute the error of Apollinaris, and also of those who were called
Monothelites. Apollinaris pretended that the eternal Spirit supplied the
place of a soul in Christ, so that he was but half a man, as though he
could expiate our sins without obedience to the Father. But where was the
disposition or will, requisite to obedience, but in his soul? which we
know was “troubled,”(1305) in order to dissipate all our fears, and obtain
peace and rest for ours. Moreover, in opposition to the Monothelites, we
see, that what was contrary to his will as man, was agreeable to his will
as God. I say nothing of his overcoming the fear of which we have spoken,
by a contrary disposition. For there is a manifest appearance of
contrariety when he says, “Father, save me from this hour: but for this
cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify thy name.”(1306) Yet, in this
perplexity, there is no such want of moderation as is evident in us, even
while we are exerting our most strenuous endeavours to conquer ourselves.

XIII. Next follows his resurrection from the dead, without which all that
we have said would be incomplete. For, since there appears nothing but
infirmity in the cross, death, and burial of Christ, faith must proceed
beyond all these things, to be furnished with sufficient strength.
Wherefore, although our salvation is perfectly accomplished by his death,
because by that we are reconciled to God, a satisfaction is given to his
righteous judgment, the curse is removed, and the punishment sustained,
yet we are said to have been “begotten again to a lively hope,” not by his
death, but “by his resurrection from the dead.”(1307) For as at his
resurrection he appeared the conqueror of death, so it is on his
resurrection that our faith principally rests. This is better expressed in
the words of Paul, when he says, that Christ “was delivered for our
offences, and was raised again for our justification;”(1308) as though he
had said, that sin was removed by his death, and righteousness renewed and
restored by his resurrection. For how was it possible for him by dying to
liberate us from death, if he had himself remained under its power? how
could he have obtained the victory for us, if he had been vanquished in
the contest? Wherefore we ascribe our salvation partly to the death of
Christ, and partly to his resurrection; we believe that sin was abolished,
and death destroyed, by the former; that righteousness was restored, and
life established, by the latter; yet so that the former discovers its
power and efficacy in us by means of the latter. Therefore Paul asserts
that he was “declared to be the Son of God, by the resurrection from the
dead;”(1309) because he then displayed his heavenly power, which is both a
lucid mirror of his Divinity, and a firm support of our faith. So, in
another place, he says, that “he was crucified through weakness, yet he
liveth by the power of God.”(1310) In the same sense, in another place,
treating of perfection, he says, “that I may know him, and the power of
his resurrection.”(1311) Yet, immediately after, he adds, “the fellowship
of his sufferings, and conformity to his death.” In perfect harmony with
this, is the following declaration of Peter: “God raised him up from the
dead, and gave him glory; that your faith and hope might be in God:”(1312)
not that faith totters when it rests on his death; but because “the power
of God,” which “keeps us through faith,”(1313) chiefly discovers itself in
his resurrection. Let us remember, therefore, that whenever mention is
made of his death alone, it comprehends also what strictly belongs to his
resurrection; and that the same figure of speech is applied to the word
_resurrection_, whenever it is used without any mention of his death, so
that it connects with it what is peculiarly applicable to his death. But
since it was by rising from the dead that he obtained the palm of victory,
to become the resurrection and the life, Paul justly contends, that, “if
Christ be not risen, then is” the “preaching” of the gospel “vain, and”
our “faith is also vain.”(1314) Therefore, in another place, after having
gloried in the death of Christ in opposition to all the fears of
condemnation, he adds, by way of amplification, “Yea, rather, that is
risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh
intercession for us.”(1315) Besides, as we have before stated, that the
mortification of our flesh depends on communion with his cross, so it must
also be understood, that we obtain another benefit, corresponding to that,
from his resurrection. The apostle says, “If we have been planted together
in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his
resurrection: even so we also should walk in newness of life.”(1316)
Therefore, in another place, as, from our being dead with Christ, he
deduces an argument for the mortification of our members which are upon
the earth,(1317) so also, because we are risen with Christ, he thence
infers that we should seek those things which are above, and not those
which are on the earth.(1318) By which expressions we are not only invited
to walk in newness of life, after the example of Christ raised from the
dead, but are taught that our regeneration to righteousness is effected by
his power. We derive also a third benefit from his resurrection, having
received, as it were, a pledge to assure us of our own resurrection, of
which his clearly affords the most solid foundation and evidence. This
subject the apostle discusses more at large in the First Epistle to the
Corinthians.(1319) But it must be remarked by the way, that when he is
said to have “risen from the dead,” this phrase expresses the reality both
of his death and of his resurrection; as though it were said, that he died
the same death as other men naturally die, and received immortality in the
same body which he had assumed in a mortal state.

XIV. His _resurrection_ is properly followed in the Creed by his
_ascension to heaven_. For though Christ began to make a more illustrious
display of his glory and power at his resurrection, having now laid aside
the abject and ignoble condition of this mortal life, and the ignominy of
the cross, yet his ascension into heaven was the real commencement of his
reign. This the apostle shows, when he informs us, that he “ascended that
he might fill all things.”(1320) Here, in an apparent contradiction, he
suggests to us that there is a beautiful harmony, because Christ departed
from us, that his departure might be more useful to us than that presence,
which, during his continuance on earth, confined itself within the humble
mansion of his body. Therefore John, after having related that remarkable
invitation, “If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink,”
subjoins, that “the Holy Ghost was not yet given; because that Jesus was
not yet glorified.”(1321) This the Lord himself also declared to his
disciples: “It is expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not away,
the Comforter will not come unto you.”(1322) Now, he proposes a
consolation for his corporeal absence, that he “will not leave them
comfortless, or orphans, but will come again to them,” in a manner
invisible indeed, but more desirable; because they were then taught by a
more certain experience that the authority which he enjoys, and the power
which he exercises, is sufficient for the faithful, not only to procure
them a blessed life, but to insure them a happy death. And, indeed, we see
how largely he then increased the effusions of his Spirit, how greatly he
advanced the magnificence of his reign, and what superior power he exerted
both in assisting his friends, and in defeating his enemies. Being
received up into heaven, therefore he removed his corporeal presence from
our view; not that he might no longer be present with the faithful who
were still in a state of pilgrimage on earth, but that he might govern
both heaven and earth by a more efficacious energy. Moreover, his promise,
that he would be with us till the end of the world, he has performed by
this his ascension; by which, as his body was elevated above all heavens,
so his power and energy have been diffused and extended beyond all the
limits of heaven and earth. In representing this, I would prefer the
language of Augustine to my own. “Christ,” says he, “was about to go by
death to the right hand of the Father, whence he will hereafter come to
judge the living and the dead; and this by a corporeal presence, according
to the rule of faith and sound doctrine. For in his spiritual presence
with them, he was to come soon after his ascension.” And elsewhere he
treats this subject in a manner still more diffuse and explicit. By his
ineffable and invisible grace, Christ has fulfilled his declaration, “Lo,
I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world.”(1323) But with
respect to the body which the Word assumed, which was born of the Virgin,
which was apprehended by the Jews, which was fixed to the cross, which was
taken down from the cross, which was folded in linen, which was laid in
the sepulchre, which was manifested at the resurrection, there has been an
accomplishment of this prediction: “Ye shall not have me always with you.”
Why? Because in his corporeal presence he conversed with his disciples for
forty days, and while they were attending him, seen but not followed by
them, he ascended into heaven; and he is not here, for he sits there at
the right hand of the Father; and yet he is here, for he has not withdrawn
the presence of his majesty. In the presence of his majesty, therefore, we
have Christ always with us; but with respect to his corporeal presence, he
said with truth to his disciples, “Me ye have not always.” For the Church
enjoyed his corporeal presence for a few days; now she enjoys him by
faith, and does not behold him with her eyes.

XV. Wherefore it is immediately added, _that he is seated at the right
hand of the Father_; which is a similitude borrowed from princes, who have
their assistants, to whom they depute the exercise of the government. So
Christ, in whom the Father determines to be exalted, and by whose medium
he chooses to reign, is said to have been received to his right hand; as
though it were said, that he had been inaugurated in the government of
heaven and earth, and had solemnly entered on the actual administration of
the power committed to him; and not only that he has entered on it, but
that he continues in it, till he descends to judgment. For so the apostle
explains it, in the following words: “The Father hath set him at his own
right hand, far above all principality, and power, and might, and
dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also
in that which is to come; and hath put all things under his feet, and gave
him to be the head over all things to the church,” &c.(1324) We see the
end of this session; it is, that all creatures, both celestial and
terrestrial, may admire his majesty, be governed by his hand, obey his
will, and be subject to his power. And the only design of the apostles in
their frequent mention of it, is to teach us that all things are committed
to his government. Wherefore they who suppose that nothing but blessedness
is signified in this article, are not right in that opinion. It affects
not our argument, that Stephen declares that he sees Christ
“standing,”(1325) because the present question relates, not to the posture
of his body, but to the majesty of his dominion; so that _sitting_
signifies no other than presiding at the tribunal of heaven.

XVI. Hence faith receives many advantages. For it perceives, that by his
ascension the Lord has opened the way to the kingdom of heaven, which had
been stopped by Adam. For since he entered there in our nature, and as it
were in our names, it follows that, as the apostle expresses it, we now
“sit together” with him “in heavenly places,”(1326) because we not only
hope for heaven, but already possess it in our Head. Besides, faith knows
that his residence with his Father conduces greatly to our advantage. For
being entered into a sanctuary, which is not of human erection,(1327) he
continually appears in the presence of the Father as our advocate and
intercessor;(1328) he attracts the eyes of the Father to his
righteousness, so as to avert them from our sins; he reconciles him to us,
so as to procure for us, by his intercession, a way of access to his
throne, which he replenishes with grace and mercy, but which otherwise
would be pregnant with horror to miserable sinners.(1329) In the third
place, faith has an apprehension of his power, in which consists our
strength, our fortitude, our wealth, and our triumph over hell. For “when
he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive,”(1330) spoiled his
enemies, and enriched his people, and daily loads them with spiritual
favours. He sits, therefore, on high, that from thence he may shed forth
his power upon us, that he may animate us with spiritual life, that he may
sanctify us by his Spirit, that he may adorn his Church with a variety of
graces, and defend it by his protection from every calamity, that by the
strength of his hand he may restrain the ferocious enemies of his cross
and of our salvation; finally, that he may retain all power in heaven and
in earth; till he shall have overthrown all his enemies, who are also
ours, and completed the edification of his Church. And this is the true
state of his kingdom, this the power which the Father has conferred on
him, till he completes the last act by coming to judge the living and the
dead.

XVII. Christ gives his servants unequivocal tokens of the presence of his
power; but because on earth his kingdom is in some measure concealed under
the meanness of the flesh, faith is, for a very good reason, called to
meditate on that visible presence which he will manifest at the last day.
For he will descend from heaven in a visible form, in the same manner in
which he was seen to ascend;(1331) and will appear to all with the
ineffable majesty of his kingdom, with the splendour of immortality, with
the infinite power of Deity, and with a host of angels.(1332) From thence,
therefore, we are commanded to expect him as our Redeemer at the last day,
when he will separate the sheep from the goats, the elect from the
reprobate; and there will not be an individual of either the living or the
dead that can escape his judgment. For from the most remote corners of the
world they will hear the sound of the trumpet, with which all mankind will
be summoned to his tribunal, both those whom that day shall find alive,
and those whom death shall previously have removed from the society of the
living. There are some who understand the words _quick_, or _living, and
dead_, in a different sense. And indeed we find that some of the fathers
hesitated respecting the exposition of this clause; but the sense we have
given, being plain and clear, is far more consistent with the design of
the Creed, which appears to have been composed for the common people. Nor
is this repugnant to the assertion of the apostle, that “it is appointed
unto men once to die.”(1333) For although they who shall survive in this
mortal life till the last judgment, shall not die in a natural manner and
order, yet that change, which they shall experience, since it will
resemble death, may without impropriety be designated by that appellation.
It is certain indeed that “all shall not sleep, but all shall be
changed.”(1334) What is that? In one moment their mortal life will be
extinguished and absorbed, and will be transformed into a nature entirely
new. This extinction of the flesh no man can deny to be death.
Nevertheless it remains a truth, that the living and the dead will be
summoned to judgment; for “the dead in Christ shall rise first: then they
which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air.”(1335) And it is very probable that
this article was taken from the sermon of Peter,(1336) and from the solemn
charge of Paul to Timothy.(1337)

XVIII. It is a source of peculiar consolation to hear that he will preside
at the judgment, who has already destined us to participate with himself
the honour of sitting in judgment with him, so far will he be from
ascending the tribunal to condemn us. For how could a most merciful prince
destroy his own people? how could a head scatter his own members? how
could an advocate condemn his own clients? For if the apostle ventures to
exclaim, that no one can condemn us while Christ intercedes for us,(1338)
it is much more certain that Christ himself, our intercessor, will not
condemn those whose cause he has undertaken, and whom he has engaged to
support. Indeed, it is no inconsiderable security, that we shall stand
before no other tribunal than that of our Redeemer, from whom we are to
expect salvation; and that he, who by the gospel now promises eternal
life, will at the judgment ratify and perform the promise which he has
given. The design of the Father in honouring the Son by “committing all
judgment to him,”(1339) was, that he might relieve the consciences of his
people from all fear concerning the judgment. Thus far I have followed the
order of the Apostles’ Creed; because, while it comprises, in a few words,
the principal points of redemption, it may serve to give us a distinct and
separate view of those particulars respecting Christ which merit our
attention. I style it the Apostles’ Creed, but am not at all solicitous to
know who was the composer of it. The ancient writers agree in ascribing it
to the apostles, either from a belief that it was written and published by
their common concurrence, or from an opinion that this compendium, being
faithfully collected from the doctrine delivered by them, was worthy of
being sanctioned by such a title. And whoever was the author of it, I have
no doubt that it has been publicly and universally received as a
confession of faith from the first origin of the Church, and even from the
days of the apostles. Nor is it probable that it was composed by any
private individual, since from time immemorial it has evidently been
esteemed as of sacred authority by all the pious. But what we ought
principally to regard, is beyond all controversy—that it comprehends a
complete account of our faith in a concise and distinct order, and that
every thing it contains is confirmed by decisive testimonies of Scripture.
This being ascertained, it is of no use anxiously to inquire, or to
contend with any one, respecting its author, unless it be not sufficient
for any one to have the unerring truth of the Holy Spirit, without knowing
either by whose mouth it was uttered, or by whose hand it was written.

XIX. Since we see that the whole of our salvation, and all the branches of
it, are comprehended in Christ, we must be cautious not to alienate from
him the least possible portion of it. If we seek salvation, we are taught
by the name of JESUS, that it is in him; if we seek any other gifts of the
Spirit, they will be found in his unction; strength, in his dominion;
purity, in his conception; indulgence discovers itself in his nativity, by
which he was made to resemble us in all things, that he might learn to
condole with us; if we seek redemption, it will be found in his passion;
absolution, in his condemnation; remission of the curse, in his cross;
satisfaction, in his sacrifice; purification, in his blood;
reconciliation, in his descent into hell; mortification of the flesh, in
his sepulchre; newness of life and immortality, in his resurrection; the
inheritance of the celestial kingdom, in his entrance into heaven;
protection, security, abundance, and enjoyment of all blessings, in his
kingdom; a fearless expectation of the judgment, in the judicial authority
committed to him. Finally, blessings of every kind are deposited in him;
let us draw from his treasury, and from no other source, till our desires
are satisfied. For they who, not content with him alone, are carried
hither and thither into a variety of hopes, although they fix their eyes
principally on him, nevertheless deviate from the right way in the
diversion of any part of their attention to another quarter. This
distrust, however, cannot intrude, where the plenitude of his blessings
has once been truly known.




