Chapter VIII. Bearing The Cross, Which Is A Branch Of Self‐Denial.


But it becomes a pious mind to rise still higher, even to that to which
Christ calls his disciples; that every one should “take up his
cross.”(1841) For all whom the Lord has chosen and honoured with admission
into the society of his saints, ought to prepare themselves for a life,
hard, laborious, unquiet, and replete with numerous and various
calamities. It is the will of their heavenly Father to exercise them in
this manner, that he may have a certain proof of those that belong to him.
Having begun with Christ his first begotten Son, he pursues this method
towards all his children. For though Christ was above all others the
beloved Son, in whom the Father was always well pleased,(1842) yet we see
how little indulgence and tenderness he experienced; so that it may be
truly said, not only that he was perpetually burdened with a cross during
his residence on earth, but that his whole life was nothing but a kind of
perpetual cross. The apostle assigns the reason, that it was necessary for
him to “learn obedience by the things which he suffered.”(1843) Why, then,
should we exempt ourselves from that condition, to which it behoved Christ
our head to be subject; especially since his submission was on our
account, that he might exhibit to us an example of patience in his own
person? Wherefore the apostle teaches, that it is the destination of all
the children of God “to be conformed to him.”(1844) It is also a source of
signal consolation to us, in unpleasant and severe circumstances, which
are esteemed adversities and calamities, that we partake of the sufferings
of Christ; that as he from a labyrinth of all evils entered into the glory
of heaven, so we are conducted forward through various tribulations to the
same glory;(1845) for Paul teaches us, that when we “know the fellowship
of his sufferings,” we also apprehend “the power of his resurrection;”
that while we are conformed to his death, we are thus prepared to partake
of his glorious resurrection.(1846) How much is this adapted to alleviate
all the bitterness of the cross, that the more we are afflicted by
adversities, our fellowship with Christ is so much the more certainly
confirmed! By this communion the sufferings themselves not only become
blessings to us, but afford considerable assistance towards promoting our
salvation.

II. Besides, our Lord was under no necessity of bearing the cross, except
to testify and prove his obedience to his Father; but there are many
reasons which render it necessary for us to live under a continual cross.
First, as we are naturally too prone to attribute every thing to our
flesh, unless we have, as it were, ocular demonstration of our imbecility,
we easily form an extravagant estimate of our strength, presuming that
whatever may happen, it will remain undaunted and invincible amidst all
difficulties. This inflates us with a foolish, vain, carnal confidence;
relying on which, we become contumacious and proud, in opposition to God
himself, just as though our own powers were sufficient for us without his
grace. This arrogance he cannot better repress, than by proving to us from
experience, not only our great imbecility, but also our extreme frailty.
Therefore he afflicts us with ignominy, or poverty, or loss of relatives,
or disease, or other calamities; to the bearing of which being in
ourselves unequal, we ere long sink under them. Thus being humbled, we
learn to invoke his strength, which alone causes us to stand erect under a
load of afflictions. Moreover, the greatest saints, though sensible that
they stand by the grace of God, not by their own strength, are
nevertheless more secure than they ought to be of their fortitude and
constancy, unless he leads them by the discipline of the cross into a
deeper knowledge of themselves. This presumption insinuated itself even
into David: “In my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved; Lord, by thy
favour thou hast made my mountain to stand strong. Thou didst hide thy
face, and I was troubled.”(1847) For he confesses that his senses were so
stupefied and benumbed by prosperity, that disregarding the grace of God,
on which he ought to have depended, he relied on himself, so as to promise
himself a permanent standing. If this happened to so great a prophet, who
of us should not be fearful and cautious? Though in prosperity, therefore,
they have flattered themselves with the notion of superior constancy and
patience, yet when humbled by adversity, they learn that this was mere
hypocrisy. Admonished by such evidences of their maladies, believers
advance in humility, and, divested of corrupt confidence in the flesh,
betake themselves to the grace of God; and when they have applied to it,
they experience the presence of the Divine strength, in which they find
abundant protection.

III. This is what Paul teaches, that “tribulation worketh patience, and
patience experience.”(1848) For the promise of God to believers, that he
will assist them in tribulations, they experience to be true, when they
patiently stand supported by his power, which they certainly could not do
by their own strength. Patience, therefore, affords a proof to the saints,
that God will really give the assistance he has promised in every time of
need. This also confirms their hope; for it would be too much ingratitude
not to rely on the truth of God for the future, which they have hitherto
experienced to be constant and certain. We see now what a series of
benefits we derive from the cross. For, subverting the opinion which we
have falsely preconceived of our own strength, and detecting our
hypocrisy, with which we are enamoured, it expels pernicious and carnal
confidence; when we are thus humbled, it teaches us to rely upon God
alone, which keeps us from sinking under afflictions. And victory is
followed by hope; inasmuch as the Lord, by the performance of his
promises, establishes his truth for the future. Though these were the only
reasons that could be given, they are sufficient to show the necessity of
the discipline of the cross. For it is no small advantage to be divested
of a blind self‐love, that we may be fully conscious of our imbecility; to
be affected with a sense of our imbecility, that we may learn to be
diffident of ourselves; to be diffident of ourselves, that we may transfer
our confidence to God; to depend with unreserved confidence on God, that,
relying on his assistance, we may persevere unconquered to the end; to
stand in his grace, that we may know his veracity in his promises; to
experience the certainty of his promises, that our hope may thereby be
strengthened.

IV. The Lord has also another end in afflicting his children; to try their
patience, and teach them obedience. Not, indeed, that they can perform any
other obedience to him than that which he has given them; but he is
pleased in this manner, by clear evidences, to exhibit and testify the
graces which he has conferred on his saints, that they may not be
concealed in inactivity within them. Therefore, in giving an open
manifestation of the strength and constancy in suffering, with which he
has furnished his servants, he is said to try their patience. Hence these
expressions, that “God did tempt Abraham,” and prove his piety, from the
circumstance of his not refusing to sacrifice his own and only son.(1849)
Wherefore Peter states, that our faith is tried by tribulations, just as
gold is tried by fire in a furnace.(1850) Now, who can say that it is not
necessary for this most excellent gift of patience, which a believer has
received from his God, to be brought forward into use, that it may be
ascertained and manifested? For otherwise men will never esteem it as it
deserves. But if God himself acts justly, when, to prevent the virtues
which he has conferred on believers from being concealed in obscurity and
remaining useless and perishing, he furnishes an occasion for exciting
them,—there is the best of reasons for the afflictions of the saints,
without which they would have no patience. By the cross they are also, I
say, instructed to obedience; because they are thus taught to live, not
according to their own inclination, but according to the will of God. If
every thing succeeded with them according to their wishes, they would not
know what it is to follow God. But Seneca mentions that this was an
ancient proverb, when they would exhort any one to bear adversity with
patience, “Follow God.” This implied that man submitted to the yoke of
God, only when he resigned himself to his corrections. Now, if it is most
reasonable that we should prove ourselves in all things obedient to our
heavenly Father, we certainly ought not to deny him the use of every
method to accustom us to practise this obedience.

V. Yet we do not perceive how necessary this obedience is to us, unless we
at the same time reflect on the great wantonness of our flesh to shake off
the Divine yoke, as soon as we have been treated with a little tenderness
and indulgence. The case is exactly the same as with refractory horses,
which, after having been pampered for some days in idleness, grow fierce
and untamable, and regard not the rider, to whose management they
previously submitted. And we are perpetual examples of what God complains
of in the people of Israel; when we are “waxen fat,” and are “covered with
fatness,”(1851) we kick against him who has cherished and supported us.
The beneficence of God ought to have allured us to the consideration and
love of his goodness; but since such is our ingratitude, that we are
rather constantly corrupted by his indulgence, it is highly necessary for
us to be restrained by some discipline from breaking out into such
petulance. Therefore, that we may not be made haughty by an excessive
abundance of wealth, that we may not become proud on being distinguished
with honours, that we may not be rendered insolent by being inflated with
other advantages, mental, corporeal, or external, the Lord himself, as he
foresees will be expedient, by the remedy of the cross, opposes,
restrains, and subdues the haughtiness of our flesh; and that by various
methods, adapted to promote the benefit of each individual. For we are not
all equally afflicted with the same diseases, or all in need of an equally
severe method of cure. Hence we see different persons exercised with
different kinds of crosses. But whilst the heavenly Physician, consulting
the health of all his patients, practises a milder treatment towards some,
and cures others with rougher remedies, yet he leaves no one completely
exempted, because he knows we are all diseased, without the exception of a
single individual.

VI. Moreover it is necessary that our most merciful Father should not only
prevent our infirmity for the future, but also frequently correct our past
offences, to preserve us in a course of legitimate obedience to himself.
Wherefore in every affliction we ought immediately to recollect the course
of our past life. In reviewing it, we shall certainly find that we have
committed what was deserving of such chastisement. Nevertheless the
exhortation to patience must not be principally founded on a consciousness
of sin. For the Scripture furnishes a far better consideration, when it
informs us, that in adversity “we are chastened of the Lord, that we
should not be condemned with the world.”(1852) Therefore, even in the
bitterness of tribulations, it becomes us to acknowledge the clemency and
benignity of our Father towards us; since even then he ceases not to
promote our salvation. For he afflicts, not to ruin or destroy us, but
rather to deliver us from the condemnation of the world. This idea will
lead us to what the Scripture inculcates in another place: “My son,
despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither be weary of his
correction; for whom the Lord loveth he correcteth, even as a father the
son in whom he delighteth.”(1853) When we recognize the rod of a father,
is it not our duty rather to show ourselves obedient and docile children,
than contumaciously to imitate desperate men, who have been hardened in
their transgressions? God loses us, unless he recalls us after our
defections from him; so that the apostle correctly remarks, “If ye be
without chastisement, then are ye bastards, and not sons.”(1854) We are
extremely perverse, therefore, if we cannot bear with him, while he
declares his benevolence towards us, and his great concern for our
salvation. The Scripture points out this difference between believers and
unbelievers; the latter, as the slaves of an inveterate and incurable
iniquity, are only rendered more wicked and obstinate by correction; the
former, like ingenuous children, are led to a salutary repentance. You
have to choose now in which number you would prefer to stand. But having
treated of this subject elsewhere, I shall conclude, contenting myself
with having thus briefly touched on it here.

VII. But it is a source of peculiar consolation when we suffer persecution
“for righteousness’ sake.”(1855) For we ought then to reflect how greatly
we are honoured by God, when he thus distinguishes us with the peculiar
characteristic of his service. I call it persecution for righteousness’
sake, not only when we suffer in defence of the gospel, but also when we
are molested in the vindication of any just cause. Whether, therefore, in
asserting the truth of God, in opposition to the falsehoods of Satan, or
in undertaking the protection of good and innocent men against the
injuries of the wicked, it be necessary for us to incur the resentment and
hatred of the world, by which our lives, our fortunes, or our reputation,
may be endangered,—let it not be grievous or irksome to us thus far to
employ ourselves in the service of God; nor let us imagine ourselves to be
miserable in those respects in which he has with his own mouth pronounced
us blessed. It is true, that poverty, considered in itself, is misery; and
the same may be said of exile, contempt, imprisonment, ignominy; finally,
death is of all calamities the last and worst. But with the favour of our
God, they are all conducive to our happiness. Let us therefore be content
with the testimony of Christ, rather than with the false opinion of the
flesh. Thus we shall rejoice, like the apostles, whenever he shall “count
us worthy to suffer shame for his name.”(1856) For if, being innocent and
conscious of our own integrity, we are stripped of our property by the
villany of the wicked, we are reduced to poverty indeed among men, but we
thereby obtain an increase of true riches with God in heaven; if we are
banished from our country, we are more intimately received into the family
of God; if we meet with vexation and contempt, we are so much the more
firmly rooted in Christ; if we are stigmatized with reproach and ignominy,
we are so much the more exalted in the kingdom of God; if we are
massacred, it opens an entrance for us into a life of blessedness. We
ought to be ashamed of setting a lower estimation on things on which the
Lord has attached such a great value, than on the shadowy and evanescent
pleasures of the present life.

VIII. Since the Scripture, therefore, by these and similar instructions,
affords abundant consolation under all the ignominy and calamity which we
sustain in the defence of righteousness, we are chargeable with extreme
ingratitude if we do not receive them from the hand of the Lord with
cheerful resignation; especially since this is the species of affliction,
or the cross, most peculiar to believers, by which Christ will be
glorified in us, according to the declaration of Peter.(1857) And
contumelious treatment being to ingenuous minds more intolerable than a
hundred deaths, Paul expressly apprizes us, that not only persecutions,
but reproaches await us, “because we trust in the living God.”(1858) As in
another place he directs us by his example to go through “evil report and
good report.”(1859) Nor are we required to exercise such a cheerfulness as
to banish all sense of bitterness and sorrow; the saints could discover no
patience under the cross, unless they were tormented with sorrow and
harassed with grief. If there were no hardship in poverty, no agony in
diseases, no distress in ignominy, no horror in death,—what fortitude or
moderation would be displayed in regarding them with absolute
indifference? But since each of these, by its own essential bitterness,
naturally preys on all our hearts, herein the fortitude of a believer is
manifested, if, when he experiences such bitterness, how grievously soever
he may be distressed by it, yet by valiantly resisting, he at length
overcomes it; his patience displays itself, if, when he is sharply
provoked, he is nevertheless restrained by the fear of God from any
eruptions of intemperance: his cheerfulness is conspicuous, if, when he is
wounded by sadness and sorrow, he is satisfied with the spiritual
consolation of God.

IX. This conflict, which believers sustain against the natural emotions of
sorrow, while they cultivate patience and moderation, Paul has beautifully
described in the following words: “We are troubled on every side, yet not
distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not
forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed.”(1860) You see that patiently to
bear the cross does not consist in an absolute stupefaction and privation
of all sense of sorrow, according to the foolish description given by the
ancient Stoics of a magnanimous man, as one who, divested of the feelings
of human nature, is alike unaffected by adverse and prosperous events, by
sorrowful and joyful ones. And what advantage have they derived from this
sublime wisdom? They have depicted an image of patience, such as never has
been found, such as never can exist among men; but in their ardour for a
patience too perfect and precise, they have banished its influence from
human life. At present also among Christians there are modern Stoics, who
esteem it sinful not only to groan and weep, but even to discover sadness
and solicitude. These paradoxes generally proceed from idle men, who,
employing themselves more in speculation than in action, can produce
nothing but such paradoxical notions. But we have nothing to do with that
iron‐hearted philosophy, which our Master and Lord has condemned not only
in words, but even by his own example. For he mourned and wept both for
his own calamities and for those of others. Nor did he teach his disciples
a different conduct. “The world,” says he, “shall rejoice, but ye shall
weep and lament.”(1861) And that no man might pervert it into a crime, he
has formally pronounced a blessing on them that mourn;(1862) and no
wonder. For if all tears be reprobated, what judgment shall we form
concerning the Lord himself, from whose body distilled tears of
blood?(1863) If every terror be stigmatized with the charge of unbelief,
what character shall we attribute to that horror and consternation with
which we read that he was so violently depressed? If all sorrow be
displeasing, how can we be pleased with his confessing that his “soul” was
“sorrowful even unto death?”

X. I have thought proper to mention these things, in order to preserve
pious minds from despair; that they may not hastily renounce the study of
patience, because they cannot divest themselves of the natural affection
of sorrow. This must necessarily be the case with those who degrade
patience into insensibility, and a man of fortitude and constancy into a
senseless block. For the Scripture applauds the saints for their patience,
when they are afflicted with severe calamities, but not broken and
overcome by them; when they are bitterly distressed, but are filled at the
same time with spiritual joy; when they are oppressed with anxiety, but
are revived and exhilarated with Divine consolation. At the same time
there is that opposition in their hearts, that the feelings of nature
avoid and dread those things which they experience to be inimical to it;
but the affection of piety struggles even through these difficulties to
obey the Divine will. This opposition the Lord expressed, when he thus
addressed Peter: “When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and
walkedst whither thou wouldest; but when thou shalt be old, another shall
gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.”(1864) It is not
probable that Peter, when he was called to glorify God by his death, was
drawn to it with reluctance and resistance; in this case his martyrdom
would be entitled to little applause. But however he might submit with the
greatest alacrity of heart to the Divine appointment, yet, not having
divested himself of human nature, he was distracted by two contrary
inclinations. For when he contemplated the bloody death he was about to
undergo, stricken with a dread of it, he would gladly have escaped. On the
contrary, when he considered that he was called to it by the Divine will,
suppressing all fear, he unreluctantly and even cheerfully submitted to
it. It must be our study, therefore, if we would be the disciples of
Christ, that our minds may be imbued with so great a reverence for God,
and such an unreserved obedience to him, as may overcome all contrary
affections, and make them submit to his appointments. Thus, whatever kind
of affliction we endure, even in the greatest distresses of the mind, we
shall constantly retain our patience. For adversity itself will have its
stings, with which we shall be wounded. Thus, when afflicted with disease,
we shall groan and be disquieted, and pray for the restoration of health;
thus, when oppressed with poverty, we shall feel the stings of solicitude
and sorrow; thus we shall be affected with the grief of ignominy,
contempt, and injury; thus we shall shed the tears due to nature at the
funerals of our friends; but we shall always recur to this conclusion,
This affliction is appointed by the Lord, therefore let us submit to his
will. Even in the agonies of grief, amid groans and tears, there is a
necessity for the intervention of this reflection, in order to incline the
heart cheerfully to bear those things by which it is so affected.

XI. But as we have deduced the principal reason for bearing the cross from
a consideration of the Divine will, we must briefly point out the
difference between philosophical and Christian patience. For very few of
the philosophers have risen to such an eminence of reason, as to perceive
that we are exercised with afflictions by the Divine hand, and to conclude
that God ought to be obeyed in these occurrences; and even those who have
gone to this length, adduce no other reason, than because it is necessary.
What is this but saying, that we must submit to God, because it were in
vain to contend against him? For if we obey God only from necessity, if it
were possible to escape from him, our obedience would cease. But the
Scripture enjoins us to consider the Divine will in a very different point
of view; first, as consistent with justice and equity; secondly, as
directed to the accomplishment of our salvation. Christian exhortations to
patience, then, are such as these: Whether we are afflicted with poverty,
or exile, or imprisonment, or reproach, or disease, or loss of relatives,
or any other similar calamity, we must reflect that none of these things
happen without the appointment and providence of God; and, moreover, that
he does nothing but with the most systematic justice. Do not our
innumerable and daily transgressions deserve more severe and grievous
chastisements than those which his clemency inflicts on us? Is it not
highly reasonable that our flesh should be subdued, and as it were
accustomed to the yoke, lest it should break out, according to its
propensities, into lawless excesses? Are not the righteousness and truth
of God worthy of our labours on their account? But if the equity of God
evidently appears in our afflictions, we cannot without iniquity either
murmur or resist. We no longer hear that frigid maxim of the philosophers,
We must submit to necessity; but a lesson lively and full of efficacy, We
must obey, because it is unlawful to resist: we must patiently suffer,
because impatience is a rebellious opposition to the justice of God.
Because nothing is really amiable to us but what we know to be conducive
to our benefit and salvation, our most merciful Father affords us
consolation also in this respect, by declaring, that even in afflicting us
with the cross, he promotes our salvation. But if it be evident that
tribulations are salutary for us, why should we not endure them with
grateful and placid hearts? In patiently bearing them, therefore, we do
not submit to necessity, but acquiesce in our own benefit. The effect of
these considerations is, that in proportion as our minds are oppressed
under the cross with the natural sense of affliction, so greatly are they
dilated with spiritual joy. This is attended also by thanksgiving, which
cannot be without joy. But if praise and thanksgiving to the Lord can only
proceed from a cheerful and joyful heart,—and there is nothing which ought
to repress these emotions within us,—this shows how necessary it is that
the bitterness of the cross should be tempered with spiritual joy.




