Chapter V. Indulgences And Purgatory. The Supplements To Their Doctrine Of
Satisfactions.


This doctrine of _satisfaction_ has given rise to _indulgences_. For by
indulgences they pretend, that the deficiency of our abilities to make
satisfaction is supplied, and even proceed to the extravagance of defining
them to be the dispensation of the merits of Christ and of the martyrs,
which the Pope distributes in his bulls. Now, though such persons are
fitter subjects for a mad‐house than for arguments, so that it would be of
little use to engage in refuting errors so frivolous, which have been
shaken by many attacks, and begin of themselves to grow obsolete, and
totter towards a fall, yet, as a brief refutation will be useful to some
minds hitherto uninformed on the subject, I shall not altogether omit it.
And indeed the establishment and long continuance of indulgences, with the
unlimited influence retained by them amidst such outrageous and furious
licentiousness, may serve to convince us in what a deep night of errors
men were immersed for several ages. They saw, that they were themselves
objects of the public and undissembled ridicule of the Pope and the
dispensers of his bulls; that lucrative bargains were made concerning the
salvation of their souls; that the price of salvation was fixed at a
trifling sum of money, and nothing presented gratuitously; that under this
pretext, contributions were extorted from them, which were vilely consumed
on brothels, pimps, and revellings; that the greatest advocates of
indulgences were the greatest despisers of them; that this monster was
daily making longer strides in licentious power and luxury, and that there
was no end, that more trash was continually produced, and more money
continually extorted. Yet they received indulgences with the greatest
veneration, adored them and purchased them; and those who had more
discernment than others, yet considered them as pious frauds, by which
they might be deceived with some advantage. At length, since the world has
permitted itself to recover a little the exercise of reason, indulgences
become more and more discredited, till they altogether disappear.

II. But since many, who see the pollution, imposture, robbery, and
rapacity, with which the dispensers of indulgences have hitherto amused
themselves and cajoled us, do not perceive the fountain of all this
impiety,—it will be necessary to show, not only the nature of indulgences
as commonly used, but what they are in themselves when abstracted from
every adventitious blemish. The merits of Christ and of the holy apostles
and martyrs, they style “the treasury of the Church.” The principal
custody of this repository they pretend to have been delivered, as I have
already hinted, to the bishop of Rome, who has the dispensation of such
great benefits, so that he can both bestow them himself, and delegate the
power of bestowing them to others. Hence from the Pope are received
sometimes plenary indulgences, sometimes indulgences for a certain number
of years; from Cardinals, for a hundred days; from Bishops, for forty
days. But to describe them correctly, they are a profanation of the blood
of Christ and a delusion of Satan, by which they seduce Christians from
the grace of God and the life which is in Christ, and turn them aside from
the right way of salvation. For how could the blood of Christ be more
basely profaned, than when it is denied to be sufficient for the remission
of sins, for reconciliation and satisfaction, unless its deficiency be
supplied from some other quarter? “To him,” says Peter, “give all the
prophets witness, that through his name, whosoever believeth on him shall
receive remission of sins.”(1795) Indulgences dispense remission of sins
through Peter, and Paul, and the martyrs. “The blood of Jesus Christ,”
says John, “cleanseth us from all sin.”(1796) Indulgences make the blood
of the martyrs the ablution of sins. Paul says, that Christ, “who knew no
sin, was made sin for us;” that is, a satisfaction for sin, “that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him.”(1797) Indulgences place
satisfaction for sins in the blood of the martyrs. Paul declared to the
Corinthians, that Christ alone was crucified and died for them.(1798)
Indulgences pronounce that Paul and others died for us. In another place
he says, that Christ “hath purchased the Church with his own blood.”(1799)
Indulgences assign another price of this purchase, in the blood of the
martyrs. The apostle says, that “by one offering Christ hath perfected for
ever them that are sanctified.”(1800) Indulgences, on the contrary,
proclaim that sanctification, which were otherwise insufficient, receives
its perfection from the martyrs. John declares that all saints “have
washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb.”(1801) Indulgences teach us
to wash our robes in the blood of the saints.

III. Leo, bishop of Rome, excellently opposes these sacrilegious
pretensions in his epistle to the Bishops of Palestine. “Although the
death of many saints,” he says, “has been precious in the sight of the
Lord, yet the murder of no innocent person has been the propitiation of
the world. The righteous have received, not bestowed, crowns; and from the
fortitude of the faithful have arisen examples of patience, not gifts of
righteousness. For their deaths have been all singular, nor has any one by
his death discharged the debt of another; for it is the Lord Christ alone,
in whom all are crucified, dead, buried, and raised from the dead.” This
passage being worthy of remembrance, he repeats it in another place.
Surely nothing clearer can be desired, in confutation of this impious
doctrine of indulgences. And Augustine expresses himself with equal
propriety to the same purpose. He says, “Although we die, brethren for
brethren, yet the blood of no martyr is ever shed for the remission of
sins. Christ has done this for us; and in doing it has not given an
example in which we should imitate him, but conferred a favour for which
we should thank him.” Again, in another place: “As the Son of God alone
became the Son of man, to make us with himself sons of God, so he alone,
without any demerits, sustained the punishment for us, that we, without
any merits, might through him obtain undeserved grace.” Indeed, whilst
their whole doctrine is a compound of horrible sacrilege and blasphemies,
yet this is a blasphemy more monstrous than the rest. Let them acknowledge
whether these be not their opinions, that the martyrs have by their death
performed for God, and merited from him, more than was necessary for
themselves; that they had so great a redundance of merits, as to
superabound to others; that therefore, lest so great a blessing should be
superfluous, their blood is commingled with the blood of Christ, and that
of both these is formed the treasury of the Church for the remission and
expiation of sins; and that in this sense we ought to understand the
declaration of Paul, “I fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of
Christ in my flesh, for his body’s sake, which is the Church.”(1802) What
is this but leaving Christ a mere name, and in other respects making him
an inferior saint of the common order, scarcely distinguishable among the
multitude? He alone ought to have been preached, he alone exhibited, he
alone mentioned, he alone regarded, in all discourses on the procurement
of remission of sins, expiation, and sanctification. But let us hear their
grand argument: That the blood of the martyrs may not be shed in vain, let
it be applied to the common benefit of the Church. Indeed? Was it no
advantage to glorify God by their death? to subscribe to his truth with
their blood? to testify by their contempt of the present life, that they
sought a better one? by their constancy, to confirm the faith of the
Church, and vanquish the obstinacy of their enemies? But this is the fact:
they acknowledge no benefit, if Christ alone be the propitiator, if he
alone died for our sins, if he alone was offered for our redemption. Peter
and Paul, they say, might nevertheless have obtained the crown of victory,
if they had expired in their beds. But since they contended even to blood,
it would be incompatible with the justice of God to leave this _barren_ or
_unfruitful_. As if God knew not how to augment the glory of his servants
according to the extent of his gifts. But the Church in general receives
an advantage sufficiently great, when by their triumphs it is inflamed
with the same zeal for similar exertions and conflicts.

IV. But how maliciously they pervert that passage of Paul, where he says,
“that he fills up in his own flesh that which is behind of the afflictions
of Christ!”(1803) For he refers that deficiency and supplement, not to the
work of redemption, satisfaction, or expiation, but to those afflictions,
with which the members of Christ, even all the faithful, must necessarily
be exercised as long as they live in the present state. He says,
therefore, that this remains of the afflictions of Christ, that having
once suffered in himself, he daily suffers in his members. Christ honors
us so far as to consider our afflictions as his. When Paul adds that he
suffered “for the Church,” he means not for the redemption,
reconciliation, or atonement of the Church, but for its edification and
profit. As in another place he says, “I endure all things for the elect’s
sakes, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ
Jesus.”(1804) He writes to the Corinthians, that whatever tribulations he
endured, he was “afflicted for their consolation and salvation.”(1805) And
he immediately proceeds to explain himself, by adding, that he was made a
minister of the Church, not for its redemption, but according to the
dispensation which had been committed to him, to preach the gospel of
Christ.(1806) But if they require also another expositor, let them attend
to Augustine: “The sufferings of Christ,” says he, “are in Christ alone,
as in the head; in Christ and the Church, as in the whole body. Whence
Paul, one of the members, says, I fill up in my flesh that which is behind
of the afflictions of Christ. If you, therefore, whoever you are that read
this, are one of the members of Christ, all that you suffer from such as
are not members of Christ, was behind in the afflictions of Christ.” But
the tendency of the sufferings of the apostles, sustained on account of
the Church, is stated by him in another place: “Christ is my door to you;
because you are the sheep of Christ, purchased with his blood: acknowledge
your price, which is not given by me, but preached by me.” Then he adds,
“As he has laid down his life, so we ought also to lay down our lives for
the brethren, for the establishment of peace and the confirmation of
faith.” This is the language of Augustine. But let it not be imagined,
that Paul thought there was any deficiency in the sufferings of Christ,
with respect to all the plenitude of righteousness, salvation, and life;
or that any addition to them was intended by him, who so clearly and
magnificently proclaims, that the “abundance of grace by Christ” was
poured forth with such liberality, that it “much more abounded” beyond all
the aboundings of sin.(1807) It is not by the merit of their own life or
death, but by this grace alone, that all the saints have been saved, as
Peter expressly testifies;(1808) so that he would be guilty of an
injurious contempt of God and of his Christ, who should place the
worthiness of any saint in any thing else but the mere mercy of God. But
why do I dwell any longer on this subject, as though it were still
involved in obscurity? whereas the statement of such monstrous notions is
of itself a complete refutation of them.

V. Now, to pass from such abominations, who taught the Pope to enclose in
lead and parchment the grace of Jesus Christ, which the Lord designed to
be dispensed by the word of the gospel? Either the gospel of God must be
false, or their indulgences fallacious. For that Christ is offered to us
in the gospel, with all his plenitude of heavenly blessings, with all his
merits, with all his righteousness, wisdom, and grace, without any
exception, is testified by Paul, when he says, “God hath committed unto us
the word of reconciliation. Now, then, we are ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ’s stead, be ye
reconciled to God. For he hath made him, who knew no sin, to be sin for
us; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.”(1809) And
believers know the meaning of that “fellowship of Christ,”(1810) which,
according to the testimony of the same apostle, is offered to our
enjoyment in the gospel. Indulgences, on the contrary, produce a certain
allowance of grace from the Pope’s repository, fix it to lead and
parchment, and even to a particular place, and separate it from the word
of God. Now, if any one inquire the origin of this abuse, it seems to have
arisen from an ancient custom, that when more severe satisfactions were
imposed on penitents than could possibly be borne by all, they who felt
themselves oppressed beyond measure, petitioned the Church for some
relaxation of rigour. The remission granted to such persons was called
indulgence. But when they transferred satisfactions to God, and said that
they were compensations, by which men might redeem themselves from the
judgment of God, they also converted these indulgences into expiatory
remedies, to deliver us from deserved punishments. But the blasphemies
which we have mentioned have been fabricated with such consummate
impudence, that they have not even the least appearance of plausibility.

VI. Nor let them now trouble us any more about their purgatory, since it
is utterly demolished by this argument. For I cannot coincide with some,
who think it best to be silent on this point, and to omit the mention of
purgatory, from which, they say, many sharp contentions arise, but very
little edification results. Indeed, I should myself be of opinion that
such trifles are unworthy of notice, if they did not consider them as
matters of importance. But since purgatory has been erected with a
multitude of blasphemies, and is daily propped by new ones, and since it
excites many and grievous offences, it really must not pass without
notice. It might be possible for a time to conceal that it was a fiction
of curious and presumptuous temerity, unsupported by the word of God; that
it was accredited by I know not what revelation invented by the subtlety
of Satan; that for its confirmation some passages of Scripture were
absurdly perverted. The Lord, however, suffers not human presumption thus
violently to break into the hidden recesses of his judgment;(1811) and has
severely prohibited the neglect of his word and the inquiry after truth
among the dead; and does not permit his word to be thus irreverently
dishonoured. Nevertheless, admitting that all these things might for a
short time have been tolerated as matters of small importance, yet when
expiation of sins is sought any where but in the blood of Christ, when
satisfaction is transferred to any other, silence becomes dangerous in the
extreme. Therefore we should exclaim with all our might, that purgatory is
a pernicious fiction of Satan, that it makes void the cross of Christ,
that it intolerably insults the Divine mercy, and weakens and overturns
our faith. For what is their purgatory, but a satisfaction for sins paid
after death by the souls of the deceased? Thus the notion of satisfaction
being overthrown, purgatory itself is immediately subverted from its very
foundations. But if it has been fully evinced, that the blood of Christ is
the only satisfaction, expiation, and purgation for the sins of the
faithful, what is the necessary inference, but that purgatory is nothing
but a horrible blasphemy against Christ? I pass by the sacrilegious
pretences with which it is daily defended, the offences which it produces
in religion, and the other innumerable evils which we perceive to have
proceeded from such a source of impiety.

VII. It is worth while, however, to wrest out of their hands those
passages of Scripture, which they have falsely and corruptly pressed into
their service. The assertion of the Lord, that the sin against the Holy
Ghost “shall not be forgiven, neither in this world, neither in the world
to come,”(1812) implies, they say, that there is a forgiveness of some
sins in the world to come. But who does not see, that the Lord there
speaks of the guilt of sin? And if this be the case, what has it to do
with their purgatory, for there they suppose punishment to be inflicted
for sins, the guilt of which they do not deny to have been forgiven in the
present life? But to prevent all further cavils, they shall have a plainer
answer. When the Lord intended to cut off from such flagitious iniquity
all hope of pardon, he thought it not sufficient to say that it should
never be forgiven; but for the sake of further amplification he adopted a
distinction, comprehending both the judgment which the conscience of every
individual feels in this life, and that final judgment which will be
publicly held at the resurrection; as though he had said, “Beware of
malicious rebellion, as of immediate perdition; for he who shall have
purposely endeavoured to extinguish the offered light of the Spirit, shall
never obtain pardon, neither in this life, which is allotted to sinners
for their conversion, nor in the last day, when the lambs shall be
separated from the goats by the angels of God, and the kingdom of heaven
shall be purged from every offence.” They next adduce this parable from
Matthew: “Agree with thine adversary; lest at any time the adversary
deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and
thou be cast into prison. Thou shalt by no means come out thence, till
thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.”(1813) If in this place the judge
signify God, the adversary the devil, the officer an angel, the prison
purgatory, I will readily submit to them. But if it be evident to every
one, that Christ there intended to show to how many dangers and calamities
persons exposed themselves, who prefer obstinately exerting the rigour of
the law, to acting upon the principles of equity and kindness, in order
the more earnestly to exhort his disciples to an equitable concord, pray
where will purgatory be found?

VIII. They derive an argument from the language of Paul, where he has
affirmed, “that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth.”(1814) For they
assume it as granted, that “things (or persons) under the earth” cannot be
understood of those who are consigned to eternal damnation. It follows,
therefore, that they must be the souls suffering in purgatory. Their
reasoning would not be very bad, if, by genuflection, the apostle designed
truly pious worship; but since he simply teaches, that dominion is
committed to Christ, by which all creatures must be subjugated, why may we
not understand this phrase of the devils, who will indeed stand at the
tribunal of the Lord, and acknowledge him as their Judge with fear and
trembling? As Paul himself elsewhere explains the same prophecy: “We shall
all stand,” says he, “before the judgment seat of Christ. For it is
written, As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me,” &c.(1815)
But they reply, we cannot give the same kind of interpretation to this
passage in the Revelation: “Every creature which is in heaven, and on the
earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are
in them, heard I saying, Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be
unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and
ever.”(1816) This I readily concede; but what creatures do they suppose to
be here enumerated? for it is very certain, that the expressions
comprehend creatures both irrational and inanimate. It is a mere
declaration that all the parts of the world, from the summit of the
heavens to the centre of the earth, celebrate, in their respective ways,
the glory of the Creator. What they produce from the history of the
Maccabees, I shall not honour with an answer, that I may not be supposed
to place that work in the catalogue of sacred books. But Augustine, they
say, received it as canonical. I inquire, first, With what degree of
credit did he receive it? He says, “The history of the Maccabees is not
esteemed by the Jews as the law, and the prophets, and the Psalms, to
which the Lord gives a testimony, as being witnesses concerning him,
saying, ‘All things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of
Moses, and in the prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning me.’(1817) But
it has been received by the Church, and not altogether unprofitably, if it
be read or heard with sobriety,” &c. Jerome, without any scruple,
inculcates, that its authority is of no force in the support of doctrines.
And from that old treatise on the Exposition of the Creed, which is
ascribed to Cyprian, it clearly appears that it was not admitted in the
ancient Church. But why am I now contending to no purpose? as though the
author himself did not sufficiently show what deference is due to him,
when, at the conclusion, he begs pardon if he should have spoken any thing
improperly. Certainly he who confesses that his writings need pardon,
proclaims them not to be the oracles of the Holy Spirit. Besides, the
piety of Judas Maccabeus is commended on no other ground, but because he
had a firm hope of the final resurrection, when he sent to Jerusalem an
oblation for the dead. Nor does the historian represent this oblation as
intended to be a price of redemption, but that those in whose names it was
offered might be partakers of eternal life with the rest of the faithful
who had died in defence of their country and religion. This action was
accompanied, indeed, by superstition and preposterous zeal; but they are
more than infatuated who apply to us a sacrifice offered under the law;
since we know, that all such ancient usages ceased at the advent of
Christ.

IX. But they find in Paul an invincible argument, which cannot be so
easily answered. “If any man,” says he, “build upon this foundation gold,
silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble, every man’s work shall be
made manifest; for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed
by fire; and the fire shall try every man’s work, of what sort it is. If
any man’s work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss; but he himself shall
be saved; yet so as by fire.”(1818) What can this be, they ask, but
purgatorial fire, by which the pollution of sins is cleansed, that we may
enter pure into the kingdom of God? But most of the fathers were of a
different opinion, understanding the word “fire” to mean tribulation, or
the cross, by which the Lord tries his children, to purify them from all
carnal pollution; and this is much more probable than the notion of
purgatory. I cannot, however, coincide with them; for I think I have
discovered a far more certain and lucid interpretation of this passage.
But before I state it, I could wish them to answer this question—whether
they suppose it was necessary for the apostles and all the saints to pass
through this purgatorial fire. I know they will answer in the negative;
for it were too absurd, that purification should be necessary to those
whose redundant merits they vainly imagine to superabound to all the
members of the Church. But the apostle affirms this; for he says, not that
the work of some, but that the work of all, shall be proved. Nor is this
my own argument, but Augustine’s, who thus opposes the interpretation now
adopted by our adversaries. And, what would be still more absurd, he says,
not that they shall pass through the fire on account of any works, but
that if they have edified the Church with perfect fidelity, they shall
receive a reward, when their work shall have been tried by fire. In the
first place, we see that the apostle uses a metaphor, when he calls
doctrines of human invention “wood, hay, stubble.” The reason of the
metaphor also is evident; that as wood, immediately on being placed in
contact with fire, consumes and wastes away, so neither will those
doctrines be able to abide the test of examination. Now, it is well known
that such an examination proceeds from the Spirit of God. Therefore, to
pursue the thread of the metaphor, and to adapt the parts by a proper
relation to each other, he gives the Holy Spirit’s examination the
appellation of _fire_. For as gold and silver afford a more certain proof
of their goodness and purity in proportion to their proximity to the fire,
so Divine truth receives the stronger confirmation of its authority, in
proportion to the strictness of spiritual examination by which it is
investigated. As wood, hay, and stubble, brought into contact with fire,
are speedily consumed, so the inventions of men, unsupported by the word
of God, cannot bear the examination of the Holy Spirit, but must
immediately fall to the ground. Finally, if false doctrines are compared
to wood, hay, and stubble, because, like wood, hay, and stubble, they are
consumed by fire and entirely destroyed, and if they are overcome only by
the Spirit of the Lord, it follows that the Spirit is that fire by which
they will be proved. This trial Paul calls _the day_, or _the day of the
Lord_, according to the common phraseology of Scripture. For that is
called the day of the Lord, whenever he manifests his presence to men.
Now, we enjoy most of the light of his countenance when we are favoured
with the radiance of his truth. It has been evinced that Paul means no
other fire than the examination of the Holy Spirit. But how are they saved
by the fire, who suffer the loss of their work? This it will not be
difficult to comprehend, if we consider of what class of men he is
speaking. For he characterizes them as builders of the Church, who retain
their legitimate foundation, but raise the superstructure of unequal
materials: they are such as do not deviate from the principal and
essential articles of the faith, but err in inferior and less important
ones, mixing their own inventions with the word of God. Such, I say, must
suffer the loss of their work, by their inventions being destroyed; but
they are themselves saved, yet so as by fire; that is, not because their
ignorance and error can be approved by the Lord, but because they are
purified from them by the grace and power of the Holy Spirit. Wherefore,
whoever have corrupted the pure gold of the Divine word with this filth of
purgatory, must necessarily suffer the loss of their work.

X. Our opponents will reply, that it has been a very ancient opinion in
the Church. Paul removes this objection when he comprehends even his own
age in this sentence, where he denounces, that all must suffer the loss of
their work, who, in the structure of the Church, should place any thing
not corresponding to the foundation. When our adversaries, therefore,
object to me, that to offer prayers for the dead has been the practice of
more than thirteen hundred years, I inquire of them, on the contrary, by
what word of God, by what revelation, by what example, it is sanctioned.
For they are not only destitute of any testimonies of Scripture in favour
of it, but none of the examples of the saints there recorded exhibit any
thing like it. Respecting mourning and funeral offices, it contains many
and sometimes long accounts; but of prayers for persons deceased, you
cannot discover the smallest hint. But the greater the importance of the
subject, so much the rather ought it to have been particularly mentioned.
Even the fathers themselves, who offered up prayers for the dead, saw that
they had neither a Divine command, nor a legitimate example, to justify
the practice. Why, then, did they presume to adopt it? In this, I say,
they discovered themselves to be but men; and therefore I contend, that
what they did ought not to be enforced for the imitation of others. For
since believers ought not to undertake any thing without an assurance of
conscience, according to the direction of Paul,(1819) this assurance is
chiefly requisite in prayer. Yet it will be urged, It is probable that
they were impelled to it by some reason. I reply, Perhaps they sought some
consolation to alleviate their sorrow, and it might appear inhuman not to
give some testimony of their love towards the dead in the presence of God.
The propensity of the human mind to this affection, all men know by
experience. The custom, also, when received, was like a flame, kindling
ardour in the minds of multitudes. We know that funeral rites have been
performed to the dead among all nations, and in every age, and that
lustrations have been annually made for their departed spirits. For though
Satan has deluded foolish mortals with these fallacies, yet he has
borrowed the occasion of the deception from a true principle—that death is
not an annihilation, but a transition from this life into another. Nor can
it be doubted, but that even superstition itself convicts the heathen
before the tribunal of God, for neglecting all the concerns of a future
life, which they professed to believe. Now, Christians, because they would
not be inferior to the heathen, were ashamed to perform no services for
the dead, as though they had wholly ceased to exist. Hence that
inconsiderate officiousness; because if they were negligent in attending
to funerals, feasts, and oblations, they were afraid they should expose
themselves to great disgrace. What first proceeded from a perverse
emulation, has been so repeatedly augmented by novel additions, that the
principal sanctity of Popery consists in relieving the distresses of the
dead. But the Scripture administers another consolation, far better and
more substantial, when it declares that “Blessed are the dead which die in
the Lord;” and adds as a reason, “that they may rest from their
labours.”(1820) But we ought not to indulge our own affection so far as to
introduce a corrupt method of praying into the Church. Certainly, he that
has but a moderate share of penetration, will easily discover all that we
find on this subject in the fathers to have been in compliance with
general practice and vulgar ignorance. I confess, they were also involved
in the error themselves, from an inconsiderate credulity which frequently
deprives the human mind of its judgment. But in the mean time, the mere
reading of them demonstrates with what hesitation they recommend prayers
for the dead. Augustine, in his Book of Confessions, relates that Monica,
his mother, had vehemently entreated to be remembered in the celebration
of the mysteries at the altar. This was the wish of an old woman, which
her son did not examine by the standard of Scripture; but from his natural
affection for her, wished it to gain the approbation of others. But the
treatise composed by him, on Care for the Dead, contains so many
hesitations, that it ought by its coolness to extinguish the heat of
imprudent zeal. If any one desires to be an intercessor for the dead, this
treatise, with its frigid probabilities, will certainly remove all the
solicitude he may have previously experienced. For this is its only
support, that since it has been customary to pray for the dead, it is a
duty not to be despised. But though I concede, that the ancient writers of
the Church esteemed it a pious act to pray for the dead, yet we must
always remember a rule which can never deceive—that it is not right for us
in our prayers to introduce any thing of our own, but that our desires
must be submitted to the word of God; because he chooses to prescribe what
he designs we should ask. Now, since there is not a syllable, in all the
law or the gospel, which allows us to pray for the dead, it is a profane
abuse of the name of God, to attempt more than he enjoins. But that our
adversaries may not glory, as though the ancient Church were associated
with them in their error, I assert that there is a considerable difference
between them. The ancients preserved the memory of the dead, that they
might not seem to have cast off all concern for them; but they at the same
time confessed their uncertainty concerning their state. Respecting
purgatory they asserted nothing, but considered it as quite uncertain. The
moderns expect their reveries concerning purgatory to be admitted as
unquestionable articles of faith. The fathers, in the communion of the
sacred supper, merely recommended their deceased friends to the mercy of
God. The Papists are incessantly urging a concern for the dead; and by
their importunate declamations cause it to be preferred to all the duties
of charity. Besides, it would not be difficult for us to produce some
testimonies from the fathers which manifestly overthrow all those prayers
for the dead which were then used. Such is this of Augustine; when he
teaches that all men expect the resurrection of the body and eternal
glory, and that every individual enters on the fruition of that rest which
follows after death, if he is worthy of it when he dies. Therefore he
declares that all the pious, as well as the prophets, apostles, and
martyrs, enjoy a blessed repose immediately after death. If such be their
condition, what advantage will our prayers confer on them? I pass over
those grosser superstitions with which they have fascinated the minds of
the simple; which nevertheless are innumerable, and for the most part so
monstrous, that they cannot be varnished over by any honest pretext. I
omit, also, that most disgraceful traffic which they licentiously carried
on while the world was in such a state of stupidity. For I should never
arrive at a conclusion, and I have already furnished the pious reader with
sufficient to establish his conscience.




