Chapter II. Faith Defined, And Its Properties Described.


All these things will be easily understood when we have given a clearer
definition of faith, that the reader may perceive its nature and
importance. But it will be proper to recall to his remembrance, what has
been already stated; that God has given us his law as the rule of our
conduct, and that, if we are guilty of even the smallest breach of it, we
are exposed to the dreadful punishment of eternal death, which he
denounces. Again, that since it is not only difficult, but entirely above
our strength, and beyond the utmost extent of our ability, to fulfil the
law as he requires,—if we only view ourselves, and consider what we have
demerited, we have not the least hope left, but, as persons rejected by
God, are on the verge of eternal perdition. In the third place, it has
been explained, that there is but one method of deliverance, by which we
can be extricated from such a direful calamity; that is, the appearance of
Christ the Redeemer, by whose means our heavenly Father, commiserating us
in his infinite goodness and mercy, has been pleased to relieve us, if we
embrace this mercy with a sincere faith, and rely on it with a constant
hope. But we must now examine the nature of this faith, by which all who
are the adopted sons of God enter on the possession of the heavenly
kingdom; since it is certain, that not every opinion, nor even every
persuasion, is equal to the accomplishment of so great a work. And we
ought to be the more cautious and diligent in our meditations and
inquiries on the genuine property of faith, in proportion to the
pernicious tendency of the mistakes of multitudes in the present age on
this subject. For a great part of the world, when they hear the word
_faith_, conceive it to be nothing more than a common assent to the
evangelical history. And even the disputes of the schools concerning
faith, by simply styling God the object of it, (as I have elsewhere
observed,) rather mislead miserable souls by a vain speculation, than
direct them to the proper mark. For, since God “dwelleth in the light,
which no man can approach unto,”(1426) there is a necessity for the
interposition of Christ, as the medium of access to him. Whence he calls
himself “the light of the world,”(1427) and in another place, “the way,
and the truth, and the life;” because “no man cometh unto the Father,” who
is the fountain of life, “but by him;”(1428) because he alone knows the
Father, and reveals him to believers.(1429)

For this reason Paul asserts, that he esteemed nothing worthy of being
known but Jesus Christ;(1430) and in the twentieth chapter of the Acts
declares, that he had preached faith in Christ; and in another place, he
introduces Christ speaking in the following manner: “I send thee unto the
Gentiles, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among
them which are sanctified by faith, that is in me.”(1431) This apostle
tells us, that the glory of God is visible to us in his person, or (which
conveys the same idea) that “the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God” shines “in his face.”(1432) It is true, that faith relates to the one
God; but there must also be added a knowledge of Jesus Christ, whom he has
sent.(1433) For God himself would be altogether concealed from us, if we
were not illuminated by the brightness of Christ. For this purpose the
Father has deposited all his treasures with his only begotten Son, that he
might reveal himself in him; and that, by such a communication of
blessings, he might express a true image of his glory. For as it has been
observed, that we require to be drawn by the Spirit, that we may be
excited to seek Christ, so we should also be apprized, that the invisible
Father is to be sought only in this image. On which subject, Augustine,
treating of the object of faith, beautifully remarks, “that we ought to
know whither we should go, and in what way;” and immediately after he
concludes, “that he who unites Deity and humanity in one person, is the
way most secure from all errors; for that it is God towards whom we tend,
and man by whom we go; but that both together can be found only in
Christ.” Nor does Paul, when he speaks of faith in God, intend to subvert
what he so frequently inculcates concerning faith, whose stability is
wholly in Christ. And Peter most suitably connects them together, when he
says, that “by him we believe in God.”(1434)

II. This evil, then, as well as innumerable others, must be imputed to the
schoolmen, who have, as it were, concealed Christ, by drawing a veil over
him; whereas, unless our views be immediately and steadily directed to
him, we shall always be wandering through labyrinths without end. They not
only, by their obscure definition, diminish, and almost annihilate, all
the importance of faith, but have fabricated the notion of implicit faith,
a term with which they have honoured the grossest ignorance, and most
perniciously deluded the miserable multitude. Indeed, to express the fact
more truly and plainly, this notion has not only buried the true faith in
oblivion, but has entirely destroyed it. Is this faith—to understand
nothing, but obediently to submit our understanding to the Church? Faith
consists not in ignorance, but in knowledge; and that not only of God, but
also of the Divine will. For we do not obtain salvation by our promptitude
to embrace as truth whatever the Church may have prescribed, or by our
transferring to her the province of inquiry and of knowledge. But when we
know God to be a propitious Father to us, through the reconciliation
effected by Christ, and that Christ is given to us for righteousness,
sanctification, and life,—by this knowledge, I say, not by renouncing our
understanding, we obtain an entrance into the kingdom of heaven. For, when
the apostle says, that “with the heart man believeth unto righteousness,
and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation,”(1435) he indicates,
that it is not sufficient for a man implicitly to credit what he neither
understands, nor even examines; but he requires an explicit knowledge of
the Divine goodness, in which our righteousness consists.

III. I do not deny (such is the ignorance with which we are enveloped)
that many things are very obscure to us at present, and will continue to
be so, till we shall have cast off the burden of the flesh, and arrived
nearer to the presence of God. On such subjects, nothing would be more
proper than a suspension of judgment, and a firm resolution to maintain
unity with the Church. But that ignorance combined with humility should,
under this pretext, be dignified with the appellation of Faith, is
extremely absurd. For faith consists in a knowledge of God and of
Christ,(1436) not in reverence for the Church. And we see what a labyrinth
they have fabricated by this notion of theirs, so that the ignorant and
inexperienced, without any discrimination, eagerly embrace as oracular
every thing obtruded upon them under the name of the Church; sometimes
even the most monstrous errors. This inconsiderate credulity, though it be
the certain precipice of ruin, is, nevertheless, excused by them on the
plea that it credits nothing definitively, but with this condition
annexed, if such be the faith of the Church. Thus they pretend that truth
is held in error, light in darkness, and true knowledge in ignorance. But,
not to occupy any more time in refuting them, we only admonish the reader
to compare their doctrine with ours; for the perspicuity of the truth will
of itself furnish a sufficient refutation. For the question with them is
not, whether faith be yet involved in many relics of ignorance, but they
positively assert, that persons are possessed of true faith, who are
charmed with their ignorance, and even indulge it, provided they assent to
the authority and judgment of the Church concerning things unknown; as if
the Scripture did not universally inculcate that knowledge is united with
faith.

IV. We grant, that during our pilgrimage in the world, our faith is
implicit, not only because many things are yet hidden from our view, but
because our knowledge of every thing is very imperfect, in consequence of
the clouds of error by which we are surrounded. For the greatest wisdom of
those who are most perfect, is to improve, and to press forward with
patient docility. Therefore Paul exhorts the faithful, if they differ from
each other on any subject, to wait for further revelation.(1437) And
experience teaches us, that till we are divested of the flesh, our
knowledge falls far short of what might be wished; in reading also, many
obscure passages daily occur, which convince us of our ignorance. With
this barrier God restrains us within the bounds of modesty, assigning to
every one a measure of faith, that even the most learned teacher may be
ready to learn. We may observe eminent examples of this implicit faith in
the disciples of Christ, before they were fully enlightened. We see with
what difficulty they imbibed the first rudiments; how they hesitated even
at the most minute particulars; what inconsiderable advances they made
even while hanging on the lips of their Master; and when they ran to the
grave at the intelligence of the women, his resurrection was like a dream
to them. The testimony already borne by Christ to their possession of
faith, forbids us to say that they were entirely destitute of it; indeed,
if they had not been persuaded that Christ would rise from the dead, they
would have felt no further concern about him. The women were not induced
by superstition to embalm with spices the body of a deceased man, of whose
life there was no hope; but though they credited his declarations, whose
veracity they well knew, yet the ignorance, which still occupied their
minds, involved their faith in darkness, so that they were almost lost in
astonishment. Whence also they are said at length to have believed, when
they saw the words of Christ verified by facts; not that their faith then
commenced, but the seed of faith, which had been latent, and as it were
dead in their hearts, then shot forth with additional vigour. They had
therefore a true but an implicit faith, because they received Christ with
reverence as their only teacher: being taught by him, they were persuaded
that he was the author of their salvation; and they believed that he came
from heaven, that through the grace of the Father he might assemble all
his disciples there. But we need not seek a more familiar proof of this
point, than that some portion of unbelief is always mixed with faith in
every Christian.

V. We may also style that an implicit faith, which in strict propriety is
nothing but a preparation for faith. The evangelists relate that many
believed, who, only being filled with admiration at the miracles of
Christ, proceeded no further than a persuasion that he was the promised
Messiah, although they had little or no knowledge of evangelical doctrine.
Such reverence, which induced them cheerfully to submit themselves to
Christ, is dignified with the title of faith, of which, however, it was
merely the commencement. Thus the nobleman, or courtier, who believed the
promise of Christ concerning the healing of his son, when he returned to
his house,(1438) according to the testimony of the evangelist, believed
again; that is, first he esteemed as an oracle what he had heard from the
lips of Christ; but afterwards he devoted himself to his authority to
receive his doctrine. It must be understood, however, that he was docile
and ready to learn; that the word _believe_, in the first place, denotes a
particular faith; but in the second place, it numbers him among the
disciples who had given their names to Christ. John gives us a similar
example in the Samaritans, who believed the report of the woman, so as to
run with eagerness to Christ; but who, after having heard him, said to the
woman, “Now we believe, not because of thy saying; for we have heard him
ourselves, and know, that this is indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the
world.”(1439) Hence it appears, that persons not yet initiated into the
first elements, but only inclined to obedience, are called believers; not,
indeed, with strict propriety, but because God, in his goodness,
distinguishes that pious disposition with such a great honour. But this
docility, connected with a desire of improvement, is very remote from that
gross ignorance which stupefies those who are content with such an
implicit faith as the Papists have invented. For if Paul severely condemns
those who are “ever learning, yet never come to the knowledge of the
truth,”(1440) how much greater ignominy do they deserve who make it their
study to know nothing!

VI. This, then, is the true knowledge of Christ—to receive him as he is
offered by the Father, that is, invested with his gospel; for, as he is
appointed to be the object of our faith, so we cannot advance in the right
way to him, without the guidance of the gospel. The gospel certainly opens
to us those treasures of grace, without which Christ would profit us
little. Thus Paul connects faith as an inseparable concomitant with
doctrine, where he says, “Ye have not so learned Christ; if so be ye have
been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus.”(1441) Yet I do not so far
restrict faith to the gospel, but that I admit Moses and the prophets to
have delivered what was sufficient for its establishment; but because the
gospel exhibits a fuller manifestation of Christ, it is justly styled by
Paul, “the words of faith and of good doctrine.”(1442) For the same
reason, in another place, he represents the law as abolished by the coming
of faith;(1443) comprehending under this term the new kind of teaching, by
which Christ, since his appearance as our Master, has given a brighter
display of the mercy of the Father, and a more explicit testimony
concerning our salvation. The more easy and convenient method for us will
be, to descend regularly from the genus to the species. In the first
place, we must be apprized, that faith has a perpetual relation to the
word, and can no more be separated from it, than the rays from the sun,
whence they proceed. Therefore God proclaims by Isaiah, “Hear, and your
souls shall live.”(1444) And that the word is the fountain of faith, is
evident from this language of John: “These are written, that ye might
believe.”(1445) The Psalmist also, intending to exhort the people to
faith, says, “To‐day, if ye will hear his voice;”(1446) and to hear,
generally means to believe. Lastly, it is not without reason that in
Isaiah, God distinguishes the children of the Church from strangers, by
this character, that they shall all be his disciples, and be taught by
him;(1447) for, if this were a benefit common to all, why should he
address himself to a few? Correspondent with this is the general use of
the words “believers,” and “disciples,” as synonymous, by the evangelists,
on all occasions, and by Luke in particular, very frequently in the Acts
of the Apostles; in the ninth chapter of which, he extends the latter
epithet even to a woman. Wherefore, if faith decline in the smallest
degree from this object, towards which it ought to be directed, it no
longer retains its own nature, but becomes an uncertain credulity, and an
erroneous excursion of the mind. The same Divine word is the foundation by
which faith is sustained and supported, from which it cannot be moved
without an immediate downfall. Take away the word, then, and there will be
no faith left. We are not here disputing whether the ministry of men be
necessary to disseminate the word of God, by which faith is produced,
which we shall discuss in another place; but we assert, that the word
itself, however it may be conveyed to us, is like a mirror, in which faith
may behold God. Whether, therefore, God in this instance use the agency of
men, or whether he operate solely by his own power, he always discovers
himself by his word to those whom he designs to draw to himself.(1448)
Whence Paul defines faith as an obedience rendered to the gospel, and
praises the service of faith.(1449) For the apprehension of faith is not
confined to our knowing that there is a God, but chiefly consists in our
understanding what is his disposition towards us. For it is not of so much
importance to us to know what he is in himself, as what he is willing to
be to us. We find, therefore, that faith is a knowledge of the will of God
respecting us, received from his word. And the foundation of this is a
previous persuasion of the Divine veracity; any doubt of which being
entertained in the mind, the authority of the word will be dubious and
weak, or rather it will be of no authority at all. Nor is it sufficient to
believe that the veracity of God is incapable of deception or falsehood,
unless you also admit, as beyond all doubt, that whatever proceeds from
him is sacred and inviolable truth.

VII. But as the human heart is not excited to faith by every word of God,
we must further inquire what part of the word it is, with which faith is
particularly concerned. God declared to Adam, “Thou shalt surely
die;”(1450) and to Cain, “The voice of thy brother’s blood crieth unto me
from the ground;”(1451) but these declarations are so far from being
adapted to the establishment of faith, that of themselves they can only
shake it. We do not deny that it is the office of faith to subscribe to
the truth of God, whatever be the time, the nature, or the manner of his
communications; but our present inquiry is only, what faith finds in the
Divine word, upon which to rest its dependence and confidence. When our
conscience beholds nothing but indignation and vengeance, how shall it not
tremble with fear? And if God be the object of its terror, how should it
not fly from him? But faith ought to seek God, not to fly from him. It
appears, then, that we have not yet a complete definition of faith; since
a knowledge of the Divine will indefinitely, ought not to be accounted
faith. But suppose, instead of will,—the declaration of which is often
productive of fear and sorrow,—we substitute benevolence or mercy. This
will certainly bring us nearer to the nature of faith. For we are allured
to seek God, after we have learned that salvation is laid up for us with
him; which is confirmed to us by his declaring it to be the object of his
care and affection. Therefore we need a promise of grace, to assure us
that he is our propitious Father; since we cannot approach to him without
it, and it is upon that alone that the human heart can securely depend.
For this reason, in the Psalms, mercy and truth are generally united, as
being closely connected; because it would be of no avail for us to know
the veracity of God, if he did not allure us to himself by his mercy; nor
should we embrace his mercy, if he did not offer it with his own mouth. “I
have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy
loving‐kindness and thy truth. Let thy loving‐kindness and thy truth
continually preserve me.”(1452) Again: “Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the
heavens; and thy faithfulness reacheth unto the clouds.”(1453) Again: “All
the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his
covenant.”(1454) Again: “His merciful kindness is great towards us; and
the truth of the Lord endureth for ever.”(1455) Again: “I will praise thy
name for thy loving‐kindness, and for thy truth.”(1456) I forbear to quote
what we read in the prophets to the same purport, that God is merciful and
faithful in his promises. For it will be temerity to conclude that God is
propitious to us, unless he testify concerning himself, and anticipate us
by his invitation, that his will respecting us may be neither ambiguous
nor obscure. But we have already seen, that Christ is the only pledge of
his love, without whom the tokens of his hatred and wrath are manifest
both above and below. Now, since the knowledge of the Divine goodness will
not be attended with much advantage, unless it lead us to rely upon it, we
must exclude that apprehension of it which is mixed with doubts, which is
not uniform and steady, but wavering and undecided. Now, the human mind,
blinded and darkened as it is, is very far from being able to penetrate
and attain to a knowledge of the Divine will; and the heart also,
fluctuating in perpetual hesitation, is far from continuing unshaken in
that persuasion. Therefore our mind must be illuminated, and our heart
established by some exterior power, that the word of God may obtain full
credit with us. Now, we shall have a complete definition of faith, if we
say, that it is a steady and certain knowledge of the Divine benevolence
towards us, which, being founded on the truth of the gratuitous promise in
Christ, is both revealed to our minds, and confirmed to our hearts, by the
Holy Spirit.

VIII. But before I proceed any further, it will be necessary to make some
preliminary observations, for the solution of difficulties, which
otherwise might prove obstacles in the way of the reader.

And first, we must refute the nugatory distinction, which prevails in the
schools, of formal and informal faith. For they imagine, that such as are
not impressed with any fear of God, or with any sense of piety, believe
all that is necessary to be known in order to salvation; as though the
Holy Spirit, in illuminating our hearts to faith, were not a witness to us
of our adoption. Yet, in opposition to the whole tenor of Scripture, they
presumptuously dignify such a persuasion, destitute of the fear of God,
with the name of faith. We need not contend with this definition any
further than by simply describing the nature of faith, as it is
represented in the Divine word. And this will clearly evince the ignorance
and insipidity of their clamour concerning it. I have treated it in part
already, and shall subjoin what remains in its proper place. At present, I
affirm, that a greater absurdity than this figment of theirs, cannot
possibly be imagined. They maintain faith to be a mere assent, with which
every despiser of God may receive as true whatever is contained in the
Scripture. But first it should be examined, whether every man acquires
faith for himself by his own power, or whether it is by faith that the
Holy Spirit becomes the witness of adoption. They betray puerile folly,
therefore, in inquiring whether faith, which is formed by the
superaddition of a quality, be the same, or whether it be a new and
different faith. It clearly appears, that while they have been trifling in
this manner, they never thought of the peculiar gift of the Spirit; for
the commencement of faith contains in it the reconciliation by which man
draws near to God. But, if they would duly consider that declaration of
Paul, “With the heart man believeth unto righteousness,”(1457) they would
cease their trifling about this superadded quality. If we had only this
one reason, it ought to be sufficient to terminate the controversy—that
the assent which we give to the Divine word, as I have partly suggested
before, and shall again more largely repeat, is from the heart rather than
the head, and from the affections rather than the understanding. For which
reason it is called “the obedience of faith,”(1458) to which the Lord
prefers no other obedience; because nothing is more precious to him than
his own truth; which, according to the testimony of John the
Baptist,(1459) believers, as it were, subscribe and seal. As this is by no
means a dubious point, we conclude at once, that it is an absurdity to
say, that faith is formed by the addition of a pious affection to an
assent of the mind; whereas, even this assent consists in a pious
affection, and is so described in the Scriptures. But another argument
offers itself, which is still plainer. Since faith accepts Christ, as he
is offered to us by the Father; and he is offered, not only for
righteousness, remission of sins, and peace, but also for sanctification
and as a fountain of living water; it is certain, that no man can ever
know him aright, unless he at the same time receive the sanctification of
the Spirit. Or, if any one would wish it to be more clearly expressed,
Faith consists in a knowledge of Christ. Christ cannot be known without
the sanctification of his Spirit. Consequently, faith is absolutely
inseparable from a pious affection.

IX. This passage of Paul, “Though I have all faith, so that I could remove
mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing,”(1460) is generally adduced
by them to support the notion of an informal faith unaccompanied with
charity; but they overlook the sense in which the apostle uses the word
“faith” in this place. For having, in the preceding chapter, treated of
the various gifts of the Spirit, among which he has enumerated “divers
kinds of tongues, the working of miracles and prophecy,”(1461) and having
exhorted the Corinthians to “covet earnestly the best gifts,” from which
the greatest benefit and advantage would accrue to the whole body of the
Church, he adds, “yet show I unto you a more excellent way;” implying,
that all such gifts, whatever be their intrinsic excellence, are yet to be
deemed worthless, unless they be subservient to charity; for that, being
given for the edification of the Church, if not employed for that purpose,
they lose their beauty and value. To prove this, he particularly specifies
them, repeating the same gifts, which he had before enumerated, but under
other names. He uses the word “faith” to denote what he had before called
powers, (δυναμεις, _potestates_, _virtutes_,) that is, a power of working
miracles. This, then, whether it be called power or faith, being a
particular gift of God, which any impious man may both possess and abuse,
as the gift of tongues, or prophecy, or other gifts, we need not wonder if
it be separated from charity. But the mistake of such persons arises
wholly from this—that though the word “faith” is used in many senses, not
observing this diversity of signification, they argue as if it had always
the same meaning. The passage which they adduce from James in support of
the same error, shall be discussed in another place. Now, although, for
the sake of instruction, when we design to show the nature of that
knowledge of God, which is possessed by the impious, we allow that there
are various kinds of faith, yet we acknowledge and preach only one faith
in the pious, according to the doctrine of the Scripture. Many men
certainly believe that there is a God; they admit the evangelical history
and the other parts of Scripture to be true; just as we form an opinion of
transactions which are narrated as having occurred in former times, or of
which we have ourselves been spectators. There are some who go further;
esteeming the word of God as an undoubted revelation from heaven, not
wholly disregarding its precepts, and being in some measure affected both
by its denunciations and by its promises. To such persons, indeed, faith
is attributed; but by a catachresis, a tropical or improper form of
expression; because they do not with open impiety resist, or reject, or
contemn the word of God, but rather exhibit some appearance of obedience
to it.

X. But this shadow or image of faith, as it is of no importance, so is
unworthy of the name of faith; its great distance from the substantial
truth of which, though we shall show more at large hereafter, there can be
no objection to its being briefly pointed out here. Simon Magus(1462) is
said to have believed, who, nevertheless, just after, betrays his
unbelief. When faith is attributed to him, we do not apprehend, with some,
that he merely pretended to it with his lips, while he had none in his
heart; but we rather think, that being overcome with the majesty of the
gospel, he did exercise a kind of faith, and perceived Christ to be the
author of life and salvation, so as freely to profess himself one of his
followers. Thus, in the Gospel of Luke, those persons are said to believe
for a time, in whom the seed of the word is prematurely choked before it
fructifies, and those in whom it takes no root, but soon dries up and
perishes. We doubt not but such persons, being attracted with some taste
of the word, receive it with avidity, and begin to perceive something of
its Divine power; so that by the fallacious counterfeit of faith, they
impose not only on the eyes of men, but even on their own minds. For they
persuade themselves, that the reverence which they show for the word of
God, is real piety; supposing that there is no impiety but a manifest and
acknowledged abuse or contempt of it. But, whatever be the nature of that
assent, it penetrates not to the heart, so as to fix its residence there;
and though it sometimes appears to have shot forth roots, yet there is no
life in them. The heart of man has so many recesses of vanity, and so many
retreats of falsehood, and is so enveloped with fraudulent hypocrisy, that
it frequently deceives even himself. But let them, who glory in such
phantoms of faith, know, that in this respect they are not at all superior
to devils. Persons of the former description, who hear and understand
without any emotion those things, the knowledge of which makes devils
tremble, are certainly far inferior to the fallen spirits; and the others
are equal to them in this respect—that the sentiments with which they are
impressed, finally terminate in terror and consternation.(1463)

XI. I know that it appears harsh to some, when faith is attributed to the
reprobate; since Paul affirms it to be the fruit of election. But this
difficulty is easily solved; for, though none are illuminated to faith, or
truly feel the efficacy of the gospel, but such as are preordained to
salvation, yet experience shows, that the reprobate are sometimes affected
with emotions very similar to those of the elect, so that, in their own
opinion, they in no respect differ from the elect. Wherefore, it is not at
all absurd, that a taste of heavenly gifts is ascribed to them by the
apostle, and a temporary faith by Christ:(1464) not that they truly
perceive the energy of spiritual grace and clear light of faith, but
because the Lord, to render their guilt more manifest and inexcusable,
insinuates himself into their minds, as far as his goodness can be enjoyed
without the Spirit of adoption. If any one object, that there remains,
then, no further evidence by which the faithful can certainly judge of
their adoption, I reply, that although there is a great similitude and
affinity between the elect of God and those who are endued with a frail
and transitory faith, yet the elect possess that confidence, which Paul
celebrates, so as boldly to “cry, Abba, Father.”(1465) Therefore, as God
regenerates for ever the elect alone with incorruptible seed, so that the
seed of life planted in their hearts never perishes, so he firmly seals
within them the grace of his adoption, that it may be confirmed and
ratified to their minds. But this by no means prevents that inferior
operation of the Spirit from exerting itself even in the reprobate. In the
mean time the faithful are taught to examine themselves with solicitude
and humility, lest carnal security insinuate itself, instead of the
assurance of faith. Besides, the reprobate have only a confused perception
of grace, so that they embrace the shadow rather than the substance;
because the Spirit properly seals remission of sins in the elect alone,
and they apply it by a special faith to their own benefit. Yet the
reprobate are justly said to believe that God is propitious to them,
because they receive the gift of reconciliation, though in a confused and
too indistinct manner: not that they are partakers of the same faith or
regeneration with the sons of God, but because they appear, under the
disguise of hypocrisy, to have the principle of faith in common with them.
Nor do I deny, that God so far enlightens their minds, that they discover
his grace; but he so distinguishes that perception from the peculiar
testimony, which he gives to his elect, that they never attain any solid
effect and enjoyment. For he does not, therefore, show himself propitious
to them, by truly delivering them from death, and receiving them under his
protection; but he only manifests to them present mercy. But he vouchsafes
to the elect alone, the living root of faith, that they may persevere even
to the end. Thus we have refuted the objection, that if God truly
discovers his grace, it remains for ever; because nothing prevents God
from illuminating some with a present perception of his grace, which
afterwards vanishes away.

XII. Moreover, though faith is a knowledge of the benevolence of God
towards us, and a certain persuasion of his veracity, yet it is not to be
wondered at, that the subjects of these temporary impressions lose the
sense of Divine love, which, notwithstanding its affinity to faith, is yet
widely different from it. The will of God, I confess, is immutable, and
his truth always consistent with itself. But I deny that the reprobate
ever go so far as to penetrate to that secret revelation, which the
Scripture confines to the elect. I deny, therefore, that they either
apprehend the will of God, as it is immutable, or embrace his truth with
constancy; because they rest in a fugitive sentiment. Thus a tree, not
planted deeply enough to shoot forth living roots, in process of time
withers; though for some years it may produce not only leaves and
blossoms, but even fruits. Finally, as the defection of the first man was
sufficient to obliterate the Divine image from his mind and soul, so we
need not wonder if God enlightens the reprobate with some beams of his
grace, which he afterwards suffers to be extinguished. Nor does any thing
prevent him from slightly tincturing some with the knowledge of his
gospel, and thoroughly imbuing others with it. It must, nevertheless, be
remembered, that how diminutive and weak soever faith may be in the elect,
yet, as the Spirit of God is a certain pledge and seal to them of their
adoption, his impression can never be erased from their hearts; but that
the reprobate have only a few scattered rays of light, which are
afterwards lost; yet that the Spirit is not chargeable with deception,
because he infuses no life into the seed which he drops in their hearts,
that it may remain for ever incorruptible, as in the elect. I go still
further; for since it is evident from the tenor of the Scripture, and from
daily experience, that the reprobate are sometimes affected with a sense
of Divine grace, some desire of mutual love must necessarily be excited in
their hearts. Thus Saul had for a time a pious disposition to love God,
from whom experiencing paternal kindness, he was allured by the charms of
his goodness. But as the persuasion of the paternal love of God is not
radically fixed in the reprobate, so they love him not reciprocally with
the sincere affection of children, but are influenced by a mercenary
disposition; for the spirit of love was given to Christ alone, that he
might instil it into his members. And this observation of Paul certainly
extends to none but the elect: “The love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us;”(1466) the same love,
which generates that confidence of invocation which I have before
mentioned. Thus, on the contrary, we see that God is wonderfully angry
with his children, whom he ceases not to love: not that he really hates
them, but because he designs to terrify them with a sense of his wrath, to
humble their carnal pride, to shake off their indolence, and to excite
them to repentance. Therefore they apprehend him to be both angry with
them, or at least with their sins, and propitious to them at the same
time; for they sincerely deprecate his wrath, and yet resort to him for
succour with tranquillity and confidence. Hence it appears, that faith is
not hypocritically counterfeited by some, who nevertheless are destitute
of true faith; but, while they are hurried away with a sudden impetuosity
of zeal, they deceive themselves by a false opinion. Nor is it to be
doubted, that indolence preoccupies them, and prevents them from properly
examining their hearts as they ought to do. It is probable that those
persons were of this description, to whom, according to John, “Jesus did
not commit himself,” notwithstanding that they believed in him, “because
he knew all men: he knew what was in man.”(1467) If multitudes did not
depart from the common faith, (I style it common, because there is a great
similitude and affinity between temporary faith and that which is living
and perpetual,) Christ would not have said to his disciples, “If ye
continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed, and ye shall know
the truth, and the truth shall make you free.”(1468) For he addresses
those who have embraced his doctrine, and exhorts them to an increase of
faith, that the light which they have received may not be extinguished by
their own supineness. Therefore Paul claims faith as peculiar to the
elect,(1469) indicating that many decay, because they have had no living
root. Thus also Christ says in Matthew, “Every plant, which my heavenly
Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up.”(1470) There is a grosser
deception in others, who are not ashamed to attempt to deceive both God
and men. James inveighs against this class of men, who impiously profane
faith by hypocritical pretensions to it.(1471) Nor would Paul require from
the children of God, a “faith unfeigned,”(1472) but because multitudes
presumptuously arrogate to themselves what they possess not, and with
their vain pretences deceive others, and sometimes even themselves.
Therefore he compares a good conscience to a vessel in which faith is
kept; because many, “having put away a good conscience, concerning faith
have made shipwreck.”(1473)

XIII. We must also remember the ambiguous signification of the word
_faith_; for frequently faith signifies the sound doctrine of piety, as in
the place which we have just cited, and in the same Epistle, where Paul
says, that deacons must hold “the mystery of the faith in a pure
conscience.”(1474) Also where he predicts the apostasy of some “from the
faith.”(1475) But, on the contrary, he says, that Timothy had been
“nourished up in the words of faith.”(1476) Again, where he says,
“avoiding profane and vain babblings, and oppositions of science, falsely
so called; which some professing, have erred concerning the faith;”(1477)
whom in another place he styles “reprobates concerning the faith.”(1478)
Thus, also, when he directs Titus to “rebuke them, that they may be sound
in the faith,”(1479) by soundness, he means nothing more than that purity
of doctrine, which is so liable to be corrupted and to degenerate through
the instability of men. Since “all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge
are hidden in Christ,”(1480) whom faith possesses, faith is justly
extended to the whole summary of heavenly doctrines, with which it is
inseparably connected. On the contrary, it is sometimes restricted to a
particular object; as when Matthew says, that “Jesus saw their
faith,”(1481) who let down the paralytic man through the roof; and when
Christ exclaimed respecting the centurion, “I have not found so great
faith, no, not in Israel.”(1482) But it is probable, that the centurion
was wholly intent on the recovery of his son, a concern for whom wholly
occupied his mind; yet, because he was contented with the mere answer of
Christ, without being importunate for his corporeal presence, it is on
account of this circumstance that his faith is so greatly extolled. And we
have lately shown, that Paul uses faith for the gift of miracles; which is
possessed by those who are neither regenerated by the Spirit of God, nor
serious worshippers of him. In another place, also, he uses it to denote
the instruction by which we are edified in the faith; for, when he
suggests that faith will be abolished, it must undoubtedly be referred to
the ministry of the Church, which is, at present, useful to our infirmity.
In these forms of expression, however, there is an evident analogy. But
when the word “faith” is in an improper sense transferred to a
hypocritical profession, or to that which falsely assumes the name, it
should not be accounted a harsher catachresis, than when the fear of God
is used for a corrupt and perverse worship; as when it is frequently said
in the sacred history, that the foreign nations, which had been
transplanted to Samaria and its vicinity, feared the fictitious deities
and the God of Israel; which is like confounding together heaven and
earth. But our present inquiry is, what is that faith by which the
children of God are distinguished from unbelievers, by which we invoke God
as our Father, by which we pass from death to life, and by which Christ,
our eternal life and salvation, dwells in us? The force and nature of it,
I conceive, I have concisely and clearly explained.

XIV. Now, let us again examine all the parts of that definition; a careful
consideration of which, I think, will leave nothing doubtful remaining.
When we call it knowledge, we intend not such a comprehension as men
commonly have of those things which fall under the notice of their senses.
For it is so superior, that the human mind must exceed and rise above
itself, in order to attain to it. Nor does the mind which attains it
comprehend what it perceives, but being persuaded of that which it cannot
comprehend, it understands more by the certainty of this persuasion, than
it would comprehend of any human object by the exercise of its natural
capacity. Wherefore Paul beautifully expresses it in these terms: “to
comprehend what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to
know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge.”(1483) For he meant to
suggest, that what our mind apprehends by faith is absolutely infinite,
and that this kind of knowledge far exceeds all understanding. Yet,
because God has revealed to his saints the secret of his will, “which had
been hidden from ages and from generations,”(1484) therefore _faith_ is in
Scripture justly styled “an acknowledgment;”(1485) and by John,
“knowledge,” when he asserts, that believers know that they are the sons
of God.(1486) And they have indeed a certain knowledge of it; but are
rather confirmed by a persuasion of the veracity of God, than taught by
any demonstration of reason. The language of Paul also indicates this:
“whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord; for we
walk by faith, not by sight.” By this he shows that the things which we
understand through faith, are at a distance from us, and beyond our sight.
Whence we conclude, that the knowledge of faith consists more in certainty
than in comprehension.

XV. To express the solid constancy of the persuasion, we further say, that
it is a certain and steady knowledge. For, as faith is not content with a
dubious and versatile opinion, so neither with an obscure and perplexed
conception; but requires a full and fixed certainty, such as is commonly
obtained respecting things that have been tried and proved. For unbelief
is so deeply rooted in our hearts, and such is our propensity to it, that
though all men confess with the tongue, that God is faithful, no man can
persuade himself of the truth of it, without the most arduous exertions.
Especially when the time of trial comes, the general indecision discloses
the fault which was previously concealed. Nor is it without reason that
the Holy Spirit asserts the authority of the Divine word in terms of such
high commendation, but with a design to remedy the disease which I have
mentioned, that the promises of God may obtain full credit with us. “The
words of the Lord (says David) are pure words; as silver tried in a
furnace of earth purified seven times.”(1487) Again: “The word of the Lord
is tried: he is a buckler to all those that trust in him.”(1488) And
Solomon confirms the same, nearly in the same words: “Every word of God is
pure.”(1489) But, as the hundred and nineteenth Psalm is almost entirely
devoted to this subject, it were needless to recite any more testimonies.
Whenever God thus recommends his word to us, he, without doubt, obliquely
reprehends our unbelief; for the design of those recommendations is no
other than to eradicate perverse doubts from our hearts. There are also
many, who have such conceptions of the Divine mercy, as to receive but
very little consolation from it. For they are at the same time distressed
with an unhappy anxiety, doubting whether he will be merciful to them;
because they confine within too narrow limits that clemency, of which they
suppose themselves to be fully persuaded. For they reflect with themselves
thus: that his mercy is large and copious, bestowed upon many, and ready
for the acceptance of all; but that it is uncertain whether it will reach
them also, or, rather, whether they shall reach it. This thought, since it
stops in the midst of its course, is incomplete. Therefore it does not so
much confirm the mind with secure tranquillity, as disturb it with
restless hesitation. But very different is the meaning of “full
assurance,” (πληροφοριας,) which is always attributed to faith in the
Scriptures; and which places the goodness of God, that is clearly revealed
to us, beyond all doubt. But this cannot take place, unless we have a real
sense and experience of its sweetness in ourselves. Wherefore the apostle
from faith deduces confidence, and from confidence boldness. For this is
his language: “In Christ we have boldness and access, with confidence by
the faith of him.”(1490) These words imply that we have no right faith,
but when we can venture with tranquillity into the Divine presence. This
boldness arises only from a certain confidence of the Divine benevolence
and our salvation; which is so true, that the word “faith” is frequently
used for confidence.

XVI. The principal hinge on which faith turns is this—that we must not
consider the promises of mercy, which the Lord offers, as true only to
others, and not to ourselves; but rather make them our own, by embracing
them in our hearts. Hence arises that confidence, which the same apostle
in another place calls “peace;”(1491) unless any one would rather make
peace the effect of confidence. It is a security, which makes the
conscience calm and serene before the Divine tribunal, and without which
it must necessarily be harassed and torn almost asunder with tumultuous
trepidation, unless it happen to slumber for a moment in an oblivion of
God and itself. And indeed it is but for a moment; for it does not long
enjoy that wretched oblivion, but is most dreadfully wounded by the
remembrance, which is perpetually recurring, of the Divine judgment. In
short, no man is truly a believer, unless he be firmly persuaded, that God
is a propitious and benevolent Father to him, and promise himself every
thing from his goodness; unless he depend on the promises of the Divine
benevolence to him, and feel an undoubted expectation of salvation; as the
apostle shows in these words: “If we hold fast the beginning of our
confidence steadfast unto the end.”(1492) Here he supposes, that no man
has a good hope in the Lord, who does not glory with confidence, in being
an heir of the kingdom of heaven. He is no believer, I say, who does not
rely on the security of his salvation, and confidently triumph over the
devil and death, as Paul teaches us in this remarkable peroration: “I am
persuaded (says he) that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, shall
be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.”(1493) Thus the same apostle is of opinion, that “the eyes of our
understanding” are not truly “enlightened,” unless we discover what is the
hope of the eternal inheritance, to which we are called.(1494) And he
every where inculcates, that we have no just apprehensions of the Divine
goodness, unless we derive from it a considerable degree of assurance.

XVII. But some one will object, that the experience of believers is very
different from this; for that, in recognizing the grace of God towards
them, they are not only disturbed with inquietude, (which frequently
befalls them,) but sometimes also tremble with the most distressing
terrors. The vehemence of temptations, to agitate their minds, is so
great, that it appears scarcely compatible with that assurance of faith of
which we have been speaking. We must therefore solve this difficulty, if
we mean to support the doctrine we have advanced. When we inculcate, that
faith ought to be certain and secure, we conceive not of a certainty
attended with no doubt, or of a security interrupted by no anxiety; but we
rather affirm, that believers have a perpetual conflict with their own
diffidence, and are far from placing their consciences in a placid calm,
never disturbed by any storms. Yet, on the other hand, we deny, however
they may be afflicted, that they ever fall and depart from that certain
confidence which they have conceived in the Divine mercy. The Scripture
proposes no example of faith more illustrious or memorable than David,
especially if you consider the whole course of his life. Yet that his mind
was not invariably serene, appears from his innumerable complaints, of
which it will be sufficient to select a few. When he rebukes his soul for
turbulent emotions, is he not angry with his unbelief? “Why (says he) art
thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted in me? Hope thou in
God.”(1495) And, certainly, that consternation was an evident proof of
diffidence, as though he supposed himself to be forsaken by God. In
another place, also, we find a more ample confession: “I said, in my
haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes.”(1496) In another place, also,
he debates with himself in anxious and miserable perplexity, and even
raises a dispute concerning the nature of God: “Hath God forgotten to be
gracious? Will the Lord cast off for ever?” What follows is still harsher:
“And I said, I must fall; these are the changes of the right hand of the
Most High.”(1497) For, in a state of despair, he consigns himself to ruin;
and not only confesses that he is agitated with doubts, but, as vanquished
in the conflict, considers all as lost; because God has deserted him, and
turned to his destruction that hand which used to support him. Wherefore
it is not without reason that he says, “Return unto thy rest, O my
soul;”(1498) since he had experienced such fluctuations amidst the waves
of trouble. And yet, wonderful as it is, amidst these concussions, faith
sustains the hearts of the pious, and truly resembles the palm‐tree,
rising with vigour undiminished by any burdens which may be laid upon it,
but which can never retard its growth; as David, when he might appear to
be overwhelmed, yet, chiding himself, ceased not to aspire towards God.
Indeed, he who, contending with his own infirmity, strives in his
anxieties to exercise faith, is already in a great measure victorious.
Which we may infer from such passages as this: “Wait on the Lord: be of
good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart; wait, I say, on the
Lord.”(1499) He reproves himself for timidity, and repeating the same
twice, confesses himself to be frequently subject to various agitations.
In the mean time, he is not only displeased with himself for these faults,
but ardently aspires towards the correction of them. Now, if we enter into
a close and correct examination of his character and conduct, and compare
him with Ahaz, we shall discover a considerable difference. Isaiah is sent
to convey consolation to the anxiety of the impious and hypocritical king;
he addresses him in these words: “Take heed, and be quiet; fear not,”
&c.(1500) But what effect had the message on him? As it had been before
said, that “his heart was moved as the trees of the wood are moved with
the wind,”(1501) though he heard the promise, he ceased not to tremble.
This therefore is the proper reward and punishment of infidelity—so to
tremble with fear, that he who opens not the gate to himself by faith, in
the time of temptation departs from God; but, on the contrary, believers,
whom the weight of temptations bends and almost oppresses, constantly
emerge from their distresses, though not without trouble and difficulty.
And because they are conscious of their own imbecility, they pray with the
Psalmist, “Take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth.”(1502) By
these words we are taught, that they sometimes become dumb, as though
their faith were destroyed; yet that they neither fail nor turn their
backs, but persevere in their conflict, and arouse their inactivity by
prayer, that they may not be stupefied by self‐indulgence.

XVIII. To render this intelligible, it is necessary to recur to that
division of the flesh and the spirit, which we noticed in another place,
and which most clearly discovers itself in this case. The pious heart
therefore perceives a division in itself, being partly affected with
delight, through a knowledge of the Divine goodness; partly distressed
with sorrow, through a sense of its own calamity; partly relying on the
promise of the gospel; partly trembling at the evidence of its own
iniquity; partly exulting in the apprehension of life; partly alarmed by
the fear of death. This variation happens through the imperfection of
faith; since we are never so happy, during the present life, as to be
cured of all diffidence, and entirely filled and possessed by faith. Hence
those conflicts, in which the diffidence which adheres to the relics of
the flesh, rises up in opposition to the faith formed in the heart. But
if, in the mind of a believer, assurance be mixed with doubts, do we not
always come to this point, that faith consists not in a certain and clear,
but only in an obscure and perplexed knowledge of the Divine will
respecting us? Not at all. For, if we are distracted by various thoughts,
we are not therefore entirely divested of faith; neither, though harassed
by the agitations of diffidence, are we therefore immerged in its abyss;
nor, if we be shaken, are we therefore overthrown. For the invariable
issue of this contest is, that faith at length surmounts those
difficulties, from which, while it is encompassed with them, it appears to
be in danger.

XIX. Let us sum it up thus: As soon as the smallest particle of grace is
infused into our minds, we begin to contemplate the Divine countenance as
now placid, serene, and propitious to us: it is indeed a very distant
prospect, but so clear, that we know we are not deceived. Afterwards, in
proportion as we improve,—for we ought to be continually improving by
progressive advances,—we arrive at a nearer, and therefore more certain
view of him, and by continual habit he becomes more familiar to us. Thus
we see, that a mind illuminated by the knowledge of God, is at first
involved in much ignorance, which is removed by slow degrees. Yet it is
not prevented either by its ignorance of some things, or by its obscure
view of what it beholds, from enjoying a clear knowledge of the Divine
will respecting itself, which is the first and principal exercise of
faith. For, as a man who is confined in a prison, into which the sun
shines only obliquely and partially through a very small window, is
deprived of a full view of that luminary, yet clearly perceives its
splendour, and experiences its beneficial influence,—thus we, who are
bound with terrestrial and corporeal fetters, though surrounded on all
sides with great obscurity, are nevertheless illuminated, sufficiently for
all the purposes of real security, by the light of God shining ever so
feebly to discover his mercy.

XX. The apostle beautifully inculcates both these ideas in various places.
For when he says, that “we know in part, and we prophesy in part, and see
through a glass darkly,”(1503) he indicates, how very slender a portion of
that wisdom which is truly Divine, is conferred upon us in the present
life. For although these words imply, not only that faith remains
imperfect as long as we groan under the burden of the flesh, but that our
imperfection renders it necessary for us to be unremittingly employed in
acquiring further knowledge, yet he suggests, that it is impossible for
our narrow capacity to comprehend that which is infinite. And this Paul
predicates concerning the whole Church; though every individual of us is
obstructed and retarded, by his own ignorance, from making that progress
which might be wished. But what a sure and certain experience, of itself,
even the smallest particle of faith gives us, the same apostle shows in
another place, where he asserts, that “we, with open face, beholding as in
a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image.”(1504)
Such profound ignorance must necessarily involve much doubt and
trepidation; especially as our hearts are, by a kind of natural instinct,
inclined to unbelief. Besides, temptations, various and innumerable,
frequently assail us with great violence. Above all, our own conscience,
oppressed by its incumbent load of sin, sometimes complains and groans
within itself, sometimes accuses itself, sometimes murmurs in secret, and
sometimes is openly disturbed. Whether, therefore, adversity discover the
wrath of God, or the conscience find in itself any reason or cause of it,
thence unbelief derives weapons to oppose faith, which are perpetually
directed to this object, to persuade us, that God is angry with us, and
inimical to us; that we may not hope for any assistance from him, but may
dread him as our irreconcilable enemy.

XXI. To sustain these attacks, faith arms and defends itself with the word
of the Lord. And when such a temptation as this assails us,—that God is
our enemy, because he is angry with us,—faith, on the contrary, objects,
that he is merciful even when he afflicts, because chastisement proceeds
rather from love than from wrath. When it is pressed with this thought,
that God is an avenger of iniquities, it opposes the pardon provided for
all offences, whenever the sinner makes application to the Divine
clemency. Thus the pious mind, how strangely soever it may be agitated and
harassed, rises at length superior to all difficulties, nor ever suffers
its confidence in the Divine mercy to be shaken. The various disputes
which exercise and fatigue it, terminate rather in the confirmation of
that confidence. It is a proof of this, that when the saints conceive
themselves to feel most the vengeance of God, they still confide their
complaints to him, and when there is no appearance of his hearing them,
they continue to call upon him. For what end would be answered by
addressing complaint to him from whom they expected no consolation? And
they would never be disposed to call upon him, unless they believed him to
be ready to assist them.(1505) Thus the disciples, whom Christ reprehends
for the weakness of their faith, complained indeed that they were
perishing, but still they implored his assistance. Nor, when he chides
them on account of their weak faith, does he reject them from the number
of his children, or class them with unbelievers; but he excites them to
correct that fault. Therefore we repeat the assertion already made, that
faith is never eradicated from a pious heart, but continues firmly fixed,
however it may be shaken, and seem to bend this way or that; that its
light is never so extinguished or smothered, but that it lies at least
concealed under embers; and that this is an evident proof, that the word,
which is an incorruptible seed, produces fruit similar to itself, whose
germ never entirely perishes. For, though it is the last cause of despair
that can happen to saints, to perceive, according to their apprehension of
present circumstances, the hand of God lifted up for their destruction,
yet Job asserts the extent of his hope to be such, that though he should
be slain by him, he would continue to trust in him.(1506) This, then, is
the real state of the case: Unbelief is not inwardly predominant in the
hearts of the pious, but it assails them from without; nor do its weapons
mortally wound them; they only molest them, or at least inflict such
wounds as are curable. For faith, according to Paul, serves us as a
shield, which, being opposed to hostile weapons, receives their blows, and
entirely repels them, or at least breaks their force, so that they
penetrate no vital part. When faith is shaken, therefore, it is just as if
a soldier, otherwise bold, were constrained, by a violent stroke of a
javelin, to change his position and retreat a little; but when faith
itself is wounded, it is just as if his shield were broken by a blow, yet
not pierced through. For the pious mind will always recover so far as to
say, with David, “Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,
I will fear no evil; for thou art with me.”(1507) To walk in the gloom of
death is certainly terrible; and believers, whatever degree of firmness
they have, cannot but dread it. But when this thought prevails, that God
is present with them, and concerned for their salvation, fear at once
gives way to security. But, as Augustine says, whatever powerful engines
the devil erects against us, when he possesses not the heart, which is the
residence of faith, he is kept at a distance. Thus, if we judge from the
event, believers not only escape in safety from every battle, so that,
receiving an accession of vigour, they are soon after prepared to enter
the field again, but we see the accomplishment of what John says, in his
canonical Epistle: “This is the victory that overcometh the world, even
our faith.”(1508) For he affirms, that it will be not only victorious in
one or in a few battles, or against some particular assault, but that it
will overcome the whole world, though it should be attacked a thousand
times.

XXII. There is another species of fear and trembling, by which,
nevertheless, the assurance of faith is so far from being impaired, that
it is more firmly established. That is, when believers, considering the
examples of the Divine vengeance against the impious as lessons given to
them, are solicitously cautious not to provoke the wrath of God against
themselves by the same crimes; or when, feeling their own misery, they
learn to place all their dependence on the Lord, without whom they
perceive themselves to be more inconstant and transient than the wind. For
when the apostle, by a representation of the punishments which the Lord
formerly inflicted on the Israelitish nation, alarms the fears of the
Corinthians, lest they should involve themselves in the same
calamities,(1509) he in no respect weakens their confidence, but shakes
off the indolence of the flesh, by which faith is rather impaired than
confirmed. Nor when, from the fall of the Jews, he takes an occasion to
exhort him that standeth to beware lest he fall,(1510) does he direct us
to waver, as though we were uncertain of our stability; but only forbids
all arrogance and presumptuous, overweening confidence in our own
strength, that the Gentiles may not proudly insult over the expelled Jews,
into whose place they have been received.(1511) In that passage, however,
he not only addresses believers, but in his discourse also includes
hypocrites, who gloried merely in external appearance. For he admonishes
not men individually, but instituting a comparison between the Jews and
the Gentiles, after having shown that the rejection of the former was a
righteous punishment for their unbelief and ingratitude, he exhorts the
latter not to lose, by pride and haughtiness, the grace of adoption
recently transferred to them. But as, in the general rejection of the
Jews, there remained some of them who fell not from the covenant of
adoption, so among the Gentiles there might possibly arise some, who,
destitute of true faith, would only be inflated with foolish and carnal
confidence, and thus abuse the goodness of God to their own ruin. But
though you should understand this to be spoken to the elect and believers,
no inconvenience would result from it. For it is one thing to repress the
temerity, which from remaining carnality sometimes discovers itself in the
saints, that it may not produce vain confidence; and another to strike the
conscience with fear, that it may not rely with full security on the mercy
of God.

XXIII. Moreover, when he teaches us to “work out our own salvation with
fear and trembling,”(1512) he only requires us to accustom ourselves, with
great self‐humiliation, to look up to the power of the Lord. For nothing
arouses us to repose all confidence and assurance of mind on the Lord, so
much as diffidence of ourselves, and anxiety arising from a consciousness
of our own misery. In which sense, we must understand this declaration of
the Psalmist, “I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercy,
and in thy fear will I worship.”(1513) Whence he beautifully connects the
confidence of faith, which relies on the mercy of God, with that religious
fear by which we ought to be affected, whenever we come into the presence
of the Divine Majesty, and from its splendour, discover our extreme
impurity. Solomon also truly pronounces, “Happy is the man who feareth
alway; but he that hardeneth his heart shall fall into mischief.”(1514)
But he intends that fear which will render us more cautious, not such as
would afflict and ruin us, such as, when the mind, confounded in itself,
recovers itself in God; dejected in itself, finds consolation in him; and
despairing of itself, revives with confidence in him. Wherefore nothing
prevents believers from being distressed with fear, and at the same time
enjoying the most serene consolation; as they now turn their eyes towards
their own vanity, and now direct the attention of their mind to the truth
of God. How can fear and faith, it will be asked, both reside in the same
mind? Just as, on the contrary, insensibility and anxiety. For though the
impious endeavour to acquire a habit of insensibility, that they may not
be disquieted by the fear of God, the judgment of God follows them so
closely, that they cannot attain the object of their desires. So nothing
prevents God from training his people to humility, that in their valiant
warfare they may restrain themselves within the bounds of modesty. And
that this was the design of the apostle appears from the context, where,
as the cause of fear and trembling, he assigns the good pleasure of God,
by which he gives to his people both rightly to will, and strenuously to
perform. In the same sense we should understand this prediction: “The
children of Israel shall fear the Lord and his goodness;”(1515) for not
only piety produces a reverence of God, but also the sweetness of grace
fills a man that is dejected in himself, with fear and admiration; causing
him to depend upon God, and humbly submit himself to his power.

XXIV. Yet we give no encouragement to the very pestilent philosophy, begun
to be broached by some semi‐Papists in the present day. For, being unable
to defend that gross notion of faith as a doubtful opinion, which has been
taught in the schools, they resort to another invention, and propose a
confidence mixed with unbelief. They confess, that whenever we look to
Christ, we find in him a sufficient ground of comfortable hope; but
because we are always unworthy of all those blessings which are offered to
us in Christ, they wish us to fluctuate and hesitate in the view of our
own unworthiness. In short, they place the conscience in such a state
between hope and fear, that it alternately inclines to both. They also
connect hope and fear together, so that when the former rises, it
depresses the latter, and when the latter lifts its head, the former
falls. Thus Satan, finding that those open engines, which he heretofore
employed to destroy the assurance of faith, are now no longer of any
avail, secretly endeavours to undermine it. But what kind of confidence
would that be, which should frequently give way to despair? If you
consider Christ, (say they,) salvation is certain; if you return to
yourself, condemnation is certain. Diffidence and good hope, therefore,
must of necessity alternately prevail in your mind. As though we ought to
consider Christ as standing apart from us, and not rather as dwelling
within us. For we therefore expect salvation from him, not because he
appears to us at a great distance, but because, having ingrafted us into
his body, he makes us partakers not only of all his benefits, but also of
himself. Wherefore I thus retort their own argument: If you consider
yourself, condemnation is certain; but since Christ, with all his
benefits, is communicated to you, so that all that he has becomes yours,
and you become a member of him, and one with him,—his righteousness covers
your sins; his salvation supersedes your condemnation; he interposes with
his merit, that your unworthiness may not appear in the Divine presence.
Indeed, the truth is, that we ought by no means to separate Christ from
us, or ourselves from him; but, with all our might, firmly to retain that
fellowship by which he has united us to himself. Thus the apostle teaches
us: “The body (says he) is dead because of sin; but the spirit is life
because of righteousness.”(1516) According to this frivolous notion of
these persons, he ought to have said, Christ indeed has life in himself;
but you, being sinners, remain obnoxious to death and condemnation. But he
speaks in a very different manner; for he states, that the condemnation
which we demerit in ourselves is swallowed up by the salvation of Christ;
and in confirmation of this, uses the same argument as I have adduced,
that Christ is not without us, but dwells within us; and not only adheres
to us by an indissoluble connection of fellowship, but by a certain
wonderful communion coalesces daily more and more into one body with us,
till he becomes altogether one with us. Nor do I deny, what I have lately
said, that some interruptions of faith at times occur, as its imbecility
is by the force of violence inclined to this or the other direction, Thus,
in the thick gloom of temptations, its light is smothered; but, whatever
befalls it, it never discontinues its efforts in seeking God.

XXV. Bernard reasons in a similar manner, when he professedly discusses
this subject, in the Fifth Homily, on the Dedication of the Temple. “By
the goodness of God, meditating sometimes on the soul, I think I discover
in it, as it were, two opposite characters. If I view it as it is in
itself and of itself, I cannot utter a greater truth concerning it, than
that it is reduced to nothing. What need is there at present to enumerate
all its miseries, how it is loaded with sins, enveloped in darkness,
entangled with allurements, inflamed with inordinate desires, subject to
the passions, filled with illusions, always prone to evil, inclined to
every vice, and finally full of ignominy and confusion? Now, if even our
righteousnesses, when viewed in the light of truth, be found to be ‘as
filthy rags,’(1517) what judgment will be formed of our acknowledged
unrighteousness? ‘If the light that is in’ us ‘be darkness, how great is
that darkness!’(1518) What then? Man is undoubtedly become like vanity;
man is reduced to nothing; man is nothing. Yet how is he entirely nothing,
whom God magnifies? How is he nothing, on whom the heart of God is fixed?
Brethren, let us revive again. Although we are nothing in our own hearts,
perhaps there may be something for us latent in the heart of God. O Father
of mercies, O Father of the miserable, how dost thou fix thine heart on
us! For thine heart is where thy treasure is. But how are we thy treasure,
if we are nothing? All nations are before thee as though they existed not;
they must be considered as nothing. That is, before thee; not within thee;
thus it is in the judgment of thy truth; but not thus in the affection of
thy clemency. Thou callest things which are not, as though they were; and
therefore they are not, because thou callest things which are not; yet
they are, because thou callest them. For though they are not, with
reference to themselves, yet with thee they are; according to this
expression of Paul: ‘Not of works, but of him that calleth.’ ”(1519) After
this, Bernard says, that there is a wonderful connection between these two
considerations. Things which are connected with each other, certainly do
not reciprocally destroy each other; which he also more plainly declares
in the following conclusion: “Now, if we diligently examine what we are in
both considerations,—how in one view we are nothing, and in the other how
we are magnified,—I conceive that our boasting appears to be restrained;
but perhaps it is more increased, and indeed established, that we may
glory not in ourselves, but in the Lord. If we reflect, if he has decreed
to save us, we shall shortly be delivered; this is sufficient to recover
us. But ascending to a loftier and more extensive prospect, let us seek
the city of God, let us seek his temple, let us seek his palace, let us
seek his spouse. I have not forgotten, but with fear and reverence I say,
We are; but in the heart of God. We are; but by his condescending favour,
not by our own merit.”

XXVI. Now, the fear of the Lord, which is universally ascribed to all the
saints, and which is called sometimes “the beginning of wisdom,”(1520)
sometimes “wisdom”(1521) itself, although it be but one, proceeds from a
twofold apprehension of him. For God requires the reverence of a Father
and of a Master. Therefore he who truly desires to worship him, will study
to pay him the obedience of a son and the submission of a servant. The
Lord, by the prophet, distinguishes the obedience which is paid to him as
a father, by the appellation of honour; and the service which he receives
as a master, by that of fear. “A son (says he) honoureth his father, and a
servant his master. If, then, I be a father, where is mine honour? And if
I be a master, where is my fear?”(1522) But notwithstanding his
distinction between them, you see how he confounds them together. Let the
fear of the Lord therefore with us be a reverence mingled with this honour
and fear. Nor is it surprising, that the same mind cherishes both these
affections; for he who considers what a Father God is to us, has ample
reason, even though there were no hell, to dread his displeasure more than
any death. But, such is the propensity of our nature to the licentiousness
of transgression, that in order to restrain it by every possible method,
we should at the same time indulge this reflection, that all iniquity is
an abomination to the Lord, under whose power we live, and whose vengeance
they will not escape, who provoke his wrath against them by the wickedness
of their lives.

XXVII. Now, the assertion of John, that “there is no fear in love, but
perfect love casteth out fear, because fear hath torment,”(1523) is not at
all repugnant to what we have advanced. For he speaks of the terror of
unbelief, between which and the fear of believers there is a wide
difference. For the impious fear not God from a dread of incurring his
displeasure, if they could do it with impunity; but because they know him
to be armed with vindictive power, they tremble with horror at hearing of
his wrath. And thus also they fear his wrath, because they apprehend it to
be impending over them, because they every moment expect it to fall on
their heads. But the faithful, as we have observed, fear his displeasure
more than punishment, and are not disturbed with the fear of punishment,
as though it were impending over them, but are rendered more cautious that
they may not incur it. Thus the apostle, when addressing believers, says,
“Let no man deceive you with vain words; for, because of these things
cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience [or
unbelief.]”(1524) He threatens not its descending on them; but admonishes
them to consider the wrath of the Lord prepared for the impious, on
account of the crimes which he had enumerated, that they may avoid
tempting it. It seldom happens, however, that the reprobate are aroused
merely by simple threatenings; but, on the contrary, being already
obdurate and insensible, when God thunders from heaven, if it be only in
words, they rather harden themselves in rebellion; but when they feel the
stroke of his hand, they are compelled to fear him, whether they will or
not. This is commonly called a servile fear, in opposition to a filial
fear, which is ingenuous and voluntary. Some persons curiously introduce
an intermediate species of fear; because that servile and constrained
affection sometimes subdues men’s minds, so that they voluntarily approach
to the fear of God.

XXVIII. Now, in the Divine benevolence, which is affirmed to be the object
of faith, we apprehend the possession of salvation and everlasting life to
be obtained. For, if no good can be wanting when God is propitious, we
have a sufficient certainty of salvation, when he himself assures us of
his love. “O God, cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved,”(1525)
says the Psalmist. Hence the Scriptures represent this as the sum of our
salvation, that he has “abolished” all “enmity,”(1526) and received us
into his favour. In which they imply, that since God is reconciled to us,
there remains no danger, but that all things will prosper with us.
Wherefore faith, having apprehended the love of God, has promises for the
present life and the life to come, and a solid assurance of all blessings;
but it is such an assurance as may be derived from the Divine word. For
faith certainly promises itself neither longevity, nor honour, nor wealth,
in the present state; since the Lord has not been pleased to appoint any
of these things for us; but is contented with this assurance, that
whatever we may want of the conveniences or necessaries of this life, yet
God will never leave us. But its principal security consists in an
expectation of the future life, which is placed beyond all doubt by the
word of God. For whatever miseries and calamities may on earth await those
who are the objects of the love of God, they cannot prevent the Divine
benevolence from being a source of complete felicity. Therefore, when we
meant to express the perfection of blessedness, we have mentioned the
grace of God, as the fountain from which every species of blessings flows
down to us. And we may generally observe in the Scriptures, that when they
treat not only of eternal salvation, but of any blessing we enjoy, our
attention is recalled to the love of God. For which reason David says,
that “The loving‐kindness of God,” when experienced in a pious heart, “is
better” and more desirable “than life” itself.(1527) Finally, if we have
an abundance of all things to the extent of our desires, but are uncertain
of the love or hatred of God, our prosperity will be cursed, and therefore
miserable. But if the paternal countenance of God shine on us, even our
miseries will be blessed, because they will be converted into aids of our
salvation.(1528) Thus Paul, after an enumeration of all possible
adversities, glories that they can never separate us from the love of God;
and in his prayers, he always begins with the grace of God, from which all
prosperity proceeds. David likewise opposes the Divine favour alone
against all the terrors which disturb us: “Though I walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, (says he,) I will fear no evil, for thou
art with me.”(1529) And we always feel our minds wavering, unless,
contented with the grace of God, they seek their peace in it, and are
deeply impressed with the sentiment of the Psalmist: “Blessed is the
nation whose God is the Lord; and the people whom he hath chosen for his
own inheritance.”(1530)

XXIX. We make the foundation of faith to be the gratuitous promise; for on
that faith properly rests. For, although faith admits the veracity of God
in all things, whether he command or prohibit, whether he promise or
threaten; though it obediently receives his injunctions, carefully
observes his prohibitions, and attends to his threatenings,—yet with the
promise it properly begins, on that it stands, and in that it ends. For it
seeks in God for life, which is found, not in precepts nor in
denunciations of punishments, but in the promise of mercy, and in that
only which is gratuitous; for a conditional promise, which sends us back
to our own works, promises life to us only if we find it in ourselves.
Therefore, if we wish our faith not to tremble and waver, we must support
it with the promise of salvation, which is voluntarily and liberally
offered us by the Lord, rather in consideration of our misery, than in
respect of our worthiness. Wherefore the apostle denominates the gospel
“the word of faith;”(1531) a character which he denies both to the
precepts and to the promises of the law; since there is nothing that can
establish faith, but that liberal embassy by which God reconciles the
world to himself. Hence also the same apostle frequently connects faith
with the gospel; as when he states, that “the ministry of the gospel was
committed to him for obedience to the faith;” that it is “the power of God
unto salvation to every one that believeth;” that therein is the
“righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith.”(1532) Nor is this to
be wondered at; for the gospel being “the ministry of
reconciliation,”(1533) there is no other sufficient testimony of the
Divine benevolence towards us, the knowledge of which is necessary to
faith. When we assert, therefore, that faith rests on the gratuitous
promise, we deny not that believers embrace and revere every part of the
Divine word, but we point out the promise of mercy as the peculiar object
of faith. Thus believers ought to acknowledge God as a judge and avenger
of crimes; yet they fix their eyes peculiarly on his clemency; described
for their contemplation as “gracious and full of compassion; slow to
anger, and of great mercy; good to all, and diffusing his tender mercies
over all his works.”(1534)

XXX. Nor do I regard the clamours of Pighius, or any such snarlers, who
censure this restriction, as though it divided faith, and comprehended
only one branch of it. I grant that, as I have already said, the general
object of faith (as they express themselves) is the veracity of God,
whether he threaten, or give us a hope of his grace. Wherefore the apostle
attributes this to faith, that Noah feared the destruction of the world
while it was yet unseen.(1535) If the fear of impending punishment was the
work of faith, threatenings ought not to be excluded from the definition
of it. This indeed is true; but these cavillers unjustly charge us with
denying that faith respects every part of the word of God. For we only
intend to establish these two points; first, that it never stands firmly
till it comes to the gratuitous promise; secondly, that we are reconciled
to God only as it unites us to Christ. Both these points are worthy of
observation. We are inquiring for a faith which may distinguish the sons
of God from the reprobate, and believers from unbelievers. If any man
believes the justice of the Divine commands and the truth of the Divine
threatenings, must he therefore be called a believer? By no means.
Therefore faith can have no stability, unless it be placed on the Divine
mercy. Now, to what purpose do we argue concerning faith? Is it not that
we may understand the way of salvation? But how is faith saving, but by
ingrafting us into the body of Christ? There will be no absurdity, then,
if, in the definition of it, we insist on its principal effect, and as a
difference, add to the genus that character which separates believers from
unbelievers. In a word, these malevolent men have nothing to carp at in
this doctrine, without involving in the same reprehension with us, the
apostle Paul, who particularly styles the gospel “the word of
faith.”(1536)

XXXI. Hence, again, we infer, what has been before stated, that the word
is as necessary to faith, as the living root of the tree is to the fruit;
because, according to David, none can trust in God but those who know his
name.(1537) But this knowledge proceeds not from every man’s own
imagination, but from the testimony which God himself gives of his own
goodness. This the same Psalmist confirms in another place: “Thy salvation
according to thy word.”(1538) Again: “Save me: I hoped in thy word.”(1539)
Where we must observe the relation of faith to the word, and that
salvation is the consequence of it. Yet we exclude not the Divine power,
by a view of which, unless faith be supported, it will never ascribe to
God the honour that is due to him. Paul seems to relate a trifling or
uninteresting circumstance concerning Abraham, when he says, that he was
persuaded that God, who had promised him the blessed seed, “was able also
to perform.”(1540) In another place, respecting himself he says, “I know
whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which
I have committed unto him against that day.”(1541) But if any one
considers, how many doubts respecting the power of God frequently intrude
themselves, he will fully acknowledge, that they who magnify it as it
deserves, have made no small progress in faith. We shall all confess, that
God is able to do whatever he pleases; but whilst the smallest temptation
strikes us with consternation and terror, it is evident that we derogate
from the Divine power, to which we prefer the menaces of Satan in
opposition to the promises of God. This is the reason why Isaiah, when he
would impress the hearts of the people with an assurance of salvation,
discourses in so magnificent a manner concerning the infinite power of
God. He frequently appears, after having begun to treat of the hope of
pardon and reconciliation, to digress to another subject, and to wander
through prolix and unnecessary circumlocutions, celebrating the wonders of
the Divine government in the machine of heaven and earth, and the whole
order of nature: yet there is nothing but what is applicable to the
present subject; for, unless the omnipotence of God be presented to our
eyes, our ears will not attend to his word, or not esteem it according to
its worth. Moreover, the Scripture there speaks of his effectual power;
for piety, as we have elsewhere seen, always makes a useful and practical
application of the power of God; and particularly proposes to itself those
of his works in which he has discovered himself as a father. Hence the
frequent mention of redemption in the Scriptures, from which the
Israelites might learn, that God, who had once been the author of
salvation, would be its everlasting preserver. David also teaches us by
his own example, that the private benefits which God has conferred on an
individual, conduce to the confirmation of his faith for the future: even
when he seems to have deserted us, we ought to extend our views further,
so as to derive encouragement from his ancient benefits, as it is said in
another psalm: “I remember the days of old; I meditate on all thy works,”
&c.(1542) Again: “I will remember the works of the Lord: surely I will
remember thy wonders of old.”(1543) But since, without the word, all our
conceptions of the power and works of God are unprofitable and transient,
we have sufficient reason for asserting, that there can be no faith,
without the illumination of Divine grace. But here a question might be
raised—What must be thought of Sarah and Rebecca, both of whom, apparently
impelled by the zeal of faith, transgressed the limits of the word? Sarah,
when she ardently desired the promised son, gave her maid‐servant to her
husband. That she sinned in many respects, is not to be denied; but I now
refer to her error in being carried away by her zeal, and not restraining
herself within the bounds of the Divine word. Yet it is certain, that this
desire proceeded from faith. Rebecca, having been divinely assured of the
election of her son Jacob, procures him the benediction by a sinful
artifice; she deceives her husband, the witness and minister of the grace
of God; she constrains her son to utter falsehoods; she corrupts the truth
of God by various frauds and impostures; finally, by exposing his promise
to ridicule, she does all in her power to destroy it. And yet this
transaction, however criminal and reprehensible, was not unaccompanied
with faith; because she had to overcome many obstacles, that she might
aspire earnestly to that which, without any expectation of worldly
advantage, was pregnant with great troubles and dangers. So we must not
pronounce the holy patriarch Isaac to be entirely destitute of faith,
because, after having been divinely apprized of the translation of the
honour to his younger son, he nevertheless ceases not to be partial to
Esau, his first‐born. These examples certainly teach that errors are
frequently mixed with faith, yet that faith, when real, always retains the
preëminence. For, as the particular error of Rebecca did not annul the
effect of the benediction, so neither did it destroy the faith which
generally predominated in her mind, and was the principle and cause of
that action. Nevertheless, Rebecca, in this instance, has discovered how
liable the human mind is to error, as soon as it allows itself the
smallest license. But though our deficiency or imbecility obscures faith,
yet it does not extinguish it: in the mean time it reminds us how
solicitously we ought to attend to the declarations of God; and confirms
what we have said, that faith decays unless it be supported by the word;
as the minds of Sarah, Isaac, and Rebecca, would have been lost in their
obliquities, if they had not, by the secret restraint of God, been kept in
obedience to the word.

XXXII. Again: it is not without reason that we include all the promises in
Christ;(1544) as the apostle in the knowledge of him includes the whole
gospel; and in another place teaches, that “all the promises of God in him
are yea, and in him amen.”(1545) The reason of this is plain. For, if God
promises any thing, he gives a proof of his benevolence; so that there is
no promise of his which is not a testimony of his love. Nor does it affect
the argument, that the impious, when they are loaded with great and
continual benefits from the Divine goodness, render themselves obnoxious
to a heavier judgment. For since they neither think nor acknowledge that
they receive those things from the hand of the Lord,—or if ever they
acknowledge it, yet they never reflect within themselves on his
goodness,—they cannot thereby be instructed concerning his mercy, any more
than the brutes, who, according to the circumstances of their condition,
receive the same effusion of his liberality, but never perceive it. Nor is
it any more repugnant to our argument, that by generally rejecting the
promises designed for them, they draw down on themselves severer
vengeance. For although the efficacy of the promises is manifested only
when they have obtained credit with us, yet their force and propriety are
never extinguished by our unbelief or ingratitude. Therefore, when the
Lord by his promises invites a man not only to receive, but also to
meditate on the effects of his goodness, he at the same time gives him a
declaration of his love. Whence we must return to this principle, that
every promise is an attestation of the Divine love to us. But it is beyond
all controversy, that no man is loved by God but in Christ;(1546) he is
the “beloved Son,” in whom the love of the Father perpetually rests, and
then from him diffuses itself to us; as Paul says, that we are “accepted
in the beloved.”(1547) It must therefore be communicated to us by his
mediation.(1548) Wherefore the apostle, in another place, calls him “our
peace,”(1549) and elsewhere represents him as the bond by which God is
united to us in his paternal love. It follows, that whenever any promise
is presented to us, our eyes must be directed to him; and that Paul is
correct in stating, that all the promises of God are confirmed and
accomplished in him.(1550) This is opposed by some examples. For it is not
credible that Naaman the Syrian, when he inquired of the prophet
respecting the right method of worshipping God,(1551) was instructed
concerning the Mediator; yet his piety is commended. Cornelius,(1552) a
Gentile and Roman, could scarcely be acquainted with what was not
universally or clearly known among the Jews; yet his benefactions and
prayers were acceptable to God; and the sacrifices of Naaman received the
approbation of the prophet, which neither of these persons could have
obtained without faith. Similar was the case of the eunuch to whom Philip
was conducted;(1553) who, unless he had been possessed of some faith,
would never have incurred the labour and expense of a long and difficult
journey, for the sake of worshipping at Jerusalem. Yet we see how, on
being interrogated by Philip, he betrayed his ignorance of the Mediator. I
confess, indeed, that their faith was in some measure implicit, not only
with respect to the person of Christ, but with respect to the power and
office assigned him by the Father. At the same time it is certain that
they had imbibed principles which afforded them some notion of Christ,
however slight; nor should this be thought strange; for the eunuch would
not have hastened from a remote country to Jerusalem to adore an unknown
God; nor did Cornelius spend so much time, after having once embraced the
Jewish religion, without acquainting himself with the rudiments of sound
doctrine. With regard to Naaman, it would have been extremely absurd for
Elisha, who directed him concerning the minutest particulars, to have been
silent on the most important subject. Although their knowledge of Christ,
therefore, was obscure, yet to suppose that they had none is unreasonable;
because they practised the sacrifices of the law, which must have been
distinguished by their end, that is, Christ, from the illegitimate
sacrifices of the heathen.

XXXIII. This simple and external demonstration of the Divine word ought,
indeed, to be fully sufficient for the production of faith, if it were not
obstructed by our blindness and perverseness. But such is our propensity
to error, that our mind can never adhere to Divine truth; such is our
dulness, that we can never discern the light of it. Therefore nothing is
effected by the word, without the illumination of the Holy Spirit. Whence
it appears, that faith is far superior to human intelligence. Nor is it
enough for the mind to be illuminated by the Spirit of God, unless the
heart also be strengthened and supported by his power. On this point, the
schoolmen are altogether erroneous, who, in the discussion of faith,
regard it as a simple assent of the understanding, entirely neglecting the
confidence and assurance of the heart. Faith, therefore, is a singular
gift of God in two respects; both as the mind is enlightened to understand
the truth of God, and as the heart is established in it. For the Holy
Spirit not only originates faith, but increases it by degrees, till he
conducts us by it all the way to the heavenly kingdom. “That good thing,”
says Paul, “which was committed unto thee, keep, by the Holy Ghost which
dwelleth in us.”(1554) If it be urged, that Paul declares the Spirit to be
given to us “by the hearing of faith,”(1555) this objection is easily
answered. If there were only one gift of the Spirit, it would be absurd to
represent the Spirit as the effect of faith, of which he is the author and
cause; but when the apostle is treating of the gifts with which God adorns
his Church, to lead it, by advancements in faith, forwards to perfection,
we need not wonder that he ascribes those gifts to faith, which prepares
us for their reception. It is accounted by the world exceedingly
paradoxical, when it is affirmed, that no one can believe in Christ, but
he to whom it is given. But this is partly for want of considering the
depth and sublimity of heavenly wisdom, and the extreme dulness of man in
apprehending the mysteries of God, and partly from not regarding that firm
and steadfast constancy of heart, which is the principal branch of faith.

XXXIV. But if, as Paul tells us, no one is acquainted with the will of a
man but “the spirit of a man which is in him,”(1556) how could man be
certain of the will of God? And if we are uncertain respecting the truth
of God in those things which are the subjects of our present
contemplation, how should we have a greater certainty of it, when the Lord
promises such things as no eye sees and no heart conceives? Human sagacity
is here so completely lost, that the first step to improvement, in the
Divine school, is to forsake it. For, like an interposing veil,(1557) it
prevents us from discovering the mysteries of God, which are revealed only
to babes.(1558) “For flesh and blood hath not revealed,”(1559) and “the
natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.”(1560) The aids of the Spirit therefore are
necessary, or rather it is his influence alone that is efficacious here.
“Who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been his
counsellor?”(1561) but “the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep
things of God;”(1562) and through him, “we have the mind of Christ.”(1563)
“No man can come to me (says he) except the Father, which hath sent me,
draw him. Every man therefore that hath heard and hath learned of the
Father, cometh unto me. Not that any man hath seen the Father, save he
which is of God.” Therefore, as we can never come to Christ, unless we are
drawn by the Spirit of God, so when we are drawn, we are raised both in
mind and in heart above the reach of our own understanding. For
illuminated by him, the soul receives, as it were, new eyes for the
contemplation of heavenly mysteries, by the splendour of which it was
before dazzled. And thus the human intellect, irradiated by the light of
the Holy Spirit, then begins to relish those things which pertain to the
kingdom of God, for which before it had not the smallest taste. Wherefore
Christ’s two disciples receive no benefit from his excellent discourse to
them on the mysteries of his kingdom,(1564) till he opens their
understanding that they may understand the Scriptures. Thus, though the
apostles were taught by his Divine mouth, yet the Spirit of Truth must be
sent to them, to instil into their minds the doctrine which they had heard
with their ears.(1565) The word of God is like the sun shining on all to
whom it is preached; but without any benefit to the blind. But in this
respect we are all blind by nature; therefore it cannot penetrate into our
minds, unless the internal teacher, the Spirit, make way for it by his
illumination.

XXXV. In a former part of this work, relating to the corruption of nature,
we have shown more at large the inability of men to believe; therefore I
shall not fatigue the reader by a repetition of the same things. Let it
suffice that faith itself, which we possess not by nature, but which is
given us by the Spirit, is called by Paul “the spirit of faith.”(1566)
Therefore he prays “that God would fulfil,” in the Thessalonians, “all the
good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power.”(1567) By
calling faith “the work” of God, and “the good pleasure of his goodness,”
he denies it to be the proper effect of human exertion; and not content
with that, he adds that it is a specimen of the Divine power. When he says
to the Corinthians, that faith stands “not in the wisdom of men, but in
the power of God,”(1568) he speaks indeed of external miracles; but
because the reprobate have no eyes to behold them, he comprehends also the
inward seal which he elsewhere mentions. And that he may more
illustriously display his liberality in so eminent a gift, God deigns not
to bestow it promiscuously on all, but by a singular privilege imparts it
to whom he will. We have already cited testimonies to prove this point.
Augustine, who is a faithful expositor of them, says, “It was in order to
teach us that the act of believing is owing to the Divine gift, not to
human merit, that our Saviour declared, ‘No man can come to me, except the
Father which hath sent me draw him;(1569) and except it were given unto
him of my Father.’(1570) It is wonderful, that two persons hear; one
despises, the other ascends. Let him who despises, impute it to himself;
let him who ascends, not arrogate it to himself.” In another place he
says, “Wherefore is it given to one, not to another? I am not ashamed to
reply, This is a depth of the cross. From I know not what depth of the
Divine judgments, which we cannot scrutinize, proceeds all our ability.
That I can, I see; whence I can, I see not; unless that I see thus far,
that it is of God. But why one, and not another? It is too much for me; it
is an abyss, a depth of the cross. I can exclaim with admiration, but not
demonstrate it in disputation.” The sum of the whole is this—that Christ,
when he illuminates us with faith by the power of his Spirit, at the same
time ingrafts us into his body, that we may become partakers of all his
benefits.

XXXVI. It next remains, that what the mind has imbibed, be transfused into
the heart. For the word of God is not received by faith, if it floats on
the surface of the brain; but when it has taken deep root in the heart, so
as to become an impregnable fortress to sustain and repel all the assaults
of temptation. But if it be true that the right apprehension of the mind
proceeds from the illumination of the Spirit, his energy is far more
conspicuous in such a confirmation of the heart; the diffidence of the
heart being greater than the blindness of the mind; and the furnishing of
the heart with assurance being more difficult than the communication of
knowledge to the understanding. Therefore the Spirit acts as a seal, to
seal on our hearts those very promises, the certainty of which he has
previously impressed on our minds, and serves as an earnest to confirm and
establish them. “After that ye believed,” says the apostle, “ye were
sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance.”(1571) Do you see how he shows that the hearts of believers
are impressed by the Spirit, as by a seal? How, for this reason, he calls
him “the Spirit of promise,” because he ratifies the gospel to us? So, to
the Corinthians, he says, “He which hath anointed us, is God; who hath
also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.”(1572)
And in another place, where he speaks of the confidence and boldness of
hope, he makes “the earnest of the Spirit”(1573) the foundation of it.

XXXVII. I have not forgotten what I have already observed, and the
remembrance of which experience incessantly renews, that faith is agitated
with various doubts; so that the minds of the pious are seldom at ease, or
at best enjoy not a state of perpetual tranquillity. But whatever assaults
they may sustain, they either emerge from the very gulf of temptation, or
remain firm in their station. This assurance alone nourishes and supports
faith, while we are satisfied of what is declared by the Psalmist, “God is
our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. Therefore will we
not fear, though the earth be removed, and the mountains be carried into
the midst of the sea.”(1574) This most delightful repose is celebrated
also in another psalm: “I laid me down and slept; I awaked; for the Lord
sustained me.”(1575) Not that David enjoyed a happy cheerfulness of soul
perpetually flowing on in one even tenor; but having tasted the grace of
God according to the proportion of his faith, he glories in intrepidly
despising whatever could disquiet the peace of his mind. Therefore the
Scripture, intending to exhort us to faith, commands us to “be quiet.” In
Isaiah, “In quietness and in confidence shall be your strength.”(1576) In
the Psalms, “Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him.”(1577) With
which corresponds the observation of the apostle to the Hebrews, “Ye have
need of patience.”(1578)

XXXVIII. Hence we may judge, how pernicious that dogma of the schoolmen
is, that it is impossible to decide concerning the favour of God towards
us, any otherwise than from moral conjecture, as every individual may deem
himself not unworthy of it. If it must be determined by our works how the
Lord is affected towards us, I admit we cannot attain this object even by
a very slight conjecture; but as faith ought to correspond to the simple
and gratuitous promise, there remains no room for doubting. For with what
confidence, pray, shall we be armed, if we reason that God is propitious
to us on this condition, provided the purity of our life deserve it? But
having determined on a separate discussion of these points, I shall pursue
them no further at present; especially since it is manifest that nothing
is more opposite to faith than either conjecture or any thing else
approaching to doubt. And they very mischievously pervert to this purpose
the observation of the Preacher, which is frequently in their mouths: “No
man knoweth whether he is worthy of hatred or of love.”(1579) For not to
observe that this passage is falsely rendered in the Vulgate translation,
yet the meaning of Solomon, in such expressions, must be clear even to
children; it is, that if any one wishes, from the present state of things,
to judge who are the objects of Divine love or hatred, he labours in vain,
and distresses himself to no good purpose; since “there is one event to
the righteous and to the wicked; to him that sacrificeth, and to him that
sacrificeth not.”(1580) Whence it follows that God neither testifies his
love to those whom he prospers with success, nor invariably discovers his
hatred against those whom he plunges into affliction. And this observation
is designed to reprove the vanity of the human understanding; since it is
so extremely stupid respecting things most necessary to be known. He had
just before said, “That which befalleth the sons of men, befalleth beasts;
as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea, they have all one breath; so
that a man hath no preëminence above a beast.”(1581) If any one would
infer from this, that the opinion which we hold of the immortality of the
soul rests upon mere conjecture, would he not be deservedly deemed insane?
Are those persons, then, in a state of sanity, who conclude that there is
no certainty of the favour of God, because it cannot be attained from the
carnal contemplation of present things?

XXXIX. But they plead that it is rash presumption in men to arrogate to
themselves an undoubted knowledge of the Divine will. This, indeed, I
would concede to them, if we pretended to subject the incomprehensible
counsel of God to the slenderness of our understanding. But when we simply
assert with Paul, that “we have received, not the spirit of the world, but
the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely
given to us of God,”(1582) what opposition can they make to us, without at
the same time insulting the Spirit of God? But if it be a horrible
sacrilege to accuse the revelation which proceeds from him either of
falsehood, or of uncertainty, or of ambiguity, wherein do we err in
affirming its certainty? But they exclaim, that we betray great temerity,
in thus presuming to boast of the Spirit of Christ. Who could believe the
stupidity of men desirous of being esteemed teachers of the world, to be
so extreme as to stumble in this shameful manner at the first elements of
religion? It would certainly be incredible to me, if it were not proved by
the writings which they have published. Paul pronounces them alone to be
the sons of God, who are led by his Spirit:(1583) these men will have
those who are the sons of God to be led by their own spirit, but to be
destitute of the Spirit of God. He teaches, that we call God our Father at
the suggestion of the Spirit, who “beareth witness with our spirit, that
we are the children of God:”(1584) these men, though they forbid not all
invocation of God, yet deprive us of the Spirit, by whose influence alone
he can be rightly invoked. He denies them to be the servants of Christ,
who are not led by the Spirit of Christ:(1585) these men invent a sort of
Christianity, to which the Spirit of Christ is not necessary. He admits no
hope of a happy resurrection, unless we experience the Spirit dwelling in
us:(1586) these men fabricate a hope unattended by such experience. But
perhaps they will answer, that they deny not the necessity of our being
endued with the Spirit; but that it is the part of modesty and humility
not to acknowledge our possession of him. What, then, is the meaning of
the apostle in this exhortation to the Corinthians—“Examine yourselves,
whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves; know ye not yourselves,
how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?”(1587) But says
John, “We know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given
us.”(1588) And do we not call in question the promises of Christ, when we
wish to be accounted the servants of God without the possession of his
Spirit, whom he has announced that he will pour out upon all his
people?(1589) Do we not injure the Holy Spirit, if we separate faith from
him, which is his peculiar work? These being the first rudiments of piety,
it is a proof of most miserable blindness, that Christians are censured as
arrogant for presuming to glory in the presence of the Holy Spirit,
without which glorying Christianity itself cannot exist. But they
exemplify the truth of Christ’s assertion, “The world knoweth not the
Spirit of truth; but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be
in you.”(1590)

XL. Not satisfied with one attempt to destroy the stability of faith, they
assail it again from another quarter; by arguing, that although we may
form a judgment concerning the favour of God from the present state of our
righteousness, yet the knowledge of final perseverance remains in
suspense. Truly we are left in possession of an admirable confidence of
salvation, if we can only conclude from mere conjecture that we are in the
favour of God at the present instant, but are utterly ignorant what may be
our fate to‐morrow. The apostle expresses a very different opinion: “I am
persuaded (says he) that neither life, nor death, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”(1591) They
attempt to evade the force of this, by a frivolous pretence that the
apostle had it from a particular revelation; but they are too closely
pressed to avail themselves of this evasion. For he is there treating of
the benefits resulting from faith to all believers in common, not of any
which were peculiar to his own experience. But the same apostle, they say,
in another place, excites fear in us, by the mention of our imbecility and
inconstancy. “Let him (says he) that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest
he fall.”(1592) It is true; but not a fear by which we may be thrown into
consternation, but from which we may learn to “humble ourselves,” as Peter
expresses it, “under the mighty hand of God.” Besides, how preposterous is
it to limit to a moment of time the assurance of faith, whose nature it is
to go beyond the bounds of the present life, and reach forward to a future
immortality! Since believers, then, ascribe it to the grace of God that
they are illuminated by his Spirit, and enjoy through faith a
contemplation of the heavenly life, such a glorying is so remote from
arrogance, that, if any one be ashamed to confess it, he rather betrays
extreme ingratitude by a criminal suppression of the Divine goodness, than
gives an evidence of modesty or humility.

XLI. Because we thought that the nature of faith could not be better or
more clearly expressed than by the substance of the promise, which is the
proper foundation on which it rests, and the removal of which would
occasion its fall or annihilation,—it is from the promise, therefore, that
we have taken our definition, which, nevertheless, is not at all at
variance with that definition, or rather description, of the apostle,
which he accommodates to his argument; where he says, that “faith is the
substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.”(1593) For
by ὑποστασις, which is the word he uses, and which is rendered substance,
he intends a prop, as it were, on which the pious mind rests and reclines;
as though he had said, that faith is a certain and secure possession of
those things which are promised to us by God. Unless any one would rather
understand ὑποστασις of confidence, to which I shall not object, though I
adopt that idea which is the more generally received. Again: to signify
that even till the last day, when the books shall be opened, these objects
are too sublime to be perceived by our senses, seen with our eyes, or
handled with our hands; and that, in the mean time, they are enjoyed by us
only as we exceed the capacity of our own understanding, extend our views
beyond all terrestrial things, and even rise above ourselves; he has
added, that this security of possession relates to things which are the
objects of hope, and therefore invisible. For “hope that is seen (as Paul
observes) is not hope; for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope
for?”(1594) But when he calls it an evidence, or proof, or (as Augustine
has frequently rendered it) a conviction of things not seen, (for the
Greek word is ἐλεγχος,) it is just as though he had called it the evidence
of things not apparent, the vision of things not seen, the perspicuity of
things obscure, the presence of things absent, the demonstration of things
concealed. For the mysteries of God, of which description are the things
that pertain to our salvation, cannot be discerned in themselves, and in
their own nature; we only discover them in his word, of whose veracity we
ought to be so firmly persuaded, as to consider all that he speaks as
though it were already performed and accomplished. But how can the mind
elevate itself to receive such a taste of the Divine goodness, without
being all inflamed with mutual love to God? For the plenitude of
happiness, which God has reserved for them who fear him, cannot be truly
known, but it must at the same time excite a vehement affection. And those
whom it has once affected, it draws and elevates towards itself. Therefore
we need not wonder if a perverse and malicious heart never feel this
affection, which conducts us to heaven itself, and introduces us to the
most secret treasures of God and the most sacred recesses of his kingdom,
which must not be profaned by the entrance of an impure heart. For what
the schoolmen(1595) advance concerning the priority of charity to faith
and hope, is a mere reverie of a distempered imagination, since it is
faith alone which first produces charity in us. How much more accurately
Bernard speaks! “I believe,” says he, “that the testimony of conscience,
which Paul calls the rejoicing of the pious, consists in three things. For
it is necessary to believe, first of all, that you cannot have remission
of sins but through the mercy of God; secondly, that you cannot have any
good work, unless he bestow this also; lastly, that you cannot by any
works merit eternal life, unless that also be freely given.”(1596) Just
after he adds, “that these things are not sufficient, but are a beginning
of faith; because in believing that sins can only be forgiven by God, we
ought at the same time to consider that they are forgiven us, till we are
also persuaded, by the testimony of the Holy Spirit, that salvation is
laid up for us; because God forgives sins; he also bestows merits; he
likewise confers rewards; it is not possible to remain in this beginning.”
But these and other things must be treated in the proper places; it may
suffice, at present, to ascertain wherein faith itself consists.

XLII. Now, wherever this living faith shall be found, it must necessarily
be attended with the hope of eternal salvation as its inseparable
concomitant, or rather must originate and produce it; since the want of
this hope would prove us to be utterly destitute of faith, however
eloquently and beautifully we might discourse concerning it. For if faith
be, as has been stated, a certain persuasion of the truth of God, that it
can neither lie, nor deceive us, nor be frustrated,—they who have felt
this assurance, likewise expect a period to arrive when God will
accomplish his promises, which, according to their persuasion, cannot but
be true; so that, in short, hope is no other than an expectation of those
things which faith has believed to be truly promised by God. Thus faith
believes the veracity of God, hope expects the manifestation of it in due
time; faith believes him to be our Father, hope expects him always to act
towards us in this character; faith believes that eternal life is given to
us, hope expects it one day to be revealed; faith is the foundation on
which hope rests, hope nourishes and sustains faith. For as no man can
have any expectations from God, but he who has first believed his
promises, so also the imbecility of our faith must be sustained and
cherished by patient hope and expectation, lest it grow weary and faint.
For which reason, Paul rightly places our salvation in hope.(1597) For
hope, while it is silently expecting the Lord, restrains faith, that it
may not be too precipitate; it confirms faith, that it may not waver in
the Divine promises, or begin to doubt of the truth of them; it refreshes
it, that it may not grow weary; it extends it to the farthest goal, that
it may not fail in the midst of the course, or even at the entrance of it.
Finally, hope, by continually renewing and restoring faith, causes it
frequently to persevere with more vigour than hope itself. But in how many
cases the assistance of hope is necessary to the establishment of faith,
will better appear, if we consider how many species of temptations assail
and harass those who have embraced the word of God. First, the Lord, by
deferring the execution of his promises, frequently keeps our minds in
suspense longer than we wish; here it is the office of hope to obey the
injunction of the prophet—“though it tarry, wait for it.”(1598) Sometimes
he not only suffers us to languish, but openly manifests his indignation:
in this case it is much more necessary to have the assistance of hope,
that, according to the language of another prophet, we may “wait upon the
Lord that hideth his face from Jacob.”(1599) Scoffers also arise, as Peter
says, and inquire, “Where is the promise of his coming? for since the
fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning
of the creation.”(1600) And the flesh and the world whisper the same
things into our ears. Here faith must be supported by the patience of
hope, and kept fixed on the contemplation of eternity, that it may
consider “a thousand years as one day.”(1601)

XLIII. On account of this union and affinity, the Scripture sometimes uses
the words faith and hope without any distinction. For when Peter says that
we “are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready to be
revealed,”(1602) he attributes to faith, what was more applicable to hope;
and not without reason, since we have already shown, that hope is no other
than the nourishment and strength of faith. Sometimes they are joined
together, as in a passage of the same Epistle—“that your faith and hope
might be in God.”(1603) But Paul, in the Epistle to the Philippians,(1604)
deduces expectation from hope; because in patient hope we suspend our
desires till the arrival of God’s appointed time. All which may be better
understood from the tenth chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews,(1605)
which I have already cited. In another place, Paul, though with some
impropriety of expression, conveys the very same idea in these words: “We,
through the Spirit, wait for the hope of righteousness by faith;”(1606)
because, having embraced the testimony of the gospel concerning his
gratuitous love, we wait till God openly manifests what is now concealed
under hope. Now, it is easy to see the absurdity of Peter Lombard, in
laying a twofold foundation of hope; the grace of God, and the merit of
works. Hope can have no other object than faith; and the only object of
faith, we have very clearly stated to be the mercy of God; to which both
its eyes, if I may be allowed the expression, ought to be directed. But it
may be proper to hear what kind of a reason he advances. If, says he, you
venture to hope for any thing without merits, it must not be called hope,
but presumption. Who is there that will not justly detest such teachers,
who pronounce a confidence in the veracity of God to be temerity and
presumption? For whereas it is the will of the Lord that we should expect
every thing from his goodness, they assert that it is presumption to
depend and rely upon it. Such a master is worthy of such disciples as he
has found in the schools of wranglers! But, as for us, since we see that
sinners are enjoined by the oracles of God to entertain a hope of
salvation, let us joyfully presume so far on his veracity as to reject all
confidence in our own works, to depend solely on his mercy, and venture to
cherish a hope of happiness. He who said, “According to your faith be it
unto you,”(1607) will not deceive us.




