Chapter VI. Redemption For Lost Man To Be Sought In Christ.


The whole human race having perished in the person of Adam, our original
excellence and dignity, which we have noticed, so far from being
advantageous to us, only involves us in greater ignominy, till God, who
does not acknowledge the pollution and corruption of man by sin to be his
work, appears as a Redeemer in the person of his only begotten Son.
Therefore, since we are fallen from life into death, all that knowledge of
God as a Creator, of which we have been treating, would be useless, unless
it were succeeded by faith exhibiting God to us as a Father in Christ.
This, indeed, was the genuine order of nature, that the fabric of the
world should be a school in which we might learn piety, and thence be
conducted to eternal life and perfect felicity. But since the fall,
whithersoever we turn our eyes, the curse of God meets us on every side,
which, whilst it seizes innocent creatures and involves them in our guilt,
must necessarily overwhelm our souls with despair. For though God is
pleased still to manifest his paternal kindness to us in various ways, yet
we cannot, from a contemplation of the world, conclude that he is our
Father, when our conscience disturbs us within, and convinces us that our
sins afford a just reason why God should abandon us, and no longer esteem
us as his children. We are also chargeable with stupidity and ingratitude;
for our minds, being blinded, do not perceive the truth; and all our
senses being corrupted, we wickedly defraud God of his glory. We must
therefore subscribe to the declaration of Paul: “For after that in the
wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.”(737) What he
denominates the wisdom of God, is this magnificent theatre of heaven and
earth, which is replete with innumerable miracles, and from the
contemplation of which we ought wisely to acquire the knowledge of God.
But because we have made so little improvement in this way, he recalls us
to the faith of Christ, which is despised by unbelievers on account of its
apparent folly. Wherefore, though the preaching of the cross is not
agreeable to human reason, we ought, nevertheless, to embrace it with all
humility, if we desire to return to God our Creator, from whom we have
been alienated, and to have him reassume the character of our Father.
Since the fall of the first man, no knowledge of God, without the
Mediator, has been available to salvation. For Christ speaks not of his
own time only, but comprehends all ages, when he says that “this is life
eternal, to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast
sent.”(738) And this aggravates the stupidity of those who set open the
gate of heaven to all unbelievers and profane persons, without the grace
of Christ, whom the Scripture universally represents as the only door of
entrance into salvation. But if any man would restrict this declaration of
Christ to the period of the first promulgation of the gospel, we are
prepared with a refutation. For it has been a common opinion, in all ages
and nations, that those who are alienated from God, and pronounced
accursed, and children of wrath, cannot please him without a
reconciliation. Here add the answer of Christ to the woman of Samaria: “Ye
worship ye know not what: we know what we worship; for salvation is of the
Jews.”(739) In these words he at once condemns all the religions of the
Gentiles as false, and assigns a reason for it; because under the law the
Redeemer was promised only to the chosen people; whence it follows that no
worship has ever been acceptable to God, unless it had respect to Christ.
Hence also Paul affirms that all the Gentiles were without God, and
destitute of the hope of life.(740) Now, as John teaches us that life was
from the beginning in Christ, and that the whole world are fallen from
it,(741) it is necessary to return to that fountain; and therefore Christ
asserts himself to be the life, as he is the author of the propitiation.
And, indeed, the celestial inheritance belongs exclusively to the children
of God. But it is very unreasonable that they should be considered in the
place and order of his children, who have not been engrafted into the body
of his only begotten Son. And John plainly declares that “they who believe
in his name become the sons of God.”(742) But as it is not my design in
this place to treat professedly of faith in Christ, these cursory hints
shall at present suffice.

II. Therefore God never showed himself propitious to his ancient people,
nor afforded them any hope of his favour, without a Mediator. I forbear to
speak of the legal sacrifices, by which the faithful were plainly and
publicly instructed that salvation was to be sought solely in that
expiation, which has been accomplished by Christ alone. I only assert,
that the happiness of the Church has always been founded on the person of
Christ. For though God comprehended in his covenant all the posterity of
Abraham, yet Paul judiciously reasons, that Christ is in reality that Seed
in whom all the nations were to be blessed;(743) since we know that the
natural descendants of that patriarch were not reckoned as his seed. For,
to say nothing of Ishmael and others, what was the cause, that of the two
sons of Isaac, the twin‐brothers Esau and Jacob, even when they were yet
unborn, one should be chosen and the other rejected? How came it to pass
that the first‐born was rejected, and that the younger obtained his
birthright? How came the majority of the people to be disinherited? It is
evident, therefore, that the seed of Abraham is reckoned principally in
one person, and that the promised salvation was not manifested till the
coming of Christ, whose office it is to collect what had been scattered
abroad. The first adoption, therefore, of the chosen people, depended on
the grace of the Mediator; which, though it is not so plainly expressed by
Moses, yet appears to have been generally well known to all the pious. For
before the appointment of any king in the nation, Hannah, the mother of
Samuel, speaking of the felicity of the faithful, thus expressed herself
in her song: “The Lord shall give strength unto his king, and exalt the
horn of his anointed.”(744) Her meaning in these words is, that God will
bless his Church. And to this agrees the oracle, which is soon after
introduced: “I will raise me up a faithful priest, and he shall walk
before mine anointed.” And there is no doubt that it was the design of the
heavenly Father to exhibit in David and his posterity a lively image of
Christ. With a design to exhort the pious, therefore, to the fear of God,
he enjoins them to “kiss the Son;”(745) which agrees with this declaration
of the gospel: “He that honoureth not the Son honoureth not the
Father.”(746) Therefore, though the kingdom was weakened by the revolt of
the ten tribes, yet the covenant, which God had made with David and his
successors, could not but stand, as he also declared by the Prophets: “I
will not rend away all the kingdom, but will give one tribe to thy son,
for David my servant’s sake, and for Jerusalem’s sake which I have
chosen.”(747) This is repeated again and again. It is also expressly
added, “I will for this afflict the seed of David, but not for ever.”(748)
At a little distance of time it is said, “For David’s sake did the Lord
his God give him a lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his son after him, and to
establish Jerusalem.”(749) Even when the state was come to the verge of
ruin, it was again said, “The Lord would not destroy Judah, for David his
servant’s sake, as he promised him to give him alway a light, and to his
children.”(750) The sum of the whole is this—that David alone was chosen,
to the rejection of all others, as the perpetual object of the Divine
favour; as it is said, in another place, “He forsook the tabernacle of
Shiloh; he refused the tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the tribe of
Ephraim; but chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion, which he loved. He
chose David also his servant, to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his
inheritance.”(751) Finally, it pleased God to preserve his Church in such
a way, that its security and salvation should depend on that head. David
therefore exclaims, “The Lord is their strength, and he is the saving
strength of his anointed;”(752) and immediately adds this petition: “Save
thy people, and bless thine inheritance;” signifying that the state of the
Church is inseparably connected with the government of Christ. In the same
sense he elsewhere says, “Save, Lord; let the king hear us when we
call.”(753) In these words he clearly teaches us that the faithful resort
to God for assistance, with no other confidence than because they are
sheltered under the protection of the king. This is to be inferred from
another psalm: “Save, O Lord! Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the
Lord;”(754) where it is sufficiently evident that the faithful are invited
to Christ, that they may hope to be saved by the power of God. The same
thing is alluded to in another prayer, where the whole Church implores the
mercy of God: “Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the
Son of man whom thou madest strong for thyself.”(755) For though the
author of the psalm deplores the dissipation of all the people, yet he
ardently prays for their restoration in their head alone. But when
Jeremiah, after the people were driven into exile, the land laid waste,
and all things apparently ruined, bewails the miseries of the Church, he
principally laments that by the subversion of the kingdom, the hope of the
faithful was cut off. “The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the
Lord, was taken in their pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall
live among the heathen.”(756) Hence it is sufficiently evident, that since
God cannot be propitious to mankind but through the Mediator, Christ was
always exhibited to the holy fathers under the law, as the object to which
they should direct their faith.

III. Now, when consolation is promised in affliction, but especially when
the deliverance of the Church is described, the standard of confidence and
hope is erected in Christ alone. “Thou wentest forth for the salvation of
thy people, even for salvation with thine anointed,”(757) says Habakkuk.
And whenever the Prophets mention the restoration of the Church, they
recall the people to the promise given to David concerning the perpetuity
of his kingdom. Nor is this to be wondered at; for otherwise there would
be no stability in the covenant. To this refers the memorable answer of
Isaiah. For when he saw that his declaration concerning the raising of the
siege, and the present deliverance of Jerusalem, was rejected by that
unbelieving king, Ahaz, he makes rather an abrupt transition to the
Messiah: “Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son;”(758)
indirectly suggesting, that although the king and the people, in their
perverseness, rejected the promise which had been given them, as though
they would purposely labour to invalidate the truth of God, yet that his
covenant would not be frustrated, but that the Redeemer should come at his
appointed time. Finally, all the Prophets, in order to display the Divine
mercy, were constantly careful to exhibit to view that kingdom of David,
from which redemption and eternal salvation were to proceed. Thus Isaiah:
“I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of
David. Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people;”(759) because
in desperate circumstances the faithful could have no hope, any otherwise
than by his interposition as a witness, that God would be merciful to
them. Thus also Jeremiah, to comfort them who were in despair, says,
“Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a
righteous Branch. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell
safely.”(760) And Ezekiel: “I will set up one Shepherd over them, and he
shall feed them, even my servant David. And I the Lord will be their God,
and my servant David a prince among them; and I will make with them a
covenant of peace.”(761) Again, in another place, having treated of their
incredible renovation, he says, “David my servant shall be king over them;
and they all shall have one Shepherd. Moreover I will make a covenant of
peace with them; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them.”(762) I
select a few passages out of many, because I only wish to apprize the
reader, that the hope of the pious has never been placed any where but in
Christ. All the other Prophets also uniformly speak the same language. As
Hosea: “Then shall the children of Judah and the children of Israel be
gathered together, and appoint themselves one head.”(763) And in a
subsequent chapter he is still more explicit: “The children of Israel
shall return, and seek the Lord their God, and David their king.”(764)
Micah also, discoursing on the return of the people, expressly declares,
“their king shall pass before them, and the Lord on the head of
them.”(765) Thus Amos, intending to predict the restoration of the people,
says, “In that day I will raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen,
and close up the breaches thereof; and I will raise up his ruins.”(766)
This implies that the only standard of salvation was the restoration of
the regal dignity in the family of David, which was accomplished in
Christ. Zechariah, therefore, living nearer to the time of the
manifestation of Christ, more openly exclaims, “Rejoice greatly, O
daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh
unto thee: he is just, and having salvation.”(767) This corresponds with a
passage from a psalm, already cited: “The Lord is the saving strength of
his anointed. Save thy people;”(768) where salvation is extended from the
head to the whole body.

IV. It was the will of God that the Jews should be instructed by these
prophecies, so that they might direct their eyes to Christ whenever they
wanted deliverance. Nor, indeed, notwithstanding their shameful
degeneracy, could the memory of this general principle ever be
obliterated—that God would be the deliverer of the Church by the hand of
Christ, according to his promise to David; and that in this manner the
covenant of grace, in which God had adopted his elect, would at length be
confirmed. Hence it came to pass, that when Christ, a little before his
death, entered into Jerusalem, that song was heard from the mouths of
children, “Hosanna to the Son of David.”(769) For the subject of their
song appears to have been derived from a sentiment generally received and
avowed by the people, that there remained to them no other pledge of the
mercy of God, but in the advent of the Redeemer. For this reason Christ
commands his disciples to believe in him, that they may distinctly and
perfectly believe in God: “Ye believe in God, believe also in me.”(770)
For though, strictly speaking, faith ascends from Christ to the Father,
yet he suggests, that though it were even fixed on God, yet it would
gradually decline, unless he interposed, to preserve its stability. The
majesty of God is otherwise far above the reach of mortals, who are like
worms crawling upon the earth. Wherefore, though I do not reject that
common observation that God is the object of faith, yet I consider it as
requiring some correction. For it is not without reason that Christ is
called “the image of the invisible God;”(771) but by this appellation we
are reminded, that unless God reveal himself to us in Christ, we cannot
have that knowledge of him which is necessary to salvation. For although
among the Jews the scribes had by false glosses obscured the declarations
of the Prophets concerning the Redeemer, yet Christ assumed it for
granted, as if allowed by common consent, that there was no other remedy
for the confusion into which the Jews had fallen, nor any other mode of
deliverance for the Church, but the exhibition of the Mediator. There was
not, indeed, such a general knowledge as there ought to have been, of the
principle taught by Paul, that “Christ is the end of the law;”(772) but
the truth and certainty of this evidently appears both from the law itself
and from the Prophets. I am not yet treating of faith; there will be a
more suitable place for that subject in another part of the work. Only let
this be well fixed in the mind of the reader; that the first step to piety
is to know that God is our Father, to protect, govern, and support us till
he gathers us into the eternal inheritance of his kingdom; that hence it
is plain, as we have before asserted, that there can be no saving
knowledge of God without Christ; and consequently that from the beginning
of the world he has always been manifested to all the elect, that they
might look to him, and repose all their confidence in him. In this sense
Irenæus says that the Father, who is infinite in himself, becomes finite
in the Son; because he has accommodated himself to our capacity, that he
may not overwhelm our minds with the infinity of his glory.(773) And
fanatics, not considering this, pervert a useful observation into an
impious reverie, as though there were in Christ merely a portion of Deity,
an emanation from the infinite perfection; whereas the sole meaning of
that writer is, that God is apprehended in Christ, and in him alone. The
assertion of John has been verified in all ages, “Whosoever denieth the
Son, the same hath not the Father.”(774) For though many in ancient times
gloried in being worshippers of the Supreme Deity, the Creator of heaven
and earth, yet, because they had no Mediator, it was impossible for them
to have any real acquaintance with the mercy of God, or persuasion that he
was their Father. Therefore, as they did not hold the head, that is,
Christ, all their knowledge of God was obscure and unsettled; whence it
came to pass, that degenerating at length into gross and vile
superstitions, they betrayed their ignorance, like the Turks in modern
times; who, though they boast of having the Creator of heaven and earth
for their God, yet only substitute an idol instead of the true God as long
as they remain enemies to Christ.




