Chapter X. The Similarity Of The Old And New Testaments.


From the preceding observations it may now be evident, that all those
persons, from the beginning of the world, whom God has adopted into the
society of his people, have been federally connected with him by the same
law and the same doctrine which are in force among us: but because it is
of no small importance that this point be established, I shall show, by
way of appendix, since the fathers were partakers with us of the same
inheritance, and hoped for the same salvation through the grace of our
common Mediator, how far their condition in this connection was different
from ours. For though the testimonies we have collected from the law and
the prophets in proof of this, render it sufficiently evident that the
people of God have never had any other rule of religion and piety, yet
because some writers have raised many disputes concerning the difference
of the Old and New Testaments, which may occasion doubts in the mind of an
undiscerning reader, we shall assign a particular chapter for the better
and more accurate discussion of this subject. Moreover, what would
otherwise have been very useful, has now been rendered necessary for us by
Servetus and some madmen of the sect of the Anabaptists, who entertain no
other ideas of the Israelitish nation, than of a herd of swine, whom they
pretend to have been pampered by the Lord in this world, without the least
hope of a future immortality in heaven. To defend the pious mind,
therefore, from this pestilent error, and at the same time to remove all
difficulties which may arise from the mention of a diversity between the
Old and New Testaments, let us, as we proceed, examine what similarity
there is between them, and what difference; what covenant the Lord made
with the Israelites, in ancient times, before the advent of Christ, and
what he has entered into with us since his manifestation in the flesh.

II. And, indeed, both these topics may be despatched in one word. The
covenant of all the fathers is so far from differing substantially from
ours, that it is the very same; it only varies in the administration. But
as such extreme brevity would not convey to any man a clear understanding
of the subject, it is necessary, if we would do any good, to proceed to a
more diffuse explication of it. But in showing their similarity, or rather
unity, it will be needless to recapitulate all the particulars which have
already been mentioned, and unseasonable to introduce those things which
remain to be discussed in some other place. We must here insist chiefly on
three principal points. We have to maintain, First, that carnal opulence
and felicity were not proposed to the Jews as the mark towards which they
should ultimately aspire, but that they were adopted to the hope of
immortality, and that the truth of this adoption was certified to them by
oracles, by the law, and by the prophets. Secondly, that the covenant, by
which they were united to the Lord, was founded, not on any merits of
theirs, but on the mere mercy of God who called them. Thirdly, that they
both possessed and knew Christ as the Mediator, by whom they were united
to God, and became partakers of his promises. The second of these points,
as perhaps it is not yet sufficiently known, shall be demonstrated at
large in its proper place. For we shall prove by numerous and explicit
testimonies of the prophets, that whatever blessing the Lord ever gave or
promised to his people, proceeded from his indulgent goodness. The third
point has been clearly demonstrated in several places. And we have not
wholly neglected the first.

III. In discussing the first point, therefore, because it principally
belongs to the present argument, and is the grand subject of their
controversy against us, we will use the more diligent application; yet in
such a manner, that if any thing be wanting to the explication of the
others, it may be supplied as we proceed, or added afterwards in a
suitable place. Indeed, the apostle removes every doubt respecting all
these points, when he says, that God the Father “promised afore by his
prophets in the holy Scriptures, the gospel concerning his Son,”(949)
which he promulgated in the appointed time: and again, that the
righteousness of faith, which is revealed in the gospel, is “witnessed by
the law and the prophets.”(950) For the gospel does not detain men in the
joy of the present life, but elevates them to the hope of immortality;
does not fasten them to terrestrial delights, but announcing to them a
hope reserved in heaven, does as it were transport them thither. For this
is the description which he gives in another place: “In whom also after
that ye believed, ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise, which
is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased
possession.”(951) Again: “We heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of
the love which ye have to all the saints, for the hope which is laid up
for you in heaven, whereof ye heard before in the word of the truth of the
gospel.”(952) Again: “He called you by our gospel, to the obtaining of the
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.”(953) Whence it is called “the word of
salvation,” and “the power of God to the salvation of believers,” and “the
kingdom of heaven.” Now, if the doctrine of the gospel be spiritual, and
open a way to the possession of an immortal life, let us not suppose that
they, to whom it was promised and announced, were totally negligent and
careless of their souls, and stupefied in the pursuit of corporeal
pleasures. Nor let any one here cavil, that the promises which are
recorded in the law and the prophets, respecting the gospel, were not
designed for the Jews. For just after having spoken of the gospel being
promised in the law, he adds, “that what things soever the law saith, it
saith to them who are under the law.”(954) This was in another argument, I
grant; but when he said that whatever the law inculcates truly belonged to
the Jews, he was not so forgetful as not to remember what he had affirmed,
a few verses before, concerning the gospel promised in the law. By
declaring that the Old Testament contained evangelical promises,
therefore, the apostle most clearly demonstrates that it principally
related to a future life.

IV. For the same reason it follows, that it was founded on the free mercy
of God, and confirmed by the mediation of Christ. For even the preaching
of the gospel only announces, that sinners are justified by the paternal
goodness of God, independently of any merit of their own; and the whole
substance of it terminates in Christ. Who, then, dares to represent the
Jews as destitute of Christ,—them with whom we are informed the
evangelical covenant was made, of which Christ is the sole foundation? Who
dares to represent them as strangers to the benefit of a free salvation,
to whom we are informed the doctrine of the righteousness of faith was
communicated? But not to be prolix in disputing on a clear point, we have
a remarkable expression of the Lord: “Abraham rejoiced to see my day; and
he saw it, and was glad.”(955) And what Christ there declares concerning
Abraham, the apostle shows to have been universal among the faithful, when
he says that Christ remains “the same yesterday, and to‐day, and for
ever.”(956) For he there speaks, not only of the eternal Divinity of
Christ, but of his power, which has been perpetually manifested to the
faithful. Wherefore both the blessed Virgin and Zachariah declare, in
their songs, that the salvation revealed in Christ is a performance of the
promises which the Lord had made to Abraham and the patriarchs.(957) If
the Lord, in the manifestation of Christ, faithfully performed his ancient
oath, it cannot be denied that the end of the Old Testament was always in
Christ and eternal life.

V. Moreover the apostle makes the Israelites equal to us, not only in the
grace of the covenant, but also in the signification of the sacraments.
For when he means to adduce examples of the punishments with which the
Scripture states them to have been formerly chastised, in order to deter
the Corinthians from running into similar crimes, he begins by premising,
that we have no reason to arrogate any preëminence to ourselves, which can
deliver us from the Divine vengeance inflicted on them; since the Lord not
only favoured them with the same benefits, but illustrated his grace among
them by the same symbols;(958) as though he had said, If ye confide in
being beyond the reach of danger, because both baptism by which you have
been sealed, and the supper which you daily receive, have excellent
promises, while at the same time you despise the Divine goodness, and live
licentious lives,—know ye, that the Jews also were not destitute of such
symbols, though the Lord inflicted on them his severest judgments. They
were baptized in their passage through the sea, and in the cloud by which
they were protected from the fervour of the sun. Our opponents maintain
that passage to have been a carnal baptism, corresponding in some degree
to our spiritual one. But if that were admitted, the apostle’s argument
would not proceed; for his design here is to prevent Christians from
supposing that they excel the Jews in the privilege of baptism. Nor is
what immediately follows, that they “did all eat the same spiritual meat,
and did all drink the same spiritual drink,” which he interprets of
Christ, liable to this cavil.

VI. To invalidate this declaration of Paul, they object the assertion of
Christ, “Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead. If
any man eat of this bread, (that is, my flesh,) he shall live for
ever.”(959) But the two passages are reconciled without any difficulty.
The Lord, because he was addressing auditors who only sought to be
satisfied with corporeal sustenance, but were unconcerned about food for
the soul, accommodates his discourse in some measure to their capacity,
and institutes a comparison between manna and his own body, particularly
to strike their senses. They demand that in order to acquire authority to
himself, he should prove his power by some miracle, such as Moses
performed in the desert, when he obtained manna from heaven. In the manna,
however, they had no idea of any thing but a remedy for corporeal hunger,
with which the people were then afflicted. They did not penetrate to that
sublimer mystery of which Paul treats. Christ, therefore, to demonstrate
the superiority of the blessing they ought to expect from him, to that
which they said their fathers had received from Moses, makes this
comparison: If it be in your opinion a great and memorable miracle, that
the Lord, to prevent his people from perishing in the wilderness, supplied
them, by means of Moses, with heavenly food, which served them as a
temporary sustenance,—hence conclude how much more excellent that food
must be, which communicates immortality. We see, then, why the Lord
omitted the principal thing designed by the manna, and only remarked the
lowest advantage that resulted from it. It was because the Jews, as if
with an intention of reproaching him, contrasted him with Moses, who had
supplied the necessities of the people with manna. He replies, that he is
the dispenser of a far superior favour, in comparison with which the
corporeal sustenance of the people, the sole object of their great
admiration, deserves to be considered as nothing. Knowing that the Lord,
when he rained manna from heaven, not only poured it down for the support
of their bodies, but likewise dispersed it as a spiritual mystery, to
typify that spiritual vivification which is experienced in Christ, Paul
does not neglect that view of the subject which is most deserving of
consideration. Wherefore it is certainly and clearly proved, that the same
promises of an eternal and heavenly life, with which the Lord now favours
us, were not only communicated to the Jews, but even sealed and confirmed
by sacraments truly spiritual. This subject is argued at length by
Augustine against Faustus the Manichæan.

VII. But if the reader would prefer a recital of testimonies from the law
and the prophets, to show him that the spiritual covenant was common also
to the fathers, as we have heard from Christ and his apostles,—I will
attend to this wish, and that with the greater readiness, because our
adversaries will thereby be more decisively confuted, and will have no
pretence for any future cavil. I will begin with that demonstration,
which, though I know the Anabaptists will superciliously deem it futile
and almost ridiculous, yet will have considerable weight with persons of
docility and good understanding. And I take it for granted, that there is
such a vital efficacy in the Divine word as to quicken the souls of all
those whom God favours with a participation of it. For the assertion of
Peter has ever been true, that it is “an incorruptible seed, which abideth
for ever;”(960) as he also concludes from the words of Isaiah.(961) Now,
when God anciently united the Jews with himself in this sacred bond, there
is no doubt that he separated them to the hope of eternal life. For when I
say, that they embraced the word which was to connect them more closely
with God, I advert not to that general species of communication with him,
which is diffused through heaven and earth, and all the creatures in the
universe, which although it animates all things according to their
respective natures, yet does not deliver from the necessity of corruption.
I refer to that particular species of communication, by which the minds of
the pious are enlightened into the knowledge of God, and in some measure
united to him. Since Adam, Abel, Noah, Abraham, and the other patriarchs,
were attached to God by such an illumination of his word, I maintain,
there can be no doubt that they had an entrance into his immortal kingdom.
For it was a real participation of God, which cannot be separated from the
blessing of eternal life.

VIII. If the subject still appear involved in any obscurity, let us
proceed to the very form of the covenant; which will not only satisfy
sober minds, but will abundantly prove the ignorance of those who
endeavour to oppose it. For the Lord has always made this covenant with
his servants: “I will be your God, and ye shall be my people.”(962) These
expressions, according to the common explanation of the prophets,
comprehend life, and salvation, and consummate felicity. For it is not
without reason that David frequently pronounces, how “blessed is the
nation whose God is the Lord; and the people whom he hath chosen for his
own inheritance;”(963) and that not on account of any earthly felicity,
but because he delivers from death, perpetually preserves, and attends
with everlasting mercy, those whom he has taken for his people. As it is
expressed in the other prophets, “Art thou not from everlasting, O Lord my
God, mine Holy One? we shall not die.”(964) “The Lord is our Lawgiver, the
Lord is our King; he will save us.”(965) “Happy art thou, O Israel: who is
like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord?”(966) But not to labour much
on a point which does not require it, we are frequently reminded, in
reading the prophets, that we shall have a plenitude of all blessings, and
even a certainty of salvation, provided the Lord be our God. And that on
good ground; for if his face, as soon as it has begun to shine, be a
present pledge of salvation, will God manifest himself to any man without
opening the treasures of salvation to him? For God is our God, on the
express condition of his “walking in the midst of us,” as he declared by
Moses.(967) But this presence of his cannot be obtained without the
possession of life. And though nothing further had been expressed, they
had a promise of spiritual life sufficiently clear in these words: “I am
the Lord your God.”(968) For he announced that he would be a God, not only
to their bodies, but chiefly to their souls; for the soul, unless united
to God by righteousness, remains alienated from him at death. But let that
union take place, and it will be attended with eternal salvation.

IX. Moreover, he not only declared himself to be their God, but promised
to continue so for ever; in order that their hope, not contented with
present blessings, might be extended to eternity. And that the use of the
future tense conveyed this idea to them, appears from many expressions,
where the faithful console themselves not only amidst present evils, but
for futurity, that God will never desert them. But in regard to the second
part of the promise, he still more plainly encouraged them concerning the
extension of the Divine blessing to them beyond the limits of the present
life: “I will be a God to thy seed after thee.”(969) For if he intended to
declare his benevolence to them after they were dead, by blessing their
posterity, much more would he not fail of manifesting his favour towards
themselves. For God is not like men, who transfer their love to the
children of their friends, because death takes away their opportunity of
performing kind offices to those who were objects of their regard. But
God, whose beneficence is not interrupted by death, deprives not the dead
of the blessings of his mercy, which for their sakes he diffuses through a
thousand generations. The design of the Lord, therefore, was to show them,
by a clear proof, the magnitude and abundance of his goodness which they
should experience after death, when he described its exuberance as
reaching to all their posterity.(970) Now, the Lord sealed the truth, and,
as it were, exhibited the completion of this promise, when he called
himself the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, long after they were
dead.(971) For what is implied in it? Would it not have been a ridiculous
appellation, if they had perished? It would have been just as if he had
said, I am the God of those who have no existence. Wherefore, the
evangelists relate, that with this single argument the Sadducees were so
embarrassed by Christ,(972) as to be unable to deny that Moses had given a
testimony in favour of the resurrection of the dead; for they had learned
from Moses himself, that “all his saints are in his hand.”(973) Whence it
was easy to infer, that death had not annihilated those whom he, who is
the arbiter of life and death, had received into his guardianship and
protection.

X. Now, to come to the principal point on which this controversy turns,
let us examine, whether the faithful themselves were not so instructed by
the Lord, as to be sensible that they had a better life in another world,
and to meditate on that to the neglect of the present. In the first place,
the course of life which was divinely enjoined them was a perpetual
exercise, by which they were reminded that they were the most miserable of
all mankind, if they had no happiness but in the present life. Adam,
rendered most unhappy by the mere remembrance of his lost felicity, finds
great difficulty in supplying his wants by anxious toils.(974) Nor does
the Divine malediction confine itself to his manual labours; he
experiences the bitterest sorrow from that which was his only remaining
consolation. Of his two sons, he is deprived of one by the parricidal
hands of his brother; the survivor is deservedly the object of his
detestation and abhorrence.(975) Abel, cruelly assassinated in the flower
of his age, exhibits an example of human calamity. Noah, while the whole
world securely abandons itself to sensual delights, consumes a valuable
part of his life with excessive fatigue in building the ark.(976) His
escape from death was attended with greater distress than if he had died a
hundred times. For besides that the ark was, as it were, a sepulchre to
him for ten months,(977) nothing could be more disagreeable than to be
detained for so long a period almost immersed in the ordure of animals.
After having escaped from such great difficulties, he meets with a fresh
occasion of grief. He sees himself ridiculed by his own son, and is
constrained to pronounce a curse with his own mouth upon him, whom by the
great goodness of God he had received safe from the deluge.(978)

XI. Abraham is one who ought to be deemed equal to a host, if we consider
his faith, which is proposed to us as the best standard of believing, so
that we must be numbered in his family, in order to be the children of
God. Now, what would be more absurd, than that Abraham should be the
father of all the faithful, and not possess even the lowest place among
them? But he cannot be excluded from the number, nor even from the most
honourable station, without the destruction of the whole Church. Now, with
respect to the circumstances of his life;—when he is first called, he is
torn by the Divine command from his country, his parents, and his friends,
the enjoyment of whom is supposed to give life its principal relish; as
though God positively intended to deprive him of all the pleasures of
life.(979) As soon as he has entered the land in which he is commanded to
reside, he is driven from it by a famine. He removes, in search of relief,
to a place where, for the preservation of his own safety, he finds it
necessary to disown his wife, which would probably be more afflictive to
him than many deaths.(980) After having returned to the country of his
residence, he is again expelled from it by famine. What kind of felicity
is it to dwell in such a country, where he must so frequently experience
hunger, and even perish for want of sustenance, unless he leaves it? In
the country of Abimelech, he is again driven to the same necessity of
purchasing his own personal safety with the loss of his wife.(981) While
he wanders hither and thither for many years in an unsettled state, he is
compelled, by the continual quarrels of his servants, to send away his
nephew, whom he regarded as a son.(982) There is no doubt that he bore
this separation just as he would the amputation of one of his limbs. Soon
after he is informed that enemies have carried him away captive.(983)
Whithersoever he directs his course, he finds himself surrounded by savage
barbarians, who will not even permit him to drink the water of wells which
with immense labour he has himself digged. For he could not have bought
the use of them from the king of Gerar, if it had not been previously
prohibited.(984) When he arrives to old age, beyond the time of having
children, he experiences the most disagreeable and painful circumstance
with which that age is attended.(985) He sees himself destitute of
posterity, till, beyond all expectation, he begets Ishmael; whose birth he
purchases at a dear rate, while he is wearied with the reproaches of
Sarah, just as if he encouraged the contumacy of his maid‐servant, and so
were himself the cause of the domestic disturbance.(986) At length Isaac
is born; but his birth is attended with this condition, that Ishmael the
first‐born must be banished from the family, and abandoned like an
enemy.(987) When Isaac is left alone to solace the good man in his
declining years, he is soon after commanded to sacrifice him.(988) What
can the human mind imagine more calamitous, than for a father to become
the executioner of his own son? If he had been taken away by sickness,
every one would have thought the aged parent unhappy in the extreme, as
having had a son given him in mockery, at the loss of whom, his former
grief on account of his being destitute of children would certainly be
redoubled. If he had been massacred by some stranger, the calamity would
have been greatly increased by the horrible nature of his end; but to be
slain by his father’s own hand exceeds all the other instances of
distress. In short, through the whole course of his life, Abraham was so
driven about and afflicted, that if any one wished to give an example of a
life full of calamity, he could not find one more suitable. Nor let it be
objected, that he was not entirely miserable, because he had at length a
prosperous deliverance from such numerous and extreme dangers. For we
cannot pronounce his to be a happy life, who for a long period struggles
through an infinity of difficulties; but his, who is exempted from
afflictions, and favoured with the peaceful enjoyment of present
blessings.

XII. Isaac, though afflicted with fewer calamities, yet scarcely ever
enjoys the smallest taste of pleasure. He also experiences those vexations
which permit not a man to be happy in the world. Famine drives him from
the land of Canaan; his wife is torn from his bosom; his neighbours
frequently harass him, and take every method of distressing him, so that
he also is constrained to contend with them about water.(989) In his own
family he suffers much uneasiness from Esau’s wives;(990) he is distressed
by the discord of his sons, and unable to remedy that great evil, but by
the exile of him to whom he had given the blessing.(991) With respect to
Jacob, he is an eminent example of nothing but extreme infelicity. He
passes his childhood at home, amidst the menaces and terrors of his elder
brother, to which he is at length constrained to give way.(992) A fugitive
from his parents and his native soil, in addition to the bitterness of
exile, he is treated with unkindness by his uncle Laban. It is not
sufficient for him to endure a most hard and severe servitude of seven
years, but he is fraudulently deceived in a wife.(993) For the sake of
another wife he must enter on a new servitude,(994) in which, as he
himself complains, he is scorched all the day by the fervid rays of the
sun, and through the wakeful night benumbed by the icy cold.(995) During
twenty years, which he spends in such extreme hardships, he is daily
afflicted with fresh injuries from his father‐in‐law. Nor does he enjoy
tranquillity in his own family, which he sees distracted and almost torn
asunder by the animosities, contentions, and rivalship of his wives.(996)
When he is commanded to return to his own country, he is obliged to depart
in a manner resembling an ignominious flight. Nor even then can he escape
the iniquity of his father‐in‐law, but is harassed with his reproaches and
insults in the midst of his journey.(997) Immediately after, he falls into
a much greater difficulty. For as he advances towards his brother, he has
death before his eyes in as many forms as a cruel and inveterate enemy can
possibly contrive. He is exceedingly tormented and distracted with
dreadful terrors, while he is expecting the approach of his brother; when
he sees him, he falls at his feet like a person half dead, till he finds
him more reconciled than he could have ventured to hope.(998) Moreover, on
his first entrance into the land, he is deprived of Rachel, his dearly
beloved wife.(999) Afterwards he hears that the son whom he had by her,
and whom, therefore, he loved above the rest, is torn asunder by wild
beasts. The severity of his grief on account of his death is expressed by
himself, when, after many days of mourning, he obstinately refuses all
consolation, saying, “I will go down into the grave unto my son
mourning.”(1000) In the mean time, the rape and violation of his daughter,
and the rashness of his sons in revenging it, which not only made him an
object of abhorrence to all the inhabitants of the country, but put him in
immediate danger of being massacred; what abundant sources were these of
anxiety, grief, and vexation!(1001) Then follows the horrible crime of
Reuben, his first‐born, than which no greater affliction could befall him.
For if the pollution of a man’s wife be numbered among the greatest
miseries, what shall we say of it, when the crime is perpetrated by his
own son?(1002) Not long after, his family is contaminated with
incest;(1003) so that such a number of disgraceful occurrences may be
expected to break a heart otherwise very firm and unbroken by calamities.
Towards the end of life, when he is seeking sustenance for himself and
family in a season of famine, his ears are wounded by the report of a new
calamity, which informs him that one of his sons is detained in prison;
and in order to recover him he is obliged to intrust his darling Benjamin
to the care of the rest.(1004) Who can suppose that in such an
accumulation of distresses he had a single moment of respite? He himself,
who is best able to give a testimony respecting himself, declares to
Pharaoh, that his days on the earth have been few and evil.(1005) By
affirming that he has lived in continual miseries, he denies that he has
enjoyed that prosperity which the Lord had promised him. Therefore either
Jacob formed an improper and ungrateful estimate of the favour of God, or
he spake the truth in asserting that he had been miserable on the earth.
If his affirmation was true, it follows that his hope was not fixed on
terrestrial things.

XIII. If these holy fathers expected, as undoubtedly they did expect, a
life of happiness from the hand of God, they both knew and contemplated a
different kind of blessedness from that of this terrestrial life. This the
apostle very beautifully shows, when he says, “By faith Abraham sojourned
in the land of promise, as in a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles
with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise; for he
looked for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God.
These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen
them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them and confessed
that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth. For they that say such
things declare plainly that they seek a country. And truly if they had
been mindful of that country from whence they came out, they might have
had opportunity to have returned. But now they desire a better country,
that is, a heavenly; wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God;
for he hath prepared for them a city.”(1006) For they would have been
stupid beyond all comparison, so steadily to follow promises, of which
there appeared no hope on earth, unless they had expected the completion
of them in another world. But the apostle, with great force, principally
insists on this—that they called the present life a _pilgrimage_, as is
also stated by Moses.(1007) For if they were strangers and sojourners in
the land of Canaan, what became of the Divine promise, by which they had
been appointed heirs of it? This manifestly implies, therefore, that the
promise, which the Lord had given them concerning the possession of it,
related to something more remote. Wherefore they never acquired a foot of
land in Canaan, except for a sepulchre; by which they testified that they
had no hope of enjoying the benefit of the promise till after death. And
this is the reason why Jacob thought it so exceedingly desirable to be
buried there, that he made his son Joseph promise it to him by oath;(1008)
and why Joseph commanded that his bones should be removed thither, even
several ages after his death, when they would have been long reduced to
ashes.(1009)

XIV. In short, it evidently appears, that in all the pursuits of life they
kept in view the blessedness of the future state. For why should Jacob
have so eagerly desired, and exposed himself to such danger in
endeavouring to obtain, the primogeniture, which would occasion his exile,
and almost his rejection from his family, but from which he could derive
no possible benefit, unless he had his views fixed on a nobler blessing?
And that such was his view he declared in these words, which he uttered
with his expiring breath: “I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord.”(1010)
What salvation could he expect, when he felt himself about to expire,
unless he had seen in death the commencement of a new life? But why do we
argue concerning the saints and children of God, when even one, who in
other respects endeavoured to oppose the truth, was not entirely destitute
of such a knowledge? For what was the meaning of Balaam, when he said,
“Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like
his,”(1011) but the same which David afterwards expressed in the following
words? “Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his
saints.”(1012) “Evil shall slay the wicked.”(1013) If death were the
ultimate bound of human existence, no difference could be observed in it
between the righteous and the impious; the distinction between them
consists in the different destinies which await them after death.

XV. We have not yet proceeded beyond Moses; whose only office, our
opponents allege, was to persuade a carnal people to the worship of God by
the fertility of the land, and an abundance of all things: and yet, unless
any one wilfully rejects the evidence presented to him, we already
discover a clear declaration of a spiritual covenant. But if we come down
to the prophets, there we have the fullest revelation both of eternal life
and of the kingdom of Christ. And first, with what perspicuity and
certainty does David direct all his writings to this end; though, as he
was prior to the rest in point of time, so, according to the order of the
Divine dispensation, he shadowed forth the heavenly mysteries more
obscurely than they did! What estimate he formed of his terrestrial
habitation, the following passage declares: “I am a stranger with thee,
and a sojourner, as all my fathers were. Verily, every man at his best
estate is altogether vanity. Surely every man walketh in a vain show. And
now, Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee.”(1014) He who, after
having confessed that there is nothing substantial or permanent on earth,
still retains the constancy of his hope in God, certainly contemplates the
felicity reserved for him in another world. To this contemplation he
frequently recalls the faithful, whenever he wishes to afford them true
consolation. For in another place, after having spoken of the brevity and
the transitory nature of human life, he adds, “But the mercy of the Lord
is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him.”(1015) Similar
to which is the following: “Of old hast thou laid the foundations of the
earth; and the heavens are the work of thy hands. They shall perish, but
thou shalt endure; yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment; as a
vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed; but thou art
the same, and thy years shall have no end. The children of thy servants
shall continue, and their seed shall be established before thee.”(1016)
If, notwithstanding the destruction of heaven and earth, the pious cease
not to be established before the Lord, it follows that their salvation is
connected with his eternity. But this hope cannot be at all supported,
unless it rest on the promise which we find in Isaiah: “The heavens,”
saith the Lord, “shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old
like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner; but
my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not be
abolished;”(1017) where perpetuity is ascribed to righteousness and
salvation, considered not as resident in God, but as experienced by men.

XVI. Nor can what he frequently says concerning the prosperity of the
faithful be understood in any other sense than as referring to the
manifestation of the glory of heaven. Such are the following passages:
“The Lord preserveth the souls of his saints; he delivereth them out of
the hand of the wicked. Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for
the upright in heart.”(1018) Again: “The righteousness of the righteous
endureth for ever; his horn shall be exalted with honour. The desire of
the wicked shall perish.”(1019) Again: “Surely the righteous shall give
thanks unto thy name; the upright shall dwell in thy presence.”(1020)
Again: “The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.”(1021)
Again: “The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants.”(1022) For the Lord
frequently leaves his servants to the rage of the impious, not only to be
harassed, but to be torn asunder and ruined; he suffers good men to
languish in obscurity and meanness, while the impious are almost as
glorious as the stars; nor does he exhilarate the faithful with the light
of his countenance, so that they can enjoy any lasting pleasure. Wherefore
David does not dissemble that, if the faithful fix their eyes on the
present state of things, they will be most grievously tempted with an
apprehension lest innocence should obtain from God neither favour nor
reward. So much does impiety in most cases prosper and flourish, while the
pious are oppressed with ignominy, poverty, contempt, and distress of
every kind. “My feet,” says he, “were almost gone; my steps had well nigh
slipped. For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of
the wicked.”(1023) At length he concludes his account of them: “When I
thought to know this, it was too painful for me; until I went into the
sanctuary of God; then understood I their end.”(1024)

XVII. We may learn, then, even from this confession of David, that the
holy fathers under the Old Testament were not ignorant, that God rarely or
never in this world gives his servants those things which he promises
them, and that, therefore, they elevated their minds to the sanctuary of
God, where they had a treasure in reserve which is not visible amid the
shadows of the present life. This sanctuary was the last judgment, which,
not being discernible by their eyes, they were contented to apprehend by
faith. Relying on this confidence, whatever events might befall them in
the world, they, nevertheless, had no doubt that there would come a time
when the Divine promises would be fulfilled. This is evident from the
following passages: “I will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be
satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.”(1025) Again: “I am like a
green olive‐tree in the house of God.”(1026) Again: “The righteous shall
flourish like the palm‐tree: he shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon. Those
that be planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the courts of
our God. They shall still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat
and flourishing.” He had just before said, “O Lord, how great are thy
works! and thy thoughts are very deep. When the wicked spring as the
grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is that they
shall be destroyed for ever.”(1027) Where can this beauty and gracefulness
of the faithful be found, but where the appearance of this world has been
reversed by the manifestation of the kingdom of God? When they could turn
their eyes towards that eternity, despising the momentary rigour of
present calamities, they securely broke forth into the following
expressions: “The Lord shall never suffer the righteous to be moved. But
thou, O God, shalt bring them” (wicked men) “down into the pit of
destruction.”(1028) Where, in this world, is the pit of destruction, to
absorb the wicked, as an instance of whose felicity it is mentioned in
another place that without languishing for any long time “they go down to
the grave in a moment?”(1029) Where is that great stability of the saints,
whom David himself, in the language of complaint, frequently represents as
not only troubled, but oppressed and consumed? He certainly had in view,
not any thing that results from the agitations of the world, which are
even more tumultuous than those of the sea, but what will be accomplished
by the Lord, when he shall one day sit in judgment to fix the everlasting
destiny of heaven and earth. This appears from another psalm, in which he
gives the following beautiful description: “They that trust in their
wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches; none of
them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for
him. For he seeth that wise men die, likewise the fool and the brutish
person perish, and leave their wealth to others. Their inward thought is,
that their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling‐places to
all generations; they call their lands after their own names. Nevertheless
man being in honour abideth not: he is like the beasts that perish. This
their way is their folly: yet their posterity approve their sayings. Like
sheep they are laid in the grave; death shall feed on them; and the
upright shall have dominion over them in the morning; and their beauty
shall consume in the grave from their dwelling.”(1030) In the first place,
this derision of fools, for placing their dependence on the mutable and
transitory blessings of the world, shows that the wise ought to seek a
very different felicity. But he more evidently discloses the mystery of
the resurrection, when he establishes the reign of the pious after the
ruin and destruction of the wicked. For what shall we understand by “the
morning” which he mentions, but the revelation of a new life commencing
after the conclusion of the present?

XVIII. Hence arose that reflection, which served the faithful as a
consolation under their miseries, and a remedy for their sufferings: “The
anger of the Lord endureth but a moment; in his favour is life.”(1031) How
did they limit their afflictions to a moment, who were afflicted all their
lifetime? When did they perceive so long a duration of the Divine
goodness, of which they had scarcely the smallest taste? If their views
had been confined to the earth, they could have made no such discovery;
but as they directed their eyes towards heaven, they perceived, that the
afflictions with which the Lord exercises his saints are but “for a small
moment,” and that the “mercies” with which he “gathers” them are
“everlasting.”(1032) On the other hand, they foresaw the eternal and
never‐ending perdition of the impious, who had been happy, as in a dream,
for a single day. Hence the following sentiments: “The memory of the just
is blessed; but the name of the wicked shall rot.”(1033) “Precious in the
sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.”(1034) Also in Samuel: “The
Lord will keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be silent in
darkness.”(1035) These expressions suggest to us, that they well knew,
that whatever vicissitudes may befall the saints, yet their last end will
be life and salvation; and that the prosperity of the impious is a
pleasant path, which gradually leads to the gulf of everlasting death.
Therefore they called the death of such the “destruction of the
uncircumcised,”(1036) as of those from whom all hope of resurrection had
been cut off. Wherefore David could not conceive a more grievous
imprecation than this: “Let them be blotted out of the book of the living,
and not be written with the righteous.”(1037)

XIX. But the following declaration of Job is remarkable beyond all others:
“I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day
upon the earth; and though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in
my flesh shall I see God; whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall
behold, and not another.”(1038) Some, who wish to display their critical
sagacity, cavil that this is not to be understood of the final
resurrection, but even of the first day on which Job expected God to be
more propitious to him. Though we partly concede this, we shall extort an
acknowledgment from them, whether they are willing or not, that Job could
never have attained to such an enlarged hope, if his thoughts had been
confined to the earth. We must, therefore, be obliged to confess that he,
who saw that his Redeemer would be present with him even when lying in the
sepulchre, must have elevated his views to a future immortality. For to
them, who think only of the present life, death is a source of extreme
despair, which, however, could not annihilate his hope. “Though he slay
me,” said he, “yet will I trust in him.”(1039) Nor let any trifler here
object, that these were the expressions of a few persons, and are far from
furnishing proof that such a doctrine was current among the Jews. I will
immediately reply, that these few persons did not in these declarations
reveal any recondite wisdom, in which only superior understandings were
separately and privately instructed; but that the Holy Spirit having
constituted them teachers of the people, they publicly promulgated the
Divine mysteries which were to be generally received, and to be the
principles of the popular religion. When we hear the public oracles of the
Holy Spirit, therefore, in which he has so clearly and evidently spoken of
the spiritual life in the Jewish church, it would be intolerable
perverseness to apply them entirely to the carnal covenant, in which no
mention is made but of the earth and earthly opulence.

XX. If we descend to the later prophets, there we may freely expatiate as
quite at home. For if it was not difficult to prove our point from David,
Job, and Samuel, we shall do it there with much greater facility. For this
is the order and economy which God observed in dispensing the covenant of
his mercy, that as the course of time accelerated the period of its full
exhibition, he illustrated it from day to day with additional revelations.
Therefore, in the beginning, when the first promise was given to Adam, it
was like the kindling of some feeble sparks. Subsequent accessions caused
a considerable enlargement of the light, which continued to increase more
and more, and diffused its splendour through a wide extent, till at
length, every cloud being dissipated, Christ, the Sun of Righteousness,
completely illuminated the whole world. There is no reason to fear,
therefore, if we want the suffrages of the prophets in support of our
cause, that they will fail us. But as I perceive it would be a very
extensive field, which would engross more of our attention than the nature
of our design will admit,—for it would furnish matter for a large
volume,—and as I also think that by what has been already said, I have
prepared the way even for a reader of small penetration to proceed without
any difficulties, I shall abstain from a prolixity which at present is not
very necessary. I shall only caution the reader to advance with the clew
which we have put into his hand; namely, that whenever the prophets
mention the blessedness of the faithful, scarcely any vestiges of which
are discernible in the present life, he should recur to this distinction;
that in order to the better elucidation of the Divine goodness, the
prophets represented it to the people in a figurative manner; but that
they gave such a representation of it as would withdraw the mind from
earth and time, and the elements of this world, all which must ere long
perish, and would necessarily excite to a contemplation of the felicity of
the future spiritual life.

XXI. We will content ourselves with one example. When the Israelites,
after being carried to Babylon, perceived how very much their dispersion
resembled a death, they could scarcely be convinced that the prophecy of
Ezekiel concerning their restitution(1040) was not a mere fable; for they
considered it in the same light, as if he had announced, that putrid
carcasses would be restored to life. The Lord, in order to show that even
that difficulty would not prevent him from displaying his beneficence,
gave the prophet a vision of a field full of dry bones, which he
instantaneously restored to life and vigour solely by the power of his
word. The vision served indeed to correct the existing incredulity; but at
the same time it reminded the Jews, how far the power of the Lord extended
beyond the restoration of the people, since the mere expression of his
will so easily reanimated the dry and dispersed bones. Wherefore you may
properly compare that passage with another of Isaiah: “Thy dead men shall
live; together with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that
dwell in dust; for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall
cast out the dead. Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut
thy doors about thee: hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until
the indignation be overpast. For, behold, the Lord cometh out of his place
to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also
shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain.”(1041)

XXII. It would be absurd, however, to attempt to reduce every passage to
such a canon of interpretation. For there are some places, which show
without any disguise the future immortality which awaits the faithful in
the kingdom of God. Such are some which we have recited, and such are many
others, but particularly these two; one in Isaiah: “As the new heavens and
the new earth which I will make, shall remain before me, saith the Lord,
so shall your seed and your name remain. And it shall come to pass, that
from one new moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all
flesh come to worship before me, saith the Lord. And they shall go forth,
and look upon the carcasses of the men that have transgressed against me;
for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched.”(1042)
And another in Daniel: “At that time shall Michael stand up, the great
prince which standeth for the children of thy people; and there shall be a
time of trouble such as never was since there was a nation even to that
same time; and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that
shall be found written in the book. And many of them that sleep in the
dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame
and everlasting contempt.”(1043)

XXIII. Now, the two remaining points, that the fathers had Christ as the
pledge of their covenant, and that they reposed in him all their
confidence of the blessing, being less controvertible and more plain, I
shall take no pains to prove them. We may safely conclude, therefore, what
all the machinations of the devil can never subvert, that the Old
Testament, or covenant which the Lord made with the Israelitish nation,
was not limited to terrestrial things, but contained a promise of
spiritual and eternal life; the expectation of which must have been
impressed on the minds of all who truly consented to the covenant. Then
let us drive far away from us this absurd and pernicious notion, either
that the Lord proposed nothing else to the Jews, or that the Jews sought
nothing else, but an abundance of food, carnal delights, flourishing
wealth, external power, a numerous offspring, and whatever is esteemed
valuable by a natural man. For under the present dispensation, Christ
promises to his people no other kingdom of heaven, than where they may sit
down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob;(1044) and Peter asserted the Jews of
his time to be heirs of the grace of the gospel, when he said that “they
were the children of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with
their fathers.”(1045) And that this might not only be testified in words,
the Lord also proved it by a matter of fact. For on the day in which he
rose from the dead, he honoured many of the saints with a participation of
his resurrection, and caused them to appear in the city;(1046) thus
furnishing a certain assurance that whatever he did and suffered for the
acquisition of eternal salvation, belonged to the faithful of the Old
Testament as much as to us. For, as Peter declares, they also were endued
with the same Spirit, who is the author of our regeneration to life.(1047)
When we are informed that the same Spirit, which is as it were a spark of
immortality in us, and is therefore called in one place “the earnest of
our inheritance,”(1048) dwelt in a similar manner in them, how can we dare
to deprive them of the inheritance of eternal life? It is therefore the
more surprising, that the Sadducees formerly fell into such stupidity as
to deny the resurrection, and the immortality of the soul, since they had
proofs of these points from such clear testimonies of Scripture. And the
folly of the whole nation of the Jews in the present age, in expecting an
earthly kingdom of the Messiah, would be equally extraordinary, had not
the Scriptures long before predicted that they would thus be punished for
their rejection of the gospel. For it was consistent with the righteous
judgment of God to strike with blindness the minds of those, who,
rejecting the light of heaven when presented to them, kept themselves in
voluntary darkness. Therefore they read Moses, and assiduously turn over
his pages, but are prevented by an interposing veil from perceiving the
light which beams in his countenance;(1049) and thus it will remain
covered and concealed to them, till they are converted to Christ, from
whom they now endeavour as much as they can to withdraw and divert it.




