Chapter XII. The Necessity Of Christ Becoming Man In Order To Fulfil The
Office Of Mediator.


It was of great importance to our interests, that he, who was to be our
Mediator, should be both true God and true man. If an inquiry be made
concerning the necessity of this, it was not indeed a simple, or, as we
commonly say, an absolute necessity, but such as arose from the heavenly
decree, on which the salvation of men depended. But our most merciful
Father has appointed that which was best for us. For since our iniquities,
like a cloud intervening between us and him, had entirely alienated us
from the kingdom of heaven, no one that could not approach to God could be
a mediator for the restoration of peace. But who could have approached to
him? Could any one of the children of Adam? They, with their parent, all
dreaded the Divine presence. Could any one of the angels? They also stood
in need of a head, by a connection with whom they might be confirmed in a
perfect and unvarying adherence to their God. What, then, could be done?
Our situation was truly deplorable, unless the Divine majesty itself would
descend to us; for we could not ascend to it. Thus it was necessary that
the Son of God should become Immanuel, that is, God with us; and this in
order that there might be a mutual union and coalition between his
Divinity and the nature of man; for otherwise the proximity could not be
sufficiently near, nor could the affinity be sufficiently strong, to
authorize us to hope that God would dwell with us. So great was the
discordance between our pollution and the perfect purity of God. Although
man had remained immaculately innocent, yet his condition would have been
too mean for him to approach to God without a Mediator. What, then, can he
do, after having been plunged by his fatal fall into death and hell,
defiled with so many blemishes, putrefying in his own corruption, and, in
a word, overwhelmed with every curse? It is not without reason, therefore,
that Paul, when about to exhibit Christ in the character of a Mediator,
expressly speaks of him as a man. “There is one Mediator,” he says,
“between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.”(1099) He might have called
him God, or might indeed have omitted the appellation of man, as well as
that of God; but because the Spirit, who spake by him, knew our infirmity,
he has provided a very suitable remedy against it, by placing the Son of
God familiarly among us, as though he were one of us. Therefore, that no
one may distress himself where he is to seek the Mediator, or in what way
he may approach him, the apostle, by denominating him a man, apprizes us
that he is near, and even close to us, since he is our own flesh. He
certainly intends the same as is stated in another place more at
large—“that we have not a high priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are,
yet without sin.”(1100)

II. This will still more fully appear, if we consider, that it was no mean
part which the Mediator had to perform; namely, to restore us to the
Divine favour, so as, of children of men, to make us children of God; of
heirs of hell, to make us heirs of the kingdom of heaven. Who could
accomplish this, unless the Son of God should become also the Son of man,
and thus receive to himself what belongs to us, and transfer to us that
which is his, and make that which is his by nature ours by grace?
Depending, therefore, on this pledge, we have confidence that we are the
children from God, because he, who is the Son of God by nature, has
provided himself a body from our body, flesh from our flesh, bones from
our bones,(1101) that he might be the same with us: he refused not to
assume that which was peculiar to us, that we also might obtain that which
he had peculiar to him; and that so in common with us he might be both the
Son of God and the Son of man. Hence arises that holy fraternity, which he
mentions with his own mouth in the following words: “I ascend unto my
Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God.”(1102) On this
account we have a certainty of the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven,
because the only Son of God, to whom it exclusively belonged, has adopted
us as his brethren; and if we are his brethren, we are consequently co‐
heirs to the inheritance.(1103) Moreover it was highly necessary also for
this reason, that he who was to be our Redeemer should be truly both God
and man. It was his office to swallow up death; who could do this, but he
who was life itself? It was his to overcome sin; who could accomplish
this, but righteousness itself? It was his to put to flight the powers of
the world and of the air; who could do this, but a power superior both to
the world and to the air? Now, who possesses life or righteousness, or the
empire and power of heaven, but God alone? Therefore the most merciful
God, when he determined on our redemption, became himself our Redeemer in
the person of his only begotten Son!

III. Another branch of our reconciliation with God was this—that man, who
had ruined himself by his own disobedience, should remedy his condition by
obedience, should satisfy the justice of God, and suffer the punishment of
his sin. Our Lord then made his appearance as a real man; he put on the
character of Adam, and assumed his name, to act as his substitute in his
obedience to the Father, to lay down our flesh as the price of
satisfaction to the justice of God; and to suffer the punishment which we
had deserved, in the same nature in which the offence had been committed.
As it would have been impossible, therefore, for one who was only God to
suffer death, or for one who was a mere man to overcome it, he associated
the human nature with the Divine, that he might submit the weakness of the
former to death, as an atonement for sins; and that with the power of the
latter he might contend with death, and obtain a victory on our behalf.
Those who despoil Christ, therefore, either of his Divinity or his
humanity, either diminish his majesty and glory, or obscure his goodness.
Nor are they, on the other hand, less injurious to men, whose faith they
weaken and subvert; since it cannot stand any longer than it rests upon
this foundation. Moreover, the Redeemer to be expected was that Son of
Abraham and David, whom God had promised in the law and the prophets.
Hence the minds of the faithful derive another advantage, because from the
circumstance of his ancestry being traced to David and to Abraham, they
have an additional assurance that this is the Christ, who was celebrated
in so many prophecies. But we should particularly remember, what I have
just stated—that our common nature is a pledge of our fellowship with the
Son of God; that, clothed in our flesh, he vanquished sin and death, in
order that the victory and triumph might be ours; that the flesh which he
received from us he offered up as a sacrifice, in order to expiate and
obliterate our guilt, and appease the just wrath of the Father.

IV. The persons who consider these things, with the diligent attention
which they deserve, will easily disregard vague speculations which attract
minds that are inconstant and fond of novelty. Such is the notion, that
Christ would have become man, even though the human race had needed no
redemption. I grant, indeed, that at the original creation, and in the
state of integrity, he was exalted as head over angels and men; for which
reason Paul calls him “the first‐born of every creature;”(1104) but since
the whole Scriptures proclaim, that he was clothed in flesh in order to
become a Redeemer, it argues excessive temerity to imagine another cause
or another end for it. The end for which Christ was promised from the
beginning, is sufficiently known; it was to restore a fallen world, and to
succour ruined men. Therefore under the law his image was exhibited in
sacrifices, to inspire the faithful with a hope that God would be
propitious to them, after he should be reconciled by the expiation of
their sins. And as, in all ages, even before the promulgation of the law,
the Mediator was never promised without blood, we conclude that he was
destined by the eternal decree of God to purify the pollution of men;
because the effusion of blood is an emblem of expiation. The prophets
proclaimed and foretold him, as the future reconciler of God and men. As a
sufficient specimen of all, we refer to that very celebrated testimony of
Isaiah, where he predicts, that he should be smitten of God for the
transgressions of the people, that the chastisement of their peace might
be upon him; and that he should be a priest to offer up himself as a
victim; that by his stripes others should be healed; and that because all
men had gone astray, and been dispersed like sheep, it had pleased the
Lord to afflict him and to lay on him the iniquities of all.(1105) As we
are informed that Christ is particularly appointed by God for the relief
of miserable sinners, all who pass these bounds are guilty of indulging a
foolish curiosity. When he himself appeared in the world, he declared the
design of his advent to be, to appease God and restore us from death to
life. The apostles testified the same. Thus John, before he informs us
that the Word was made flesh, mentions the defection of man.(1106) But our
principal attention is due to Christ himself speaking of his own office.
He says, “God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life.”(1107) Again: “The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God; and they that hear shall live.”(1108) “I
am the resurrection and the life; he that believeth in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live.”(1109) Again: “The Son of man is come to save
that which was lost.”(1110) Again: “They that be whole need not a
physician.”(1111) There would be no end, if I meant to quote all the
passages. The apostles with one consent call us back to this principle;
for certainly, if he had not come to reconcile God, the honour of his
priesthood would have been lost, for a priest is appointed as a Mediator
to intercede between God and men:(1112) he could not have been our
righteousness, because he was made a sacrifice for us, that God might not
impute sins to us.(1113) Finally, he would have been despoiled of all the
noble characters under which he is celebrated in the Scripture. This
assertion of Paul would have no foundation: “What the law could not do,
God, sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin,
condemned sin in the flesh.”(1114) Nor would there be any truth in what he
teaches in another place, that “the kindness and love of God our Saviour
towards man appeared”(1115) in the gift of Christ as a Redeemer. To
conclude, the Scripture no where assigns any other end, for which the Son
of God should choose to become incarnate, and should also receive this
command from the Father, than that he might be made a sacrifice to appease
the Father on our account. “Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ
to suffer; and that repentance should be preached in his name.”(1116)
“Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life. This
commandment have I received of my Father.”(1117) “As Moses lifted up the
serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted
up.”(1118) Again: “Father, save me from this hour; but for this cause came
I unto this hour.”(1119) “Father, glorify thy Son.”(1120) Where he clearly
assigns, as the end of his assumption of human nature, that it was to be
an expiatory sacrifice for the abolition of sins. For the same reason,
Zacharias pronounces that he is come, according to the promise given to
the fathers, “to give light to them that sit in the shadow of
death.”(1121) Let us remember that all these things are spoken of the Son
of God, “in whom,” according to the testimony of Paul, “are hidden all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge,”(1122) and besides whom he glories in
knowing nothing.(1123)

V. If any one object, that it is not evinced by any of these things, that
the same Christ, who has redeemed men from condemnation, could not have
testified his love to them by assuming their nature, if they had remained
in a state of integrity and safety,—we briefly reply, that since the
Spirit declares these two things, Christ’s becoming our Redeemer, and his
participation of the same nature, to have been connected by the eternal
decree of God, it is not right to make any further inquiry. For he who
feels an eager desire to know something more, not being content with the
immutable appointment of God, shows himself also not to be contented with
this Christ, who has been given to us as the price of our redemption. Paul
not only tells us the end of his mission, but ascending to the sublime
mystery of predestination, very properly represses all the licentiousness
and prurience of the human mind, by declaring, that “the Father hath
chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world, and predestinated
us to the adoption of children according to the good pleasure of his will,
and made us accepted in his beloved Son, in whom we have redemption
through his blood.”(1124) Here the fall of Adam is certainly not
presupposed, as of anterior date; but we have a discovery of what was
decreed by God before all ages, when he determined to remedy the misery of
mankind. If any adversary object again, that this design of God depended
on the fall of man, which he foresaw, it is abundantly sufficient for me,
that every man is proceeding with impious presumption to imagine to
himself a new Christ, whoever he be that permits himself to inquire, or
wishes to know, concerning Christ, any more than God has predestinated in
his secret decree. And justly does Paul, after having been thus treating
of the peculiar office of Christ, implore, on behalf of the Ephesians, the
spirit of understanding, “that they may be able to comprehend what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of
Christ, which passeth knowledge;”(1125) as though he would labour to
surround our minds with barriers, that wherever mention is made of Christ,
they may not decline in the smallest degree from the grace of
reconciliation. Wherefore, since “this is” testified by Paul to be “a
faithful saying, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners,”(1126) I gladly acquiesce in it. And since the same apostle in
another place informs us, that “the grace, which is now made manifest by
the gospel, was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began,”(1127) I
conclude that I ought to persevere in the same doctrine with constancy to
the end. This modesty is unreasonably censured by Osiander, who in the
present age has unhappily agitated this question, which a few persons had
slightly touched before. He alleges a charge of presumption against those
who deny that the Son of God would have appeared in the flesh, if Adam had
never fallen, because this tenet is contradicted by no testimony of
Scripture; as if Paul laid no restraint on such perverse curiosity, when,
after having spoken of the accomplishment of our redemption by Christ, he
immediately adds this injunction: “Avoid foolish questions.”(1128) The
frenzy of some, that have been desirous of appearing prodigiously acute,
has proceeded to such a length as to question whether the Son of God could
assume the nature of an ass. This monstrous supposition, which all pious
persons justly abhor and detest, Osiander excuses under this pretext, that
it is nowhere in Scripture expressly condemned; as if, when Paul esteems
nothing valuable or worthy of being known but Christ crucified, he would
admit an ass to be the author of salvation! Therefore he who in another
place declares that Christ was appointed by the eternal decree of the
Father as “the head over all,”(1129) would never acknowledge any other who
had not been appointed to the office of a Redeemer.

VI. But the principle which he boasts is altogether frivolous. He
maintains that man was created in the image of God, because he was formed
in the similitude of the future Messiah, that he might resemble him whom
the Father had already decreed to clothe with flesh. Whence he concludes
that if Adam had never fallen from his primitive integrity, Christ would
nevertheless have become man. How nugatory and forced this is, all who
possess a sound judgment readily perceive. But he supposes that he has
been the first to discover wherein the Divine image consisted; namely,
that the glory of God not only shone in those eminent talents with which
man was endued, but that God himself essentially resided in him. Now,
though I admit that Adam bore the Divine image, inasmuch as he was united
to God, which is the true and consummate perfection of dignity, yet I
contend that the similitude of God is to be sought only in those
characters of excellence, with which God distinguished Adam above the
other creatures. And that Christ was even then the image of God, is
universally allowed; and therefore whatever excellence was impressed on
Adam proceeded from this circumstance, that he approached to the glory of
his Maker by means of his only begotten Son. Man, therefore, was made in
the image of God, and was designed to be a mirror to display the glory of
his Creator. He was exalted to this degree of honour by the favour of the
only begotten Son; but I add, that this Son was a common head to angels as
well as to men; so that the angels also were entitled to the same dignity
which was conferred on man. And when we hear them called the “children of
God,”(1130) it would be unreasonable to deny that they have some
resemblance to their Father. But if he designed his glory to be
represented in angels as well as in men, and to be equally conspicuous in
the angelic as in the human nature, Osiander betrays his ignorance and
folly in saying that men were preferred to angels, because the latter did
not bear the image of Christ. For they could not constantly enjoy the
present contemplation of God, unless they were like him. And Paul teaches
us that men are no otherwise renewed after the image of God, than that if
they be associated with angels, they may be united together under one
head.(1131) Finally, if we give credit to Christ, our ultimate felicity,
when we shall be received into heaven, will consist in being conformed to
the angels. But if Osiander may infer, that the primary exemplar of the
Divine image was taken from the human nature of Christ, with the same
justice may any other person contend, that Christ must have been a
partaker of the nature of angels, because they likewise possess the image
of God.

VII. Osiander, then, has no reason to fear, that God might possibly be
proved a liar, unless the decree concerning the incarnation of his Son had
been previously and immutably fixed in his mind. Because, though Adam had
not fallen from his integrity, yet he would have resembled God just as the
angels do; and yet it would not have been necessary on that account for
the Son of God to become either a man or an angel. Nor has he any cause to
fear this absurdity, that if God had not immutably decreed, before the
creation of man, that Christ should be born, not as a Redeemer, but as the
first man, he might lose his prerogative; whereas now he would not have
become incarnate but for an accidental cause, that is, to restore mankind
from ruin; so that he might thence infer, that Christ was created after
the image of Adam. For why should he dread, what the Scripture so plainly
teaches, that he was made like us in all things, sin excepted?(1132)
whence also Luke hesitates not in his genealogy to call him “the son of
Adam.”(1133) I would also wish to know why Paul styles Christ “the second
Adam,”(1134) but because he was destined to become man, in order to
extricate the posterity of Adam from ruin. If he sustained that capacity
before the creation, he ought to have been called “the first Adam.”
Osiander boldly affirms, that because Christ was already foreknown as man
in the Divine mind, therefore men were formed in his likeness. But Paul,
by denominating him “the second Adam,” places the fall, whence arises the
necessity of restoring our nature to its primitive condition, in an
intermediate point between the first original of mankind and the
restitution which we obtain through Christ; whence it follows that the
fall was the cause of the incarnation of the Son of God. Now, Osiander
argues unreasonably and impertinently, that while Adam retained his
integrity, he would be the image of himself, and not of Christ. On the
contrary, I reply, that although the Son of God had never been incarnate,
both the body and the soul of man would equally have displayed the image
of God; in whose radiance it always appeared, that Christ was truly the
head, possessing the supremacy over all. And thus we destroy that futile
subtilty raised by Osiander, that the angels would have been destitute of
this head, unless God had decreed to clothe his Son with flesh, even
without any transgression of Adam. For he too inconsiderately takes for
granted, what no wise man will concede, that Christ has no supremacy over
angels, and that he is not their Prince, except in his human nature. But
we may easily conclude, from the language of Paul, that, as the eternal
Word of God, he is “the first‐born of every creature;”(1135) not that he
was created, or ought to be numbered among creatures, but because the holy
state of the world, adorned as it was at the beginning with consummate
beauty, had no other author; and that afterwards, as man, he was “the
first begotten from the dead.” For in one short passage he proposes to our
consideration both these points—that all things were created by the Son,
that he might have dominion over angels; and that he was made man, that he
might become our Redeemer.(1136) Another proof of Osiander’s ignorance is
his assertion, that men would not have had Christ for their King, if he
had not been incarnate; as though the kingdom of God could not subsist, if
the eternal Son of God, without being invested with humanity, uniting
angels and men in the participation of his glorious life, had himself held
the supreme dominion! But he is always deceived, or rather bewilders
himself, in this false principle, that the Church would have been
destitute of a head, if Christ had not been manifested in the flesh; as
if, while he was head over angels, he could not likewise by his Divine
power preside over men, and by the secret energy of his Spirit animate and
support them, like his own body, till they should be exalted to heaven,
and enjoy the life of angels! These impertinencies, which I have thus far
refuted, Osiander esteems as incontrovertible oracles. Inebriated by the
charms of his own speculations, he is accustomed to express himself in the
language of ridiculous triumph, without any sufficient cause. But he
quotes one passage more, which he asserts to be conclusive beyond all the
rest; that is, the prophecy of Adam, who, when he saw his wife, said,
“This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh.”(1137) But how does
he prove this to be a prophecy? Because Christ, according to Matthew,
attributes the same language to God; as though every thing that God has
spoken by men contained some prophecy! Then Osiander may seek for
prophecies in each of the precepts of the law, of which it is evident God
was the author. Besides, Christ would have been a low and grovelling
expositor, if he had confined himself to the literal sense. Because he is
treating, not of the mystical union, with which he has honoured his
Church, but only of conjugal fidelity; he informs us, that God had
pronounced a husband and wife to be one flesh, that no one might attempt
by a divorce to violate that indissoluble bond. If Osiander be displeased
with this simplicity, let him censure Christ, because he did not conduct
his disciples to a mystery, by a more subtile interpretation of the
language of the Father. Nor does his delirious imagination obtain any
support from Paul, who, after having said that “we are members of Christ’s
flesh,” immediately adds, “this is a great mystery.”(1138) For the
apostle’s design was, not to explain the sense in which Adam spoke, but,
under the figure and similitude of marriage, to display the sacred union
which makes us one with Christ. And this is implied in his very words; for
when he apprizes us that he is speaking of Christ and the Church, he
introduces a kind of correction to distinguish between the law of marriage
and the spiritual union of Christ and the Church. Wherefore this futile
notion appears destitute of any solid foundation. Nor do I think there
will be any necessity for me to discuss similar subtilties; since the
vanity of them all will be discovered from the foregoing very brief
refutation. But this sober declaration will be amply sufficient for the
solid satisfaction of the children of God; that “when the fulness of the
time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the
law, to redeem them that were under the law.”(1139)




