Chapter IV. The Sophistry And Jargon Of The Schools Concerning Repentance,
Very Remote From The Purity Of The Gospel. On Confession And Satisfaction.


I come now to the discussion of those things which have been advanced by
the sophists of the schools concerning Repentance, which I shall run over
as briefly as possible; for it is not my design to pursue the subject at
large, lest this book, which I am endeavouring to make a compendium of
doctrine, should be drawn out to an immoderate extent. They have involved
a subject, otherwise not very intricate, in so many perplexities, that
those who have entered but a little way into their labyrinths will not
find it easy to extricate themselves. In the first place, the definition
they have given of repentance, clearly shows that they never understood
what it was; for they catch at some passages in the writings of the
fathers, which by no means express the nature of repentance; as, “that to
repent is to weep for sins previously committed, and not to commit sins to
be wept for.” Again: “that it is to lament evils that are past, and not to
commit new ones to be lamented.” Again: “that it is a kind of mournful
vengeance, punishing in ourselves what we bewail having committed.” Again:
“that it is a sorrow of heart and bitterness of soul on account of the
evils which a man has committed, or to which he has consented.” But though
we concede that these expressions were properly used by the fathers,
which, however, a contentious man would find no difficulty in denying, yet
they were used not with a view to describe repentance, but only to exhort
their readers to avoid relapsing into those crimes from which they had
been delivered. But if we are disposed to convert all observations of this
kind into definitions, others may be added with equal propriety. As this
of Chrysostom, “Repentance is a medicine which destroys sin, a gift
bestowed from heaven, an admirable virtue, a grace exceeding the power of
laws.” Moreover, the doctrine which they afterwards advance is still worse
than these definitions; for they are so obstinately riveted to external
exercises, that one can collect nothing else from immense volumes, but
that repentance is an austere discipline, which serves partly to subdue
the flesh, partly to chastise and punish vices; but concerning the
internal renovation of the mind, which is attended with a real reformation
of the life, they observe a wonderful silence. Of _contrition_ and
_attrition_, indeed, they treat largely; they torment souls with a
multitude of scruples, and drive them to extreme trouble and anxiety; but
when they appear to have thoroughly wounded the heart, they heal all the
bitterness by a slight sprinkling of ceremonies. Having thus quaintly
defined repentance, they divide it into contrition of heart, confession of
mouth, and satisfaction of work—a division which is no more agreeable to
the rules of logic than their definition, though they would be thought to
have spent their whole lives in composing syllogisms. But should any one
reason from the definition, (which is a kind of argumentation common among
logicians,) that a man may weep for sins previously committed, and commit
no more to be wept for; may lament evils that are past, and commit no more
to be lamented; may punish what he mourns that he has committed, &c.,
although he makes no confession with his mouth; how will they defend their
division? For if he who confesses not, be nevertheless truly penitent,
repentance may exist where there is no confession. But if they reply that
this division refers to repentance as a sacrament, or is to be understood
of the complete perfection of repentance, which they comprehend not in
their definition, they have no reason to accuse me; let them impute the
blame to themselves, for not giving definitions with more correctness and
perspicuity. For myself, indeed, according to my dull capacity, in all
controversies I refer every thing to the definition, which is the hinge
and foundation of the whole argument. But, admitting this to be their
magisterial license, we proceed to an attentive examination of the parts
themselves in order. When I neglect, and pass over as frivolous, things
which, with supercilious gravity, they represent as mysteries, I never do
it without design; not that I should find it very laborious to canvass the
arguments in which they conceive themselves to have discovered most
shrewdness and subtilty; but I could not conscientiously fatigue my
readers with such impertinences to no good purpose. From the questions
which they raise and agitate, and with which they miserably embarrass
themselves, it is easy to see, that they talk of subjects of which they
are utterly ignorant; such as this: Whether repentance for one sin be
pleasing to God during an obstinate continuance in others. Again: Whether
punishments inflicted by God be available for satisfaction. Again: Whether
repentance may be frequently repeated for mortal sins. On this point they
shamefully and impiously determine, that repentance is daily practised
only for venial sins. They also torment themselves much with a gross
error, in an expression of Jerome, “That repentance is a second plank
after a shipwreck;” thus giving proof, that they have never been awakened
from their brutish stupidity, so as to have even the most distant view of
the thousandth part of their sins.

II. I wish the reader to consider, that this is not a contention about an
insignificant trifle, but a question respecting the most serious of all
subjects—remission of sins. For by requiring, in repentance, compunction
of heart, confession of mouth, and satisfaction of work, they maintain,
that these three things are necessary to procure the remission of sins.
But if it be important for us to know any thing in the whole science of
religion, it is certainly of the greatest importance to apprehend, and
fully to understand, by what means, by what law, on what condition, and
with what facility or difficulty, remission of sins may be obtained.
Unless this knowledge be clear and certain, the conscience can have no
rest, no peace with God, no confidence or security; but is the subject of
perpetual trepidations and fluctuations, is disturbed, tormented, and
harassed, and dreads, hates, and avoids the presence of God. But if
remission of sins depend on those conditions to which they confine it, we
are in a most miserable and deplorable situation. They make contrition the
first step towards obtaining pardon, and require such as is due from us,
that is, such as is just and perfect; but they have not determined, when a
man may be assured that he has arrived at this degree of perfect
contrition. I grant, indeed, that every man ought to be sedulously and
earnestly urged, that by bitterly mourning for his sins, he may
continually augment his displeasure and hatred against them. For this
“sorrow worketh repentance to salvation, not to be repented of.”(1692) But
when such an anguish of sorrow is required as may correspond to the
magnitude of the guilt, and may be weighed in the balance with confidence
of pardon, then the wretched conscience is wonderfully tormented and
agitated, when it sees a due contrition for sins imposed on it, and
understands not the extent of the debt so as to be able to decide with
itself that it has discharged what was due from it. If they say that we
must do what we can, we still return to the same point; for when will any
man presume to flatter himself that he has exerted all his power in
bewailing his sins? Consciences, therefore, that have been long striving
with themselves, and exercised in tedious conflicts, but without finding
at length any place of rest, endeavour to procure some small alleviation,
extorting from themselves some sorrow, and forcing out some tears to
complete their contrition.

III. If they charge me with calumny, let them come forth and produce a
single individual, who has not, by this doctrine of contrition, either
been driven into despair, or endeavoured to avert the Divine judgment by a
pretended sorrow instead of real compunction. We have said ourselves, that
forgiveness of sins is never enjoyed without repentance, because none but
those who are afflicted and wounded with a consciousness of sins, can
sincerely implore the mercy of God; but we have likewise added, that
repentance is not the cause of remission of sins. But those torments of
soul, which they say are duties to be performed, we have put aside. We
have taught the sinner not to look on his compunction or on his tears, but
to fix both his eyes solely on the mercy of God. We have only declared,
that Christ called the labouring and heavy‐laden, when he was sent “to
preach the gospel to the poor, to heal the broken‐hearted, to preach
deliverance to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that
are bound, and to comfort all that mourn.”(1693) This would exclude the
Pharisees, who, satisfied with their own righteousness, acknowledge not
their poverty; and despisers, who, careless of the wrath of God, seek no
remedy for their disease; for such neither labour, nor are heavy‐laden;
they are not broken‐hearted, or in bondage, or in captivity. But there is
a considerable difference, whether a man be taught to merit remission of
sins by a true and perfect contrition, (which no sinner can ever perform,)
or be instructed to hunger and thirst for the Divine mercy, that by the
knowledge of his misery, by his disquietude, fatigue, and captivity, he
may be shown where he ought to seek for consolation, rest, and liberty,
and may learn to glorify God by his humility.

IV. Concerning confession, there has always been a great controversy
between the canonists and the scholastic divines; the latter contending,
that confession is commanded by the word of God; the other, on the
contrary, maintaining that it is enjoined only by the ecclesiastical
constitutions. But this controversy has discovered the singular impudence
of the theologians, who have corrupted and violently distorted all the
passages of Scripture which they have cited in favour of their argument.
And when they perceived that they could not even thus obtain what they
desired, those who would appear more shrewd than others, resorted to this
subterfuge, that confession, as to the substance of it, came from the
Divine law, but afterwards derived its form from a positive law. In a
similar manner the most foolish lawyers pretend, that citations originated
from the Divine law, because it is said, “Adam, where art thou?”(1694) and
exceptions also, because Adam answered, as if by way of exception, “The
woman whom thou gavest to be with me,” &c.; but that both received their
form from the civil code. But let us examine by what arguments they prove
this confession, either formal or informal, to have been commanded by God.
The Lord, say they, sent leprous persons to the priests. What then? Did he
send them to confession? Who ever heard that the Levitical priests were
appointed to hear confessions? Therefore they resort to allegories: it was
enacted by the Mosaic law, that the priests should distinguish between
leprosy and leprosy; sin is a spiritual leprosy, concerning which it is
the office of the priests to decide. Before I reply to this, I would
inquire, by the way, if this passage constitutes them judges of the
spiritual leprosy, why do they arrogate to themselves the cognizance of
the natural and corporeal leprosy? Is not this trifling with the
Scriptures? The law commits to the Levitical priests the cognizance of the
leprosy; let us usurp this to ourselves. Sin is a spiritual leprosy; let
us also take cognizance of sin. Now, I reply, “The priesthood being
changed, there is made, of necessity, a change also of the law.”(1695) All
the priestly functions have been transferred to Christ; in him they are
fulfilled and finished; therefore every privilege and honour of the
sacerdotal office has been transferred to him alone. If they are so
extremely fond of pursuing allegories, let them propose Christ to
themselves as the only priest, and accumulate on his tribunal the
unlimited jurisdiction over all things; this we shall easily admit.
Besides, this allegory of theirs is very absurd, since it places among the
ceremonies a law that was merely political. Why, then, does Christ send
leprous persons to the priests? To preclude the priests from calumniating
him with a violation of the law, which commanded him that was cured of the
leprosy to show himself to the priest, and to be purged by the oblation of
a sacrifice. “Go (said he) show thyself to the priest, and offer the gift
that Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.”(1696) And truly this
miracle was to be a testimony to them; for they had pronounced him
leprous, now they pronounce him healed. Are they not, whether willingly or
reluctantly, constrained to become witnesses of the miracles of Christ?
Christ gives them his miracle for their examination; they cannot deny it;
but because they still cavil, this work is a testimony to them. Thus it is
said, “This gospel shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto
all nations.”(1697) Again: “Ye shall be brought before governors and
kings, for a testimony against them.”(1698) That is, that they may be more
powerfully convicted at the judgment of God. But if they would rather
coincide with Chrysostom, he also teaches, that Christ did this on account
of the Jews, that he might not be deemed a transgressor of the law. Though
on a point so clear I am ashamed to adduce the suffrage of any man; when
Christ declares that he leaves the legal rights entirely to the priests,
as the professed enemies of the gospel, who were always ready to cavil, if
their mouths were not stopped. Wherefore the Popish priests, in order to
retain this possession, should publicly espouse the party of those whom it
is necessary to restrain by force from uttering their curses against
Christ. For with this his true ministers have no concern.

V. Their second argument they derive from the same source, that is, from
allegory; as though allegories were sufficient for the confirmation of any
dogma. Let them be admitted as sufficient, if I do not prove that those
very allegories may be urged by me with more plausibility than they
possibly can by them. They plead, therefore, that the Lord commanded his
disciples to loose Lazarus from his bandages, when he was raised from the
grave.(1699) Here, in the first place, they are guilty of falsehood; for
it is nowhere recorded, that the Lord said this to his disciples; and it
is much more probable that he said it to the Jews who were standing near
him, that the miracle might be rendered more evident, beyond all suspicion
of fraud, and that his power might appear the greater, from his raising
the dead to life without the least touch, solely by the call of his voice.
For I apprehend, that the Lord, in order to remove from the minds of the
Jews every unfavourable suspicion, chose that they should roll back the
stone, should perceive the fetid odour, should see the certain tokens of
death, should behold him rising by the sole energy of a word, and be the
first to touch him on his restoration to life. And this is the opinion of
Chrysostom. But admitting this to have been addressed to the disciples,
what will they gain by it? That the Lord gave his apostles the power of
loosing; but with how much more aptitude and skill might these words be
handled in an allegorical sense, if we should say, that God intended by
this emblem to instruct believers, that they ought to loose those whom he
has raised to life; that is, that they should not recall to remembrance
the sins which he had forgotten; that they should not condemn as sinners
those whom he had absolved; that they should not continue to upbraid with
offences which he had forgiven; that where he is merciful and ready to
spare, they should not be severe and rigorous to punish! Nothing, surely,
ought to be a stronger motive to the exercise of forgiveness by us, than
the example of that judge, who threatens to be implacable towards them who
are too rigorous and cruel. Let them go now and boast of their allegories.

VI. They come to a closer contest, when they oppose us with what they
apprehend to be plain passages. Those who came to the baptism of John
confessed their sins;(1700) and James directs us to confess our sins one
to another.(1701) It is no wonder, if those who desired to be baptized
confessed their sins, for it is said, that John “preached the baptism of
repentance,” and “baptized with water unto repentance.” Whom, then, should
he baptize, but such as confessed themselves sinners? Baptism is an emblem
of remission of sins; and who should be admitted to this emblem but
sinners, and those who acknowledged themselves to be such? They confessed
their sins, therefore, in order to be baptized. Nor is it without reason
that James directs us to confess one to another. But if they would observe
what immediately follows, they would perceive, that this also affords them
very little support. “Confess (says he) your faults one to another, and
pray for one another.” He connects mutual confession and mutual prayer. If
our confessions must be made only to priests, then our prayers ought to be
offered up for them alone. But would it not follow from the language of
James, that priests alone might make confessions? For when he enjoins
mutual confession, he addresses such only as have a right to hear the
confessions of others. Αλληλοι implies mutually, by turns, successively,
or reciprocally. But none can reciprocally confess, but those who are
qualified to hear confessions. And since they dignify the priests
exclusively with this prerogative, we also relinquish to them alone the
task of making confession. Then let us dismiss such impertinences, and
attend to the real meaning of the apostle, which is simple and clear; it
is, that we should reciprocally communicate our infirmities to each other,
to receive from one another mutual advice, mutual compassion, and mutual
consolation; and, also, that being mutually conscious of the infirmities
of our brethren, we should pray to the Lord on their behalf. Why, then, do
they quote James in opposition to us, when we so strongly urge a
confession of the Divine mercy? But no man can confess the mercy of God,
if he has not previously confessed his own misery. Indeed, we rather
pronounce an anathema against him who has not confessed himself a sinner
before God, before his angels, before the Church, and, in a word, before
all mankind. “For the Scripture hath concluded all under sin—that every
mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before
God;”(1702) and that he alone may be justified and exalted.

VII. But I wonder with what face they can presume to contend, that the
confession of which they speak is of Divine appointment. The practice we
admit to be very ancient, but we can easily prove, that Christians were
formerly quite at liberty as to the use of it. That there was no fixed law
or constitution respecting it till the time of Innocent III., is certain
from the testimony of their own histories. Surely, if there had been a
more ancient law, they would rather have cited it, than, by being content
with a decree of the Council of Lateran, have rendered themselves
ridiculous even in the eyes of children. They hesitate not in other cases
to fabricate fictitious decrees, which they ascribe to the most ancient
councils, that they may dazzle the eyes of the simple by a veneration for
antiquity. In this instance they never thought of obtruding such a
forgery. Therefore, according to their own testimony, three hundred years
have not yet elapsed, since Innocent III. introduced the snare, and
imposed the necessity of confession. But, to say nothing respecting the
time, the barbarism of the diction is, of itself, sufficient to deprive
that law of all credit. For the good fathers enjoin, that every person, of
both sexes, shall, once in every year, make a particular confession of all
sins to the proper priest; but some wits facetiously object, that this
precept binds none but hermaphrodites, and relates to no one who is either
a male or a female. Moreover, their disciples have betrayed still greater
folly, in their inability to explain what is meant by the proper priest.
Whatever may be clamorously pretended by all the Pope’s mercenary
disputants, we are certain, that Christ was not the author of this law,
which compels men to enumerate their sins, and that twelve centuries
passed away after the resurrection of Christ, before any such law was
promulgated; so that this tyranny was not introduced till after the
extinction of piety and learning, when masques, occupying the place of
pastors, had assumed an unlimited license of doing whatever they pleased.
There are also plain testimonies, in histories and other ancient writings,
which inform us, that this was a political discipline instituted by
bishops, not a law given by Christ or his apostles. Of a great number, I
shall produce only one, which will be a clear proof of this assertion.
Sozomen, in his Ecclesiastical History, relates, that this ordinance of
the bishops was diligently observed in all the Western Churches, and
especially at Rome. He fully implies that it was not the universal custom
of all the churches, and says, that one of the Presbyters was peculiarly
appointed to this office. In this, he abundantly confutes the false
pretensions of these men, that the keys were given promiscuously, for this
use, to the whole sacerdotal order, since it was not the common function
of all priests, but the peculiar department of one who was chosen to it by
the bishop. This is the same, who, in the present day, in every cathedral
church is called the Penitentiary, who takes cognizance of crimes of
peculiar enormity, and such as are censured for the sake of example. The
historian immediately adds, that this was the custom also at
Constantinople, till a certain matron, pretending to go to confession, was
discovered to have concealed, under this specious pretext, a criminal
connection with the deacon of that church. On account of this crime,
Nectarius, the bishop of the church, (a man eminent for sanctity and
erudition,) abolished the ceremony of confession. Here let them erect
their asinine ears. If auricular confession had been a law of God, how
could Nectarius have presumed to reverse and disannul it? Will they accuse
Nectarius of heresy and schism, who is acknowledged by all the fathers to
have been a holy man of God? But the same sentence would condemn the
Constantinopolitan church, in which Sozomen affirms the custom of
confession not only to have been discontinued for a season, but to have
been altogether disused down to his time. And they would accuse of
apostasy, not only the church of Constantinople, but all the Oriental
churches, who neglected a law which they maintain to be inviolable and
obligatory on all Christians.

VIII. But this abrogation is plainly attested by Chrysostom, who was
himself also a bishop of the church of Constantinople, in so many places,
that it is surprising how they dare to open their mouths in contradiction
of it. “Confess your sins, (says he,) that you may obliterate them. If you
are ashamed to tell any one what sins you have committed, confess them
daily in your soul. I say not, that you should confess them to your
fellow‐servant, who may reproach you; confess them to God, who cures them.
Confess your sins on your bed, that there your conscience may daily
recognize its crimes.” Again: “But, now, it is not necessary to confess in
the presence of witnesses; let an inquisition into your transgressions be
the work of your own thoughts; let there be no witness of this judgment;
let God alone see you confessing.” Again: “I conduct you not into the
public view of your fellow‐servants; I do not oblige you to reveal your
sins to men; lay open your conscience in the presence of God. Show your
wounds to the Lord, who is the best physician, and implore a remedy from
him; show them to him, who upbraideth not, but most mercifully heals.”
Again: “You certainly should not tell it to a man, lest he reproach you;
nor is confession to be made to a fellow‐servant, who may publish it; but
show your wounds to the Lord, who exercises his care over you, and is a
most merciful physician.” He afterwards introduces God, speaking thus: “I
constrain you not to come forth into the midst of a theatre, and assemble
a multitude of witnesses; declare your sin privately to me alone, that I
may heal your wound.” Shall we say, that Chrysostom proceeded to such a
degree of temerity, when he wrote those and similar passages, as to
liberate the consciences of men from obligations imposed on them by the
Divine law? Certainly not. But he dares not to require as necessary what
he knows is never prescribed in the word of God.

IX. But to place the whole subject in a more plain and familiar light, we
will first faithfully state what kind of confession is taught in the word
of God; and then we will subjoin an account of those inventions of the
Papists, not indeed of all, (for who could exhaust that immense ocean?)
but only of those which comprise the substance of their doctrine
respecting secret confession. Here it grieves me to mention, how
frequently the old translator has translated confess instead of praise;
which is well known even to the most unlearned; only it is necessary to
expose their audacity, in transferring to their own tyrannical edict what
was written with reference to the praises of God. To prove the virtue of
confession to exhilarate the mind, they produce this passage from the
Psalmist: “With the voice of exultation and confession.”(1703) But if such
a metamorphosis of the passage be admitted, we shall be able to infer any
thing from any thing. But since they are thus lost to all sense of shame,
let the pious reader remember, that they have been consigned over to a
reprobate mind by the righteous vengeance of God, to render their
presumption the more detestable. If we are satisfied with the simple
doctrine of the Scripture, we shall be in no danger of being deluded by
such fallacies; for there one method of confession is prescribed; which
is, that since it is the Lord who forgives, forgets, and obliterates sins,
we should confess our sins to him, that we may obtain pardon. He is a
physician; to him, then, let us discover our wounds. He is injured and
offended; let us pray to him for peace. He is the searcher of hearts, and
privy to all thoughts; let us hasten to pour out our hearts before him.
Finally, it is he who calls sinners; let us not delay to approach him.
David says, “I acknowledge my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not
hid. I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord; and thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin.”(1704) Similar to this is another
confession of David: “Have mercy upon me, O God, according unto the
multitude of thy tender mercies.”(1705) Such, also, is the confession of
Daniel: “We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done
wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts.”(1706)
And such are the other confessions, which frequently occur in the
Scriptures, the recital of which would almost fill a volume. John says,
“If we confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins.”(1707) To whom must we confess? To him, certainly; and this we do,
if we prostrate ourselves before him with a distressed and humbled heart;
if we sincerely accuse and condemn ourselves in his presence, and pray to
be pardoned by his goodness and mercy.

X. Whoever from the heart makes this confession before God, will also,
without doubt, have a tongue prepared for confession, as often as it shall
be necessary to proclaim the Divine mercy among men; and not only to
whisper the secret of his mind once into the ear of an individual, but
frequently and publicly, and in the hearing of the whole world,
ingenuously to declare, both his own ignominy, and the magnificence and
glory of God. In this manner, when David was reproved by Nathan, he felt
compunction of conscience, and confessed his sin both to God and to men:
“I have sinned (said he) against the Lord;”(1708) that is, I now make no
excuse, nor use the least subterfuge to prevent all men from condemning me
as a sinner, and what I wished to conceal from the Lord, from being
revealed also to men. The secret confession, therefore, which is made to
God, is followed by a voluntary confession before men, whenever it
contributes either to the Divine glory or to our humiliation. For this
reason, the Lord anciently enjoined upon the Israelites, that all the
people should confess their iniquities publicly in the temple, by the
mouth of the priest.(1709) For he foresaw this assistance to be necessary
for them, to bring every person to a proper view of himself. And it is
reasonable, that, by the confession of our misery, we should glorify the
goodness and mercy of God, both among ourselves and before the whole
world.

XI. This kind of confession ought to be both ordinary, in the Church; and
extraordinary, to be practised in a particular manner whenever the people
at large are chargeable with the guilt of any common crime. We have an
example of the latter in that solemn confession which was made by all the
people under the auspices of Ezra and Nehemiah. For as their long exile,
the destruction of their city and temple, and the subversion of their
religion, were punishments of the common defection of all, they could not
properly acknowledge the blessing of deliverance, unless they had first
confessed their guilt. Nor is it of any importance if, in a congregation,
there be sometimes a few innocent persons; for as they are members of a
languid and diseased body, they ought not to boast of health. Nor is it
possible, indeed, but they must contract some of the pollution, and
sustain part of the guilt. Therefore, whenever we are afflicted with
pestilence, or war, or sterility, or any other calamity, if it be our duty
to resort to mourning, to fasting, and other expressions of
guilt,—confession itself, on which all these other things depend, ought by
no means to be neglected. The ordinary confession is not only recommended
from the mouth of the Lord, but no judicious man, who has considered its
usefulness, will venture to condemn it. For since, in every religious
assembly, we introduce ourselves into the presence of God and angels, how
shall we commence our services, except by an acknowledgment of our
unworthiness? But this, you will say, is done in every prayer; for
whenever we pray for pardon, we make a confession of our sins. This I
acknowledge. But, if you consider our extreme carelessness, or drowsiness,
or stupidity, you will admit to me, that it would be a salutary
regulation, if the generality of Christians were accustomed to humble
themselves by some solemn act of confession. For though the ceremony,
which the Lord enjoined on the Israelites, was a part of the tutelage of
the law, yet the thing itself, in some measure, belongs also to us. And,
indeed, we see that in all well‐regulated churches this custom is
advantageously observed; that on every Lord’s day the minister makes a
formal confession, in which he represents all as guilty of sin, and
supplicates pardon from the Lord on behalf of all. Finally, by this key
the gate of prayer is opened, both to individuals in private, and in
public to all the congregation.

XII. Moreover, the Scripture sanctions two kinds of private confession;
one to be made for our own sake, which is referred to in the direction of
James, that we should “confess our faults one to another;”(1710) for he
means, that, revealing our infirmities to one another, we should assist
each other with mutual advice and consolation; another, which is to be
made for the sake of our neighbour, to pacify and reconcile him to us, if
we have done him any injury. In the former species of confession, though
James, by not expressly appointing any one into whose bosom we should
disburden ourselves, leaves us quite at liberty to confess to any member
of the church who shall appear most suitable; yet, since the pastors must
generally be considered more proper than others, we ought chiefly to make
choice of them. I say that they are more suitable than others, since, in
their very vocation to the ministry, they are designated by the Lord, to
instruct us to subdue and correct our sins, and to console us with a
confidence of pardon. For though the office of mutual admonition and
reproof is committed to all, yet it is especially confided to ministers.
And so, while we all ought mutually to console and confirm each other in a
confidence of the Divine mercy, yet we see, that ministers are constituted
witnesses and sureties of it, that they may afford our consciences a
stronger assurance of the remission of sins; insomuch that they themselves
are said to remit sins and to loose souls.(1711) When you find this
attributed to them, consider that it is for your benefit. Therefore, let
every believer remember that it is his duty, if he feels such secret
anguish or affliction from a sense of his sins, that he cannot extricate
himself without some exterior aid, not to neglect the remedy offered him
by the Lord; which is, that in order to alleviate his distress, he should
use private confession with his pastor, and, to obtain consolation, should
privately implore his assistance, whose office it is, both publicly and
privately, to comfort the people of God with the doctrine of the gospel.
But we should always observe such a degree of moderation, as to lay no
yoke on the conscience, where God has given no positive command. Hence it
follows, that such confession ought to be free, so as not to be required
of all, but only to be recommended to those who conceive themselves to
need it. It follows also, that they who practise it on account of their
need of it, should neither be compelled by any precept, nor be induced by
any artifice, to enumerate all their sins; but only so far as they shall
think beneficial to themselves, that they may receive solid consolation.
Faithful pastors ought not only to leave the churches in possession of
this liberty, but also to defend and vindicate it with all their power, if
they wish to preserve their ministry from tyranny, and the people from
superstition.

XIII. Concerning the other species of confession, Christ says, in the
Gospel of Matthew, “If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there
rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee, leave there thy gift
before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and
then come and offer thy gift.”(1712) Thus is that charity, which has been
broken by our offence, to be repaired by acknowledging the fault we have
committed, and imploring forgiveness. In this kind is comprehended the
confession of those who have sinned to the offence of the whole Church.
For, if Christ esteems the private offence of one man of such importance,
as to prohibit from the sacred ordinances all those who have sinned
against their brethren till they have been restored to favour by an
adequate satisfaction,—how much stronger is the reason, that he who, by
any evil example, has injured the whole Church, should reconcile it to
himself by an acknowledgment of his guilt! Thus was the Corinthian
readmitted to the communion, after having submitted to reproof.(1713) This
mode of confession is stated by Cyprian to have been practised in the
ancient Church. “They repent (says he) in due time; and afterwards they
come to confession; and by the imposition of the hands of the bishop and
clergy, they receive a right to communion.” The Scripture knows nothing of
any other method or form of confession; and it is not our province to
impose new chains on men’s consciences, which Christ most strictly forbids
to reduce under the yoke of bondage. But that the sheep should present
themselves to their pastor, whenever they desire to partake of the sacred
supper, I am so far from opposing, that I earnestly wish it were
universally observed. For those who experience distress of conscience may
receive singular benefit from such an interview; and those who require to
be admonished, will thus afford an opportunity for admonitions; provided
that care be always taken to guard against tyranny and superstition.

XIV. The power of the keys is exercised in these three kinds of
confession: either when the whole church implores pardon by a solemn
acknowledgment of its transgressions; or when an individual, who, by any
remarkable crime, has occasioned a common offence, declares his
repentance; or when he who needs the assistance of the minister on account
of the disquietude of his conscience, discloses his infirmity to him. The
removal of an offence proceeds on a different principle; because, though
it is also designed to produce peace of conscience, yet the principal end
is, that animosity may be destroyed, and the minds of men united in the
bonds of peace. But this advantage, which I have mentioned, is by no means
to be despised, that we may confess our sins with the greater readiness.
For, when the whole church stands, as it were, before the tribunal of God,
when they confess themselves guilty, and have no refuge but in the Divine
mercy,—it is no mean or trivial consolation to have Christ’s ambassador
present, furnished with the mandate of reconciliation, by whom they may
have their absolution pronounced. Here the usefulness of the keys is
deservedly celebrated, when this embassy is rightly performed, with
becoming order and reverence. So, when he who had, in some measure,
alienated himself from the Church, is pardoned and restored to the unity
of the brethren, how great a blessing does he experience in knowing
himself to be forgiven by them, to whom Christ has said, “Whose soever
sins ye shall remit on earth, they shall be remitted in heaven!”(1714) Nor
is private absolution less efficacious or beneficial, when it is requested
by those who need a particular remedy for the relief of their infirmities.
For it frequently happens, that he who hears the general promises, which
are addressed to the whole congregation of believers, nevertheless remains
in some suspense, and his mind is still disquieted with doubts of the
forgiveness of his sins. The same person, if he discloses to his pastor
the secret distress of his mind, and hears this language of the gospel
particularly directed to him, “Be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven
thee,”(1715) will encourage his mind to an assurance, and will be
liberated from that trepidation with which he was before disturbed. But
when we are treating of the keys, we must always be cautious not to dream
of any power distinct from the preaching of the gospel. This subject will
again be discussed more fully in another place, where we shall have to
treat of the government of the Church; and there we shall see, that all
the power of binding and loosing, which Christ has conferred on the
Church, is inseparable from the word. But this is chiefly applicable to
the ministry of the keys, the whole force and meaning of which consist in
this, that the grace of the gospel should be confirmed and sealed, as it
were, to the minds of the faithful, in public as well as private, by those
whom the Lord has ordained to this office; which cannot be done but by
preaching alone.

XV. But what is the doctrine of the Romish divines? They maintain, that
all persons, of both sexes, as soon as they shall have arrived at years of
discretion, should, once at least in every year, confess all their sins to
their own priest; that there is no remission of sin, unless they have
firmly resolved to confess it; that unless they fulfil this resolution,
when opportunity offers, there is no admittance for them into Paradise;
and, moreover, that the priest has the power of the keys, with which he
may loose the sinner or bind him; because Christ has not said in vain,
“Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven.”(1716) But
concerning this power, they have obstinate contentions among themselves.
Some say, that there is essentially but one key, namely, the power of
binding and loosing; that knowledge is required, indeed, for the good use
of it, but that it is only like an accessory, not an essential
concomitant. Others, perceiving this to be too unlimited a license, have
mentioned two keys, discretion and power. Others, again, observing that
the wickedness of the priests was restrained by such moderation, have
invented other keys, an authority of discerning which they might use in
pronouncing decisions; and a power, which they might exert in executing
their sentences; with knowledge, to assist as a counsellor. But they
venture not to explain this binding and loosing simply to mean, forgiving
and obliterating sins; because they hear the Lord proclaiming by the
prophet, “I am the Lord, and beside me there is no Saviour. I, even I, am
he which blotteth out thy transgressions.”(1717) But they say, that it
belongs to the priest to pronounce who are bound or loosed, and to declare
whose sins are remitted or retained; and that he declares it, either by
confession, when he absolves and retains sins; or by his sentence, when he
excommunicates, and when he receives to the communion of the sacraments.
Lastly, when they perceive that they are not yet extricated from this
difficulty, but that it may always be objected, that their priests
frequently bind and loose improper persons, who are not therefore bound or
loosed in heaven,—as their last resource, they reply, that the commission
of the keys must be understood with some limitation, Christ having
promised, that the sentence of the priest, which has been justly
delivered, according to the merits of the persons bound or loosed, shall
be confirmed at his tribunal. They add also, that these keys were given by
Christ to all priests, who receive them from the bishops on their
promotion to the sacerdotal office; but that the free use of them belongs
only to those who exercise ecclesiastical functions; that the keys
themselves remain, indeed, with the excommunicated or suspended ones, but
that they are rusty and disused. And those who advance these things may
justly be considered modest and sober, in comparison with others, who, on
a new anvil, have fabricated new keys, with which they tell us the
treasure of the Church is locked up; which we shall examine in the proper
place.

XVI. I shall briefly reply to each of these things; though without
noticing, at present, the justice or injustice with which they bind the
souls of the faithful by their laws; as that will be considered in due
order. But when they impose a law respecting the enumeration of all sins;
when they deny that sin is forgiven, but on condition that a firm
resolution has been formed to confess it; when they say that there remains
no entrance into Paradise, if the opportunity of confession has been
neglected,—this is altogether intolerable. Must all sins be enumerated?
David, who (I suppose) had often meditated the confession of his sins,
nevertheless exclaimed, “Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me
from secret faults.”(1718) And in another place: “Mine iniquities are gone
over mine head; as a heavy burden they are too heavy for me.”(1719) He had
just apprehensions of the vast abyss of our sins, of the numerous species
of our crimes, of the many heads this monster bore, and the long tail it
drew after it. Therefore he attempted not to detail his transgressions,
but from the abyss of his distresses cried to the Lord. “I am afflicted
and ready to die; my spirit is overwhelmed within me; I dwell in darkness,
as those that have been long dead;”(1720) “the sorrows of death compassed
me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me;”(1721) “I sink in deep mire;
deliver me out of the mire, and let me not sink.”(1722) Who can now think
of recounting his sins, when he sees that David was unable to enter on an
enumeration of his?

XVII. The souls of those who have been affected with any discoveries of
God, have been most cruelly tormented by this fatal delusion. First, they
called themselves to an account; they divided sins into boughs, branches,
twigs, and leaves, according to the distinctions of these confessors: then
they examined the qualities, quantities, and circumstances; and the
business made some little progress. But, when they had advanced further,
they were surrounded on all sides by the sea and the sky, no port, no
haven in prospect; the more they had passed over, the greater mass was
always accumulating on their view; they beheld, as it were, lofty
mountains rising before them, and no time or labour seemed to encourage
the least hope of escaping. Thus they remained in extreme distress, and
after all, found it terminate in nothing but despair. Then the remedy
applied by those cruel murderers, to alleviate the wounds which they had
made, was, that every one should do to the uttermost of his ability. But
new cares again disturbed, and new agonies again excruciated, these
miserable souls: I have not devoted sufficient time; I have not applied
with proper diligence; I have omitted many things through negligence, and
the forgetfulness which arises from negligence is inexcusable. To assuage
such pains, other remedies were now added: Repent of your negligence; if
it be not too great, it will be forgiven. But all these things cannot heal
the wound; nor do they act as alleviations of the malady, but rather as
poisons concealed in honey, that they may not by their harshness offend at
the first taste, but may penetrate into the inmost parts before they are
perceived. This terrible injunction, therefore, is always pursuing them
and resounding in their ears: “Confess all your sins;” nor can that terror
be appeased but by some certain consolation. Here let the reader consider
the possibility of taking an account of the actions of a whole year, and
selecting the sins of every day; since experience convinces every man
that, when at evening he comes to examine the delinquencies of only one
day, his memory is confounded by their great multitude and variety. I
speak not of stupid hypocrites, who, if they have noticed three or four
gross sins, imagine they have discharged their duty; but of the true
worshippers of God, who, when they find themselves overwhelmed with the
examination they have made, conclude, in the language of John, “If our
heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart.”(1723) They tremble,
therefore, before that Judge, whose knowledge far exceeds our
apprehension.

XVIII. The acquiescence of a great part of the world in such soothing
arts, employed to temper this mortal poison, was not indulged from a
belief that God was satisfied, or because they were altogether satisfied
themselves; but that, like mariners, having cast anchor in the midst of
the sea, they might enjoy a short respite from the toils of navigation, or
like a fatigued and fainting traveller, might lie down in the road. I
shall not take much trouble to establish this point for every man may be
his own witness of it. I will briefly state the nature of this law. First,
it is absolutely impracticable; therefore it can only destroy, condemn,
confound, and precipitate into ruin and despair. In the next place, it
diverts sinners from a true sense of their sins, and makes them
hypocrites, ignorant both of God and themselves. For while they are wholly
employed in enumerating their sins, they forget, in the mean time, that
latent source of vices, their secret iniquities and inward pollutions, a
knowledge of which is above all things necessary to a consideration of
their misery. But the most certain rule of confession is to acknowledge
and confess the abyss of our guilt to be vast beyond all our
comprehension. The publican’s confession appears to have been composed
according to this rule—“God be merciful to me a sinner.”(1724) As though
he had said, “All that I am is utterly sinful; I cannot reach the
magnitude of my sins, either with my tongue or with my mind; let the abyss
of thy mercy swallow up this abyss of sin.” But you will say, Are not
particular sins, then, to be confessed? Is no confession accepted by God
unless it be comprised in these precise words, “I am a sinner?” I reply,
that we should rather endeavour, as far as we possibly can, to pour out
our whole heart before the Lord; and not only confess ourselves sinners in
a single expression, but truly and cordially acknowledge ourselves such;
and consider in all our reflections, how great and various is the
pollution of sin; not only that we are unclean, but the nature and extent
of our impurity; not only that we are debtors, but the magnitude and
number of the debts with which we are burdened; not only that we are
wounded, but what a multitude of mortal wounds we have received. Yet when
the sinner has wholly unbosomed himself before God in this acknowledgment,
let him seriously and sincerely reflect, that more sins still remain, and
that the secret recesses of his guilt are too deep to be entirely
disclosed. And therefore let him exclaim with David, “Who can understand
his errors? Cleanse thou me from secret faults.”(1725) Now, when they
affirm, that sins are not forgiven without a strong resolution having been
formed to confess them, and that the gate of Paradise is shut against him
who has neglected an opportunity afforded him of confessing,—far be it
from us to make them such a concession. For there is no other remission of
sins now than there always has been. Among all those who are said to have
obtained remission of sins from Christ, none are said to have made a
confession in the ear of any priest. Nor, indeed, was it possible for them
thus to confess, when there were no confessionary priests, and confession
itself was altogether unknown. And this confession was unheard of for many
ages after, during which sins were forgiven without this condition. But,
not to debate any longer as respecting a doubtful point, “the word of God
which abideth for ever,”(1726) is perfectly clear: “If the wicked will
turn from all his sins, all his transgressions that he hath committed,
they shall not be mentioned unto him.”(1727) He who presumes to make any
addition to this declaration, does not bind sins, but limits the mercy of
God. When they contend that judgment cannot be given without a trial of
the cause, we are prepared with an answer—that they are guilty of arrogant
presumption in creating themselves judges. And it is surprising that they
so securely fabricate principles for themselves, which no man of sound
understanding will admit. They boast that the office of binding and
loosing is committed to them, as though it were a kind of jurisdiction
annexed to examination. That the apostles were strangers to this
authority, their whole doctrine proclaims; and to know certainly whether
the sinner be loosed, belongs not to the priest, but to Him of whom
absolution is implored; since the priest who bears the confession, can
never know whether the enumeration of sins be true and perfect. Thus there
would be no absolution, but what must be restricted to the words of the
person to be judged. Besides, the loosing of sins depends entirely on
faith and repentance; which both elude the knowledge of man, when sentence
is to be given respecting another. It follows, therefore, that the
certainty of binding and loosing is not subject to the decision of an
earthly judge; because a minister, in the legitimate execution of his
office, can pronounce only a conditional absolution; but that the
declaration, “_Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted_,” is spoken
for the sake of sinners, to preclude every doubt that the pardon, which is
promised according to the command and word of God, will be ratified in
heaven.

XIX. It is not to be wondered at, therefore, if we condemn and desire the
total removal of this auricular confession—a thing so pestilent, and in so
many respects injurious to the Church. Even if it were a thing
abstractedly indifferent, yet, since it is of no use or benefit, but has
occasioned so much impiety, sacrilege, and error,—who can refuse to admit,
that it ought to be immediately abolished? They mention, indeed, some
uses, which they boast of as very beneficial; but these are mere fictions,
or productive of no advantage whatever. One circumstance they state as a
peculiar recommendation, that the shame of the person who confesses is a
grievous punishment, by which the sinner is rendered more cautious in
future, and prevents the vengeance of God by punishing himself. As though
we humble not a man with a sufficient degree of shame, when we summon him
to the supreme tribunal of heaven—to the cognizance of God! It is a
wonderful advantage, indeed, if we cease to sin through a shame of one
man, but are never ashamed of having God for a witness of our evil
conscience! Though this very notion is utterly false; for it is
universally observable, that nothing produces a greater confidence or
licentiousness in sinning, than the idea entertained by some men, after
they have made their confession to a priest, that they may “wipe their
mouth and say, I have done no wickedness.”(1728) And they not only become
more presumptuous in their sins throughout the year, but, having no
concern about confession for the rest of the year, they never aspire after
God, they never retire into themselves, but accumulate sins upon sins,
till they disembogue them, as they imagine, all at once. But when they
have done this, they conceive themselves to be exonerated of their burden,
and to have transferred from God the judgment they have conferred on the
priest; and that they have deprived God of remembrance, by the information
they have communicated to the priest. Besides, who rejoices to see the day
of confession approaching? Who goes to confess with alacrity of heart; and
does not rather come with unwillingness and reluctance, as though he were
forcibly dragged to a prison; except perhaps the priests, who pleasantly
entertain themselves with mutual narrations of their exploits, as with
humorous anecdotes? I will not soil much paper by relating the monstrous
abominations with which auricular confession abounds. I only remark, if
that holy man was not guilty of indiscretion, who, on account of one
rumour of fornication, banished confession from his church, or rather from
the memory of his people,—we are thus reminded of what ought to be done in
the present day, when rapes, adulteries, incests, and seductions exceed
all enumeration.

XX. As the advocates of confession plead the power of the keys, and rest
upon it all the merits of their cause, we must examine the weight that is
due to this argument. Are the keys, then, (say they,) given without any
reason? Is it without any cause that it is said, “Whatsoever ye shall
loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven?”(1729) Do we, then, frustrate
the declaration of Christ? I reply, that there was an important reason why
the keys should be given; as I have already stated, and shall again more
explicitly show, when I come to treat of excommunication. But what if I
refute the whole of their pretensions with one argument, that their
priests are not vicars, or successors of the apostles? But this, also,
will be discussed in another place. Now, they set up, as their principal
defence, an engine by which their whole structure may be completely
demolished. For Christ never conferred on his apostles the power of
binding and loosing, till after he had given them the Holy Ghost. I deny,
therefore, that the power of the keys belongs to any, who have not
previously received the Holy Ghost. I deny that any one can use the keys,
unless the Spirit guide and instruct him, and direct him how he ought to
act. They impertinently pretend, that they have the Holy Ghost; but in
reality they deny it; unless perhaps they imagine, as they certainly do,
that the Holy Ghost is a useless and worthless thing; but they will not be
believed. By this weapon they are completely vanquished. Of whatever door
they pretend to have the key, they should always be asked, whether they
have the Holy Ghost, who is the arbiter and governor of the keys. If they
reply in the affirmative, they must be questioned again, whether it be
possible for the Holy Ghost to err. This they will not dare expressly to
avow, though they obliquely insinuate it in their doctrine. We may justly
infer, therefore, that no priests have the power of the keys, who, without
discrimination, frequently loose what the Lord had designed to be bound,
and bind what he had commanded to be loosed.

XXI. When they find themselves convinced, by evident experience, that they
promiscuously loose and bind the worthy and the unworthy, they arrogate to
themselves the power without knowledge. And though they dare not deny that
knowledge is requisite to a good use of it, yet they tell us, that the
power itself is committed to improper dispensers of it. But this is the
power—“Whatsoever thou bindest or loosest on earth, shall be bound or
loosed in heaven.” Either the promise of Christ must be false, or the
binding and loosing is rightly performed by those who are endued with this
power. Nor is there any room for them to quibble, that the declaration of
Christ is limited according to the merits of the person that is bound or
loosed. We also acknowledge, that none can be bound or loosed, but such as
are worthy to be bound or loosed. But the preachers of the gospel, and the
Church, have the word as the standard of this worthiness. In this word,
the ministers of the gospel may promise to all remission of sins in Christ
through faith; they may denounce damnation against all and upon all who
receive not Christ. In this word, the Church pronounces, that fornicators,
adulterers, thieves, murderers, misers, and extortioners, have no part in
the kingdom of God; and binds such with the firmest bonds. In the same
word, the Church looses and comforts those who repent.(1730) But what kind
of power will it be, not to know what ought to be bound or loosed? and not
to be able to bind or loose without this knowledge? Why, then, do they
say, that they absolve by the authority committed to them, when their
absolution is uncertain? Why should we concern ourselves about this
imaginary power, if it be quite useless? But I have already ascertained,
either that it has no existence, or that it is too uncertain to be
considered of any value. For, as they confess that there are many of the
priests who make no right use of the keys, and that the power has no
efficacy without a legitimate use of it, who will assure me, that he by
whom I am loosed is a good dispenser of the keys? But if he be a bad one,
what else does he possess but this frivolous dispensation of them: “What
ought to be bound or loosed in you, I know not, since I am destitute of
the proper use of the keys; but if you deserve it, I absolve you?” But as
much as this might be done, I will not say by a layman, (since they could
not hear that with any patience,) but by a Turk or a devil. For it is
equivalent to saying, “I have not the word of God, which is the certain
rule of loosing; but I am invested with authority to absolve you, on
condition that your merits deserve it.” We see, then, what they intended,
when they defined the keys to be an authority of discerning, and a power
of executing, attended with knowledge as a counsellor, to promote the good
use. The truth is, that they wished to reign according to their own
licentious inclinations, independently of God and his word.

XXII. If it be objected, that the legitimate ministers of Christ will be
equally perplexed in their office, since the absolution, which depends on
faith, will ever be doubtful, and that therefore sinners will have but a
slight consolation, or none at all, since the minister himself, who is not
a competent judge of their faith, is not certain of their absolution,—we
are prepared with an answer. They say, that no sins are remitted by the
priest, but those which fall under his cognizance; thus, according to
them, remission depends on the judgment of the priest; and unless he
sagaciously discerns who are worthy of pardon, the whole transaction is
frivolous and useless. In short, the power of which they speak is a
jurisdiction annexed to examination, to which pardon and absolution are
restricted. In this statement, we find no firm footing, but rather a
bottomless abyss; for where the confession is deficient, the hope of
pardon is also imperfect; in the next place, the priest himself must
necessarily remain in suspense, while he is ignorant whether the sinner
faithfully enumerates all his crimes; lastly, such is the ignorance and
inexperience of priests, that the majority of them are no more qualified
for the exercise of this office, than a shoemaker for cultivating the
ground; and almost all the rest ought justly to be suspicious of
themselves. Hence, then, the perplexity and doubtfulness of the Papal
absolution, because they maintain it to be founded on the person of the
priest; and not only so, but on his knowledge, so that he can only judge
of what he hears, examines, and ascertains. Now, should any one inquire of
these good doctors, whether a sinner be reconciled to God on the remission
of part of his sins, I know not what answer they can give, without being
constrained to acknowledge the inefficacy of whatever the priest may
pronounce concerning the remission of sins which he has heard enumerated,
as long as the guilt of others still remains. What a pernicious anxiety
must oppress the conscience of the person that confesses, appears from
this consideration, that while he relies on the discretion of the priest,
(as they express themselves,) he decides nothing by the word of God. The
doctrine maintained by us, is perfectly free from all these absurdities.
For absolution is conditional, in such a way, that the sinner may be
confident that God is propitious to him, provided he sincerely seeks an
atonement in the sacrifice of Christ, and relies upon the grace offered to
him. Thus it is impossible for him to err, who, according to his duty as a
preacher, promulgates what he has been taught by the Divine word; and the
sinner may receive a certain and clear absolution, simply on condition of
embracing the grace of Christ, according to that general rule of our Lord
himself, which has been impiously despised among the Papists—“According to
your faith be it unto you.”(1731)

XXIII. Their absurd confusion of the clear representations of the
Scripture concerning the power of the keys, I have promised to expose in
another place; and a more suitable opportunity will present itself, in
discussing the government of the Church. But let the reader remember, that
they preposterously pervert to auricular and secret confession, passages
which are spoken by Christ, partly of the preaching of the gospel, and
partly of excommunication. Wherefore, when they object that the power of
loosing was committed to the apostles, which is now exercised by the
priests in remitting the sins confessed to them, it is evidently an
assumption of a false and frivolous principle; for the absolution
consequent on faith, is nothing but a declaration of pardon taken from the
gracious promise of the gospel; but the other absolution, which depends on
ecclesiastical discipline, relates not to secret sins, but is rather for
the sake of example, that the public offence of the Church may be removed.
They rake together testimonies from every quarter, to prove, that it is
not sufficient to make a confession of sins to God, or to laymen, unless
they are likewise submitted to the cognizance of a priest; but they ought
to be ashamed of such a disgusting employment. For, if the ancient fathers
sometimes persuade sinners to disburden themselves to their own pastor, it
cannot be understood of a particular enumeration of sins, which was not
then practised. Moreover, Lombard and others of the same class have been
so unfair, that they appear to have designedly consulted spurious books,
in order to use them as a pretext to deceive the unwary. They do, indeed,
properly acknowledge, that since loosing always accompanies repentance,
there really remains no bond where any one has experienced repentance,
although he may not yet have made a confession; and, therefore, that then
the priest does not so much remit sins, as pronounce and declare them to
be remitted. Though in the word _declare_ they insinuate a gross error,
substituting a ceremony in the place of instruction; but by adding, that
he who had already obtained pardon before God, is absolved in the view of
the Church, they unseasonably apply to the particular use of every
individual, what we have already asserted to have been appointed as a part
of the common discipline of the Church, when the offence of some great and
notorious crime requires to be removed. But they presently corrupt and
destroy all the moderation they had observed, by adding another mode of
remission, that is, with an injunction of punishment and satisfaction; by
which they arrogantly ascribe to their priests the power of dividing into
two parts what God has every where promised as complete. For, as he simply
requires repentance and faith, this partition or exception is an evident
sacrilege. For it is just as if the priest, sustaining the character of a
tribune, should interpose his _veto_, and not suffer God of his mere
goodness to receive any one into favour, unless he had lain prostrate
before the tribunitial seat, and there been punished.

XXIV. The whole argument comes to this—that if they will represent God as
the author of this fictitious confession, it is a full proof of their
error; for I have pointed out their fallacies in the few passages which
they quote. But since it is evident that this is a law of human
imposition, I assert that it is also tyrannical and injurious to God, who
binds the consciences of men by his word, and whose will it is that they
should be free from the authority of men. Now, when they prescribe as a
necessary prerequisite to pardon that which God has chosen should be free,
I maintain that it is an intolerable sacrilege; for nothing is more
peculiarly the prerogative of God than the remission of sins, in which our
salvation consists. I have moreover proved, that this tyranny was not
introduced till the world was oppressed with the rudest barbarism. I have
likewise shown that it is a pestilent law, because, if wretched souls are
affected with the fear of God, it precipitates them into despair; or if
they are in a state of careless security, it soothes them with vain
flatteries, and renders them still more insensible. Lastly, I have stated,
that all the mitigations which they add, have no other tendency than to
perplex, obscure, and corrupt the pure doctrine, and to conceal their
impieties under false and illusive colours.

XXV. The third place in repentance they assign to _satisfaction_; all
their jargon concerning which may be overturned in one word. They say,
that it is not sufficient for a penitent to abstain from his former sins,
and to change his morals for the better, unless he make satisfaction to
God for the crimes which he has committed; and that there are many helps
by which we may redeem sins, such as tears, fastings, oblations, and works
of charity; that by these the Lord is to be propitiated, by these our
debts are to be paid to the Divine justice, by these we must compensate
for the guilt of our sins, by these we must merit pardon; for that though,
in the plenitude of his mercy, he has remitted our sins, yet, in the
discipline of justice, he retains the punishment, and that this is the
punishment which must be redeemed by _satisfactions_. All that they say,
however, comes to this conclusion—that we obtain the pardon of our
transgressions from the mercy of God, but that it is by the intervention
of the merit of works, by which the evil of our sins must be compensated,
that the Divine justice may receive the satisfaction which is due to it.
To such falsehoods I oppose the gratuitous remission of sins, than which
there is nothing more clearly revealed in the Scripture. In the first
place, what is remission, but a gift of mere liberality? For the creditor
is not said to forgive, who testifies by a receipt that the debt has been
paid, but he who, without any payment, merely through his beneficence,
voluntarily cancels the obligation. In the next place, why is this said to
be free, but to preclude every idea of satisfaction? With what confidence,
then, can they still set up their satisfactions, which are overthrown by
such a mighty thunderbolt? But when the Lord proclaims by Isaiah, “I, even
I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will
not remember thy sins,”(1732) does he not evidently declare, that he
derives the cause and foundation of forgiveness merely from his own
goodness? Besides, while the whole Scripture bears testimony to Christ,
that “remission of sins” is to be “received through his name,”(1733) does
it not exclude all other names? How, then, do they teach, that it is
received through the name of _satisfactions_? Nor can they deny that they
ascribe this to satisfactions, although they call their intervention
_subsidiary_. For when the Scripture states it to be “through the name of
Christ,” it signifies, that we bring nothing, that we plead nothing, of
our own, but rely solely on the mediation of Christ; as Paul, after
affirming, “that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them,” immediately adds the method and
nature of it, “for he hath made him, who knew no sin, to be sin for
us.”(1734)

XXVI. But such is their perverseness, they reply that both remission of
sins and reconciliation are obtained at once, when in baptism we are
received into the favour of God, through Christ; that if we fall after
baptism, we are to be raised up again by _satisfactions_; and that the
blood of Christ avails us nothing, any further than it is dispensed by the
keys of the Church. I am not speaking of a doubtful point, for they have
betrayed their impurity in the most explicit terms; and this is the case
not only of two or three, but of all the schoolmen. For their master,
Lombard, after having confessed that, according to the doctrine of Peter,
Christ suffered the punishment of sins on the cross,(1735) immediately
corrects that sentiment by the addition of the following exception: that
all the temporal punishments of sins are remitted in baptism; but that
after baptism they are diminished by means of repentance, so that our
repentance coöperates with the cross of Christ. But John speaks a very
different language: “If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the propitiation for our sins: I
write unto you, little children, because your sins are forgiven you for
his name’s sake.”(1736) He certainly addresses believers, and when he
exhibits Christ to them as the propitiation for sins, proves that there is
no other satisfaction by which our offended God may be propitiated or
appeased. He says not, God was once reconciled to you by Christ, now seek
some other means; but represents him as a perpetual advocate, who by his
intercession restores us to the Father’s favour for ever, and as a
perpetual propitiation by which our sins are expiated. For this is
perpetually true, that was declared by the other John, “Behold the Lamb of
God, which taketh away the sins of the world.”(1737) He takes them away
himself, I say, and no other; that is, since he alone is the Lamb of God,
he alone is the oblation, the expiation, the satisfaction for sins. For
the right and power to forgive being the peculiar prerogative of the
Father, as distinguished from the Son, as we have already seen, Christ is
here represented in another capacity, since by transferring to himself the
punishment we deserved, he has obliterated our guilt before the throne of
God. Whence it follows, that we shall not be partakers of the atonement of
Christ in any other way, unless he remain in the exclusive possession of
that honour, which they unjustly assume to themselves who endeavour to
appease God by satisfactions of their own.

XXVII. And here two things demand our consideration—that the honour, which
belongs to Christ, should be preserved to him entire and undiminished; and
that consciences assured of the pardon of their sins, should have peace
with God. Isaiah says, “The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all,”
and “With his stripes we are healed.”(1738) Peter, repeating the same
truth in different words, says, that Christ “bare our sins in his own body
on the tree.”(1739) Paul informs us, that “sin was condemned in the
flesh,”(1740) when “Christ was made sin for us;”(1741) that is, that the
power and curse of sin were destroyed in his flesh, when he was given as a
victim, to sustain the whole load of our sins, with their curse and
execrations, with the dreadful judgment of God, and the condemnation of
death. We cannot here listen to those foolish fictions; that after the
initial purgation or baptism, none of us can have any further experience
of the efficacy of the sufferings of Christ, than in proportion to a
satisfactory repentance. But whenever we have fallen, the Scripture
recalls us to the satisfaction of Christ alone. Now, review their
pestilent follies; “that the grace of God operates alone in the first
remission of sins; but that if we afterwards fall, our works coöperate
with it in the impetration of a second pardon.” If these things be
admitted, does Christ remain exclusively possessed of what we have before
attributed to him? How immensely wide is the difference between these
positions—that our iniquities are laid on Christ to be expiated by him,
and that they are expiated by our own works! that Christ is the
propitiation for our sins, and that God must be propitiated by works! But
with respect to pacifying the conscience, what peace will it afford any
one, to hear that sins are redeemed by satisfactions? When will he be
assured of the accomplishment of satisfaction? Therefore he will always
doubt whether God be propitious to him, he will always be in a state of
fluctuation and terror. For those who content themselves with trivial
satisfactions, have too contemptuous sentiments of the judgment of God,
and reflect very little on the vast evil of sin, as we shall elsewhere
observe. But though we should allow them to expiate some sins by a proper
satisfaction, yet what will they do when they are overwhelmed with so many
sins, that to make adequate satisfactions for them, even a hundred lives
entirely devoted to it could not possibly be sufficient? Besides, all the
passages in which remission of sins is declared, are not addressed to
catechumens, [or persons not yet baptized,] but to the regenerated sons of
God, and those who have been long nurtured in the bosom of the Church.
That embassy which Paul so splendidly extols, “We pray you in Christ’s
stead, be ye reconciled to God,”(1742) is directed not to strangers, but
to those who had already been regenerated. But, dismissing all
satisfactions, he sends them to the cross of Christ. Thus, when he writes
to the Colossians, that “Christ had made peace by the blood of his cross,
and reconciled all things both in earth and in heaven,”(1743) he restricts
not this to the moment of our reception into the Church, but extends it
through our whole course; as is evident from the context, where he says
that believers “have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins.” But it is unnecessary to accumulate more passages, which are
frequently occurring.

XXVIII. Here they take refuge in a foolish distinction, that some sins are
_venial_, and some _mortal_; that a great satisfaction is due for mortal
sins; but that those which are venial are purged away by easier remedies,
by the Lord’s prayer, the aspersion of holy water, and the absolution of
the mass. Thus they sport and trifle with God. But though they are
incessantly talking of venial and mortal sins, yet they have never been
able to discriminate one from the other, except by making impiety and
impurity of heart a venial sin. But we maintain, according to the doctrine
of the Scripture, the only standard of righteousness and sin, that “the
wages of sin is death,” and “the soul that sinneth, it shall die;”(1744)
but that the sins of believers are venial, not because they are not
deserving of death, but because, through the mercy of God, “there is no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus;”(1745) because they are
not imputed to them, but obliterated by a pardon. I know their unjust
calumnies against this doctrine of ours; they assert it to be the Stoical
paradox concerning the equality of sins; but they will easily be refuted
out of their own lips. For I ask, whether among those very sins which they
confess to be mortal, they do not acknowledge one to be greater or less
than another? It does not, therefore, immediately follow, that sins are
equal because they are alike mortal. Since the Scripture declares that the
wages of sin is death, that obedience to the law is the way of life, and
the transgression of it death, they cannot evade this decision. What end,
then, will they find to satisfactions in so great an accumulation of sins?
If it be the business of one day to satisfy for one sin, while they are
employed in that, they involve themselves in more; for the most righteous
man cannot pass a single day without falling several times. While they
shall be preparing themselves to make satisfaction for these, they will
accumulate a numerous, or rather an innumerable multitude. Now, all
confidence in satisfaction is cut off: on what do they depend? How do they
still presume to think of making satisfaction?

XXIX. They endeavour to extricate themselves from this difficulty, but
without success. They invent a distinction between the guilt and the
punishment; and acknowledge that the guilt is forgiven by the Divine
mercy, but maintain, that after the remission of the guilt, there still
remains the punishment, which the Divine justice requires to be suffered;
and, therefore, that satisfactions properly relate to the remission of the
punishment. What desultory levity is this! Now, they confess that
remission of guilt is proposed as gratuitous, which they are continually
teaching men to merit by prayers and tears, and other preparations of
various kinds. But every thing delivered in the Scripture concerning
remission of sins is diametrically opposite to this distinction. And
though I think I have fully established this point already, I will subjoin
some additional testimonies, by which our opponents will be so much
embarrassed, as, notwithstanding all their serpentine lubricity, to be
totally unable ever to extricate themselves. “This is the new covenant,”
which God has made with us in Christ, “that he will not remember our
iniquities.”(1746) The import of these expressions we learn from another
prophet, by whom the Lord says, “When the righteous turneth away from his
righteousness, all his righteousness that he hath done shall not be
mentioned. When the wicked man turneth away from his wickedness, he shall
surely live, he shall not die.”(1747) “Not to mention righteousness,”
signifies, not to notice it so as to reward it; and “not to remember
sins,” is, not to inflict punishment for them. This is expressed in other
passages by the following phrases: to “cast behind the back,” to “blot out
as a cloud,” to “cast into the depths of the sea,” “not to impute,” to
“cover.”(1748) These forms of expression would clearly convey to us the
sense of the Holy Spirit, if we attended to them with docility. If God
punishes sins, he certainly imputes them; if he avenges them, he remembers
them; if he cites them to judgment, he does not cover them; if he examines
them, he has not cast them behind his back; if he inspects them, he has
not blotted them out as a cloud; if he scrutinizes them, he has not cast
them into the depths of the sea. And in this manner the subject is clearly
explained by Augustine. “If God has covered sins, he would not look at
them; if he would not look at them, he would not take cognizance of them;
if he would not take cognizance of them, he would not punish them; he
would not know them, he would rather forgive them. Why, then, has he said
that sins are covered? That they might not be seen. For what is meant by
God’s seeing sin, but his punishing it?” Let us also hear from another
passage of the prophet, on what conditions God remits sins. “Though your
sins be as scarlet, (says he,) they shall be as white as snow; though they
be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.”(1749) And in Jeremiah we find
this declaration: “In that time the iniquities of Israel shall be sought
for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be
found; for I will pardon them whom I reserve.”(1750) Would you briefly
know what is the meaning of these words? Consider, on the contrary, the
import of the following expressions: “the Lord seweth up iniquity in a
bag;” “iniquity is bound up;” “sin is hid;” to “write sins with a pen of
iron, and engrave them with the point of a diamond.”(1751) If they signify
that God will execute vengeance, as they undoubtedly do, neither can it be
doubted but that, by the contrary declaration, the Lord proclaims his
remission of all vindictive punishment. Here I must conjure my readers not
to listen to my expositions, but only to pay some deference to the word of
God.

XXX. What would Christ have done for us, if punishment for sins were still
inflicted on us? For when we say, that he “bare all our sins in his own
body on the tree,”(1752) we intend only, that he sustained the vindictive
punishment which was due to our sins. This sentiment is more significantly
expressed by Isaiah, when he says that the “chastisement (or correction)
of our peace was upon him.”(1753) Now, what is the correction of our
peace, but the punishment due to sins, and which we must have suffered
before we could be reconciled to God, if he had not become our substitute?
Thus we see clearly, that Christ bore the punishment of sins, that he
might deliver his people from it. And whenever Paul mentions the
redemption accomplished by him, he generally calls it ἀπολυτρωσις,(1754)
which signifies not simply redemption, as it is commonly understood, but
the price and satisfaction of redemption. Thus he says that Christ “gave
himself a ransom” (αντιλυτρον) for us.(1755) “What propitiation is there
with the Lord (says Augustine) but sacrifice? And what sacrifice is there,
but that which has been offered for us in the death of Christ?” But the
institutions of the law of Moses, respecting expiations for sins, furnish
us with a most powerful argument. For there the Lord prescribes not this
or the other method of satisfying, but requires the whole compensation in
sacrifices; though he specifies all the rites of expiation with the most
particular care, and in the most exact order. How is it that he commands
the expiation of sins without any works at all, requiring no other
atonement than by sacrifices, but because he intends in this way to
declare, that there is only one kind of satisfaction by which his justice
is appeased? For the sacrifices then immolated by the Israelites were not
considered as the works of men, but were estimated according to their
antitype, that is, the one sacrifice of Christ alone. The nature of the
compensation which the Lord receives from us is concisely and beautifully
expressed by Hosea: “Take away (saith he) all iniquity, O Lord;” here is
remission of sins; “so will we render the calves of our lips;”(1756) here
is satisfaction, [which is no other than thanksgiving.] I am aware of
another still more subtle evasion to which they resort, by distinguishing
between eternal punishments and those which are temporal. But when they
assert that temporal punishment is any suffering inflicted by God on the
body or the soul, eternal death only excepted, this limitation affords
them but little assistance. For the passages which we have cited above,
expressly signify, that God receives us into favour on this condition,
that in forgiving our guilt, he remits all the punishment that we had
deserved. And whenever David or the other prophets implore the pardon of
their sins, they at the same time deprecate the punishment; and to this
they are impelled by an apprehension of the Divine judgment. Again: when
they promise mercy from the Lord, they almost always professedly speak of
punishments, and of the remission of them. Certainly when the Lord
announces by Ezekiel, that he will put an end to the Babylonian captivity,
and that for his own sake, not for the sake of the Jews, he sufficiently
shows this deliverance to be gratuitous. Finally, if Christ delivers us
from guilt, the punishments consequent upon it must necessarily cease.

XXXI. But as our adversaries also, on their part, arm themselves with
testimonies from the Scripture, let us examine what arguments they offer.
They reason in this way: David, after having been reproved by Nathan the
prophet for adultery and murder, receives the pardon of his sin; and yet
is afterwards punished by the death of the son that was the fruit of his
adultery.(1757) We are taught to compensate by satisfactions for such
punishments as would be inflicted even after the remission of the guilt.
For Daniel exhorted Nebuchadnezzar to atone for his sins by acts of
mercy.(1758) And Solomon says, “By mercy and truth, iniquity is
purged.”(1759) And that “charity shall cover a multitude of sins,”(1760)
is a sentiment confirmed by the united testimony of Solomon and Peter. The
Lord also says in Luke, concerning the woman that had been a sinner, “Her
sins are forgiven; for she loved much.”(1761) How perversely and
preposterously they always estimate the Divine proceedings! But if they
had observed, what should by no means have been overlooked, that there are
two kinds of Divine judgment, they would have seen, in this correction of
David, a species of punishment very different from that which may be
considered as vindictive. But since it highly concerns us all to
understand the design of those chastisements with which God corrects our
sins, and how greatly they differ from the examples of his indignation
pursuing the impious and reprobate, I conceive it will not be unseasonable
to give a summary account of them. For the sake of perspicuity, let us
call one _vengeance_, or _vindictive judgment_, and the other
_chastisement_, or _disciplinary judgment_. In vindictive judgment, God is
to be contemplated as taking vengeance on his enemies, so as to exert his
wrath against them, to confound, dissipate, and reduce them to nothing. We
consider it, therefore, strictly speaking, to be the vengeance of God,
when the punishment he inflicts is attended with his indignation. In
disciplinary judgment, he is not so severe as to be angry; nor does he
punish in order to destroy or precipitate into perdition. Wherefore, it is
not properly punishment or vengeance, but correction and admonition. The
former is the part of a judge, the latter of a father. For a judge, when
he punishes an offender, attends to the crime itself, and inflicts
punishment according to the nature and aggravations of it. When a father
corrects his child with severity, he does it not to take vengeance or
satisfaction, but rather to teach him, and render him more cautious for
the future. Chrysostom somewhere uses a comparison a little different,
which, nevertheless, comes to the same point. “A son (says he) is beaten;
a servant also is beaten; but the latter is punished as a slave, because
he has transgressed; the former is chastised as free and a son, that needs
to be disciplined.” Correction serves to the latter for a probation and
reformation, to the former for a scourge and a punishment.

XXXII. To obtain a clear view of the whole subject in a small compass, it
is necessary to state two distinctions respecting it. The first is, that
wherever there is vindictive punishment, there also is a manifestation of
the curse and wrath of God, which he always withholds from believers.
Chastisement, on the contrary, is, as the Scripture teaches us, both a
blessing of God, and a testimony of his love. This difference is
sufficiently marked in every part of the Divine word. For all the
afflictions which the impious endure in the present life, are represented
to us as constituting a kind of antechamber of hell, whence they already
have a distant prospect of their eternal damnation; and they are so far
from being reformed, or receiving any benefit from this, that they are
rather prepared by such preludes for that most tremendous vengeance which
finally awaits them. On the contrary, the Lord repeatedly chastises his
servants, yet does not deliver them over to death;(1762) wherefore they
confess that the strokes of his rod were highly beneficial and instructive
to them. As we every where find that the saints bore these corrections
with resignation of soul, so they always earnestly deprecated punishments
of the former kind. Jeremiah says, “O Lord, correct me, but with judgment;
not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing. Pour out thy fury upon
the heathen that know thee not, and upon the families that call not upon
thy name.”(1763) And David: “O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither
chasten me in thy hot displeasure.”(1764) Nor is it any objection to this,
that the Lord is frequently said to be angry with his saints, when he
chastises them for their sins. As in Isaiah: “O Lord, I will praise thee;
though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou
comfortedst me.”(1765) Habakkuk also: “In wrath remember mercy.”(1766) And
Micah: “I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him.”(1767) Which reminds us, not only that those who are justly
punished, receive no advantage from murmuring, but that the faithful
derive a mitigation of their sorrow from a consideration of the intention
of God. For on the same account he is said to profane his own inheritance,
which, however, we know, he never will profane.(1768) That relates not to
the design or disposition of God in punishing, but to the vehement sense
of sorrow experienced by those who suffer any of his severity. He not only
distresses his believing people with no small degree of rigour, but
sometimes wounds them in such a manner, that they seem to themselves to be
on the brink of infernal destruction. Thus he declares, that they have
deserved his wrath; and this in order that they may be displeased with
themselves in their distresses, may be influenced by a greater concern to
appease God, and may hasten with solicitude to implore his pardon; but in
this very procedure he exhibits a brighter testimony of his clemency than
of his wrath. The covenant still remains which was made with us in our
true Solomon, and the validity of which he, who cannot deceive, has
declared shall never be diminished: “If his children forsake my law, and
walk not in my commandments; if they break my statutes, and keep not my
commandments; then will I visit their transgressions with the rod, and
their iniquities with stripes. Nevertheless, my loving‐kindness will I not
utterly take from him.”(1769) To assure us of this loving‐kindness, he
says, that the rod with which he will chastise the posterity of Solomon,
and the stripes he will inflict on them, will be “the rod of men, and the
stripes of the children of men.”(1770) While by these phrases he signifies
moderation and lenity, he also implies that those who feel his hand
exerted against them cannot but be confounded with an extreme and deadly
horror. How much he observes this lenity in chastising his Israel, he
shows by the prophet: “I have refined thee, (says he,) but not with
silver;(1771) for thou wouldst have been wholly consumed.” Though he
teaches him that chastisements serve to purify him, yet he adds that he so
far moderates them, that they may not exceed what he is able to bear. And
this is highly necessary; for the more a man reveres God and devotes
himself to the cultivation of piety, he is so much the more tender to bear
his wrath. For though the reprobate groan under his scourges, yet because
they consider not the cause, but rather turn their backs both on their
sins and on the Divine judgments, from this carelessness they contract an
insensibility; or because they murmur and resist, and rebel against their
judge, that furious impetuosity stupefies them with madness and rage. But
believers, admonished by the Divine corrections, immediately descend to
the consideration of their sins, and, stricken with fear and dread, resort
to a suppliant deprecation of punishment. If God did not mitigate these
sorrows, with which wretched souls torment themselves, they would be
continually fainting, even under slight tokens of his wrath.

XXXIII. The second distinction is, that when the reprobate are lashed by
the scourges of God in this world, they already begin to suffer his
vindictive punishments; and though they will not escape with impunity for
having disregarded such indications of the Divine wrath, yet they are not
punished in order to their repentance, but only that, from their great
misery, they may prove God to be a judge who will inflict vengeance
according to their crimes. On the contrary, the children of God are
chastised, not to make satisfaction to him for their sins, but that they
may thereby be benefited and brought to repentance. Wherefore we see, that
such chastisements relate to the future rather than the past. To express
this, I would prefer Chrysostom’s language to my own. “For this reason
(says he) God punishes us, not to take vengeance for our sins, but to
correct us for the future.” Thus also Augustine: “That which you suffer,
and which causes you to mourn, is a medicine to you, not a punishment; a
chastisement, and not damnation. Reject not the scourge, if you desire not
to be rejected from the inheritance. All this misery of mankind, under
which the world groans, know, brethren, that it is a medicinal sorrow, not
a penal sentence.” These passages I have therefore thought proper to
quote, that no one might consider the phraseology which I have adopted to
be novel or unusual. And to the same purpose are the indignant complaints
in which the Lord frequently expostulates on account of the ingratitude of
the people, and their obstinate contempt of all their punishments. In
Isaiah: “Why should ye be stricken any more? From the sole of the foot
even unto the head there is no soundness.”(1772) But as the prophets
abound in such passages, it will be sufficient briefly to have suggested,
that God punishes his Church with no other design than to subdue it to
repentance. Therefore, when he rejected Saul from the kingdom, he punished
him in a vindictive manner;(1773) when he deprived David of his infant
son, he corrected him in order to his reformation.(1774) In this sense we
must understand the observation of Paul: “When we are judged, we are
chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the
world.”(1775) That is, when we, the children of God, are afflicted by the
hand of our heavenly Father, this is not a punishment to confound us, but
only a chastisement to instruct us. In which Augustine evidently coincides
with us; for he teaches that the punishments with which men are equally
chastised by God, are to be considered in different points of view;
because to the saints, after the remission of their sins, they are
conflicts and exercises, but to the reprobate, whose sins are not
forgiven, they are the penalties due to their iniquity. He also mentions
the punishments inflicted on David and other pious persons, and says, that
those chastisements tended to promote their humility, and thereby to
exercise and prove their piety. And the declaration of Isaiah, that
Jerusalem’s “iniquity is pardoned, for she hath received of the Lord’s
hand double for all her sins,”(1776) proves not the pardon of
transgressions to depend on the suffering of the punishment, but is just
as though he had said, “Punishments enough have now been inflicted on you;
and as the severity and multitude of them have harassed you with a long
continuance of grief and sorrow, it is time for you to receive the message
of complete mercy, that your hearts may be expanded with joy, and
experience me to be your Father.” For God there assumes the character of a
Father, who repents even of his righteous severity, when he has been
constrained to chastise his son with any degree of rigour.

XXXIV. It is necessary that the faithful should be provided with these
reflections in the anguish of afflictions. “The time is come that judgment
must begin at the house of God, upon which his name is called.”(1777) What
would the children of God do, if they believed the severity which they
feel to be the vengeance of God upon them? For he who, under the strokes
of the Divine hand, considers God as an avenging Judge, cannot but
conceive of Him as incensed against him, and hostile to him, and will
therefore detest his scourge itself as a curse and condemnation; in a
word, he who thinks that God is still determined to punish him, can never
be persuaded to believe himself an object of the Divine love. The only one
who receives any benefit from the Divine chastisements, is he who
considers God as angry with his crimes, but propitious and benevolent
towards his person. For otherwise the case must necessarily be similar to
what the Psalmist complains of having experienced: “Thy fierce wrath goeth
over me; thy terrors have cut me off.”(1778) And what Moses also speaks
of: “For we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled.
Thou hast set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of
thy countenance. For all our days are passed away in thy wrath: we spend
our years as a tale that is told.”(1779) On the contrary, David, speaking
of his paternal chastisements, in order to show that believers are rather
assisted than oppressed by them, sings: “Blessed is the man whom thou
chastenest, O Lord, and teachest him out of thy law; that thou mayest give
him rest from the days of adversity, until the pit be digged for the
wicked.”(1780) It is certainly a severe temptation, when the Lord spares
unbelievers, and conceals their crimes, while he appears more rigorous
towards his own children. For their consolation, therefore, he adds the
admonition of the law, whence they may learn, that it is for the promotion
of their salvation when they are recalled into the way, but that the
impious are precipitated into their errors, which end in the pit. Nor is
it of any importance whether the punishment be eternal or temporal. For
wars, famines, plagues, and diseases are curses from God, as well as the
judgment of eternal death itself, when they are inflicted as the
instruments of the Lord’s wrath and vengeance against the reprobate.

XXXV. Every one, I presume, now perceives the design of the Lord’s
correction of David, that it was to be a proof of God’s extreme
displeasure against murder and adultery, with which he declared himself to
be so greatly offended in his beloved and faithful servant, and to teach
David never again to be guilty of such crimes; but not as a punishment, by
which he was to render God a satisfaction for his offence. And we ought to
form the same judgment concerning the other correction, in which the Lord
afflicted the people with a violent pestilence, on account of the
disobedience of David in numbering them. For he freely forgave David the
guilt of his sin; but because it was necessary, as a public example to all
ages, and also to the humiliation of David, that such an offence should
not remain unpunished, he chastised him with extreme severity. This end we
should keep in view also in the universal curse of mankind. For since we
all, even after having obtained pardon, still suffer the miseries which
were inflicted on our first parent as the punishment of sin, we consider
such afflictions as admonitions how grievously God is displeased with the
transgression of his law; that being thus dejected and humbled with a
consciousness of our miserable condition, we may aspire with greater
ardour after true blessedness. Now, he is very unwise, who imagines that
the calamities of the present life are inflicted upon us as satisfactions
for the guilt of sin. This appears to me to have been the meaning of
Chrysostom, when he said, “If God therefore inflicts punishments on us,
that while we are persisting in sins he may call us to repentance,—after a
discovery of repentance, the punishment will be unnecessary.” Wherefore he
treats one person with greater severity, and another with more tender
indulgence, as he knows to be suitable to every man’s particular
disposition. Therefore, when he means to suggest that he is not
excessively severe in the infliction of punishment, he reproaches an
obdurate and obstinate people, that though they have been corrected, they
have not forsaken their sins.(1781) In this sense he complains, that
“Ephraim is a cake not turned,”(1782) that is, scorched on one side,
unbaked on the other; because his corrections did not penetrate the hearts
of the people, so as to expel their vices and render them proper objects
of pardon. By expressing himself in this manner, he certainly gives us to
understand, that as soon as they shall have repented, he will be
immediately appeased, and that the rigour which he exercises in chastising
offences is extorted from him by our obstinacy, but would be prevented by
a voluntary reformation. Yet since our obduracy and ignorance are such as
universally to need castigation, our most wise Father is pleased to
exercise all his children, without exception, with the strokes of his rod,
as long as they live. It is astonishing why they fix their eyes thus on
the example of David alone, and are unaffected by so many instances in
which they might behold a gratuitous remission of sins. The publican is
said to have gone down from the temple justified;(1783) no punishment
follows. Peter obtained the pardon of his sins. “We read,” says Ambrose,
“of his tears, but not of his satisfaction.”(1784) And a paralytic hears
the following address: “Be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven
thee;”(1785) no punishment is inflicted. All the absolutions which are
mentioned in the Scripture, are described as gratuitous. A general rule
ought rather to be deduced from these numerous examples, than from that
single case which is attended with peculiar circumstances.

XXXVI. When Daniel exhorted Nebuchadnezzar to “break off his sins by
righteousness, and his iniquities by showing mercy to the poor,”(1786) he
meant not to intimate that righteousness and mercy propitiate God and
atone for sins; for God forbid that there should ever be any other
redemption than the blood of Christ. But he used the term _break off_ with
reference to men, rather than to God; as though he had said, “Thou hast
exercised, O king, an unrighteous and violent despotism; thou hast
oppressed the weak; thou hast plundered the poor; thou hast treated thy
people with harshness and iniquity; instead of unjust exactions, instead
of violence and oppression, now substitute mercy and righteousness.” In a
similar sense Solomon says, that “love covereth all sins;” not with
reference to God, but among men. For the whole verse is as follows:
“Hatred stirreth up strifes; but love covereth all sins.”(1787) In which
verse, he, according to his usual custom, contrasts the evils arising from
hatred with the fruits of love; signifying, that they who hate each other,
reciprocally harass, criminate, reproach, revile, and convert every thing
into a fault; but that they who love one another, mutually conceal,
connive at, and reciprocally forgive, many things among themselves; not
that they approve each other’s faults, but bear with them, and heal them
by admonition, rather than aggravate them by invectives. Nor can we doubt
that Peter intended the same in his citation of this passage,(1788) unless
we mean to accuse him of corrupting, and craftily perverting the
Scriptures. When Solomon says, that “by mercy and truth iniquity is
purged,”(1789) he intends not a compensation in the Divine view, so that
God, being appeased with such a satisfaction, remits the punishment which
he would otherwise have inflicted; but, in the familiar manner of
Scripture, he signifies, that they shall find him propitious to them who
have forsaken their former vices and iniquities, and are converted to him
in piety and truth; as though he had said, that the wrath of God subsides,
and his judgment ceases, when we cease from our sins. He describes not the
cause of pardon, but the mode of true conversion. Just as the prophets
frequently declare that it is in vain for hypocrites to offer to God
ostentatious ceremonies instead of repentance, since he is only pleased
with integrity and the duties of charity; and as the author of the Epistle
to the Hebrews, when he recommends us “to do good and to communicate,”
informs us that “with such sacrifices God is well pleased.”(1790) And when
Christ ridicules the Pharisees for having attended only to the cleansing
of dishes, and neglected all purity of heart, and commands them to give
alms that all might be clean,(1791) he is not exhorting them to make a
satisfaction, but only teaching them what kind of purity obtains the
Divine approbation. But of this expression we have treated in another
work.(1792)

XXXVII. With respect to the passage of Luke,(1793) no one, who has read
with a sound judgment the parable the Lord there proposes, will enter into
any controversy with us concerning it. The Pharisee thought within
himself, that the Lord did not know the woman, whom he had so easily
admitted to his presence. For he imagined that Christ would not have
admitted her, if he had known what kind of a sinner she was. And thence he
inferred that Christ, who was capable of being so deceived, was not a
prophet. To show that she was not a sinner, her sins having already been
forgiven, the Lord proposed this parable: “There was a certain creditor,
which had two debtors; the one owed five hundred pence, and the other
fifty. He frankly forgave them both. Which of them will love him most?”
The Pharisee answered, “He to whom he forgave most.” The Lord rejoins,
Hence know that “this woman’s sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she
loved much.” In these words, you see, he makes her love, not the cause of
the remission of her sins, but the proof of it. For they are taken from a
comparison of that debtor to whom five hundred pence had been forgiven, of
whom it is said, not that his debt was forgiven, because he had loved
much, but that he loved much because his debt had been forgiven. And this
similitude may be applied to the case of the woman in the following
manner: “You suppose this woman to be a sinner; but you ought to know that
she is not such, since her sins are forgiven her. And her love ought to
convince you of the remission of her sins, by the grateful return she
makes for this blessing.” It is an argumentum _a posteriori_, by which any
thing is proved from its consequences. By what means she obtained
remission of sins, the Lord plainly declares: “Thy faith,” says he, “hath
saved thee.” By faith therefore we obtain remission, by love we give
thanks and declare the goodness of the Lord.

XXXVIII. To those things which frequently occur in the works of the
fathers concerning _satisfaction_, I pay little regard. I see, indeed,
that some of them, or, to speak plainly, almost all whose writings are
extant, have either erred on this point, or expressed themselves too
harshly. But I shall not admit that they were so ignorant and
inexperienced, as to write those things in the sense in which they are
understood by the modern advocates for satisfaction. Chrysostom somewhere
expresses himself thus: “Where mercy is requested, examination ceases;
where mercy is implored, judgment is not severe; where mercy is sought,
there is no room for punishment; where there is mercy, there is no
inquiry; where mercy is, an answer is freely given.” These expressions,
however they may be distorted, can never be reconciled with the dogmas of
the schools. In the treatise On Ecclesiastical Doctrines, which is
ascribed to Augustine, we read the following passage: “The satisfaction of
repentance is to cut off the causes of sins, and not to indulge an
entrance to their suggestions.” Whence it appears, that even in those
times the doctrine of satisfaction, as a compensation for sins committed,
was universally rejected, since he refers all satisfaction to a cautious
abstinence from sins in future. I will not quote what is further asserted
by Chrysostom, that the Lord requires of us nothing more than to confess
our sins before him with tears; for passages of this kind frequently occur
in his writings, and in those of other fathers. Augustine somewhere calls
works of mercy “remedies for obtaining remission of sins;” but lest any
one should stumble at that expression, he explains himself more fully in
another place. “The flesh of Christ,” says he, “is the true and sole
sacrifice for sins, not only for those which are all obliterated in
baptism, but also for those which afterwards creep in through infirmity;
on account of which the whole Church at present exclaims, Forgive us our
debts;(1794) and they are forgiven through that single sacrifice.”

XXXIX. But they most commonly used the word “satisfaction” to signify, not
a compensation rendered to God, but a public testification, by which those
who had been punished with excommunication, when they wished to be
readmitted to communion, gave the Church an assurance of their repentance.
For there were enjoined on those penitents certain fastings, and other
observances, by which they might prove themselves truly and cordially
weary of their former life, or rather obliterate the memory of their past
actions; and thus they were said to make satisfaction, not to God, but to
the Church. This is also expressed by Augustine in these very words, in
his Enchiridion ad Laurentium. From that ancient custom have originated
the confessions and satisfactions which are used in the present age; a
viperous brood which retain not even the shadow of that original form. I
know that the fathers sometimes express themselves rather harshly; nor do
I deny, what I have just asserted, that perhaps they have erred. But their
writings, which were only besprinkled with a few spots, after they have
been handled by such foul hands, became thoroughly soiled. And if we must
contend with the authority of fathers, what fathers do they obtrude upon
us? Most of those passages, of which Lombard, their champion, has compiled
his heterogeneous collection, are extracted from the insipid reveries of
some monks, which are circulated under the names of Ambrose, Jerome,
Augustine, and Chrysostom. Thus, on the present argument, he borrows
almost every thing from a Treatise on Repentance, which is a ridiculous
selection from various authors, good and bad; it bears the name of
Augustine indeed, but no man even of moderate learning can deign to admit
it as really his. For not entering into a more particular examination of
their absurdities, I request the pardon of the reader, whom I wish to
spare that trouble. It would be both easy and plausible for me to expose
to the greatest contempt, what they have heretofore celebrated as
mysteries; but I forbear, as my object is to write what may tend to
edification.




