Chapter IV. The Operation Of God In The Hearts Of Men.


It has now, I apprehend, been sufficiently proved, that man is so enslaved
by sin, as to be of his own nature incapable of an effort, or even an
aspiration, towards that which is good. We have also laid down a
distinction between coaction and necessity, from which it appears that
while he sins necessarily, he nevertheless sins voluntarily. But since,
while he is devoted to the servitude of the devil, he seems to be actuated
by his will, rather than by his own, it remains for us to explain the
nature of both kinds of influence. There is also this question to be
resolved, whether any thing is to be attributed to God in evil actions, in
which the Scripture intimates that some influence of his is concerned.
Augustine somewhere compares the human will to a horse, obedient to the
direction of his rider; and God and the devil he compares to riders. “If
God rides it, he, like a sober and skilful rider, manages it in a graceful
manner; stimulates its tardiness; restrains its immoderate celerity;
represses its wantonness and wildness; tames its perverseness, and
conducts it into the right way. But if the devil has taken possession of
it, he, like a foolish and wanton rider, forces it through pathless
places, hurries it into ditches, drives it down over precipices, and
excites it to obstinacy and ferocity.” With this similitude, as no better
occurs, we will at present be content. When the will of a natural man is
said to be subject to the power of the devil, so as to be directed by it,
the meaning is, not that it resists and is compelled to a reluctant
submission, as masters compel slaves to an unwilling performance of their
commands, but that, being fascinated by the fallacies of Satan, it
necessarily submits itself to all his directions. For those whom the Lord
does not favour with the government of his Spirit, he abandons, in
righteous judgment, to the influence of Satan. Wherefore the Apostle says,
that “the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe
not,” who are destined to destruction, “lest the light of the gospel
should shine unto them.”(654) And in another place, that he “worketh in
the children of disobedience.”(655) The blinding of the wicked, and all
those enormities which attend it, are called the works of Satan; the cause
of which must nevertheless be sought only in the human will, from which
proceeds the root of evil, and in which rests the foundation of the
kingdom of Satan, that is, sin.

II. Very different, in such instances, is the method of the Divine
operation. And that we may have a clearer view of it, let us take as an
example the calamity which holy Job suffered from the Chaldeans.(656) The
Chaldeans massacred his shepherds, and committed hostile depredations on
his flock. Now, the wickedness of their procedure is evident; yet in these
transactions Satan was not unconcerned; for with him the history states
the whole affair to have originated. But Job himself recognizes in it the
work of the Lord, whom he asserts to have taken from him those things of
which he had been plundered by the Chaldeans. How can we refer the same
action to God, to Satan, and to man, as being each the author of it,
without either excusing Satan by associating him with God, or making God
the author of evil? Very easily, if we examine, first, the end for which
the action was designed, and secondly, the manner in which it was
effected. The design of the Lord is to exercise the patience of his
servant by adversity; Satan endeavours to drive him to despair: the
Chaldeans, in defiance of law and justice, desire to enrich themselves by
the property of another. So great a diversity of design makes a great
distinction in the action. There is no less difference in the manner. The
Lord permits his servant to be afflicted by Satan: the Chaldeans, whom he
commissions to execute his purpose, he permits and resigns to be impelled
by Satan: Satan, with his envenomed stings, instigates the minds of the
Chaldeans, otherwise very depraved, to perpetrate the crime: they
furiously rush into the act of injustice, and overwhelm themselves in
criminality. Satan therefore is properly said to work in the reprobate, in
whom he exercises his dominion; that is, the kingdom of iniquity. God also
is said to work in a way proper to himself, because Satan, being the
instrument of his wrath, turns himself hither and thither at his
appointment and command, to execute his righteous judgments. Here I allude
not to the universal influence of God, by which all creatures are
sustained, and from which they derive an ability to perform whatever they
do. I speak only of that special influence which appears in every
particular act. We see, then, that the same action is without absurdity
ascribed to God, to Satan, and to man; but the variety in the end and in
the manner, causes the righteousness of God to shine without the least
blemish, and the iniquity of Satan and of man to betray itself to its own
disgrace.

III. The fathers are sometimes too scrupulous on this subject, and afraid
of a simple confession of the truth, lest they should afford an occasion
to impiety to speak irreverently and reproachfully of the works of God.
Though I highly approve this sobriety, yet I think we are in no danger, if
we simply maintain what the Scripture delivers. Even Augustine at one time
was not free from this scrupulosity; as when he says that hardening and
blinding belong not to the operation, but to the prescience of God. But
these subtleties are inconsistent with numerous expressions of the
Scripture, which evidently import some intervention of God beyond mere
foreknowledge. And Augustine himself, in his fifth book against Julian,
contends very largely, that sins proceed not only from the permission or
the prescience, but from the power of God, in order that former sins may
thereby be punished. So also what they advance concerning permission is
too weak to be supported. God is very frequently said to blind and harden
the reprobate, and to turn, incline, and influence their hearts, as I have
elsewhere more fully stated. But it affords no explication of the nature
of this influence to resort to prescience or permission. We answer,
therefore, that it operates in two ways. For, since, when his light is
removed, nothing remains but darkness and blindness; since, when his
Spirit is withdrawn, our hearts harden into stones; since, when his
direction ceases, they are warped into obliquity; he is properly said to
blind, harden, and incline those whom he deprives of the power of seeing,
obeying, and acting aright. The second way, which is much more consistent
with strict propriety of language, is, when, for the execution of his
judgments, he, by means of Satan, the minister of his wrath, directs their
counsels to what he pleases, and excites their wills and strengthens their
efforts. Thus, when Moses relates that Sihon the king would not grant a
free passage to the people, because God had “hardened his spirit, and made
his heart obstinate,” he immediately subjoins the end of God’s design:
“That he might deliver him into thy hand.”(657) Since God willed his
destruction, the obduration of his heart, therefore, was the Divine
preparation for his ruin.

IV. The following expressions seem to relate to the former method: “He
removeth away the speech of the trusty, and taketh away the understanding
of the aged. He taketh away the heart of the chief people of the earth,
and causeth them to wander in a wilderness where there is no way.”(658)
Again: “O Lord, why hast thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened
our heart from thy fear?”(659) For these passages rather indicate what God
makes men by deserting them, than show how he performs his operations
within them. But there are other testimonies, which go further; as those
which relate to the hardening of Pharaoh: “I will harden his (Pharaoh’s)
heart, that he shall not let the people go.”(660) Afterwards the Lord
says, “I have hardened his heart.”(661) Did he harden it by not mollifying
it? That is true; but he did somewhat more, for he delivered his heart to
Satan to be confirmed in obstinacy; whence he had before said, “I will
harden his heart.” The people march out of Egypt; the inhabitants of the
country meet them in a hostile manner: by whom were they excited? Moses
expressly declared to the people, that it was the Lord who had hardened
their hearts.(662) The Psalmist, reciting the same history, says, “He
turned their heart to hate his people.”(663) Now, it cannot be said that
they fell in consequence of being deprived of the counsel of God. For if
they are “hardened” and “turned,” they are positively inclined to that
point. Besides, whenever it has pleased him to punish the transgressions
of his people, how has he executed his work by means of the reprobate? In
such a manner that any one may see, that the efficacy of the action
proceeded from him, and that they were only the ministers of his will.
Wherefore he threatened sometimes that he would call them forth by
hissing,(664) sometimes that he would use them as a net(665) to entangle,
sometimes as a hammer(666) to strike the people of Israel. But he
particularly declared himself to be operative in them, when he called
Sennacherib an axe,(667) which was both directed and driven by his hand.
Augustine somewhere makes the following correct distinction: “that they
sin, proceeds from themselves; that in sinning they perform this or that
particular action, is from the power of God, who divides the darkness
according to his pleasure.”

V. Now that the ministry of Satan is concerned in instigating the
reprobate, whenever the Lord directs them hither or thither by his
providence, may be sufficiently proved even from one passage. For it is
frequently asserted in Samuel that an evil spirit of the Lord, and an evil
spirit from the Lord, either agitated or quitted Saul.(668) To refer this
to the Holy Spirit were impious. An impure spirit, therefore, is called a
spirit of God, because it acts according to his command and by his power,
being rather an instrument in the performance of the action, than itself
the author of it. We must add, also, what is advanced by Paul, that “God
shall send strong delusion, that they who believed not the truth should
believe a lie.”(669) Yet there is always a wide difference, even in the
same work, between the operation of God and the attempts of Satan and
wicked men. He makes the evil instruments, which he has in his hand, and
can turn as he pleases, to be subservient to his justice. They, as they
are evil, produce the iniquity which the depravity of their nature has
conceived. The other arguments, which tend to vindicate the majesty of God
from every calumny, and to obviate the cavils of the impious, have already
been advanced in the chapter concerning Providence. For, at present, I
only intend briefly to show how Satan reigns in the reprobate man, and how
the Lord operates in them both.

VI. But what liberty man possesses in those actions which in themselves
are neither righteous nor wicked, and pertain rather to the corporeal than
to the spiritual life, although we have before hinted, has not yet been
explicitly stated. Some have admitted him in such things to possess a free
choice; rather, as I suppose, from a reluctance to dispute on a subject of
no importance, than from an intention of positively asserting that which
they concede. Now, though I grant that they who believe themselves to be
possessed of no power to justify themselves, believe what is principally
necessary to be known in order to salvation, yet I think that this point
also should not be neglected, that we may know it to be owing to the
special favour of God, whenever our mind is disposed to choose that which
is advantageous for us; whenever our will inclines to it; and, on the
other hand, whenever our mind and understanding avoid what would otherwise
hurt us. And the power of the providence of God extends so far, as not
only to cause those events to succeed which he foresees will be best, but
also to incline the wills of men to the same objects. Indeed, if we view
the administration of external things with our own reason, we shall not
doubt their subjection to the human will; but if we listen to the numerous
testimonies, which proclaim that in these things also the hearts of men
are governed by the Lord, they will constrain us to submit the will itself
to the special influence of God. Who conciliated the minds of the
Egyptians towards the Israelites,(670) so as to induce them to lend them
the most valuable of their furniture? They would never have been induced
to do this of their own accord. It follows, therefore, that their hearts
were guided by the Lord rather than by an inclination of their own. And
Jacob, if he had not been persuaded that God infuses various dispositions
into men according to his pleasure, would not have said concerning his son
Joseph, whom he thought to be some profane Egyptian, “God Almighty give
you mercy before the man.”(671) As the whole Church confesses in the
Psalms, that, when God chose to compassionate her, he softened the hearts
of the cruel nations into clemency.(672) Again, when Saul was so inflamed
with rage, as to prepare himself for war, it is expressly mentioned as the
cause, that he was impelled by the Spirit of God.(673) Who diverted the
mind of Absalom from adopting the counsel of Ahithophel, which used to be
esteemed as an oracle?(674) Who inclined Rehoboam to be persuaded by the
counsel of the young men?(675) Who caused the nations, that before were
very valiant, to feel terror at the approach of the Israelites? Rahab the
harlot confessed that this was the work of God. Who, on the other hand,
dejected the minds of the Israelites with fear and terror, but he who had
threatened in the law that he would “send a faintness into their
hearts?”(676)

VII. Some one will object, that these are peculiar examples, to the rule
of which, things ought by no means universally to be reduced. But I
maintain, that they are sufficient to prove that for which I contend; that
God, whenever he designs to prepare the way for his providence, inclines
and moves the wills of men even in external things, and that their choice
is not so free, but that its liberty is subject to the will of God. That
your mind depends more on the influence of God, than on the liberty of
your own choice, you must be constrained to conclude, whether you are
willing or not, from this daily experience, that in affairs of no
perplexity your judgment and understanding frequently fail; that in
undertakings not arduous your spirits languish; on the other hand, in
things the most obscure, suitable advice is immediately offered; in things
great and perilous, your mind proves superior to every difficulty. And
thus I explain the observation of Solomon, “The hearing ear, and the
seeing eye, the Lord hath made even both of them.”(677) For he appears to
me to speak, not of their creation, but of the peculiar favour of God
displayed in their performing their functions. When he says, that “the
king’s heart is in the hand of the Lord; as the rivers of water, he
turneth it whithersoever he will;”(678) under one species he clearly
comprehends the whole genus. For if the will of any man be free from all
subjection, that privilege belongs eminently to the will of a king, which
exercises a government in some measure over the wills of others; but if
the will of the king be subject to the power of God, ours cannot be
exempted from the same authority. Augustine has a remarkable passage on
this subject: “The Scripture, if it be diligently examined, shows, not
only that the good wills of men, which he turns from evil into good, and
directs to good actions and to eternal life, but also that those wills
which relate to the present life, are subject to the power of God, so that
he, by a most secret, but yet a most righteous judgment, causes them to be
inclined whither he pleases, and when he pleases, either for the
communication of benefits, or for the infliction of punishments.”

VIII. Here let the reader remember, that the ability of the human will is
not to be estimated from the event of things, as some ignorant men are
preposterously accustomed to do. For they conceive themselves fully and
ingeniously to establish the servitude of the human will, because even the
most exalted monarchs have not all their desires fulfilled. But this
ability, of which we speak, is to be considered within man, and not to be
measured by external success. For in the dispute concerning free will, the
question is not, whether a man, notwithstanding external impediments, can
perform and execute whatever he may have resolved in his mind, but whether
in every case his judgment exerts freedom of choice, and his will freedom
of inclination. If men possess both these, then Attilius Regulus, when
confined to the small extent of a cask stuck round with nails, will
possess as much free will as Augustus Cæsar, when governing a great part
of the world with his nod.




