Chapter III. Every Thing That Proceeds From The Corrupt Nature Of Man
Worthy Of Condemnation.


But man cannot be better known in either faculty of his soul, than when he
is represented in those characters by which the Scripture has
distinguished him. If he be completely described in these words of Christ,
“That which is born of the flesh is flesh,”(612) as it is easy to prove,
it is evident that he is a very miserable creature. For, according to the
testimony of the Apostle, “to be carnally minded is death, because the
carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the law of
God, neither indeed can be.”(613) Is the flesh so perverse, that, with all
its affections, it entertains a secret hatred against God? that it cannot
consent to the righteousness of the Divine law? in a word, that it can
produce nothing but what tends to death? Now, grant, that in the nature of
man there is nothing but flesh, and elicit any good from it, if you can.
But the name of flesh, it will be said, pertains only to the sensual, and
not to the superior faculties of the soul. This is abundantly refuted by
the words of Christ and of the Apostle. For the argument of our Lord is,
that man must be born again, because he is flesh. He does not teach a new
birth in regard to the body. Now, a new birth of the soul requires not a
correction of some portion of it, but an entire renovation. And this is
confirmed by the antithesis in both places; for there is such a comparison
between the flesh and the spirit, that there is no medium left. Therefore,
every thing in man that is not spiritual, is, according to this mode of
reasoning, denominated carnal. But we have nothing of the spirit, except
by regeneration. Whatever, therefore, we have from nature is carnal. But
if on that point there could otherwise be any doubt, we have it removed by
Paul, when, after a description of the old man, which he had asserted to
be “corrupt according to the deceitful lusts,”(614) he directs us to “be
renewed in the spirit of our mind.” You see that he places unlawful and
corrupt affections not only in the sensitive part, but also in the mind
itself, and, therefore, requires a renovation of it. And, indeed, he had
just before drawn such a picture of human nature, as showed us to be in
every part corrupted and depraved. For his description of all the
Gentiles, as “walking in the vanity of their mind, having the
understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart,”(615)
is undoubtedly applicable to all those whom the Lord has not yet renewed
to the rectitude of his wisdom and righteousness. This is still more
evident from the comparison soon after introduced, where he reminds the
faithful, that they “have not so learned Christ.” For from these words we
conclude, that the grace of Christ is the only remedy, by which we can be
liberated from that blindness, and from the evils consequent upon it. And
this is what Isaiah had prophesied concerning the kingdom of Christ, when
he predicted that the Lord would be “an everlasting light” to his Church,
whilst at the same time “darkness covered the earth, and gross darkness
the people.”(616) When he declares, that the light of God will only arise
upon the Church, beyond the limits of the Church he certainly leaves
nothing but darkness and blindness. I will not particularly recite all the
passages which are to be found, especially in the Psalms and in the
Prophets, concerning the vanity of man. It is a striking observation of
David, that “to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter than
vanity.”(617) It is a severe condemnation of his understanding, when all
the thoughts which proceed from it are derided as foolish, frivolous, mad,
and perverse.

II. Equally severe is the condemnation of the heart, when it is called
“deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked.”(618) But as I study
brevity, I shall be content with citing a single passage, which, however,
will resemble a very lucid mirror, in which we may behold at full length
the image of our nature. For the Apostle, when he wishes to demolish the
arrogance of mankind, does it by these testimonies: “There is none
righteous, no, not one; there is none that understandeth, there is none
that seeketh after God. They are all gone out of the way, they are
together become unprofitable; there is none that doeth good, no, not one.
Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have used
deceit; the poison of asps is under their lips; whose mouth is full of
cursing and bitterness; their feet are swift to shed blood; destruction
and misery are in their ways; there is no fear of God before their
eyes.”(619) In this terrible manner he inveighs, not against particular
individuals, but against all the posterity of Adam. He does not declaim
against the depraved manners of one or another age, but accuses the
perpetual corruption of our nature. For his design in that passage is not
simply to rebuke men, in order that they may repent, but rather to teach
us that all men are overwhelmed with an inevitable calamity, from which
they can never emerge unless they are extricated by the mercy of God. As
this could not be proved unless it were evinced by the ruin and
destruction of our nature, he has adduced these testimonies, which
demonstrate our nature to be totally ruined. Let this, then, be admitted,
that men are such as they are here described, not only by corrupt habits,
but also by a depravity of nature; for otherwise the reasoning of the
Apostle could not be supported, “that there is no salvation for man but
from the mercy of God; since in himself he is in a ruined and desperate
condition.” Here I shall not attempt to establish the application of the
testimonies, to preclude the appearance of their being improperly
introduced. I shall treat them just as if they had been originally uttered
by Paul, and not quoted from the Prophets. He divests man first of
righteousness, that is, integrity and purity, and then of understanding.
Defect of understanding is proved by apostasy from God, the seeking of
whom is the first step in the path of wisdom; but this loss must
necessarily befall those who have revolted from God. He adds, that all
have gone out of the way, and are become altogether corrupt, that there is
not one that does good. Then he subjoins the flagitious crimes, with which
they, who are once abandoned to iniquity, contaminate all the members of
their bodies. Lastly, he declares them to be destitute of the fear of God,
the rule by which all our steps ought to be directed. If these are the
hereditary characters of mankind, in vain do we seek in our nature for any
thing that is good. I grant, indeed, that all these crimes are not
exhibited in every individual; yet it cannot be denied that this monster
lurks in the hearts of all. For as the body, which already contains within
itself the cause and matter of a disease, although it has yet no sensation
of pain, cannot be said to enjoy good health, neither can the soul be
esteemed healthy, while it is full of such moral maladies; although this
similitude will not correspond in every particular; for in the body,
however diseased, there remains the vigour of life; but the soul, immersed
in this gulf of iniquity, is not only the subject of vices, but totally
destitute of every thing that is good.

III. A question, nearly the same as we have already answered, here
presents itself to us again. For in all ages there have been some persons,
who, from the mere dictates of nature, have devoted their whole lives to
the pursuit of virtue. And though many errors might perhaps be discovered
in their conduct, yet by their pursuit of virtue they afforded a proof,
that there was some degree of purity in their nature. The value attached
to virtues of such a description before God, we shall more fully discuss
when we come to treat of the merits of works; yet it must be stated also
in this place, so far as is necessary for the elucidation of the present
subject. These examples, then, seem to teach us that we should not
consider human nature to be totally corrupted; since, from its instinctive
bias, some men have not only been eminent for noble actions, but have
uniformly conducted themselves in a most virtuous manner through the whole
course of their lives. But here we ought to remember, that amidst this
corruption of nature there is some room for Divine grace, not to purify
it, but internally to restrain its operations. For should the Lord permit
the minds of all men to give up the reins to every lawless passion, there
certainly would not be an individual in the world, whose actions would not
evince all the crimes, for which Paul condemns human nature in general, to
be most truly applicable to him. For can you except yourself from the
number of those whose feet are swift to shed blood, whose hands are
polluted with rapine and murder, whose throats are like open sepulchres,
whose tongues are deceitful, whose lips are envenomed, whose works are
useless, iniquitous, corrupt, and deadly, whose souls are estranged from
God, the inmost recesses of whose hearts are full of pravity, whose eyes
are insidiously employed, whose minds are elated with insolence—in a word,
all whose powers are prepared for the commission of atrocious and
innumerable crimes? If every soul be subject to all these monstrous vices,
as the Apostle fearlessly pronounces, we clearly see what would be the
consequence, if the Lord should suffer the human passions to go all the
lengths to which they are inclined. There is no furious beast, that would
be agitated with such ungovernable rage; there is no river, though ever so
rapid and violent, that would overflow its boundaries with such
impetuosity. In his elect, the Lord heals these maladies by a method which
we shall hereafter describe. In others, he restrains them, only to prevent
their ebullitions so far as he sees to be necessary for the preservation
of the universe. Hence some by shame, and some by fear of the laws, are
prevented from running into many kinds of pollutions, though they cannot
in any great degree dissemble their impurity; others, because they think
that a virtuous course of life is advantageous, entertain some languid
desires after it; others go further, and display more than common
excellence, that by their majesty they may confine the vulgar to their
duty. Thus God by his providence restrains the perverseness of our nature
from breaking out into external acts, but does not purify it within.

IV. But it may be said, the difficulty is not yet removed. For either we
must esteem Camillus to be exactly similar to Catiline, or in Camillus we
shall have an example that nature, if it be studiously cultivated, is not
altogether destitute of goodness. I grant, indeed, that the virtues
displayed in Camillus were gifts of God, and if considered in themselves,
appear justly worthy of commendation: but how will they be proofs of any
natural goodness in him? To establish this, must we not recur to the
heart, and argue, that if a natural man was eminent for such integrity of
manners, human nature is not destitute of ability for the pursuit of
virtue? But what if his heart was depraved and perverted, and followed any
thing rather than the path of rectitude? And that it was such, if you
concede that he was a natural man, is beyond all doubt. What ability,
then, will you attribute to human nature for the pursuit of virtue, if,
with the greatest appearance of integrity, it is discovered to be always
tending to corruption? Therefore, as you will not commend a man for
virtue, whose vices have only counterfeited the external form of virtue,
so you must not attribute to the human will a power of desiring what is
right, as long as it continues fixed in its perverseness. The most certain
and easy solution of this question, however, is, that those virtues are
not the common properties of nature, but the peculiar graces of God, which
he dispenses in great variety, and in a certain degree to men that are
otherwise profane. For which reason we hesitate not, in common speech, to
call the nature of one man good, and of another depraved. Yet we still
include both in the universal state of human depravity; but we signify
what peculiar grace God has conferred on the one, with which he has not
deigned to favour the other. When he determined to exalt Saul to the
kingdom, he made him, as it were, a new man; and this is the reason why
Plato, alluding to the fable of Homer, says, that the sons of kings are
formed with some distinguishing singularity of character; because God,
consulting the benefit of mankind, frequently furnishes with an heroic
nature those whom he destines to hold the reins of empire; and from this
source have proceeded all the exploits of great heroes which are
celebrated in history. The same judgment must be formed concerning those
also who are in a private station. But because every one who has risen to
great eminence has been impelled by his ambition, which defiles all
virtues, and deprives them of all excellence in the Divine view, whatever
may be apparently laudable in ungodly men, ought not to be esteemed at all
meritorious. Besides, the chief branch of rectitude is wanting, where
there is no concern to display the glory of God: of this principle all are
destitute whom he has not regenerated by his Spirit. Nor is it in vain
that Isaiah says, that “the spirit of the fear of the Lord shall rest
upon” Christ;(620) which teaches us, that all who are alienated from
Christ are destitute of that “fear of the Lord” which is “the beginning of
wisdom.”(621) The virtues which deceive us by their vain and specious
appearance, will be applauded in civil courts, and in the common
estimation of mankind; but before the celestial tribunal they will possess
no value to merit the reward of righteousness.

V. The will, therefore, is so bound by the slavery of sin, that it cannot
excite itself, much less devote itself to any thing good; for such a
disposition is the beginning of a conversion to God, which in the
Scriptures is attributed solely to Divine grace. Thus Jeremiah prays to
the Lord to convert or turn him, if he would have him to be turned.(622)
Whence the Prophet, in the same chapter, describing the spiritual
redemption of the faithful, says, “The Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and
ransomed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he;”(623)
alluding to the strong fetters with which the sinner is bound as long as
he is deserted by the Lord, and continues under the yoke of the devil.
Nevertheless there still remains the faculty of will, which with the
strongest propensity is inclined to and rushes into sin; for when man
subjected himself to this necessity, he was not deprived of his will, but
of soundness of will. Bernard properly observes, that we all have a power
to will; but that to will what is good, is an advantage; to will what is
evil, a defect. Therefore simply to will belongs to man; to will what is
evil, to corrupt nature; to will what is good, to grace. Now, when I
assert that the will, being deprived of its liberty, is necessarily drawn
or led into evil, I should wonder, if any one considered it as a harsh
expression, since it has nothing in it absurd, nor is it unsanctioned by
the custom of good men. It offends those who know not how to distinguish
between necessity and compulsion. But if any one should ask them, whether
God is not necessarily good, and whether the devil is not necessarily
evil,—what answer will they make? For there is such a close connection
between the goodness of God and his Deity, that his being God is not more
necessary than his being good. But the devil is by his fall so alienated
from communion with all that is good, that he can do nothing but what is
evil. But if any one should sacrilegiously object, that little praise is
due to God for his goodness, which he is constrained to preserve,—shall we
not readily reply, that his inability to do evil arises from his infinite
goodness, and not from the impulse of violence? Therefore, if a necessity
of doing well impairs not the liberty of the Divine will in doing well; if
the devil, who cannot but do evil, nevertheless sins voluntarily; who then
will assert that man sins less voluntarily, because he is under a
necessity of sinning? This necessity Augustine every where maintains; and
even when he was pressed with the cavils of Celestius, who tried to throw
an odium on this doctrine, he confidently expressed himself in these
terms: “By means of liberty it came to pass that man fell into sin; but
now the penal depravity consequent on it, instead of liberty, has
introduced necessity.” And whenever the mention of this subject occurs, he
hesitates not to speak in this manner of the necessary servitude of sin.
We must therefore observe this grand point of distinction, that man,
having been corrupted by his fall, sins voluntarily, not with reluctance
or constraint; with the strongest propensity of disposition, not with
violent coercion; with the bias of his own passions, and not with external
compulsion: yet such is the pravity of his nature, that he cannot be
excited and biassed to any thing but what is evil. If this be true, there
is no impropriety in affirming, that he is under a necessity of sinning.
Bernard, subscribing to what is said by Augustine, thus expresses himself:
“Among all the animals, man alone is free; and yet, by the intervention of
sin, he also suffers a species of violence; but from the will, not from
nature, so that he is not thereby deprived of his innate liberty.” For
what is voluntary is also free. And a little after: “The will being, by I
know not what corrupt and surprising means, changed for the worse, is
itself the author of the necessity to which it is subject; so that neither
necessity, being voluntary, can excuse the will, nor the will, being
fascinated, can exclude necessity.” For this necessity is in some measure
voluntary. Afterwards he says, that we are oppressed with a yoke, but no
other than that of a voluntary servitude; that therefore our servitude
renders us miserable, and our will renders us inexcusable; because the
will, when it was free, made itself the slave of sin. At length he
concludes, “Thus the soul, in a certain strange and evil manner, under
this kind of voluntary and free yet pernicious necessity, is both enslaved
and free; enslaved by necessity, free by its will; and, what is more
wonderful and more miserable, it is guilty, because free; and enslaved
wherein it is guilty; and so therein enslaved wherein it is free.” From
these passages the reader clearly perceives that I am teaching no novel
doctrine, but what was long ago advanced by Augustine, with the universal
consent of pious men, and which for nearly a thousand years after was
confined to the cloisters of monks. But Lombard, for want of knowing how
to distinguish necessity from coaction, gave rise to a pernicious error.

VI. It is necessary, on the other hand, to consider the remedy of Divine
grace, by which the depravity of nature is corrected and healed. For since
the Lord, in the assistance which he affords us, bestows on us that which
we need, an exhibition of the nature of his work in us will immediately
discover the nature of our necessity. When the Apostle tells the
Philippians, that he is “confident that he which hath begun a good work in
them will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ;”(624) by the beginning
of a good work he undoubtedly designs the commencement of conversion,
which takes place in the will. Therefore God begins the good work in us by
exciting in our hearts a love, desire, and ardent pursuit of
righteousness; or, to speak more properly, by bending, forming, and
directing our hearts towards righteousness; but he completes it, by
confirming us to perseverance. That no one may cavil, that the good work
is begun by the Lord, inasmuch as the will, which is weak of itself, is
assisted by him, the Spirit declares in another place how far the ability
of the will reaches, when left to itself. “A new heart also,” says he,
“will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take
away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you a heart of
flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes.”(625) Who will assert that the infirmity of the human will is
only strengthened by assistance, to enable it efficaciously to aspire to
the choice of that which is good, when it actually needs a total
transformation and renovation? If there be in a stone any softness, which,
by some application, being made more tender, would be flexible in every
direction, then I will not deny the flexibility of the human heart to the
obedience of rectitude, provided its imperfections are supplied by the
grace of God. But if, by this similitude, the Lord intended to show that
no good will ever be extracted from our hearts, unless they are entirely
renewed, let us not divide between him and us, what he claims exclusively
to himself. If, therefore, when God converts us to the pursuit of
rectitude, this change is like the transformation of a stone into flesh,
it follows, that whatever belongs to our own will is removed, and what
succeeds to it is entirely from God. The will, I say, is removed, not
considered as the will; because, in the conversion of man, the properties
of our original nature remain entire. I assert also, that it is created
anew, not that the will then begins to exist, but that it is then
converted from an evil into a good one. This I affirm to be done entirely
by God, because, according to the testimony of the same Apostle, “we are
not sufficient” even “to think.”(626) Therefore he elsewhere declares, not
merely that God assists the infirmity of our will, or corrects its
depravity, but that he “worketh in us to will.”(627) Whence it is easy to
infer what I have already remarked, that whatever good is in the human
will, is the work of pure grace. In the same sense he elsewhere pronounces
that it is “God which worketh all in all.”(628) For in that place he is
not discussing the government of the universe, but asserting that the
praise of all the excellences found in the faithful belongs to God alone.
And by using the word “all,” he certainly makes God the author of
spiritual life from its commencement even to its termination. This is the
same as he had before taught in other words, declaring that the faithful
are “of God in Christ;”(629) where he evidently intends the new creation,
by which what belonged to our common nature is abolished. For we must here
understand an implied contrast between Adam and Christ, which he states
more plainly in another place, where he teaches that “we are the
workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
hath before ordained that we should walk in them.”(630) For by this
argument he designs to prove that our salvation is gratuitous, because the
beginning of all good is from the second creation, which we obtain in
Christ. Now, if we possessed any ability, though ever so small, we should
also have some portion of merit. But to annihilate all our pretensions, he
argues that we have merited nothing, because “we are created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained;” in which
expressions he again signifies that all the parts of good works, even from
the first inclination of the mind, are entirely from God. For this reason
the Psalmist, after having said that “he (God) hath made us,” that there
may be no division of the work, immediately subjoins, “and not we
ourselves.”(631) That he speaks of regeneration, which is the commencement
of the spiritual life, is evident from the context, where it follows
immediately after, that “we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.”
We see, then, that not content with having simply attributed to God the
praise of our salvation, he expressly excludes us from all fellowship with
him; as though he would say, that man has not even the smallest particle
remaining in which he can glory, because all is of God.

VII. But there may be some, who will concede that the will, being, of its
own spontaneous inclination, averse to what is good, is converted solely
by the power of the Lord; yet in such a manner, that being previously
prepared, it has also its own share in the work; that grace, as Augustine
teaches, precedes every good work, the will following grace, not leading
it, being its companion, not its guide. This unobjectionable observation
of that holy man, Peter Lombard preposterously wrests to an erroneous
meaning. Now, I contend that both in the words of the Prophet which I have
cited, and in other passages, these two things are clearly signified, that
the Lord corrects our depraved will, or rather removes it, and of himself
introduces a good one in its place. As it is preceded by grace, I allow
you to style it an attendant; but since its reformation is the work of the
Lord, it is wrong to attribute to man a voluntary obedience in following
the guidance of grace. Therefore it is not a proper expression of
Chrysostom, that grace is able to effect nothing without the will, nor the
will without grace; as if grace did not produce the will itself, as we
have just seen from Paul. Nor was it the intention of Augustine, when he
called the human will the companion of grace, to assign to it any
secondary office next to grace in the good work; but with a view to refute
the nefarious dogma broached by Pelagius, who made the prime cause of
salvation to consist in human merit, he contends, what was sufficient for
his present argument, that grace is prior to all merit; omitting, at this
time, the other question concerning the perpetual efficiency of grace,
which is admirably treated by him on other occasions. For when he
frequently says, that the Lord precedes the unwilling that he may will,
and follows the willing that he may not will in vain, he makes him the
sole author of the good work. His language on this subject is too explicit
to require much argument. “Men labour,” says he, “to discover in our will
something that is our own, and not derived from God; and how any such
discovery can be made, I know not.” In his first book against Pelagius and
Celestius, where he explains that declaration of Christ, “Every man that
hath heard of the Father cometh unto me,”(632) he says, that “the will is
assisted so as to enable it not only to know its duty, but what it knows,
also to do.” And thus when God teaches not by the letter of the law, but
by the grace of the Spirit, he teaches in such a manner, that whatever
each one has learned, he not only sees in knowing it, but desires in
willing, and performs in doing.

VIII. And as we are now engaged on the principal point of the argument,
let us give the reader a summary of the doctrine, and prove it by a few
very clear testimonies of Scripture; and then, that no one may accuse us
of perverting the Scripture, let us also show that the truth which we
assert to be deduced from the Scripture is not destitute of the support of
this holy man; I mean Augustine. For I conceive it is unnecessary to
recite in regular order all the passages which might be adduced from the
Scriptures in confirmation of our opinion; provided that the selection,
which shall be made, prepares a way to the understanding of all the rest,
which are frequently to be found. Nor do I think that there will be any
impropriety in evincing my agreement with that man, to whose authority the
consent of the pious pays a great and merited deference. The origin of all
good clearly appears, from a plain and certain reason, to be from no other
than from God alone; for no propensity of the will to any thing good can
be found but in the elect. But the cause of election must not be sought in
men. Whence we may conclude, that man has not a good will from himself,
but that it proceeds from the same decree by which we were elected before
the creation of the world. There is also another reason, not dissimilar.
For since good volitions and good actions both arise from faith, we must
see whence faith itself originates. Now, since the Scripture uniformly
proclaims it to be the gratuitous gift of God, it follows that it is the
effect of mere grace, when we, who are naturally and completely prone to
evil, begin to will any thing that is good. Therefore the Lord, when he
mentions these two things in the conversion of his people, that he takes
away from them their stony heart, and gives them a heart of flesh, plainly
declares, that what originates from ourselves must be removed, that we may
be converted to righteousness; and that whatever succeeds in its place
proceeds from himself. Nor is it only in one passage that he announces
this; for he says in Jeremiah, “I will give them one heart and one way,
that they may fear me for ever.”(633) And a little after, “I will put my
fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.” Again in
Ezekiel, “I will give them one heart, and will put a new spirit within
you; and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give
them a heart of flesh.”(634) He could not more evidently claim to himself
and take from us all that is good and upright in our will, than when he
declares our conversion to be the creation of a new spirit and of a new
heart. For it always follows, that nothing good proceeds from our will
till it be renovated; and that after its renovation, as far as it is good,
it is from God, and not from ourselves.

IX. And we find the saints have made this the subject of their prayers.
Solomon prayed, “May the Lord incline our hearts unto him to keep his
commandments.”(635) He shows the stubbornness of our heart, which, unless
a new bias be given to it, naturally indulges itself in rebellion against
the Divine law. The same petition is offered by the Psalmist: “Incline my
heart unto thy testimonies.”(636) For we should always remark the
opposition between the perverse bias of the heart, which inclines it to
rebellion, and this correction, which constrains it to obedience. But when
David, perceiving himself to be for a time deprived of the direction of
grace, prays that God would “create in” him “a clean heart, and renew a
right spirit within” him,(637) does he not acknowledge that all the parts
of his heart are full of impurity, and his spirit warped by a depraved
obliquity? and by calling the purity which he earnestly implores, the
creation of God, does he not ascribe it entirely to him? If any one
object, that the petition itself is a proof of a pious and holy affection,
the answer is easy, that although David had already partly repented, yet
he compares his former state with that melancholy fall, which he had
experienced. Assuming the character, therefore, of a man alienated from
God, he properly requests for himself all those things which God confers
on his elect in regeneration. Resembling a dead man, therefore, he prays
to be created anew, that, instead of being the slave of Satan, he may
become the instrument of the Holy Spirit. Truly wonderful and monstrous is
the extravagance of our pride. God requires of us nothing more severe than
that we most religiously observe his sabbath, by resting from our own
works; but there is nothing which we find more difficult, or to which we
are more reluctant, than to bid farewell to our own works, in order to
give the works of God their proper place. If there were no obstacle
arising from our folly, Christ has given a testimony to his graces,
sufficiently clear to prevent them from being wickedly suppressed. “I am
the vine,” says he, “ye are the branches. My Father is the husbandman. As
the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine, no
more can ye, except ye abide in me. For without me ye can do
nothing.”(638) If we cannot bear fruit of ourselves, any more than a
branch can bud after it is torn up from the ground, and deprived of
moisture, we must no longer seek for any aptitude in our nature to that
which is good. There is no ambiguity in this conclusion, “Without me ye
can do nothing.” He does not say that we are too weak to be sufficient for
ourselves, but reducing us to nothing, excludes every idea of ability,
however diminutive. If, being engrafted into Christ, we bear fruit like a
vine, which derives the energy of vegetation from the moisture of the
earth, from the dew of heaven, and from the benign influences of the sun,
I see nothing of our own remaining in any good work, if we preserve entire
to God the honour which belongs to him. It is in vain to urge that
frivolous subtlety, that the branch already possesses sap, and a
fructifying power, and that therefore it does not derive all from the
earth, or from the original root, because it contributes something of its
own. For the meaning of Christ is clearly that we are as a dry and
worthless log, when separated from him; because, independently of him, we
have no ability to do good, as he says also in another place: “Every
plant, which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up.”(639)
Wherefore the Apostle ascribes all the praise to him in the place already
cited. “It is God,” says he, “which worketh in you both to will and to
do.”(640) The first part of a good work is volition, the next an effectual
endeavour to perform it; God is the author of both. Therefore we rob the
Lord, if we arrogate any thing to ourselves either in volition or in
execution. If God were said to assist the infirmity of our will, then
there would be something left to us; but since he is said to produce the
will, all the good that is in it, is placed without us. And because the
good will is still oppressed by the burden of our flesh, so that it cannot
extricate itself, he has added, that in struggling with the difficulties
of that conflict, we are supplied with constancy of exertion to carry our
volitions into effect. For otherwise there would be no truth in what he
elsewhere teaches, that “it is the same God which worketh all in
all,”(641) which we have before shown comprehends the whole course of the
spiritual life. For which reason David, after having prayed that the way
of God may be discovered to him, that he may walk in his truth,
immediately adds, “Unite my heart to fear thy name.”(642) In these words
he intimates, that even good men are subject to so many distractions of
mind, that they soon wander and fall, unless they are strengthened to
persevere. For the same reason, in another passage, having prayed that his
steps might be ordered in the word of the Lord, he likewise implores
strength for a warfare: “Let not any iniquity have dominion over me.”(643)
In this manner, therefore, the Lord both begins and completes the good
work in us; that it may be owing to him, that the will conceives a love
for what is right, that it is inclined to desire it, and is excited and
impelled to endeavour to attain it; and then that the choice, desire, and
endeavour do not fail, but proceed even to the completion of the desired
effect; lastly, that a man proceeds with constancy in them, and perseveres
even to the end.

X. And he moves the will, not according to the system maintained and
believed for many ages, in such a manner that it would afterwards be at
our option either to obey the impulse or to resist it, but by an
efficacious influence. The observation, therefore, so frequently repeated
by Chrysostom, that “Whom God draws, he draws willing,” we are obliged to
reject, being an insinuation that God only waits for us with his hand
extended, if we choose to accept his assistance. We grant that such was
the primitive condition of man during his state of integrity, that he
could incline to the one side or the other; but since Adam has taught us
by his own example how miserable free will is, unless God give us both
will and power, what will become of us if he impart his grace to us in
that small proportion? Nay, we obscure and diminish his grace by our
ingratitude. For the Apostle does not teach that the grace of a good will
is offered to us for our acceptance, but that he “worketh in us to will;”
which is equivalent to saying, that the Lord, by his Spirit, directs,
inclines, and governs our heart, and reigns in it as in his own
possession. Nor does he promise by Ezekiel that he will give to the elect
a new spirit, only that they may be able to walk, but that they may
actually walk, in his precepts.(644) Nor can the declaration of Christ,
“Every man that hath heard of the Father cometh unto me,”(645) be
understood in any other sense than as a proof of the positive efficacy of
Divine grace; as Augustine also contends. This grace the Lord deigns not
to give to any person promiscuously, according to the observation commonly
attributed, if I mistake not, to Occam, that it is denied to no man who
does what he can. Men are to be taught, indeed, that the Divine benignity
is free to all who seek it, without any exception; but since none begin to
seek it, but those who have been inspired by heavenly grace, not even this
diminutive portion ought to be taken from his praise. This is the
privilege of the elect, that, being regenerated by the Spirit of God, they
are led and governed by his direction. Wherefore Augustine as justly
ridicules those who arrogate to themselves any part of a good volition, as
he reprehends others, who suppose that to be given promiscuously to all,
which is the special evidence of gratuitous election. “Nature,” says he,
“is common to all men, but not grace.” He calls it “a transparent
subtlety, which shines merely with vanity, when that is extended generally
to all, which God confers on whom he chooses.” But elsewhere, “How have
you come? by believing. Be afraid, lest while you arrogate to yourself the
discovery of the way of righteousness, you perish from the way of
righteousness. I am come, you say, by free will; I am come through my own
choice. Why are you inflated with pride? Will you know that this also is
given to you? Hear him proclaiming, ‘No man can come to me, except the
Father which hath sent me draw him.’ ”(646) And it incontrovertibly
follows, from the words of John, that the hearts of the pious are divinely
governed with such effect, that they follow with an affection which
nothing can alter. “Whosoever is born of God,” he says, “cannot sin; for
his seed remaineth in him.”(647) For we see that the neutral,
inefficacious impulse imagined by the sophists, which every one would be
at liberty to obey or resist, is evidently excluded, where it is asserted
that God gives a constancy that is effectual to perseverance.

XI. Concerning perseverance there would have been no doubt that it ought
to be esteemed the gratuitous gift of God, had it not been for the
prevalence of a pestilent error, that it is dispensed according to the
merit of men, in proportion to the gratitude which each person has
discovered for the grace bestowed on him. But as that opinion arose from
the supposition that it was at our own option to reject or accept the
offered grace of God, this notion being exploded, the other falls of
course. Though here is a double error; for beside teaching that our
gratitude for the grace first bestowed on us, and our legitimate use of
that grace, are remunerated by subsequent blessings, they add also, that
now grace does not operate alone in us, but only coöperates with us. On
the first point, we must admit that the Lord, while he daily enriches and
loads his servants with new communications of his grace, perceiving the
work which he has begun in them grateful and acceptable, discovers
something in them which he blesses with still greater degrees of grace.
And this is implied in the following declarations: “Unto every one that
hath, shall be given.” And, “Well done, good and faithful servant; thou
hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many
things.”(648) But here two errors must be avoided; the legitimate use of
the grace first bestowed must not be said to be rewarded with subsequent
degrees of grace, as though man, by his own industry, rendered the grace
of God efficacious; nor must it be accounted a remuneration in such a
sense as to cease to be esteemed the free favour of God. I grant, then,
that this Divine benediction is to be expected by the faithful, that the
better they have used the former measures of grace, they shall afterwards
be enriched with proportionably greater degrees of it. But I assert that
this use also is from the Lord, and that this remuneration proceeds from
his gratuitous benevolence. They are equally awkward and unhappy in their
use of the trite distinction of operating and coöperating grace. Augustine
has used it indeed, but softens it by a suitable definition; that God in
coöperating completes what in operating he begins, and that it is the same
grace, but derives its name from the different mode of its efficiency.
Whence it follows, that he makes no partition of the work between God and
us, as though there were a mutual concurrence from the respective
exertions of each; but that he only designates the multiplication of
grace. To the same purpose is what he elsewhere asserts, that the good
will of man precedes many of the gifts of God, but is itself one of their
number. Whence it follows, that he leaves nothing for it to arrogate to
itself. This is also particularly expressed by Paul. For having said that
“it is God which worketh in us both to will and to do,”(649) he
immediately adds, that he does both “of his own good pleasure,” signifying
by this expression that these are acts of gratuitous benignity. Now, to
their wonted assertion, that after we have admitted the first grace, our
own endeavours coöperate with the grace which follows, I reply, if they
mean that, after having been once subdued by the Divine power to the
obedience of righteousness, we voluntarily advance, and are disposed to
follow the guidance of grace, I make no objection. For it is very certain,
that where the grace of God reigns, there is such a promptitude of
obedience. But whence does this arise but from the Spirit of God, who,
uniformly consistent with himself, cherishes and strengthens to a
constancy of perseverance that disposition of obedience which he first
originated? But if they mean that man derives from himself an ability to
coöperate with the grace of God, they are involved in a most pestilent
error.

XII. And to this purpose they falsely and ignorantly pervert that
observation of the Apostle, “I laboured more abundantly than they all; yet
not I, but the grace of God which was with me.”(650) For they understand
it in this manner; that because his preference of himself to all others
might appear rather too arrogant, he corrects it by referring the praise
to the grace of God; but yet so as to denominate himself a coöperator with
grace. It is surprising that so many men, not otherwise erroneous, have
stumbled at this imaginary difficulty. For the Apostle does not say that
the grace of God laboured with him, to make himself a partner in the
labour; but rather by that correction ascribes the whole praise of the
labour to grace alone. “It is not I,” says he, “that have laboured, but
the grace of God which was with me.” They have been deceived by an
ambiguity of expression; but still more by a preposterous translation, in
which the force of the Greek article is omitted. For if you translate it
literally, he says, not that grace was coöperative with him, but that the
grace which was with him was the author of all. And the same is maintained
by Augustine, though briefly, yet without obscurity, when he thus
expresses himself: “The good will of man precedes many of the gifts of
God, but not all. But of those which it precedes it is itself one.” Then
follows this reason; because it is written, “The God of my mercy shall
prevent me.”(651) And, “Mercy shall follow me.”(652) It prevents the
unwilling, that he may will; it follows the willing, that he may not will
in vain. With this agrees Bernard, who introduces the Church, saying,
“Draw me unwilling, to make me willing; draw me inactive, to make me run.”

XIII. Now, let us hear Augustine speak in his own words, lest the sophists
of the Sorbonne, those Pelagians of the present age, according to their
usual custom, accuse us of opposing the whole current of antiquity. In
this they imitate their father Pelagius, by whom Augustine was formerly
obliged to enter into the same field of controversy. In his treatise _De
Corr. et Grat._, addressed to Valentine, he treats very much at large what
I shall recite briefly, but in his own words: “That to Adam was given the
grace of persevering in good if he chose; that grace is given to us to
will, and by willing to overcome concupiscence. That Adam therefore had
the power if he had the will, but not the will that he might have the
power; but that it is given to us to have both the will and the power.
That the primitive liberty was a power to abstain from sin, but that ours
is much greater, being an inability to commit sin.” And lest he should be
supposed to speak of the perfection to be enjoyed after the attainment of
a state of immortality, as Lombard misinterprets his meaning, he presently
removes this difficulty. For he says, “the will of the saints is so
inflamed by the Holy Spirit, that they therefore have an ability, because
they have such a will; and that their having such a will proceeds from the
operations of God.” For if, amidst such great weakness, which still
requires “strength” to be “made perfect”(653) for the repressing of pride,
they were left to their own will, so as to have ability, through the
Divine assistance, if they were willing, and God did not operate in them
to produce that will; among so many temptations and infirmities their will
would fail, and therefore they could not possibly persevere. The infirmity
of the human will, then, is succoured, that it may be invariably and
inseparably actuated by Divine grace, and so, notwithstanding all its
weakness, may not fail. He afterwards discusses more at large how our
hearts necessarily follow the impulse of God; and he asserts that the Lord
draws men with their own wills, but that those wills are such as he
himself has formed. Now, we have a testimony from the mouth of Augustine
to the point which we are principally endeavouring to establish; that
grace is not merely offered by the Lord to be either received or rejected,
according to the free choice of each individual, but that it is grace
which produces both the choice and the will in the heart; so that every
subsequent good work is the fruit and effect of it, and that it is obeyed
by no other will but that which it has produced. For this is his language
also in another place—that it is grace alone which performs every good
work in us.

XIV. When he observes that the will is not taken away by grace, but only
changed from a bad one into a good one, and when it is good, assisted; he
only intends that man is not drawn in such a manner as to be carried away
by an external impulse, without any inclination of his mind; but that he
is internally so disposed as to obey from his very heart. That grace is
specially and gratuitously given to the elect, he maintains in an epistle
to Boniface, in the following language: “We know that the grace of God is
not given to all men; and that to them to whom it is given, it is given
neither according to the merits of works, nor according to the merits of
will, but by gratuitous favour; and to those to whom it is not given, we
know that it is not given by the righteous judgment of God.” And in the
same epistle, he strenuously combats that opinion, which supposes that
subsequent grace is given to the merits of men, because by not rejecting
the first grace they showed themselves worthy of it. For he wishes
Pelagius to allow that grace is necessary to us for every one of our
actions, and is not a retribution of our works, that it may be
acknowledged to be pure grace. But the subject cannot be comprised in a
more concise summary than in the eighth chapter of his treatise addressed
to Valentine; where he teaches, that the human will obtains, not grace by
liberty, but liberty by grace; that being impressed by the same grace with
a disposition of delight, it is formed for perpetuity; that it is
strengthened with invincible fortitude; that while grace reigns, it never
falls, but, deserted by grace, falls immediately; that by the gratuitous
mercy of the Lord, it is converted to what is good, and, being converted,
perseveres in it; that the first direction of the human will to that which
is good, and its subsequent constancy, depend solely on the will of God,
and not on any merit of man. Thus there is left to man such a free will,
if we choose to give it that appellation, as he describes in another
place, that he can neither be converted to God nor continue in God but by
grace; and that all the ability which he has is derived from grace.




