Chapter V. A Refutation Of The Objections Commonly Urged In Support Of
Free Will.


Enough might appear to have been already said on the servitude of the
human will, did not they, who endeavour to overthrow it with a false
notion of liberty, allege, on the contrary, certain reasons in opposition
to our sentiments. First, they collect together some absurdities, in order
to render it odious, as if it were abhorrent to common sense; and then
they attack it with testimonies of Scripture. Both these weapons we will
repel in order. If sin, say they, be necessary, then it ceases to be sin;
if it be voluntary, then it may be avoided. These were also the weapons
used by Pelagius in his attacks on Augustine; with whose authority,
however, we wish not to urge them, till we shall have given some
satisfaction on the subject itself. I deny, then, that sin is the less
criminal, because it is necessary; I deny also the other consequence,
which they infer, that it is avoidable because it is voluntary. For, if
any one wish to dispute with God, and to escape his judgment by the
pretext of having been incapable of acting otherwise, he is prepared with
an answer, which we have elsewhere advanced, that it arises not from
creation, but from the corruption of nature, that men, being enslaved by
sin, can will nothing but what is evil. For whence proceeded that
impotence, of which the ungodly would gladly avail themselves, but from
Adam voluntarily devoting himself to the tyranny of the devil? Hence,
therefore, the corruption with which we are firmly bound. It originated in
the revolt of the first man from his Maker. If all men are justly
accounted guilty of this rebellion, let them not suppose themselves
excused by necessity, in which very thing they have a most evident cause
of their condemnation. And this I have before clearly explained, and have
given an example in the devil himself, which shows, that he who sins
necessarily, sins no less voluntarily; and also in the elect angels, whose
will, though it cannot swerve from what is good, ceases not to be a will.
Bernard also judiciously inculcates the same doctrine, that we are,
therefore, the more miserable because our necessity is voluntary; which
yet constrains us to be so devoted to it, that we are, as we have already
observed, the slaves of sin. The second branch of their argument is
erroneous; because it makes an improper transition from what is voluntary
to what is free; but we have before evinced, that a thing may be done
voluntarily, which yet is not the subject of free choice.

II. They add, that unless both virtues and vices proceed from the free
choice of the will, it is not reasonable either that punishments should be
inflicted, or that rewards should be conferred on man. This argument,
though first advanced by Aristotle, yet I grant is used on some occasions
by Chrysostom and Jerome. That it was familiar to the Pelagians, however,
Jerome himself does not dissemble, but even relates their own words: “If
the grace of God operates in us, then the crown will be given to grace,
not to us who labour.” In regard to punishments, I reply, that they are
justly inflicted on us, from whom the guilt of sin proceeds. For of what
importance is it, whether sin be committed with a judgment free or
enslaved, so it be committed with the voluntary bias of the passions;
especially as man is proved to be a sinner, because he is subject to the
servitude of sin? With respect to rewards of righteousness, where is the
great absurdity, if we confess that they depend rather on the Divine
benignity than on our own merits? How often does this recur in Augustine,
“that God crowns not our merits, but his own gifts; and that they are
called rewards, not as though they were due to our merits, but because
they are retributions to the graces already conferred on us!” They
discover great acuteness in this observation, that there remains no room
for merits, if they originate not from free will; but in their opinion of
the erroneousness of our sentiment they are greatly mistaken. For
Augustine hesitates not on all occasions to inculcate as certain, what
they think it impious to acknowledge; as where he says, “What are the
merits of any man? When he comes not with a merited reward, but with free
grace, he alone being free and a deliverer from sins, finds all men
sinners.” Again: “If you receive what is your due, you must be punished.
What then is done? God has given you not merited punishment, but unmerited
grace. If you wish to be excluded from grace, boast your merits.” Again:
“You are nothing of yourself; sins are yours, merits belong to God; you
deserve punishment; and when you come to be rewarded, he will crown his
own gifts, not your merits.” In the same sense he elsewhere teaches that
grace proceeds not from merit, but merit from grace. And a little after he
concludes, that God with his gifts precedes all merits, that thence he may
elicit his other merits, and gives altogether freely, because he discovers
nothing as a cause of salvation. But what necessity is there for further
quotations, when his writings are full of such passages? But the Apostle
will even better deliver them from this error, if they will hear from what
origin he deduces the glory of the saints. “Whom he did predestinate, them
he also called; and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he
justified, them he also glorified.”(679) Why, then, according to the
Apostle, are the faithful crowned? Because by the mercy of the Lord, and
not by their own industry, they are elected, and called, and justified.
Farewell, then, this vain fear, that there will be an end of all merits if
free will be overturned. For it is a proof of extreme folly, to be
terrified and to fly from that to which the Scripture calls us. “If,” says
he, “thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not
received it?”(680) You see that he divests free will of every thing, with
the express design of leaving no room for merits. But yet, the beneficence
and liberality of God being inexhaustible and various, those graces which
he confers on us, because he makes them ours, he rewards, just as if they
were our own virtues.

III. They further allege what may appear to be borrowed from Chrysostom,
that if our will has not this ability to choose good or evil, the
partakers of the same nature must be either all evil or all good. And not
very far from this is the writer, whoever he was, of the treatise _On the
Calling of the Gentiles_, which is circulated under the name of Ambrose,
when he argues, that no man would ever recede from the faith, unless the
grace of God left us the condition of mutability. In which it is
surprising that such great men were so inconsistent with themselves. For
how did it not occur to Chrysostom, that it is the election of God, which
makes this difference between men? We are not afraid to allow, what Paul
very strenuously asserts, that all, without exception, are depraved and
addicted to wickedness; but with him we add, that the mercy of God does
not permit all to remain in depravity. Therefore, since we all naturally
labour under the same disease, they alone recover to whom the Lord has
been pleased to apply his healing hand. The rest, whom he passes by in
righteous judgment, putrefy in their corruption till they are entirely
consumed. And it is from the same cause, that some persevere to the end,
and others decline and fall in the midst of their course. For perseverance
itself also is a gift of God, which he bestows not on all men
promiscuously, but imparts to whom he pleases. If we inquire the cause of
the difference, why some persevere with constancy, and others fail through
instability, no other can be found, but that God sustains the former by
his power, that they perish not, and does not communicate the same
strength to the latter, that they may be examples of inconstancy.

IV. They urge further, that exhortations are given in vain, that the use
of admonitions is superfluous, and that reproofs are ridiculous, if it be
not in the power of the sinner to obey. When similar objections were
formerly made to Augustine, he was obliged to write his treatise _On
Correction and Grace_; in which, though he copiously refutes them, he
calls his adversaries to this conclusion: “O man, in the commandment learn
what is your duty: in correction learn, that through your own fault you
have it not: in prayer learn whence you may receive what you wish to
enjoy.” There is nearly the same argument in the treatise _On the Spirit
and Letter_, in which he maintains that God does not regulate the precepts
of his law by the ability of men, but when he has commanded what is right,
freely gives to his elect ability to perform it. This is not a subject
that requires a prolix discussion. First, we are not alone in this cause,
but have the support of Christ and all the Apostles. Let our opponents
consider how they can obtain the superiority in a contest with such
antagonists. Does Christ, who declares that without him we can do
nothing,(681) on that account the less reprehend and punish those who
without him do what is evil? Does he therefore relax in his exhortations
to every man to practise good works? How severely does Paul censure the
Corinthians for their neglect of charity!(682) Yet he earnestly prays that
charity may be given them by the Lord. In his Epistle to the Romans he
declares that “it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but
of God that showeth mercy:”(683) yet afterwards he refrains not from the
use of admonition, exhortation, and reproof. Why do they not, therefore,
remonstrate with the Lord, not to lose his labour in such a manner, by
requiring of men those things which he alone can bestow, and punishing
those things which are committed for want of his grace? Why do they not
admonish Paul to spare those who are unable to will or run without the
previous mercy of God, of which they are now destitute? As though truly
the Lord has not the best reason for his doctrine, which readily presents
itself to those who religiously seek it. Paul clearly shows how far
doctrine, exhortation, and reproof, can of themselves avail towards
producing a change of heart, when he says that “neither is he that
planteth any thing, neither he that watereth; but” that the efficacy is
solely from “God that giveth the increase.”(684) Thus we see that Moses
severely sanctions the precepts of the law, and the Prophets earnestly
urge and threaten transgressors; whilst, nevertheless, they acknowledge,
that men never begin to be wise till a heart is given them to understand;
that it is the peculiar work of God to circumcise the heart, and instead
of a stony heart to give a heart of flesh; to inscribe his law in men’s
minds; in a word, to render his doctrine effectual by a renovation of the
soul.

V. What, then, it will be inquired, is the use of exhortations? I reply,
If the impious despise them with obstinate hearts, they will serve for a
testimony against them, when they shall come to the tribunal of the Lord;
and even in the present state they wound their consciences; for however
the most audacious person may deride them, he cannot disapprove of them in
his heart. But it will be said, What can a miserable sinner do, if the
softness of heart, which is necessary to obedience, be denied him? I ask,
What excuse can he plead, seeing that he cannot impute the hardness of his
heart to any one but himself? The impious, therefore, who are ready, if
possible, to ridicule the Divine precepts and exhortations, are, in spite
of their own inclinations, confounded by their power. But the principal
utility should be considered in regard to the faithful, in whom as the
Lord performs all things by his Spirit, so he neglects not the
instrumentality of his word, but uses it with great efficacy. Let it be
allowed, then, as it ought to be, that all the strength of the pious
consists in the grace of God, according to this expression of the Prophet:
“I will give them a new heart, that they may walk in my statutes.”(685)
But you will object, Why are they admonished of their duty, and not rather
left to the direction of the Spirit? Why are they importuned with
exhortations, when they cannot make more haste than is produced by the
impulse of the Spirit? Why are they chastised, if they have ever deviated
from the right way, seeing that they erred through the necessary infirmity
of the flesh? I reply, Who art thou, O man, that wouldest impose laws upon
God? If it be his will to prepare us by exhortation for the reception of
this grace, by which obedience to the exhortation is produced, what have
you to censure in this economy? If exhortations and reproofs were of no
other advantage to the pious, than to convince them of sin, they ought not
on that account to be esteemed wholly useless. Now, since, by the internal
operation of the Spirit, they are most effectual to inflame the heart with
a love of righteousness, to shake off sloth, to destroy the pleasure and
poisonous sweetness of iniquity, and, on the contrary, to render it
hateful and burdensome, who can dare to reject them as superfluous? If any
one would desire a plainer answer, let him take it thus: The operations of
God on his elect are twofold—internally, by his Spirit, externally, by his
word. By his Spirit illuminating their minds and forming their hearts to
the love and cultivation of righteousness, he makes them new creatures. By
his word he excites them to desire, seek, and obtain the same renovation.
In both he displays the efficacy of his power, according to the mode of
his dispensation. When he addresses the same word to the reprobate, though
it produces not their correction, yet he makes it effectual for another
purpose, that they may be confounded by the testimony of their consciences
now, and be rendered more inexcusable at the day of judgment. Thus Christ,
though he pronounces that “no man can come to him, except the Father draw
him,” and that the elect come when they have “heard and learned of the
Father,”(686) yet himself neglects not the office of a teacher, but with
his own mouth sedulously invites those who need the internal teachings of
the Holy Spirit to enable them to derive any benefit from his
instructions. With respect to the reprobate, Paul suggests that teaching
is not useless, because it is to them “the savour of death unto death,”
but “a sweet savour unto God.”(687)

VI. Our adversaries are very laborious in collecting testimonies of
Scripture; and this with a view, since they cannot refute us with their
weight, to overwhelm us with their number. But as in battles, when armies
come to close combat, the weak multitude, whatever pomp and ostentation
they may display, are soon defeated and routed, so it will be very easy
for us to vanquish them, with all their multitude. For as all the
passages, which they abuse in their opposition to us, when properly
classed and distributed, centre in a very few topics, one answer will be
sufficient for many of them; it will not be necessary to dwell on a
particular explication of each. Their principal argument they derive from
the precepts; which they suppose to be so proportioned to our ability,
that whatever they can be proved to require, it necessarily follows we are
capable of performing. They proceed, therefore, to a particular detail of
them, and by them measure the extent of our strength. Either, say they,
God mocks us, when he commands holiness, piety, obedience, chastity, love,
and meekness, and when he forbids impurity, idolatry, unchastity, anger,
robbery, pride, and the like; or he requires only such things as we have
power to perform. Now, almost all the precepts which they collect, may be
distributed into three classes. Some require the first conversion to God;
others simply relate to the observation of the law; others enjoin
perseverance in the grace of God already received. Let us first speak of
them all in general, and then proceed to the particulars. To represent the
ability of man as coëxtensive with the precepts of the Divine law, has
indeed for a long time not been unusual, and has some appearance of
plausibility; but it has proceeded from the grossest ignorance of the law.
For those who think it an enormous crime to say that the observation of
the law is impossible, insist on this very cogent argument, that otherwise
the law was given in vain. For they argue just as if Paul had never said
any thing concerning the law. But, pray, what is the meaning of these
expressions—“The law was added because of transgressions;” “by the law is
the knowledge of sin;” “the law worketh wrath;” “the law entered that the
offence might abound?”(688) Do they imply a necessity of its being limited
to our ability, that it might not be given in vain? Do they not rather
show that it was placed far beyond our ability, in order to convince us of
our impotence? According to the definition of the same Apostle, “the end
of the commandment is charity.”(689) But when he wishes the minds of the
Thessalonians to “abound in love,”(690) he plainly acknowledges that the
law sounds in our ears in vain, unless God inspire the principles of it
into our hearts.

VII. Indeed, if the Scripture taught only that the law is the rule of
life, to which our conduct ought to be conformed, I would immediately
accede to their opinion. But since it carefully and perspicuously states
to us various uses of the law, it will be best to consider the operation
of the law in man according to that exposition. As far as relates to the
present argument, when it has prescribed any thing to be performed by us,
it teaches that the power of obedience proceeds from the goodness of God,
and therefore invites us to pray that it may be given us. If there were
only a commandment, and no promise, there would be a trial of the
sufficiency of our strength to obey the commandment; but since the
commands are connected with promises, which declare that we must derive
not only subsidiary power, but our whole strength, from the assistance of
Divine grace, they furnish abundant evidence that we are not only unequal
to the observation of the law, but altogether incapable of it. Wherefore
let them no more urge the proportion of our ability to the precepts of the
law, as though the Lord had regulated the standard of righteousness, which
he designed to give in the law, according to the measure of our
imbecility. It should rather be concluded from the promises, how
unprepared we are of ourselves, since we stand in such universal need of
his grace. But will it, say they, be credited by any, that the Lord
addressed his law to stocks and stones? I reply, that no one will attempt
to inculcate such a notion. For neither are the impious stocks or stones,
when they are taught by the law the contrariety of their dispositions to
God, and are convicted of guilt by the testimony of their own minds; nor
the pious, when, admonished of their own impotence, they have recourse to
the grace of God. To this purpose are the following passages from
Augustine: “God gives commands which we cannot perform, that we may know
what we ought to request of him. The utility of the precepts is great, if
only so much be given to free will, that the grace of God may receive the
greater honour. Faith obtains what the law commands; and the law therefore
commands, that faith may obtain that which is commanded by the law:
moreover God requires faith itself of us, and finds not what he requires,
unless he has given what he finds.” Again: “Let God give what he enjoins,
and let him enjoin what he pleases.”

VIII. This will more clearly appear in an examination of the three kinds
of precepts which we have already mentioned. The Lord, both in the law and
in the prophets, frequently commands us to be converted to him;(691) but
the Prophet, on the other hand, says, “Turn thou me, and I shall be
turned.” “After that I was turned, I repented,” &c.(692) He commands us to
circumcise our hearts; but he announces by Moses, that this circumcision
is the work of his own hand.(693) He frequently requires newness of heart;
but elsewhere declares that this is his own gift.(694) “What God
promises,” Augustine says, “we do not perform ourselves through free will
or nature; but he does it himself by his grace.” And this is the
observation to which he himself assigns the fifth place in his enumeration
of Ticonius’s rules of Christian doctrine; that we should make a proper
distinction between the law and the promises, or between the commandments
and grace. This may suffice, in answer to those who from the precepts
infer an ability in man to obey them, that they may destroy the grace of
God, by which those very precepts are fulfilled. The precepts of the
second class are simple, enjoining on us the worship of God, constant
submission to his will, observance of his commands, and adherence to his
doctrine. But there are innumerable passages, which prove that the highest
degree of righteousness, sanctity, piety, and purity, capable of being
attained, is his own gift. Of the third class is that exhortation of Paul
and Barnabas to the faithful, mentioned by Luke, “to continue in the grace
of God.”(695) But whence the grace of perseverance should be sought, the
same Apostle informs us, when he says, “Finally, my brethren, be strong in
the Lord.”(696) In another place he cautions us to “grieve not the Holy
Spirit of God, whereby we are sealed unto the day of redemption.”(697) But
because what he there requires could not be performed by men, he prays for
the Thessalonians, “that our God would count them worthy of this calling,
and fulfil all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith
with power.”(698) Thus, also, in the Second Epistle to the Corinthians,
treating of alms, he frequently commends their benevolent and pious
disposition;(699) yet a little after he gives thanks to God for having
inclined the heart of Titus to “accept” or undertake “the exhortation.” If
Titus could not even use his own tongue to exhort others without having
been prompted by God, how should others have been inclined to act, unless
God himself had directed their hearts?

IX. Our more subtle adversaries cavil at all these testimonies, because
there is no impediment, they say, that prevents our exerting our own
ability, and God assisting our weak efforts. They adduce also passages
from the Prophets, where the accomplishment of our conversion seems to be
divided equally between God and us. “Turn ye unto me, and I will turn unto
you.”(700) What assistance we receive from the Lord has already been
shown, and needs not to be repeated here. I wish only this single point to
be conceded to me, that it is in vain to infer our possession of ability
to fulfil the law from God’s command to us to obey it; since it is
evident, that for the performance of all the Divine precepts, the grace of
the Legislator is both necessary for us, and promised to us; and hence it
follows, that at least more is required of us than we are capable of
performing. Nor is it possible for any cavils to explain away that passage
of Jeremiah, which assures us, that the covenant of God, made with his
ancient people, was frustrated because it was merely a literal one;(701)
and that it can only be confirmed by the influence of the Spirit, who
forms the heart to obedience. Nor does their error derive any support from
this passage: “Turn ye unto me, and I will turn unto you.” For this
denotes, not that turning of God in which he renovates our hearts to
repentance, but that in which he declares his benevolence and kindness by
external prosperity; as by adversity he sometimes manifests his
displeasure. When the people of Israel, therefore, after having been
harassed with miseries and calamities under various forms, complained that
God was departed from them, he replies that his benignity will not fail
them if they return to rectitude of life, and to himself, who is the
standard of righteousness. The passage, then, is miserably perverted, when
it is made to represent the work of conversion as divided between God and
men. We have observed the greater brevity on these points, because it will
be a more suitable place for this argument when we treat of the Law.

X. The second description of arguments is nearly allied to the first. They
allege the promises, in which God covenants with our will; such as, “Seek
good, and not evil, that ye may live.” “If ye be willing and obedient, ye
shall eat the good of the land; but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be
devoured with the sword; for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.”(702)
Again: “If thou wilt put away thine abominations out of my sight, then
shalt thou not remove.” “If thou shalt hearken diligently unto the voice
of the Lord thy God, to observe and to do all his commandments which I
command thee this day, the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all
nations of the earth;”(703) and other similar passages. They consider it
an absurdity and mockery, that the benefits which the Lord offers in the
promises are referred to our will, unless it be in our power either to
confirm or to frustrate them. And truly it is very easy to amplify this
subject with eloquent complaints, that we are cruelly mocked by the Lord,
when he announces that his benignity depends on our will, if that will be
not in our own power; that this would be egregious liberality in God, to
present his benefits to us in such a manner, that we should have no power
to enjoy them; and that there must be a strange certainty in his promises,
if they depend on a thing impossible, so that they can never be fulfilled.
Concerning promises of this kind, to which a condition is annexed, we
shall speak in another place, and evince that there is no absurdity in the
impossibility of their completion. With respect to the present question, I
deny that God is cruel or insincere to us, when he invites us to merit his
favours, though he knows us to be altogether incapable of doing this. For
as the promises are offered equally to the faithful and to the impious,
they have their use with them both. As by the precepts God disturbs the
consciences of the impious, that they may not enjoy too much pleasure in
sin without any recollection of his judgments, so in the promises he calls
them to attest how unworthy they are of his kindness. For who can deny
that it is most equitable and proper for the Lord to bless those who
worship him, and severely to punish the despisers of his majesty? God
acts, therefore, in a right and orderly manner, when, addressing the
impious, who are bound with the fetters of sin, he adds to the promises
this condition, that when they shall have departed from their wickedness,
they shall then, and not till then, enjoy his favours; even for this sole
reason, that they may know that they are deservedly excluded from those
benefits which belong to the worshippers of the true God. On the other
hand, since he designs by all means to stimulate the faithful to implore
his grace, it will not be at all strange, if he tries in his promises
also, what we have shown he does with considerable effect in his precepts.
Being instructed by the precepts concerning the will of God, we are
apprized of our misery, in having our hearts so completely averse to it;
and are at the same time excited to invoke his Spirit, that we may be
directed by him into the right way. But because our sluggishness is not
sufficiently roused by the precepts, God adds his promises, to allure us
by their sweetness to the love of his commands. Now, in proportion to our
increased love of righteousness will be the increase of our fervour in
seeking the grace of God. See how, in these addresses, “If ye be willing,”
“If ye be obedient,” the Lord neither attributes to us an unlimited power
to will and to obey, nor yet mocks us on account of our impotence.

XI. The third class of arguments also has a great affinity with the
preceding. For they produce passages in which God reproaches an ungrateful
people, that it was wholly owing to their own fault that they did not
receive blessings of all kinds from his indulgent hand. Of this kind are
the following passages: “The Amalekites and the Canaanites are there
before you, and ye shall fall by the sword; because ye are turned away
from the Lord.”(704) “Because I called you, but ye answered not, therefore
will I do unto this house as I have done to Shiloh.”(705) Again: “This is
a nation that obeyeth not the voice of the Lord their God, nor receiveth
correction: the Lord hath rejected and forsaken the generation of his
wrath.”(706) Again: “They obeyed not thy voice, neither walked in thy law;
they have done nothing of all that thou commandedst them to do: therefore
thou hast caused all this evil to come upon them.”(707) How, say they,
could such reproaches be applicable to those who might immediately reply,
It is true that we desired prosperity and dreaded adversity; but our not
obeying the Lord, or hearkening to his voice, in order to obtain good and
to avoid evil, has been owing to our want of liberty, and subjection to
the dominion of sin. It is in vain, therefore, to reproach us with evils,
which we had no power to avoid. In answer to this, leaving the pretext of
necessity, which is but a weak and futile plea, I ask whether they can
exculpate themselves from all guilt. For if they are convicted of any
fault, the Lord justly reproaches them with their perverseness, as the
cause of their not having experienced the advantage of his clemency. Let
them answer, then, if they can deny that their own perverse will was the
cause of their obstinacy. If they find the source of the evil within
themselves, why do they so earnestly inquire after extraneous causes, that
they may not appear to have been the authors of their own ruin? But if it
be true that sinners are deprived of the favours of God, and chastised
with his punishments, for their own sin, and only for their own, there is
great reason why they should hear those reproaches from his mouth; that if
they obstinately persist in their crimes, they may learn in their
calamities rather to accuse and detest their iniquity, than to charge God
with unrighteous cruelty; that if they have not cast off all docility,
they may become weary of their sins, the demerits of which they see to be
misery and ruin, and may return into the good way, acknowledging in a
serious confession the very thing for which the Lord rebukes them. And
that those reproofs, which are quoted from the Prophets, have produced
this beneficial effect on the faithful, is evident from the solemn prayer
of Daniel, given us in his ninth chapter. Of the former use of them we
find an example in the Jews, to whom Jeremiah is commanded to declare the
cause of their miseries; though nothing could befall them, otherwise than
the Lord had foretold. “Thou shalt speak all these words unto them; but
they will not hearken to thee: thou shalt also call unto them; but they
will not answer thee.”(708) For what purpose, then, it will be asked, did
they speak to persons that were deaf? It was in order that, in spite of
their disinclination and aversion, they might know what was declared to
them to be true; that it was an abominable sacrilege to transfer to God
the guilt of their crimes, which belonged solely to themselves. With these
few solutions, we may very easily despatch the immense multitude of
testimonies, which the enemies of the grace of God are accustomed to
collect, both from the precepts of the law, and from the expostulations
directed to transgressors of it, in order to establish the idol of free
will. In one psalm the Jews are stigmatized as “a stubborn and rebellious
generation, a generation that set not their heart aright.”(709) In
another, the Psalmist exhorts the men of his age to “harden not their
hearts;”(710) which implies, that all the guilt of rebellion lies in the
perverseness of men. But it is absurd to infer from this passage that the
heart is equally flexible to either side; whereas “the preparation” of it
is “from the Lord.”(711) The Psalmist says, “I have inclined my heart to
perform thy statutes;”(712) because he had devoted himself to the service
of God without any reluctance, but with a cheerful readiness of mind. Yet
he boasts not of being himself the author of this inclination, which in
the same psalm he acknowledges to be the gift of God.(713) We should
remember, therefore, the admonition of Paul, when he commands the faithful
to “work out” their “own salvation with fear and trembling; for it is God
which worketh in” them “both to will and to do.”(714) He assigns them a
part to perform, that they may not indulge themselves in carnal
negligence; but by inculcating “fear and trembling,” he humbles them, and
reminds them that this very thing, which they are commanded to do, is the
peculiar work of God. In this he plainly suggests that the faithful act,
if I may be allowed the expression, passively, inasmuch as they are
furnished with strength from heaven, that they may arrogate nothing at all
to themselves. Wherefore, when Peter exhorts us to “add to” our “faith,
virtue,”(715) he does not allot us an under part to be performed, as
though we could do any thing separately, of ourselves; he only arouses the
indolence of the flesh, by which faith itself is frequently extinguished.
To the same purpose is the exhortation of Paul: “Quench not the
Spirit;”(716) for slothfulness gradually prevails over the faithful,
unless it be corrected. But if any one should infer from this, that it is
at his own option to cherish the light offered him, his ignorance will
easily be refuted; since this diligence which Paul requires, proceeds only
from God. For we are also frequently commanded to “cleanse ourselves from
all filthiness,”(717) whilst the Spirit claims the office of sanctifying
us exclusively to himself. In short, that what properly belongs to God is,
by concession, transferred to us, is plain from the words of John: “He
that is begotten of God, keepeth himself.”(718) The preachers of free will
lay hold of this expression, as though we were saved partly by the Divine
power, partly by our own; as though we did not receive from heaven this
very preservation which the Apostle mentions. Wherefore also Christ prays
that his Father would “keep” us “from evil;”(719) and we know that the
pious, in their warfare against Satan, obtain the victory by no other arms
than those which are furnished by God. Therefore Peter, having enjoined us
to “purify” our “souls, in obeying the truth,” immediately adds, as a
correction, “through the Spirit.”(720) Finally, the impotence of all human
strength in the spiritual conflict is briefly demonstrated by John when he
says, “Whosoever is born of God cannot sin; for his seed remaineth in
him:”(721) and in another place he adds the reason, that “this is the
victory that overcometh the world, even our faith.”(722)

XII. There is also a testimony cited from the law of Moses, which appears
directly repugnant to our solution. For, after having published the law,
he makes the following solemn declaration to the people: “This
commandment, which I command thee this day, it is not hidden from thee,
neither is it far off: it is not in heaven: but the word is very nigh unto
thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it.”(723) If
these expressions be understood merely of the precepts, I grant that they
have much weight in the present argument. For although we might easily
elude their force, by saying that they treat of the facility and
promptitude, not of observance, but of knowledge, yet still perhaps they
might leave some doubt. But the Apostle, in whose expositions there is no
ambiguity, removes all our doubts, by affirming that Moses here spake of
the doctrine of the gospel.(724) But if any one should obstinately
contend, that Paul has violently perverted the passage from its genuine
meaning, by applying it to the gospel, although his presumption could not
be acquitted of impiety, yet there is enough to refute him, independently
of the authority of the Apostle. For, if Moses spoke only of the precepts,
he was deceiving the people with the vainest confidence. For would they
not have precipitated themselves into ruin, if they had attempted the
observance of the law in their own strength, as a thing of no difficulty?
What, then, becomes of the very obvious facility with which the law may be
observed, when there appears no access to it but over a fatal precipice?
Wherefore nothing is more certain, than that Moses in these words
comprehended the covenant of mercy, which he had promulgated together with
the precepts of the law. For in a preceding verse he had taught that our
hearts must be circumcised by God, in order that we may love him.(725)
Therefore he placed this facility, of which he afterwards speaks, not in
the strength of man, but in the assistance and protection of the Holy
Spirit, who powerfully accomplishes his work in our infirmity. However,
the passage is not to be understood simply of the precepts, but rather of
the promises of the gospel, which are so far from maintaining an ability
in us to obtain righteousness, that they prove us to be utterly destitute
of it. Paul, considering the same, proves by this testimony that salvation
is proposed to us in the gospel, not under that hard, difficult, and
impossible condition, prescribed to us in the law, which pronounces it
attainable only by those who have fulfilled all the commandments, but
under a condition easily and readily to be performed. Therefore this
testimony contributes nothing to support the liberty of the human will.

XIII. Some other passages also are frequently objected, which show that
God sometimes tries men by withdrawing the assistance of his grace, and
waits to see what course they will pursue; as in Hosea: “I will go and
return to my place, till they acknowledge their offence, and seek my
face.”(726) It would be ridiculous, they say, for the Lord to consider,
whether Israel would seek his face, unless their minds were flexible,
capable of inclining either way, according to their own pleasure; as if it
were not very common for God, in the Prophets, to represent himself as
despising and rejecting his people, till they should amend their lives.
But what will our adversaries infer from such threats? If they maintain,
that those who are deserted by God, are capable of converting themselves,
they oppose the uniform declarations of Scripture. If they acknowledge
that the grace of God is necessary to conversion, what is their
controversy with us? But they will reply, that they concede its necessity
in such a sense as to maintain that man still retains some power. How do
they prove it? Certainly not from this or any similar passages. For it is
one thing to depart from a man, to observe what he will do when forsaken
and left to himself, and another to assist his little strength in
proportion to his imbecility. What, then, it will be inquired, is implied
in such forms of expression? I reply, that the import of them is just as
if God had said, Since admonitions, exhortations, and reproofs, produce no
good effect on this rebellious people, I will withdraw myself for a little
while, and silently leave them to affliction. I will see whether, at some
future period, after a series of calamities, they will remember me, and
seek my face. The departure of the Lord signifies the removal of his word.
His observing what men will do, signifies his concealing himself in
silence, and exercising them for a season with various afflictions. He
does both to humble us the more; for we should sooner be confounded than
corrected with the scourges of adversity, unless he rendered us docile by
his Spirit. Now, when the Lord, offended, and, as it were, wearied by our
extreme obstinacy, leaves us for a time, by the removal of his word, in
which he is accustomed to manifest his presence with us, and makes the
experiment, what we shall do in his absence,—it is falsely inferred from
this, that there is some power of free will, which he observes and proves;
since he acts in this manner with no other design than to bring us to a
sense and acknowledgment of our own nothingness.

XIV. They argue also from the manner of expression which is invariably
observed, both in the Scripture and in the common conversation of mankind.
For good actions are called our own, and we are said to perform what is
holy and pleasing to the Lord, as well as to commit sins. But if sins be
justly imputed to us, as proceeding from ourselves, certainly some share
ought to be, for the same reason, assigned to us also in works of
righteousness. For it would be absurd that we should be said to do those
things, to the performance of which, being incapable of any exertion of
our own, we were impelled by God, as so many stones. Wherefore, though we
allow the grace of God the preëminence, yet these expressions indicate
that our own endeavours hold at least the second place. If it were only
alleged, that good works are called our own, I would reply, that the bread
which we pray to God to give us, is called ours. What will they prove by
this term, but that what otherwise by no means belongs to us, becomes ours
through the benignity and gratuitous munificence of God? Therefore let
them either ridicule the same absurdity in the Lord’s prayer, or no longer
esteem it ridiculous, that good works are denominated ours, in which we
have no propriety but from the liberality of God. But there is rather more
force in what follows; that the Scripture frequently affirms that we
ourselves worship God, work righteousness, obey the law, and perform good
works. These being the proper offices of the understanding and will, how
could they justly be referred to the Spirit, and at the same time be
attributed to us, if there were not some union of our exertions with the
grace of God? We shall easily extricate ourselves from these objections,
if we properly consider the manner in which the Spirit of the Lord
operates in the saints. The similitude with which they try to cast an
odium on our sentiments, is quite foreign to the subject; for who is so
senseless as to suppose that there is no difference between impelling a
man, and throwing a stone? Nor does any such consequence follow from our
doctrine. We rank among the natural powers of man, approving, rejecting;
willing, nilling; attempting, resisting; that is, a power to approve
vanity, and to reject true excellence; to will what is evil, to refuse
what is good; to attempt iniquity, and to resist righteousness. What
concern has the Lord in this? If it be his will to use this depravity as
an instrument of his wrath, he directs and appoints it according to his
pleasure, in order to execute his good work by means of a wicked hand.
Shall we, then, compare a wicked man who is thus subservient to the Divine
power, while he only studies to gratify his own corrupt inclination, to a
stone which is hurled by an extrinsic impulse, and driven along without
any motion, sense, or will of its own? We perceive what a vast difference
there is. But how does the Lord operate in good men, to whom the question
principally relates? When he erects his kingdom within them, he by his
Spirit restrains their will, that it may not be hurried away by unsteady
and violent passions, according to the propensity of nature; that it may
be inclined to holiness and righteousness, he bends, composes, forms, and
directs it according to the rule of his own righteousness; that it may not
stagger or fall, he establishes and confirms it by the power of his
Spirit. For which reason Augustine says, “You will reply to me, Then we
are actuated; we do not act. Yes, you both act and are actuated; and you
act well, when you are actuated by that which is good. The Spirit of God,
who actuates you, assists those who act, and calls himself a helper,
because you also perform something.” In the first clause he inculcates
that the agency of man is not destroyed by the influence of the Spirit;
because the will, which is guided to aspire to what is good, belongs to
his nature. But the inference which he immediately subjoins, from the term
_help_, that we also perform something, we should not understand in such a
sense, as though he attributed any thing to us independently; but in order
to avoid encouraging us in indolence, he reconciles the Divine agency with
ours in this way; that to will is from nature, to will what is good is
from grace. Therefore he had just before said, “Without the assistance of
God, we shall be not only unable to conquer, but even to contend.”

XV. Hence it appears that the grace of God, in the sense in which this
word is used when we treat of regeneration, is the rule of the Spirit for
directing and governing the human will. He cannot govern it unless he
correct, reform, and renovate it; whence we say that the commencement of
regeneration is an abolition of what is from ourselves; nor unless he also
excite, actuate, impel, support, and restrain it; whence we truly assert,
that all the actions which proceed from this are entirely of the Spirit.
At the same time, we fully admit the truth of what Augustine teaches, that
the will is not destroyed by grace, but rather repaired; for these two
things are perfectly consistent—that the human will may be said to be
repaired, when, by the correction of its depravity and perverseness, it is
directed according to the true standard of righteousness; and also that a
new will may be said to be created in man, because the natural will is so
vitiated and corrupted, that it needs to be formed entirely anew. Now,
there is no reason why we may not justly be said to perform that which the
Spirit of God performs in us, although our own will contributes nothing of
itself, independently of his grace. And, therefore, we should remember
what we have before cited from Augustine, that many persons labour in vain
to find in the human will some good, properly its own. For whatever
mixture men study to add from the power of free will to the grace of God,
is only a corruption of it; just as if any one should dilute good wine
with dirty or bitter water. But although whatever good there is in the
human will, proceeds wholly from the internal influence of the Spirit, yet
because we have a natural faculty of willing, we are, not without reason,
said to do those things, the praise of which God justly claims to himself;
first, because whatever God does in us, becomes ours by his benignity,
provided we do not apprehend it to originate from ourselves; secondly,
because the understanding is ours, the will is ours, and the effort is
ours, which are all directed by him to that which is good.

XVI. The other testimonies, which they rake together from every quarter,
will not much embarrass even persons of moderate capacities, who have well
digested the answers already given. They quote this passage from Genesis:
“Unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him;”(727) or, as
they would translate the words, “Subject to thee shall be its appetite,
and thou shalt rule over it;” which they explain to relate to sin, as
though the Lord promised Cain, that the power of sin should not obtain
dominion over his mind, if he would labour to overcome it. But we say that
it is more agreeable to the tenor of the context, to understand it to be
spoken concerning Abel. For the design of God in it is to prove the
iniquity of that envy, which Cain had conceived against his brother. This
he does by two reasons: first, that it was in vain for him to meditate
crimes in order to excel his brother in the sight of God, with whom no
honour is given but to righteousness; secondly, that he was extremely
ungrateful for the favours God had already conferred on him, since he
could not bear his brother, even though subject to his authority. But that
we may not appear to adopt this explanation, merely because the other is
unfavourable to our tenets, let us admit that God spake concerning sin. If
it be so, then what the Lord there declares, is either promised or
commanded by him. If it be a command, we have already demonstrated that it
affords no proof of the power of men: if it be a promise, where is the
completion of the promise, seeing that Cain fell under the dominion of
sin, over which he ought to have prevailed? They will say, that the
promise includes a tacit condition, as though it had been declared to him
that he should obtain the victory if he would contend for it; but who can
admit these subterfuges? For if this dominion be referred to sin, the
speech is doubtless a command, expressive, not of our ability, but of our
duty, which remains our duty even though it exceed our ability. But the
subject itself, and grammatical propriety, require a comparison to be made
between Cain and Abel; in which the elder brother would not have been
placed below the younger, if he had not degraded himself by his own
wickedness.

XVII. They adduce also the testimony of the Apostle, who says, that “it is
not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that showeth
mercy;”(728) whence they conclude, that there is something in the will and
endeavour, which, though ineffectual of itself, is rendered successful by
the assistance of the Divine mercy. But if they would soberly examine the
subject there treated by Paul, they would not so inconsiderately pervert
this passage. I know that they can allege the suffrages of Origen and
Jerome in defence of their exposition; and in opposition to them, I could
produce that of Augustine. But their opinions are of no importance to us
if we can ascertain what was the meaning of Paul. He is there teaching,
that salvation is provided for them alone, whom the Lord favours with his
mercy; but that ruin and perdition await all those whom he has not chosen.
He had shown, by the example of Pharaoh, the condition of the reprobate;
and had confirmed the certainty of gratuitous election by the testimony of
Moses: “I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy.” His conclusion is,
that “it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God
that showeth mercy.” If this be understood to imply that our will and
endeavour are not sufficient, because they are not equal to so great a
work, Paul has expressed himself with great impropriety. Away, therefore,
with these sophisms: “It is not of him that willeth, nor of him that
runneth;” therefore there is some willing and some running. For the
meaning of Paul is more simple—It is neither our willing nor our running,
which procures for us a way of salvation, but solely the mercy of God. For
he expresses here the same sentiment as he does to Titus, when he says,
“that the kindness and love of God towards man appeared, not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy.”(729) The
very persons, who argue that Paul, in denying that it is of him that
willeth or of him that runneth, implies that there is some willing and
some running, would not allow me to use the same mode of reasoning, that
we have done some good works, because Paul denies that we have obtained
the favour of God by any works which we have done. But if they perceive a
flaw in this argumentation, let them open their eyes, and they will
perceive a similar fallacy in their own. For the argument on which
Augustine rests the dispute is unanswerable: “If it be said, that it is
not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, merely because neither
our willing nor our running is sufficient, it may, on the contrary, be
retorted, that it is not of the mercy of God, because that does not act
alone.”(730) The latter position being absurd, Augustine justly concludes
the meaning of this passage to be, that there is no good will in man,
unless it be prepared by the Lord; not but that we ought to will and to
run, but because God works in us both the one and the other. With similar
want of judgment, some pervert this declaration of Paul, “We are labourers
together with God;”(731) which, without doubt, is restricted solely to
ministers, who are denominated “workers with him,” not that they
contribute any thing of themselves, but because God makes use of their
agency, after he has qualified them and furnished them with the necessary
talents.

XVIII. They produce a passage from Ecclesiasticus, which is well known to
be a book of doubtful authority. But though we should not reject it,
which, nevertheless, if we chose, we might justly do, what testimony does
it afford in support of free will? The writer says, that man, as soon as
he was created, was left in the power of his own will; that precepts were
given to him, which if he kept, he should also be kept by them; that he
had life and death, good and evil, set before him; and that whatever he
desired, would be given him.(732) Let it be granted, that man at his
creation was endowed with a power of choosing life or death. What if we
reply, that he has lost it? I certainly do not intend to contradict
Solomon, who asserts that “God hath made man upright; but they have sought
out many inventions.”(733) But man, by his degeneracy, having shipwrecked
both himself and all his excellences, whatever is attributed to his
primitive state, it does not immediately follow that it belongs to his
vitiated and degenerated nature. Therefore I reply, not only to them, but
also to Ecclesiasticus himself, whoever he be: If you design to teach man
to seek within himself a power to attain salvation, your authority is not
so great in our estimation as to obtain even the smallest degree of
credit, in opposition to the undoubted word of God. But if you only aim to
repress the malignity of the flesh, which vainly attempts to vindicate
itself by transferring its crimes to God, and you therefore reply, that
man was originally endued with rectitude, from which it is evident that he
was the cause of his own ruin, I readily assent to it; provided we also
agree in this, that through his own guilt he is now despoiled of those
ornaments with which God invested him at the beginning; and so unite in
confessing, that in his present situation he needs not an advocate, but a
physician.

XIX. But there is nothing which our adversaries have more frequently in
their mouths, than the parable of Christ concerning the traveller, who was
left by robbers in the road half dead.(734) I know it is the common
opinion of almost all writers, that the calamity of the human race is
represented under the type of this traveller. Hence they argue, that man
is not so mutilated by the violence of sin and the devil, but that he
still retains some relics of his former excellences, since he is said to
have been left only half dead; for what becomes of the remaining portion
of life, unless there remain some rectitude both of reason and will? In
the first place, what could they say, if I refused to admit their
allegory? For there is no doubt but that this interpretation, invented by
the fathers, is foreign to the genuine sense of our Lord’s discourse.
Allegories ought to be extended no further than they are supported by the
authority of Scripture; for they are far from affording of themselves a
sufficient foundation for any doctrines. Nor is there any want of
arguments by which, if I chose, I could completely confute this erroneous
notion; for the word of God does not leave man in the possession of a
proportion of life, but teaches, that as far as respects happiness of
life, he is wholly dead. Paul, when speaking of our redemption, says, not
that we were recovered when half dead, but that “even when we were dead,
we were raised up.” He calls not on the half dead, but on those who are in
the grave, sleeping the sleep of death, to receive the illumination of
Christ.(735) And the Lord himself speaks in a similar manner, when he
says, that “the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of God; and they that hear shall live.”(736) With what
face can they oppose a slight allusion against so many positive
expressions? Yet let this allegory even be admitted as a clear testimony;
what will it enable them to extort from us? Man, they will say, is but
half dead; therefore he has some faculty remaining entire. I grant that he
has a mind capable of understanding, though it attains not to heavenly and
spiritual wisdom; he has some idea of virtue; he has some sense of the
Deity, though he acquires not the true knowledge of God. But what is to be
concluded from all this? It certainly does not disprove the assertion of
Augustine, which has received the general approbation even of the schools,
that man, since his fall, has been deprived of the gifts of grace on which
salvation depends; but that the natural ones are corrupted and polluted.
Let us hold this, then, as an undoubted truth, which no opposition can
ever shake—that the mind of man is so completely alienated from the
righteousness of God, that it conceives, desires, and undertakes every
thing that is impious, perverse, base, impure, and flagitious; that his
heart is so thoroughly infected by the poison of sin, that it cannot
produce any thing but what is corrupt; and that if at any time men do any
thing apparently good, yet the mind always remains involved in hypocrisy
and fallacious obliquity, and the heart enslaved by its inward
perverseness.




