Chapter VII. The Law Given, Not To Confine The Ancient People To Itself,
But To Encourage Their Hope Of Salvation In Christ, Till The Time Of His
Coming.


From the deduction we have made, it may easily be inferred, that the law
was superadded about four hundred years after the death of Abraham, not to
draw away the attention of the chosen people from Christ, but rather to
keep their minds waiting for his advent, to inflame their desires and
confirm their expectations, that they might not be discouraged by so long
a delay. By the word _law_, I intend, not only the decalogue, which
prescribes the rule of a pious and righteous life, but the form of
religion delivered from God by the hands of Moses. For Moses was not made
a legislator to abolish the blessing promised to the seed of Abraham; on
the contrary, we see him on every occasion reminding the Jews of that
gracious covenant made with their fathers, to which they were heirs; as
though the object of his mission had been to renew it. It was very clearly
manifested in the ceremonies. For what could be more vain or frivolous
than for men to offer the fetid stench arising from the fat of cattle, in
order to reconcile themselves to God? or to resort to any aspersion of
water or of blood, to cleanse themselves from pollution? In short, the
whole legal worship, if it be considered in itself, and contain no shadows
and figures of correspondent truths, will appear perfectly ridiculous.
Wherefore it is not without reason, that both in the speech of Stephen and
in the Epistle to the Hebrews, that passage is so carefully stated, in
which God commands Moses to make all things pertaining to the tabernacle
“according to the pattern showed to him in the mount.”(775) For unless
there had been some spiritual design, to which they were directed, the
Jews would have laboured to no purpose in these observances, as the
Gentiles did in their mummeries. Profane men, who have never seriously
devoted themselves to the pursuit of piety, have not patience to hear of
such various rites: they not only wonder why God should weary his ancient
people with such a mass of ceremonies, but they even despise and deride
them as puerile and ludicrous. This arises from inattention to the end of
the legal figures, from which if those figures be separated, they must be
condemned as vain and useless. But the “pattern,” which is mentioned,
shows that God commanded the sacrifices, not with a design to occupy his
worshippers in terrestrial exercises, but rather that he might elevate
their minds to sublimer objects. This may be likewise evinced by his
nature; for as he is a Spirit, he is pleased with none but spiritual
worship. Testimonies of this truth may be found in the numerous passages
of the Prophets, in which they reprove the stupidity of the Jews for
supposing that sacrifices possess any real value in the sight of God. Do
they mean to derogate from the law? Not at all; but being true
interpreters of it, they designed by this method to direct the eyes of the
people to that point from which the multitude were wandering. Now, from
the grace offered to the Jews, it is inferred as a certain truth, that the
law was not irrespective of Christ; for Moses mentioned to them this end
of their adoption, that they might “be unto God a kingdom of
priests;”(776) which could not be attained without a greater and more
excellent reconciliation than could arise from the blood of beasts. For
what is more improbable than that the sons of Adam, who by hereditary
contagion are all born the slaves of sin, should be exalted to regal
dignity, and thus become partakers of the glory of God, unless such an
eminent blessing proceeded from some other source than themselves? How
also could the right of the priesthood remain among them, the pollution of
whose crimes rendered them abominable to God, unless they had been
consecrated in a holy head? Wherefore Peter makes a beautiful application
of this observation of Moses, suggesting that the plenitude of that grace,
of which the Jews enjoyed a taste under the law, is exhibited in Christ.
“Ye are,” says he, “a chosen generation, a royal priesthood.”(777) This
application of the words tends to show, that they, to whom Christ has
appeared under the gospel, have obtained more than their forefathers;
because they are all invested with sacerdotal and regal honours, that in a
dependence on their Mediator they may venture to come boldly into the
presence of God.

II. And here it must be remarked, by the way, that the kingdom, which at
length was erected in the family of David, is a part of the law, and
comprised under the ministry of Moses; whence it follows, that both in the
posterity of David, and in the whole Levitical tribe, as in a twofold
mirror, Christ was exhibited to the view of his ancient people. For, as I
have just observed, it was otherwise impossible that in the Divine view
they should be kings and priests, who were the slaves of sin and death,
and polluted by their own corruptions. Hence appears the truth of the
assertion of Paul, that the Jews were subject, as it were, to the
authority of a schoolmaster, till the advent of that seed, for whose sake
the promise was given.(778) For Christ being not yet familiarly
discovered, they were like children, whose imbecility could not yet bear
the full knowledge of heavenly things. But how they were led to Christ by
the ceremonies, has been already stated, and may be better learned from
the testimonies of the Prophets. For although they were obliged every day
to approach God with new sacrifices, in order to appease him, yet Isaiah
promises them the expiation of all their transgressions by a single
sacrifice,(779) which is confirmed by Daniel.(780) The priests chosen from
the tribe of Levi, used to enter into the sanctuary; but concerning that
one priest it was once said, that he was divinely chosen with an oath, to
be “a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.”(781) There was,
then, an unction of visible oil; but Daniel, from his vision, foretells an
unction of a different kind. But not to insist on many proofs, the author
of the Epistle to the Hebrews, from the fourth chapter to the eleventh,
demonstrates in a manner sufficiently copious and clear, that,
irrespective of Christ, all the ceremonies of the law are worthless and
vain. And in regard to the decalogue, we should attend to the declaration
of Paul, that “Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one
that believeth;”(782) and also that Christ is “the Spirit,” who gives
“life” to the otherwise dead letter.(783) For in the former passage he
signifies that righteousness is taught in vain by the precepts, till
Christ bestows it both by a gratuitous imputation, and by the Spirit of
regeneration. Wherefore he justly denominates Christ the completion or end
of the law; for we should derive no benefit from a knowledge of what God
requires of us, unless we were succoured by Christ when labouring and
oppressed under its yoke and intolerable burden. In another place, he
states that “the law was added because of transgressions;”(784) that is,
to humble men, by convicting them of being the causes of their own
condemnation. Now, this being the true and only preparation for seeking
Christ, the various declarations which he makes are in perfect unison with
each other. But as he was then engaged in a controversy with erroneous
teachers, who pretended that we merit righteousness by the works of the
law,—in order to refute their error, he was sometimes obliged to use the
term _law_ in a more restricted sense, as merely preceptive, although it
was otherwise connected with the covenant of gratuitous adoption.

III. But it is worthy of a little inquiry, how we are rendered more
inexcusable by the instructions of the moral law, in order that a sense of
our guilt may excite us to supplicate for pardon. If it be true that the
law displays a perfection of righteousness, it also follows that the
complete observation of it, is in the sight of God a perfect
righteousness, in which a man would be esteemed and reputed righteous at
the tribunal of heaven. Wherefore Moses, when he had promulgated the law,
hesitated not to “call heaven and earth to record”(785) that he had
proposed to the Israelites life and death, good and evil. Nor can we deny
that the reward of eternal life awaits a righteous obedience to the law,
according to the Divine promise. But, on the other hand, it is proper to
examine whether we perform that obedience, the merit of which can warrant
our confident expectation of that reward. For how unimportant is it, to
discover that the reward of eternal life depends on the observance of the
law, unless we also ascertain whether it be possible for us to arrive at
eternal life in that way! But in this point the weakness of the law is
manifest. For as none of us are found to observe the law, we are excluded
from the promises of life, and fall entirely under the curse. I am now
showing, not only what does happen, but what necessarily must happen. For
the doctrine of the law being far above human ability, man may view the
promises, indeed, from a distance, but cannot gather any fruit from them.
It only remains for him, from their goodness to form a truer estimate of
his own misery, while he reflects that all hope of salvation is cut off,
and that he is in imminent danger of death. On the other hand, we are
urged with terrible sanctions, which bind, not a few of us, but every
individual of mankind; they urge, I say, and pursue us with inexorable
rigour, so that in the law we see nothing but present death.

IV. Therefore, if we direct our views exclusively to the law, the effects
upon our minds will only be despondency, confusion, and despair, since it
condemns and curses us all, and keeps us far from that blessedness which
it proposes to them who observe it. Does the Lord, then, you will say, in
this case do nothing but mock us? For how little does it differ from
mockery, to exhibit a hope of felicity, to invite and exhort to it, to
declare that it is ready for our reception, whilst the way to it is closed
and inaccessible! I reply, although the promises of the law, being
conditional, depend on a perfect obedience to the law, which can nowhere
be found, yet they have not been given in vain. For when we have learned
that they will be vain and inefficacious to us, unless God embrace us with
his gratuitous goodness, without any regard to our works, and unless we
have also embraced by faith that goodness, as exhibited to us in the
gospel,—then these promises are not without their use, even with the
condition annexed to them. For then he gratuitously confers every thing
upon us, so that he adds this also to the number of his favours, that not
rejecting our imperfect obedience, but pardoning its deficiencies, he
gives us to enjoy the benefit of the legal promises, just as if we had
fulfilled the condition ourselves. But as we shall more fully discuss this
question when we treat of the justification of faith, we shall pursue it
no further at present.

V. Our assertion, respecting the impossibility of observing the law, must
be briefly explained and proved; for it is generally esteemed a very
absurd sentiment, so that Jerome has not scrupled to denounce it as
accursed. What was the opinion of Jerome, I regard not; let us inquire
what is truth. I shall not here enter into a long discussion of the
various species of possibility; I call that impossible which has never
happened yet, and which is prevented by the ordination and decree of God
from ever happening in future. If we inquire from the remotest period of
antiquity, I assert that there never has existed a saint, who, surrounded
with a body of death, could attain to such a degree of love, as to love
God with all his heart, with all his soul, and with all his mind; and,
moreover, that there never has been one, who was not the subject of some
inordinate desire. Who can deny this? I know, indeed, what sort of saints
the folly of superstition imagines to itself, such as almost excel even
the angels of heaven in purity; but such an imagination is repugnant both
to Scripture and to the dictates of experience. I assert also that no man,
who shall exist in future, will reach the standard of true perfection,
unless released from the burden of the body. This is established by clear
testimonies of Scripture: Solomon says, “There is not a just man upon
earth, that doeth good and sinneth not.”(786) David; “In thy sight shall
no man living be justified.”(787) Job in many passages affirms the same
thing;(788) but Paul most plainly of all, that “the flesh lusteth against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh.”(789) Nor does he prove,
that “as many as are of the works of the law are under the curse,” by any
other reason but because “it is written, Cursed is every one that
continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the law to
do them;”(790) evidently suggesting, and even taking it for granted, that
no one can continue in them. Now, whatever is predicted in the Scriptures,
must be considered as perpetual, and even as necessary. With a similar
fallacy Augustine used to be teased by the Pelagians, who maintained that
it is an injury to God, to say that he commands more than the faithful
through his grace are able to perform. To avoid their cavil, he admitted
that the Lord might, if he chose, exalt a mortal man to the purity of
angels; but that he neither had ever done it, nor would ever do it,
because he had declared otherwise in the Scriptures.(791) This I do not
deny; but I add that it is absurd to dispute concerning the power of God,
in opposition to his veracity; and that, therefore, it affords no room for
cavilling, when any one maintains that to be impossible, which the
Scriptures declare will never happen. But if the dispute be about the
term, the Lord, in reply to an inquiry of his disciples, “Who, then, can
be saved?” says, “With men this is impossible; but with God all things are
possible.”(792) Augustine contends, with a very powerful argument, that in
this flesh we never render to God the legitimate love which we owe to him.
“Love,” says he, “is an effect of knowledge, so that no man can perfectly
love God, who has not first a complete knowledge of his goodness. During
our pilgrimage in this world, we see through an obscure medium; the
consequence of this, then, is, that our love is imperfect.” It ought,
therefore, to be admitted without controversy, that it is impossible in
this carnal state to fulfil the law, if we consider the impotence of our
nature, as will elsewhere be proved also from Paul.(793)

VI. But for the better elucidation of the subject, let us state, in a
compendious order, the office and use of what is called the moral law. It
is contained, as far as I understand it, in these three points. The first
is, that while it discovers the righteousness of God, that is, the only
righteousness which is acceptable to God, it warns every one of his own
unrighteousness, places it beyond all doubt, convicts, and condemns him.
For it is necessary that man, blinded and inebriated with self‐love,
should thus be driven into a knowledge of himself, and a confession of his
own imbecility and impurity. Since, unless his vanity be evidently
reproved, he is inflated with a foolish confidence in his strength, and
can never be brought to perceive its feebleness as long as he measures it
by the rule of his own fancy. But as soon as he begins to compare it to
the difficulty of the law, he finds his insolence and pride immediately
abate. For how great soever his preconceived opinion of it, he perceives
it immediately pant under so heavy a load, and then totter, and at length
fall. Thus, being instructed under the tuition of the law, he lays aside
that arrogance with which he was previously blinded. He must also be cured
of the other disease, of pride, with which, we have observed, he is
afflicted. As long as he is permitted to stand in his own judgment, he
substitutes hypocrisy instead of righteousness; contented with which, he
rises up with I know not what pretended righteousnesses, in opposition to
the grace of God. But when he is constrained to examine his life according
to the rules of the law, he no longer presumes on his counterfeit
righteousness, but perceives that he is at an infinite distance from
holiness; and also that he abounds with innumerable vices, from which he
before supposed himself to be pure. For the evils of concupiscence are
concealed in such deep and intricate recesses, as easily to elude the view
of man. And it is not without cause that the Apostle says, “I had not
known lust, except the law had said, Thou shalt not covet;”(794) because,
unless it be stripped of its disguises, and brought to light by the law,
it destroys the miserable man in so secret a manner, that he does not
perceive its fatal dart.

VII. Thus the law is like a mirror, in which we behold, first, our
impotence; secondly, our iniquity, which proceeds from it; and lastly, the
consequence of both, our obnoxiousness to the curse; just as a mirror
represents to us the spots on our face. For when a man is destitute of
power to practise righteousness, he must necessarily fall into the habits
of sin. And sin is immediately followed by the curse. Therefore the
greater the transgression of which the law convicts us, the more severe is
the judgment with which it condemns us. This appears from the observation
of the Apostle, that “by the law is the knowledge of sin.”(795) For he
there speaks only of the first office of the law, which is experienced in
sinners not yet regenerated. The same sentiment is conveyed in the
following passages: that “the law entered, that the offence might
abound;”(796) and that it is therefore “the ministration of death, which
worketh wrath and slayeth.”(797) For iniquity undoubtedly increases more
and more, in proportion to the clearness of that sense of sin which
strikes the conscience; because to transgression of the law, there is then
added contumacy against the lawgiver. It remains, therefore, that the law
arm the Divine wrath against the sinner; for of itself it can only accuse,
condemn, and destroy. And, as Augustine says, if we have not the Spirit of
grace, the law serves only to convict and slay us. But this assertion
neither reflects dishonour on the law, nor at all derogates from its
excellence. Certainly, if our will were wholly conformed to the law, and
disposed to obey it, the mere knowledge of it would evidently be
sufficient to salvation. But since our carnal and corrupt nature is in a
state of hostility against the spirituality of the Divine law, and not
amended by its discipline, it follows that the law, which was given for
salvation, if it could have found adequate attention, becomes an occasion
of sin and death. For since we are all convicted of having transgressed
it, the more clearly it displays the righteousness of God, so, on the
contrary, the more it detects our iniquity, and the more certainly it
confirms the reward of life and salvation reserved for the righteous, so
much the more certain it makes the perdition of the wicked. These
expressions, therefore, are so far from being dishonourable to the law,
that they serve more illustriously to recommend the Divine goodness. For
hence it really appears, that our iniquity and depravity prevent us from
enjoying that blessed life which is revealed to all men in the law. Hence
the grace of God, which succours us without the assistance of the law, is
rendered sweeter; and his mercy, which confers it on us, more amiable;
from which we learn that he is never wearied with repeating his blessings
and loading us with new favours.

VIII. But though the iniquity and condemnation of us all are confirmed by
the testimony of the law, this is not done (at least if we properly profit
by it) in order to make us sink into despair, and fall over the precipice
of despondency. It is true that the wicked are thus confounded by it, but
this is occasioned by the obstinacy of their hearts. With the children of
God, its instructions must terminate in a different manner. The Apostle
indeed declares that we are all condemned by the sentence of the law,
“that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty
before God.”(798) Yet the same Apostle elsewhere informs us, that “God
hath concluded them all in unbelief,” not that he might destroy or suffer
all to perish, but “that he might have mercy upon all;”(799) that is, that
leaving their foolish opinion of their own strength, they may know that
they stand and are supported only by the power of God; that being naked
and destitute, they may resort for assistance to his mercy, recline
themselves wholly upon it, hide themselves entirely in it, and embrace it
alone for righteousness and merits, since it is offered in Christ to all
who with true faith implore it and expect it. For in the precepts of the
law, God appears only, on the one hand, as the rewarder of perfect
righteousness, of which we are all destitute; and on the other, as the
severe judge of transgressions. But in Christ, his face shines with a
plenitude of grace and lenity, even towards miserable and unworthy
sinners.

IX. Of making use of the law to implore the assistance of God, Augustine
frequently treats; as when he writes to Hilary: “The law gives commands,
in order that, endeavouring to perform them, and being wearied through our
infirmity under the law, we may learn to pray for the assistance of
grace.” Also to Asellius: “The utility of the law is to convince man of
his own infirmity, and to compel him to pray for the gracious remedy
provided in Christ.” Also to Innocentius Romanus: “The law commands: grace
furnishes strength for the performance.” Again, to Valentine: “God
commands what we cannot perform, that we may know for what blessings we
ought to supplicate him.” Again: “The law was given to convict you; that
being convicted you might fear, that fearing you might pray for pardon,
and not presume on your own strength.” Again: “The end for which the law
was given, was to diminish that which was great, to demonstrate that you
have of yourself no ability to work righteousness, that thus, being poor,
indigent, and destitute, you might have recourse to grace for relief.”
Afterwards he addresses himself to God: “Thus do, O Lord! thus do, O
merciful Lord! command that which cannot be performed: even command that
which cannot be performed without thy grace: that when men cannot perform
it in their own strength, every mouth may be stopped, and no man appear
great in his own estimation. Let all men be mean, and let all the world be
proved guilty before God.” But I am not wise in collecting so many
testimonies, when this holy man has written a treatise expressly on this
subject, which he has entitled _De Spiritu et Litera_, On the Spirit and
Letter. The second use of the law he does not so clearly describe, either
because he knew that it depends on the first, or because he did not so
fully understand it, or because he wanted words to explain it with
distinctness and perspicuity adequate to his ideas of it. Yet this first
office of the law is not confined to the pious, but extends also to the
reprobate. For though they do not, with the children of God, advance so
far as, after the mortification of the flesh, to be renewed, and to
flourish again in the inner man, but, confounded with the first horrors of
conscience, remain in despair, yet they contribute to manifest the equity
of the Divine judgment, by their consciences being agitated with such
violent emotions. For they are always desirous of cavilling against the
judgment of God; but now, while it is not yet manifested, they are,
nevertheless, so confounded with the testimony of the law and of their own
conscience, that they betray in themselves what they have deserved.

X. The second office of the law is, to cause those who, unless
constrained, feel no concern for justice and rectitude, when they hear its
terrible sanctions, to be at least restrained by a fear of its penalties.
And they are restrained, not because it internally influences or affects
their minds, but because, being chained, as it were, they refrain from
external acts, and repress their depravity within them, which otherwise
they would have wantonly discharged. This makes them neither better nor
more righteous in the Divine view. For although, being prevented either by
fear or by shame, they dare not execute what their minds have contrived,
nor openly discover the fury of their passions, yet their hearts are not
disposed to fear and obey God; and the more they restrain themselves, the
more violently they are inflamed within; they ferment, they boil, ready to
break out into any external acts, if they were not prevented by this dread
of the law. And not only so, they also inveterately hate the law itself,
and execrate God the lawgiver, so that, if they could, they would wish to
annihilate him whom they cannot bear, either in commanding that which is
right, or in punishing the despisers of his majesty. In some, indeed, this
state of mind is more evident, in others more concealed; but it is really
the case of all who are yet unregenerate, that they are induced to attend
to the law, not by a voluntary submission, but with reluctance and
resistance, only by the violence of fear. But yet this constrained and
extorted righteousness is necessary to the community, whose public
tranquillity is provided for by God in this instance, while he prevents
all things being involved in confusion, which would certainly be the case,
if all men were permitted to pursue their own inclinations. Moreover, it
is useful even to the children of God, to be exercised by its discipline
before their vocation, while they are destitute of the Spirit of
sanctification, and are absorbed in carnal folly. For when the dread of
Divine vengeance restrains them even from external licentiousness,
although, their minds being not yet subdued, they make but a slow progress
at present, yet they are in some measure accustomed to bear the yoke of
righteousness; so that when they are called, they may not be entirely
unaccustomed to its discipline, as a thing altogether unknown. To this
office of the law the Apostle appears particularly to have referred, when
he says, “that the law is not made for a righteous man, but for the
lawless and disobedient; for the ungodly and for sinners; for unholy and
profane; for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers; for
manslayers, for whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with
mankind, for men‐stealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and if there
be any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine.”(800) For he here
signifies that it restrains the violence of the carnal desires, which
would otherwise indulge themselves in the most unbounded licentiousness.

XI. But we may apply to both what he elsewhere asserts, that to the Jews
“the law was a schoolmaster to bring them to Christ;”(801) for there are
two kinds of persons who are led to Christ by its discipline. Some, whom
we mentioned in the first place, from too much confidence either in their
own strength or in their own righteousness, are unfit to receive the grace
of Christ, till they have first been stripped of every thing. The law,
therefore, reduces them to humility by a knowledge of their own misery,
that thus they may be prepared to pray for that of which they before
supposed themselves not destitute. Others need a bridle to restrain them,
lest they abandon themselves to carnal licentiousness, to such a degree as
wholly to depart from all practice of righteousness. For where the Spirit
does not yet reign, there is sometimes such a violent ebullition of the
passions, as to occasion great danger of the soul that is under their
influence being swallowed up in forgetfulness and contempt of God; which
would certainly be the case, if the Lord did not provide this remedy
against it. Those, therefore, whom he has destined to the inheritance of
his kingdom, if he do not immediately regenerate them, he keeps under fear
by the works of the law till the time of his visitation; not that chaste
and pure fear which ought to be felt by his children, but a fear which is,
nevertheless, useful to train them, according to their capacity, to true
piety. Of this we have so many proofs, that there is no need to adduce any
example. For all who have lived for a considerable time in ignorance of
God will confess it to have been their experience, that they were
constrained by the law to a certain kind of fear and reverence of God,
till, being regenerated by his Spirit, they began to love him from their
hearts.

XII. The third use of the law, which is the principal one, and which is
more nearly connected with the proper end of it, relates to the faithful,
in whose hearts the Spirit of God already lives and reigns. For although
the law is inscribed and engraven on their hearts by the finger of
God,—that is, although they are so excited and animated by the direction
of the Spirit, that they desire to obey God,—yet they derive a twofold
advantage from the law. For they find it an excellent instrument to give
them, from day to day, a better and more certain understanding of the
Divine will to which they aspire, and to confirm them in the knowledge of
it. As, though a servant be already influenced by the strongest desire of
gaining the approbation of his master, yet it is necessary for him
carefully to inquire and observe the orders of his master, in order to
conform to them. Nor let any one of us exempt himself from this necessity;
for no man has already acquired so much wisdom, that he could not by the
daily instruction of the law make new advances into a purer knowledge of
the Divine will. In the next place, as we need not only instruction, but
also exhortation, the servant of God will derive this further advantage
from the law; by frequent meditation on it he will be excited to
obedience, he will be confirmed in it, and restrained from the slippery
path of transgression. For in this manner should the saints stimulate
themselves, because, with whatever alacrity they labour for the
righteousness of God according to the Spirit, yet they are always burdened
with the indolence of the flesh, which prevents their proceeding with due
promptitude. To this flesh the law serves as a whip, urging it, like a
dull and tardy animal, forwards to its work; and even to the spiritual
man, who is not yet delivered from the burden of the flesh, it will be a
perpetual spur, that will not permit him to loiter. To this use of the law
David referred, when he celebrated it in such remarkable encomiums as
these: “The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the statutes
of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of the Lord is
pure, enlightening the eyes,” &c.(802) Again: “Thy word is a lamp unto my
feet, and a light unto my path;”(803) and many others, which he introduces
in every part of this psalm. Nor are these assertions repugnant to those
of Paul, in which he shows, not what service the law renders to the
regenerate, but what it can bestow upon man merely of itself; whereas the
Psalmist in these passages celebrates the great advantage derived, through
the Divine teaching, from the reading of the law, by those whom God
inspires with an inward promptitude to obedience. And he adverts not only
to the precepts, but to the promise of grace annexed to their performance,
which alone causes that which is bitter to become sweet. For what would be
less amiable than the law, if by demands and threats it only distressed
the mind with fear, and harassed it with terror? But David particularly
shows, that in the law he discovered the Mediator, without whom there is
nothing pleasant or delightful.

XIII. Some unskilful men, being unable to discern this distinction, rashly
explode Moses altogether, and discard the two tables of the law; because
they consider it improper for Christians to adhere to a doctrine which
contains the administration of death. Far from us be this profane opinion;
for Moses has abundantly taught us, that the law, which in sinners can
only produce death, ought to have a better and more excellent use in the
saints. For just before his death he thus addressed the people: “Set your
hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this day, which ye
shall command your children to observe, to do all the words of this law.
For it is not a vain thing for you; because it is your life.”(804) But if
no one can deny that the law exhibits a perfect model of righteousness,
either we ought to have no rule for an upright and just life, or it is
criminal for us to deviate from it. For there are not many rules of life,
but one, which is perpetually and immutably the same. Wherefore, when
David represents the life of a righteous man as spent in continual
meditations on the law,(805) we must not refer it to one period of time
only, because it is very suitable for all ages, even to the end of the
world. Let us neither be deterred, therefore, nor fly from its
instructions, because it prescribes a holiness far more complete than we
shall attain, as long as we remain in the prison of the body. For it no
longer exercises towards us the part of a rigorous exactor, only to be
satisfied by the perfect performance of every injunction; but in this
perfection, to which it exhorts us, it shows us a goal, to aim at which,
during the whole of our lives, would be equally conducive to our interest
and consistent with our duty; in which attempt it is happy for us if we
fail not. For the whole of this life is a course, which when we have
completed, the Lord will grant us to reach that goal, towards which at so
great a distance our efforts are now vigorously directed.

XIV. Now, because the law, in regard to the faithful, has the force of an
exhortation, not to bind their consciences with a curse, but by its
frequent admonitions to arouse their indolence, and reprove their
imperfection,—many persons, when they design to express this liberation
from its curse, say that the law (I still speak of the moral law) is
abrogated to the faithful; not that it no longer enjoins upon them that
which is right, but only that it ceases to be to them what it was before,
no longer terrifying and confounding their consciences, condemning and
destroying them. And such an abrogation of the law is clearly taught by
Paul. It appears also to have been preached by our Lord, since he would
not have refuted the opinion concerning his abolishing the law, unless it
had prevailed among the Jews. Now, as this opinion could not prevail
without any pretext, it is probable that it proceeded from a false
interpretation of his doctrine; in the same manner as almost all errors
have usually taken some colour from the truth. But lest we ourselves fall
into the same error, let us accurately distinguish what is abrogated in
the law, and what still remains in force. When the Lord declares that he
came “not to destroy the law, but to fulfil it,” and that “till heaven and
earth shall pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the
law, till all be fulfilled,”(806) he sufficiently proves that his advent
would detract nothing from the observance of the law. And with sufficient
reason, since the express end of his advent was to heal the transgressions
of it. The doctrine of the law remains, therefore, through Christ,
inviolable; which by tuition, admonition, reproof, and correction, forms
and prepares us for every good work.

XV. The assertions of Paul respecting the abrogation of the law evidently
relate, not to the instruction itself, but to the power of binding the
conscience. For the law not only teaches, but authoritatively requires,
obedience to its commands. If this obedience be not yielded, and even if
there be any partial deficiency of duty, it hurls the thunderbolt of its
curse. For this reason the Apostle says, that “as many as are of the works
of the law are under the curse; for it is written, Cursed is every one
that continueth not in all things.”(807) Now, he affirms those to be “of
the works of the law,” who place not their righteousness in the remission
of sins, by which we are released from the rigour of the law. He teaches
us, therefore, that we must be released from the bondage of the law,
unless we would perish in misery under it. But what bondage? the bondage
of that austere and rigid exaction, which remits nothing from its
strictest requirements, and permits no transgression to pass with
impunity; I say, Christ, in order to redeem us from this curse, was “made
a curse for us. For it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a
tree.”(808) In the following chapter, indeed, he tells us, that Christ was
“made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law;” but in the
same sense; for he immediately adds, “that we might receive the adoption
of sons.”(809) What is this? that we might not be oppressed with a
perpetual servitude, which would keep our consciences in continual
distress with the dread of death. At the same time this truth remains for
ever unshaken, that the law has sustained no diminution of its authority,
but ought always to receive from us the same veneration and obedience.

XVI. The case of ceremonies, which have been abrogated, not as to their
effect, but only as to their use, is very different. Their having been
abolished by the advent of Christ, is so far from derogating from their
sanctity, that it rather recommends and renders it more illustrious. For
as they must have exhibited to the people, in ancient times, a vain
spectacle, unless they had discovered the virtue of the death and
resurrection of Christ, so, if they had not ceased, we should, in the
present age, have been unable to discern for what purpose they were
instituted. To prove, therefore, that the observance of them is not only
needless, but even injurious, Paul teaches us that they were shadows, the
body of which we have in Christ.(810) We see, then, that the truth shines
with greater splendour in their abolition, than if they still continued to
give a distant and obscure representation of Christ, who has openly
appeared. For this reason, at the death of Christ, “the veil of the temple
was rent in twain from the top to the bottom;”(811) because, according to
the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, the living and express image of
the heavenly blessings, which before had been only sketched in obscure
lineaments, was now clearly revealed. The same truth is conveyed in the
declaration of Christ, that “the law and the prophets were until John;
since that time the kingdom of God is preached.”(812) Not that the holy
fathers had been destitute of that preaching which contains the hope of
salvation, and of eternal life, but because they saw only at a distance,
and under shadows, what we now contemplate in open day. But the reason,
why it was necessary for the Church of God to ascend from those rudiments
to sublimer heights, is explained by John the Baptist: “the law was given
by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.”(813) For although
expiation of sin was truly promised in the ancient sacrifices, and the ark
of the covenant was a certain pledge of the paternal favour of God, all
these would have been mere shadows, if they had not been founded in the
grace of Christ, where alone we may find true and eternal stability. Let
us firmly maintain, then, that though the legal rites have ceased to be
observed, yet their very discontinuance gives us a better knowledge of
their great utility before the advent of Christ, who, abolishing the
observance of them, confirmed their virtue and efficacy in his death.

XVII. The reasoning of Paul is attended with more difficulty: “And you,
being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcision of your flesh, hath he
quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses; blotting
out the hand‐writing of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary
to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross,” &c.(814) For
it seems to extend the abolition of the law somewhat further, as though we
had now no concern with its “ordinances.” For they are in an error who
understand it simply of the moral law, the abolition of which they,
nevertheless, explain to relate to its inexorable severity, rather than to
its precepts. Others, more acutely and carefully considering the words of
Paul, perceive that they belong particularly to the ceremonial law; and
prove that the word “ordinances” is more than once used by Paul in that
signification. For he thus expresses himself to the Ephesians: “He is our
peace, who hath made both one; having abolished the law of commandments
contained in ordinances; for to make in himself of twain one new
man.”(815) That he there speaks of the ceremonies, is very evident; for he
calls the law “the middle wall of partition,” by which the Jews were
separated from the Gentiles. Wherefore I allow that the former
commentators are justly censured by these; but even these do not appear to
me clearly to explain the meaning of the Apostle. For to compare these two
passages as in all respects similar, is what I by no means approve. When
he designs to assure the Ephesians of their admission into fellowship with
the Israelites, he informs them, that the impediment which formerly
prevented it is now removed. That consisted in ceremonies. For the rites
of ablutions and sacrifices, by which the Jews were consecrated to the
Lord, caused a separation between them and the Gentiles. But in the
Epistle to the Colossians he treats of a sublimer mystery. The controversy
there relates to the Mosaic observances, to which the false Apostles were
strenuously attempting to subject the Christians. But as in the Epistle to
the Galatians he goes to the depth of that controversy, and reduces it to
its source, so also in this place. For if in the rites you contemplate
nothing but the necessity of performing them, to what purpose were they
called a “hand‐writing that was against us”? and almost the whole of our
redemption made to consist in its being “blotted out?” Wherefore it is
evident, that here is something to be considered beside the external
ceremonies. And I am persuaded that I have discovered the genuine meaning,
at least if that be conceded to me as a truth, which Augustine somewhere
very truly asserts, and which he has even borrowed from the positive
expressions of an Apostle,(816) that in the Jewish ceremonies there was
rather a confession of sins than an expiation of them. For what did they
do in offering sacrifices, but confess themselves worthy of death, since
they substituted victims to be slain in their stead? What were their
purifications, but confessions that they were themselves impure? Thus the
hand‐writing both of their sin and of their impurity was frequently
renewed by them; but that confession afforded no deliverance. For which
reason the Apostle says that the death of Christ effected “the redemption
of the transgressions that were under the first testament.”(817) The
Apostle, therefore, justly denominates the ceremonies “a hand‐writing
against those who observe them;” because by them they publicly attested
their condemnation and impurity. Nor does any objection arise from their
having been also partakers of the same grace with us. For this they
obtained in Christ, not in the ceremonies, which the Apostle there
distinguishes from Christ; for being practised at that time after the
introduction of the gospel, they obscured the glory of Christ. We find,
then, that the ceremonies, considered by themselves, are beautifully and
appositely called a “hand‐writing that was against” the salvation of men;
because they were solemn instruments testifying their guilt. When the
false Apostles wished to bring the Church back to the observance of them,
the Apostle deeply investigated their signification, and very justly
admonished the Colossians into what circumstances they would relapse, if
they should suffer themselves to be thus enslaved by them. For they would
at the same time be deprived of the benefit of Christ; since, by the
eternal expiation that he has once effected, he has abolished those daily
observances, which could only attest their sins, but could never cancel
them.




