CHAPTER X

APPENDICITIS IN PREGNANCY


Primary appendicitis in pregnancy is very rare; recurrent
appendicitis is not so rare. When appendicitis goes on to suppuration
and perforative peritonitis the condition is worse in pregnant women
than in the non-pregnant. In pregnancy protective adhesions, walling
off, are less likely to occur; the inflammation is more intense owing
to increased vascularity; thrombosis and phlebitis are more frequent;
drainage may be obstructed and the burrowing of pus widespread;
tympany, too, causes dyspnoea earlier. About 75 per cent. of the
cases occur after the third month, and the earlier the appendicitis
appears, the better the prognosis. During labor the contracting
uterus sometimes tears open an adhesive appendix, or ruptures a pus
sac and starts a general peritonitis. This condition may be mistaken
for a general sepsis which is puerperal. Acute appendicitis is
likely to be confused with an inflammation of a Fallopian tube. When
the appendicitis is perforative abortion, infection of the uterine
contents and death of the child happen in most cases. Labor is very
painful when appendicitis is present, and the uterine contractions
are often weak. After delivery many forms of infection of the uterus
and its adnexa are possible.

Operation is much less difficult in the first half of gestation
than in the latter months. At the beginning of gestation the
operation does not, as a rule, cause abortion. Late in pregnancy
appendicitis rapidly goes on to suppuration and perforation, with
a high mortality. Hirst says that where there is reason to suspect
suppuration a median incision should be made and the pelvic cavity
examined for possible areas of infection. John Deaver says, "Always
cut down on the sore spot and do not handle the uterus." An infected
uterus after cesarean section complicated with appendicitis has to be
amputated.

The diagnosis between appendicitis, ectopic gestation, twisted
ovarian tumors, ureteritis, and ureteral stone is to be made. In a
discussion of a paper by Finley on Appendicitis in Pregnancy,[117]
Dr. John Murphy of Chicago, a great authority, advised operation
as soon as the diagnosis is made, and he was of the opinion that
this diagnosis is not difficult to make in pregnancy. Deaver said a
diagnosis of catarrhal appendicitis is not seldom very difficult to
make. This form is very rare in pregnancy. Deaver is not of the same
opinion as Murphy as to operating as soon as the diagnosis is made in
all cases. Where there is a general peritonitis, operation commonly
only makes matters worse by spreading infection. The mortality of
cases of appendicitis in pregnancy left without operation is as high
as 77 per cent.; where the cases are operated upon within forty-eight
hours after diagnosis the mortality is 6.7 per cent. and it would be
better if the operation were done within twenty-four hours. Finley
says that in the fifteen cases reviewed in his paper the operation
did not cause abortion. Deaver tells us the muscular rigidity in
the right groin characteristic of appendicitis is often missing in
pregnancy, and that sometimes the pain is on the left side of the
belly.

  [117] _Jour. Amer. Med. Assoc._, December 24, 1912.




CHAPTER XI

PUERPERAL INSANITY AND STERILIZATION


From 8 to 10 per cent. of all insanity in women develops during the
puerperium--the incidence is about one case to 400 births. Puerperal
insanity in nearly 70 per cent. of the cases begins within the first
two weeks after parturition. Next in frequency of occurrence is
the period of lactation, especially in multiparae. Insanity during
pregnancy itself is relatively rare, and it begins usually after the
fourth month.

As in other forms of insanity, hereditary predisposition is found
in from 25 to 30 per cent. of the cases. Alcoholism, sepsis, and
neuroses like hysteria, chorea, and epilepsy, are the predisposing
elements. The most common immediate exciting cause during pregnancy
is toxemia from faulty metabolism and excretion. Other frequent
direct excitants are mental worry from poverty, desertion, seduction,
and the like troubles.

Prolongation of the lactation period beyond the usual time for
weaning, from the ninth to the twelfth month, is common among
ignorant and lazy women. Some women prolong lactation in the
erroneous notion that it prevents renewed impregnation. Such
lactation is injurious to the child, as a rule. Ploss says
hyperlactation is frequent in Spain, and that some Japanese,
Chinese, and Armenian women may nurse their children for years, but
this practice is undoubtedly injurious, especially among European
races. The women get tabes lactea with emaciation, asthenia, anemia,
backache, pain in the breasts, neurasthenia, cramps, and blindness.
The uterus atrophies in some cases and may be permanently injured.
Insanity is not unusual.

The forms of mental disturbance commonest in puerperal insanity are
mania with or without delirium, melancholia, and dementia. Dementia
is the final stage in the cases that become chronic. Mania is the
prevailing type in insanity after labor, and melancholia in insanity
during gestation. The melancholy of insanity during gestation is
often suicidal, and must always be watched. Religious and erotic
symptoms are also observed.

The onset may be very sudden during labor. An outbreak after labor
may be suicidal or homicidal. Maniacal puerperal women are dangerous.
They have delusions and hallucinations, with very rapid and incessant
changes that range from obscenity to prayer. Melancholy in the
puerperium is likely to be suicidal.

About 75 per cent. of puerperal insanity cases recover within five or
six months. From 2 to 10 per cent. die from sepsis, exhaustion, or
intercurrent diseases; the remainder become permanently insane. The
nearer the delivery the insanity appears, the better the prognosis.
Menzies found that of cases which began during gestation 56.7 per
cent. remained insane; of those that began during the puerperium 25
per cent. did not recover; of those that began during lactation 43.5
per cent. remained insane. Melancholia is more favorable than mania
in pregnancy, but after labor mania gives the better prognosis. The
maniacal patient is more likely to die, but the melancholic is more
likely to remain insane. The older the woman, the greater the number
of her pregnancies, the more the depression, and the higher the
temperature, the worse the prognosis. Alcoholism is an added risk
always.

All puerperal insanities should be treated in sanatoria or asylums
and not at home. When a woman with puerperal insanity is allowed to
remain at home she cannot get proper treatment, and is a constant
menace to her own life and the lives of her family.

A woman who has had puerperal insanity and has recovered her mental
health is likely to have a recurrence of her malady at subsequent
pregnancies. The question has been asked me a few times, "Would
it not be justifiable to sterilize such a woman to prevent this
recurrence, with its dangers and terrors?"

It would not be justifiable: 1. Because it is not licit to inflict
a grave mutilation to avert a possible or probable future evil.
2. There are other means to escape the danger: a woman with this
tendency is justified in denying the debitum. 3. Once crazy, always
crazy, is an aphorism with much truth in it, and it is doubtful
that sterilization in itself will prevent ultimate insanity. 4. The
conjugal relation of a sterilized woman would be no better than
onanistic. 5. The sterilization would fall under the decrees and
penalties described at the end of the chapter on Cesarean Section.




