CHAPTER XXVI

EVENTS, MATTER, AND MIND


Everything in the world is composed of “events”; that, at least, is the
thesis I wish to maintain. An “event”, as I understand it, is something
having a small finite duration and a small finite extension in space;
or rather, in view of the theory of relativity, it is something
occupying a small finite amount of space-time. If it has parts, these
parts, I say, are again events, never something occupying a mere point
of instant, whether in space, in time, or in space-time. The fact that
an event occupies a finite amount of space-time does not prove that it
has parts. Events are not impenetrable, as matter is supposed to be; on
the contrary, every event in space-time is overlapped by other events.
There is no reason to suppose that any of the events with which we are
familiar are infinitely complex; on the contrary, everything known
about the world is compatible with the view that every complex event
has a finite number of parts. We do not know that this is the case,
but it is an hypothesis which cannot be refuted and is simpler than
any other possible hypothesis. I shall therefore adopt it as a working
hypothesis in what follows.

When I speak of an “event” I do not mean anything out of the way.
Seeing a flash of lightning is an event; so is hearing a tire burst,
or smelling a rotten egg, or feeling the coldness of a frog. These
are events that are “data” in the sense of Chapter XXV; but, on the
principles explained in that chapter, we infer that there are events
which are not data and happen at a distance from our own body. Some of
these are data to other people, others are data to no one. In the case
of the flash of lightning, there is an electro-magnetic disturbance
consisting of events travelling outward from the place where the flash
takes place, and then when this disturbance reaches the eye of a
person or animal that can see, there is a percept, which is causally
continuous with the events between the place of the lightning and the
body of the percipient. Percepts afford the logical premisses for all
inferences to events that are not precepts, wherever such inferences
are logically justifiable. Particular colours and sounds and so on are
events; their causal antecedents in the inanimate world are also events.

If we assume, as I propose to do, that every event has only a finite
number of parts, then every event is composed of a finite number of
events that have no parts. Such events I shall call “minimal events.”
It will simplify our discussion to assume them, but by a little
circumlocution this assumption could be eliminated. The reader must not
therefore regard it as an essential part of what follows.

A minimal event occupies a finite region in space-time. Let us take
time alone for purposes of illustration. The event in question may
overlap in time with each of two others, although the first of these
others wholly precedes the second; for example, you may hear a long
note on the violin while you hear two short notes on the piano. (It
is not necessary to suppose that these are really minimal events; I
merely want to illustrate what is meant.) I assume that every event
is contemporaneous with events that are not contemporaneous with each
other; this is what is meant by saying that every event lasts for a
finite time, as the reader can easily convince himself if he remembers
that time is wholly relational. If we look away from the world of
physics for a moment, and confine ourselves to the world of one man’s
experience, we can easily define an “instant” in his life. It will be
a group of events, all belonging to his experience, and having the
following two properties: (1) any two of the events overlap; (2) no
event outside the group overlaps with every member of the group. By
a slightly more complicated but essentially similar method, we can
define a point-instant in space-time as a group of events having two
properties analogous to those used just now in defining an “instant”
in one biography.[13] Thus the “points” (or point-instants) that
the mathematician needs are not simple, but are structures composed
of events, made up for the convenience of the mathematician. There
will be many “points” of which a given minimal event is a member;
all these together make up the region of space-time occupied by that
event. Space-time order, as well as space-time points, results from the
relations between events.

     [13] See _The Analysis of Matter_, by the present author,
          chap. xxviii.

A piece of matter, like a space-time point, is to be constructed out of
events, but the construction is considerably more complicated, and in
the end is only an approximation to what the physicist supposes to be
really taking place. There are, at the moment, two somewhat different
views of matter, one appropriate to the study of atomic structure, the
other to the general theory of relativity as affording an explanation
of gravitation. The view appropriate to atomic structure has itself
two forms, one derived from Heisenberg, the other from De Broglie
and Schrödinger. These two forms, it is true, are mathematically
equivalent, but in words they are very different. Heisenberg regards
a piece of matter as a centre from which radiations travel outward;
the radiations are supposed really to occur, but the matter at their
centre is reduced to a mere mathematical fiction. The radiations are,
for example, such as constitute light; they are all avowedly systems
of events, not changes in the conditions or relations of “substances.”
In the De Broglie-Schrödinger system, matter consists of wave motions.
It is not necessary to the theory to postulate anything about these
wave-motions except their mathematical characteristics, but, obviously,
since they are to explain matters they cannot serve their purpose if
they consist of motions of matter. In this system also, therefore,
we are led to construct matter out of systems of events, which just
happen, and do not happen “to” matter or “to” anything else.

Gravitation, as explained by the general theory of relativity, is
reduced to “crinkles” in space-time. Space-time being, as we have
already seen, a system constructed out of events, the “crinkles” in it
are also derived from events. There is no reason to suppose that there
is a “thing” at the place where the “crinkle” is most crinkly. Thus in
this part of physics, also, matter has ceased to be a “thing” and has
become merely a mathematical characteristic of the relations between
complicated logical structures composed of events.

It was traditionally a property of substance to be permanent, and to a
considerable extent matter has retained this property in spite of its
loss of substantiality. But its permanence now is only approximate,
not absolute. It is thought that an electron and a proton can meet and
annihilate each other; in the stars this is supposed to be happening
on a large scale.[14] And even while an electron or a proton lasts,
it has a different kind of persistence from that formerly attributed
to matter. A wave in the sea persists for a longer or shorter time:
the waves that I see dashing themselves to pieces on the Cornish coast
may have come all the way from Brazil, but that does not mean that a
“thing” has travelled across the Atlantic; it means only that a certain
process of change has travelled. And just as a wave in the sea comes
to grief at last on the rocks, so an electron or a proton may come to
grief when it meets some unusual state of affairs.

     [14] See _The Analysis of Matter_, by the present author,
          chap. xxviii.

Thus “matter” has very definitely come down in the world as a result of
recent physics. It used to be the cause of our sensations: Dr. Johnson
“disproved” Berkeley’s denial of matter by kicking a stone. If he had
known that his foot never touched the stone, and that both were only
complicated systems of wave-motions, he might have been less satisfied
with his refutation. We cannot say that “matter” is the cause of our
sensations. We can say that the events which cause our sensations
usually belong to the sort of group that physicists regard as material;
but that is a very different thing. Impenetrability used to be a noble
property of matter, a kind of Declaration of Independence; now it is a
merely tautological result of the way in which matter is defined. The
events which are the real stuff of the world are not impenetrable,
since they can overlap in space-time. In a word, “matter” has become
no more than a convenient shorthand for stating certain causal laws
concerning events.

But if matter has fared badly, mind has fared little better.
The adjective “mental” is one which is not capable of any exact
significance. There is, it is true, an important group of events,
namely percepts, all of which may be called “mental”. But it would be
arbitrary to say that there are no “mental” events except percepts,
and yet it is difficult to find any principle by which we can decide
what other events should be included. Perhaps the most essential
characteristics of mind are introspection and memory. But memory
in some of its forms is, as we have seen, a consequence of the law
of conditioned reflexes, which is at least as much physiological
as psychological, and characterises living tissue rather than
mind. Knowledge, as we have found, is not easy to distinguish from
sensitivity, which is a property possessed by scientific instruments.
Introspection is a form of knowledge, but turns out, on examination, to
be little more than a cautious interpretation of ordinary “knowledge”.
Where the philosopher’s child at the Zoo says “There is a hippopotamus
over there”, the philosopher should reply: “There is a coloured pattern
of a certain shape, which may perhaps be connected with a system of
external causes of the sort called a hippopotamus”. (I do not live up
to this precept myself.) In saying that there is a coloured pattern,
the philosopher is practising introspection in the only sense that I
can attach to that term, _i.e._ his knowledge-reaction is to an event
situated in his own brain from the standpoint of physical space, and
is consciously avoiding physiological and other inference as far as
possible. Events to which a knowledge-reaction of this sort occurs are
“mental”; so are, presumably, other events resembling them in certain
respects. But I do not see any way of defining this wider group except
by saying that mental events are events in a living brain, or, better,
in a region combining sensitivity and the law of learned reactions to
a marked extent. This definition has at least the merit of showing that
mentality is an affair of causal laws, not of the quality of single
events, and also that mentality is a matter of degree.

Perhaps it is not unnecessary to repeat, at this point, that events in
the brain are not to be regarded as consisting of motions of bits of
matter. Matter and motion, as we have seen, are logical constructions
using events as their material, and events are therefore something
quite different from matter in motion. I take it that, when we have
a percept, just what we perceive (if we avoid avoidable sources of
error) is an event occupying part of the region which, for physics, is
occupied by the brain. In fact, perception gives us the most concrete
knowledge we possess as to the stuff of the physical world, but what
we perceive is part of the stuff of our brains, not part of the stuff
of tables and chairs, sun, moon, and stars. Suppose we are looking at
a leaf, and we see a green patch. This patch is not “out there” where
the leaf is, but is an event occupying a certain volume in our brains
during the time that we see the leaf. Seeing the leaf consists of
the existence, in the region occupied by our brain, of a green patch
causally connected with the leaf, or rather with a series of events
emanating from the place in physical space where physics places the
leaf. The percept is one of this series of events, differing from the
others in its effects owing to the peculiarities of the region in
which it occurs--or perhaps it would be more correct to say that the
different effects _are_ the peculiarities of the region.

Thus “mind” and “mental” are merely approximate concepts, giving a
convenient shorthand for certain approximate laws. In a completed
science, the word “mind” and the word “matter” would both disappear,
and would be replaced by causal laws concerning “events”, the only
events known to us otherwise than in their mathematical and causal
properties being percepts, which are events situated in the same
region as a brain and having effects of a peculiar sort called
“knowledge-reactions”.

It will be seen that the view which I am advocating is neither
materialism nor mentalism, but what we call “neutral monism”. It is
monism in the sense that it regards the world as composed of only one
_kind_ of stuff, namely events; but it is pluralism in the sense that
it admits the existence of a great multiplicity of events, each minimal
event being a logically self-subsistent entity.

There is, however, another question, not quite the same as this, namely
the question as to the relations of psychology and physics. If we knew
more, would psychology be absorbed in physics? or, conversely, would
physics be absorbed in psychology? A man may be a materialist and
yet hold that psychology is an independent science; this is the view
taken by Dr. Broad in his important book on _The Mind and its Place
in Nature_. He holds that a mind is a material structure, but that it
has properties which could not, even theoretically, be inferred from
those of its material constituents. He points out that structures very
often have properties which, in the present state of our knowledge,
cannot be inferred from the properties and relations of their parts.
Water has many properties which we cannot infer from those of hydrogen
and oxygen, even if we suppose ourselves to know the structure of the
molecule of water more completely than we do as yet. Properties of a
whole which cannot, even theoretically, be inferred from the properties
and relations of its parts are called by Dr. Broad “emergent”
properties. Thus he holds that a mind (or brain) has properties which
are “emergent”, and to this extent psychology will be independent of
physics and chemistry. The “emergent” properties of minds will only be
discoverable by observation of minds, not by inference from the laws
of physics and chemistry. This possibility is an important one, and it
will be worth while to consider it.

Our decision to regard a unit of matter as itself not ultimate, but an
assemblage of events, somewhat alters the form of our question as to
“emergent” properties. We have to ask: Is matter emergent from events?
Is mind emergent from events? If the former, is mind emergent from
matter, or deducible from the properties of matter, or neither? If the
latter, is matter emergent from mind or deducible from the properties
of mind, or neither? Of course, if neither mind nor matter is emergent
from events, these latter questions do not arise.

Let us coin a word, “chrono-geography”, for the science which begins
with events having space-time relations and does not assume at the
outset that certain strings of them can be treated as persistent
material units or as minds. Then we have to ask ourselves first: can
the science of matter, as it appears in physics and chemistry, be
wholly reduced to chrono-geography? If no, matter is emergent from
events; if yes, it is not emergent.

_Is matter emergent from events?_ In the present state of science it
is difficult to give a decided answer to this question. The notion
of matter, in modern physics, has become absorbed into the notion of
energy. Eddington, in his _Mathematical Theory of Relativity_ shows
that, in virtue of the laws assumed concerning events, there must
be something having the observed properties of matter and energy as
regards conservation. This he calls the “material-energy-tensor”, and
suggests that it is the reality which we sometimes call “matter” and
sometimes “energy”. To this extent, matter has been shown to be not
emergent. But the existence of electrons and protons (to the extent
that they do exist) has not yet been deduced from the general theory
of relativity, though attempts are being made and may at any moment
succeed. If and when these attempts succeed, physics will cease to be
in any degree independent of chrono-geography, but for the present
it remains in part independent. As for chemistry, although we cannot
practically reduce it all to physics, we can see how, theoretically,
this could be done, and I think it is safe to assume that it is not an
ultimately independent science.

The question we have been asking is: could we predict, theoretically,
from the laws of events that there must be material units obeying
the laws which they do in fact obey, or is this a new, logically
independent, fact? In theory we might be able to prove that it is _not_
independent, but it would be very difficult to prove that it _is_. The
present position is, broadly speaking, that the continuous properties
of the physical world can be deduced from chrono-geography, but not the
discontinuous facts, viz. electrons and protons and Planck’s quantum.
Thus for the present materiality is practically, though perhaps not
theoretically, an emergent characteristic of certain groups of events.

_Is mind emergent from events?_ This question, as yet, can hardly be
even discussed intelligently, because psychology is not a sufficiently
advanced science. There are, nevertheless, some points to be noted.
Chrono-geography is concerned only with the abstract mathematical
properties of events, and cannot conceivably, unless it is radically
transformed, prove that there are visual events, or auditory events, or
events of any of the kinds that we know by perception. In this sense,
psychology is certainly emergent from chrono-geography and also from
physics, and it is hard to see how it can ever cease to be so. The
reason for this is that our knowledge of data contains features of a
qualitative sort, which cannot be deduced from the merely mathematical
features of the space-time events inferred from data, and yet these
abstract mathematical features are all that we can legitimately infer.

The above argument decides also that mind must be emergent from matter,
if it is a material structure. No amount of physics can ever tell us
all that we do in fact know about our own percepts.

We have still to ask whether we are to regard a mind as a structure of
material units or not. If we do so regard it, we are, so far as mind is
concerned, emergent materialists in view of what we have just decided;
this is the view favoured by Dr. Broad. If we do not so regard it, we
are in no sense materialists. In favour of the materialist view, there
is the fact that, so far as our experience goes, minds only emerge in
connection with certain physical structures, namely living bodies, and
that mental development increases with a certain kind of complexity
of physical structure. We cannot set against this the argument that
minds have peculiar characteristics, for this is quite consistent with
_emergent_ materialism. If we are to refute it, it must be by finding
out what sort of group of events constitutes a mind. It is time to
address ourselves to this question.

_What is a mind?_ It is obvious, to begin with, that a mind must be a
group of mental events, since we have rejected the view that it is a
single simple entity such as the ego was formerly supposed to be. Our
first step, therefore, is to be clear as to what we mean by a “mental”
event.

We said a few pages ago that: _Mental events are events in a region
combining sensitivity and the law of learned reactions to a marked
extent_. For practical purposes, this means (subject to a proviso to be
explained shortly) that a mental event is any event in a living brain.
We explained that this does not mean that a mental event consists of
matter in motion, which is what an old-fashioned physicist would regard
as the sort of event that happens in a brain. Matter in motion, we have
seen, is not an event in our sense, but a shorthand description of a
very complicated causal process among events of a different sort. But
we must say a few words in justification of our definition.

Let us consider some alternative definitions. A mental event, we might
say, is one which is “experienced.” When is an event “experienced”?
We might say: when it has “mnemic” effects, _i.e._ effects governed
by the law of association. But we saw that this law applies to purely
bodily events such as the contraction of the pupil, with which nothing
“mental” seems to be connected. Thus if our definition is to serve,
we shall have to define “experience” differently; we shall have to
say that the mnemic effects must include something that can be called
“knowledge.” This would suggest the definition: A mental event is
anything that is remembered. But this is too narrow: we only remember
a small proportion of our mental events. We might have regarded
“consciousness” as the essence of mental events, but this view was
examined and found inadequate in Chapter XX. Moreover, we do not want
our definition to exclude the “unconscious”.

It is clear that the primary mental events, those about which there can
be no question, are percepts. But percepts have certain peculiar causal
properties, notably that they give rise to knowledge-reactions, and
that they are capable of having mnemic effects which are cognitions.
These causal properties, however, belong to some events which are not
apparently percepts. It seems that any event in the brain may have
these properties. And perhaps we were too hasty in saying that the
contraction of the pupil on hearing a loud noise involves nothing
“mental”. There may be other “mental” events connected with a human
body besides those belonging to the central personality. I shall come
back to this possibility presently. Meanwhile, I shall adhere to the
above definition of a “mental” event, which, as we saw, makes mentality
a matter of degree.

We can now return to the question: What is a mind? There may be mental
events not forming part of the sort of group that we should call a
“mind”, but there certainly are groups having that kind of unity that
make us call them one mind. There are two marked characteristics of
a mind: First, it is connected with a certain body; secondly, it has
the unity of one “experience”. The two _prima facie_ diverge in cases
of dual or multiple personality, but I think this is more apparent
than real. These two characteristics are, one physical, the other
psychological. Let us consider each in turn as a possible definition of
what we mean by one “mind”.

In the physical way, we begin by observing that every mental event
known to us is also part of the history of a living body, and we define
a “mind” as the group of mental events which form part of the history
of a certain living body. The definition of a living body is chemical,
and the reduction of chemistry to physics is clear in theory, though
in practice the mathematics is too difficult. It is so far a merely
empirical fact that mnemic causation is almost exclusively associated
with matter having a certain chemical structure. But the same may be
said of magnetism. As yet, we cannot deduce the magnetic properties of
iron from what we know of the structure of the atom of iron, but no one
doubts that they could be deduced by a person with sufficient knowledge
and sufficient mathematical skill. In like manner it may be assumed
that mnemic causation is theoretically deducible from the structure of
living matter. If we knew enough, we might be able to infer that some
other possible structure would exhibit mnemic phenomena, perhaps in an
even more marked degree; if so, we might be able to construct Robots
who would be more intelligent than we are.

In the psychological way of defining a “mind”, it consists of all the
mental events connected with a given mental event by “experience”,
_i.e._ by mnemic causation, but this definition needs a little
elaboration before it can be regarded as precise. We do not want the
contraction of the pupil to count as a “mental” event; therefore a
mental event will have to be one which has mnemic effects, not merely
mnemic causes. In that case, however, there cannot be a last mental
event in a man’s life, unless we assume that it may have mnemic effects
on his body after death. Perhaps we may avoid this inconvenience by
discovering the _kind_ of event that usually has mnemic effects, though
they may be prevented from occurring by special circumstances. Or we
might maintain that death is gradual, even when it is what is called
instantaneous; in that case the last events in a man’s life grow
progressively less mental as life ebbs. Neglecting this point, which is
not very important, we shall define the “experience” to which a given
mental event belongs as all those mental events which can be reached
from the given event by a mnemic causal chain, which may go backwards
or forwards, or alternately first one and then the other. This may be
conceived on the analogy of an engine shunting at a junction or where
there are many points: any line that can be reached, by however many
shuntings, will count as part of the same experience.

We cannot be sure that all the mental events connected with one body
are connected by links of mnemic causation with each other, and
therefore we cannot be sure that our two definitions of one “mind”
give the same result. In cases of multiple personality, some at least
of the usual mnemic effects, notably recollection, are absent in the
life of one personality when they have occurred in the life of the
other. But probably both personalities are connected by mnemic chains
with events which occurred before the dissociation took place, so that
there would be only one mind according to our definition. But there
are other possibilities which must be considered. It may be that each
cell in the body has its own mental life, and that only selections from
these mental lives go to make up the life which we regard as ours.
The “unconscious” might be the mental lives of subordinate parts of
the body, having occasional mnemic effects which we can notice, but
in the main separate from the life of which we are “conscious”. If
so, the mental events connected with one body will be more numerous
than the events making up its central “mind”. These, however, are only
speculative possibilities.

I spoke a moment ago of the life of which we are “conscious”, and
perhaps the reader has been wondering why I have not made more use of
the notion of “consciousness”. The reason is that I regard it as only
one kind of mnemic effect, and not one entitled to a special place.
To say that I am “conscious” of an event is to say that I recollect
it, at any rate for a short time after it has happened. To say that I
recollect an event is to say that a certain event is occurring in me
now which is connected by mnemic causation with the event recollected,
and is of the sort that we call a “cognition” of that event. But
events which I do not recollect may have mnemic effects upon me. This
is the case, not only where we have Freudian suppression, but in all
habits which were learnt long ago and have now become automatic, such
as writing and speaking. The emphasis upon consciousness has made a
mystery of the “unconscious”, which ought to be in no way surprising.

It does not much matter which of our two definitions of a “mind” we
adopt. Let us, provisionally, adopt the first definition, so that a
mind is all the mental events which form part of the history of a
certain living body, or perhaps we should rather say a living brain.

We can now tackle the question which is to decide whether we are
emergent materialists or not, namely:

_Is a mind a structure of material units?_

I think it is clear that the answer to this question is in the
negative. Even if a mind consists of all the events in a brain, it
does not consist of bundles of these events grouped as physics groups
them, _i.e._ it does not lump together all the events that make up
one piece of matter in the brain, and then all the events that make
up another, and so on. Mnemic causation is what concerns us most in
studying mind, but this seems to demand a recourse to physics, if we
assume, as seems plausible, that mental mnemic causation is due to
effects upon the brain. This question, however, is still an open one.
If mnemic causation is ultimate, mind is emergent. If not, the question
is more difficult. As we saw earlier, there certainly is knowledge in
psychology which cannot ever form part of physics. But as this point is
important, I shall repeat the argument in different terms.

The difference between physics and psychology is analogous to that
between a postman’s knowledge of letters and the knowledge of a
recipient of letters. The postman knows the movements of many letters,
the recipient knows the contents of a few. We may regard the light and
sound waves that go about the world as letters of which the physicist
may know the destination; some few of them are addressed to human
beings, and when read give psychological knowledge. Of course the
analogy is not perfect, because the letters with which the physicist
deals are continually changing during their journeys, as if they were
written in fading ink, which, also, was not quite dry all the time,
but occasionally got smudged with rain. However, the analogy may pass
if not pressed.

It would be possible without altering the detail of previous
discussions, except that of Chapter XXV, to give a different turn
to the argument, and make matter a structure composed of mental
units. I am not quite sure that this is the wrong view. It arises not
unnaturally from the argument as to data contained in Chapter XXV. We
saw that all data are mental events in the narrowest and strictest
sense, since they are percepts. Consequently all verification of causal
laws consists in the occurrence of expected percepts. Consequently any
inference beyond percepts (actual or possible) is incapable of being
empirically tested. We shall therefore be prudent if we regard the
non-mental events of physics as mere auxiliary concepts, not assumed
to have any reality, but only introduced to simplify the laws of
percepts. Thus matter will be a construction built out of percepts, and
our metaphysic will be essentially that of Berkeley. If there are no
non-mental events, causal laws will be very odd; for example, a hidden
dictaphone may record a conversation although it did not exist at the
time, since no one was perceiving it. But although this seems odd, it
is not logically impossible. And it must be conceded that it enables
us to interpret physics with a smaller amount of dubious inductive and
analogical inference than is required if we admit non-mental events.

In spite of the logical merits of this view, I cannot bring myself
to accept it, though I am not sure that my reasons for disliking it
are any better than Dr. Johnson’s. I find myself constitutionally
incapable of believing that the sun would not exist on a day when he
was everywhere hidden by clouds, or that the meat in a pie springs into
existence at the moment when the pie is opened. I know the logical
answer to such objections, and _qua logician_ I think the answer a good
one. The logical argument, however, does not even tend to show that
there are _not_ non-mental events; it only tends to show that we have
no right to feel sure of their existence. For my part, I find myself
in fact believing in them in spite of all that can be said to persuade
me that I ought to feel doubtful.

There is an argument, of a sort, against the view we are considering.
I have been assuming that we admit the existence of other people and
their perceptions, but question only the inference from perceptions to
events of a different kind. Now there is no good reason why we should
not carry our logical caution a step further. I cannot verify a theory
by means of another man’s perceptions, but only by means of my own.
Therefore the laws of physics can only be verified by me in so far as
they lead to predictions of _my_ percepts. If then, I refuse to admit
non-mental events because they are not verifiable, I ought to refuse
to admit mental events in every one except myself, on the same ground.
Thus I am reduced to what is called “solipsism”, _i.e._ the theory that
I alone exist. This is a view which is hard to refute, but still harder
to believe. I once received a letter from a philosopher who professed
to be a solipsist, but was surprised that there were no others! Yet
this philosopher was by way of believing that no one else existed. This
shows that solipsism is not really believed even by those who think
they are convinced of its truth.

We may go a step further. The past can only be verified indirectly,
by means of its effects in the future; therefore the type of logical
caution we have been considering should lead us to abstain from
asserting that the past really occurred: we ought to regard it as
consisting of auxiliary concepts convenient in stating the laws
applicable to the future. And since the future, though verifiable if
and when it occurs, is as yet unverified, we ought to suspend judgment
about the future also. If we are not willing to go so far as this,
there seems no reason to draw the line at the precise point where it
was drawn by Berkeley. On these grounds I feel no shame in admitting
the existence of non-mental events such as the laws of physics lead us
to infer. Nevertheless, it is important to realise that other views are
tenable.




