PART II

THE PHYSICAL WORLD




CHAPTER IX

THE STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM


In all that we have said hitherto on the subject of man from without,
we have taken a common-sense view of the material world. We have not
asked ourselves: what _is_ matter? Is there such a thing, or is the
outside world composed of stuff of a different kind? And what light
does a correct theory of the physical world throw upon the process of
perception? These are questions which we must attempt to answer in the
following chapters. And in doing so the science upon which we must
depend is physics. Modern physics, however, is very abstract, and by
no means easy to explain in simple language. I shall do my best, but
the reader must not blame me too severely if, here and there, he finds
some slight difficulty or obscurity. The physical world, both through
the theory of relativity and through the most recent doctrines as to
the structure of the atom, has become very different from the world
of everyday life, and also from that of scientific materialism of the
eighteenth-century variety. No philosophy can ignore the revolutionary
changes in our physical ideas that the men of science have found
necessary; indeed it may be said that all traditional philosophies have
to be discarded, and we have to start afresh with as little respect
as possible for the systems of the past. Our age has penetrated more
deeply into the nature of things than any earlier age, and it would be
a false modesty to over-estimate what can still be learned from the
metaphysicians of the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

What physics has to say about matter, and the physical world generally,
from the standpoint of the philosopher, comes under two main heads:
first, the structure of the atom; secondly, the theory of relativity.
The former was, until recently, the less revolutionary philosophically,
though the more revolutionary in physics. Until 1925, theories of the
structure of the atom were based upon the old conception of matter as
indestructible substance, although this was already regarded as no
more than a convenience. Now, owing chiefly to two German physicists,
Heisenberg and Schrödinger, the last vestiges of the old solid atom
have melted away, and matter has become as ghostly as anything in
a spiritualist seance. But before tackling these newer views, it
is necessary to understand the much simpler theory which they have
displaced. This theory does not, except here and there, take account
of the new doctrines on fundamentals that have been introduced by
Einstein, and it is much easier to understand than relativity. It
explains so much of the facts that, whatever may happen, it must remain
a stepping-stone to a complete theory of the structure of the atom;
indeed, the newer theories have grown directly out of it, and could
hardly have arisen in any other way. We must therefore spend a little
time in giving a bare outline, which is the less to be regretted as the
theory is in itself fascinating.

The theory that matter consists of “atoms”, _i.e._ of little bits
that cannot be divided, is due to the Greeks, but with them it was
only a speculation. The evidence for what is called the atomic
theory was derived from chemistry, and the theory itself, in its
nineteenth-century form, was mainly due to Dalton. It was found that
there were a number of “elements”, and that other substances were
compounds of these elements. Compound substances were found to be
composed of “molecules”, each molecule being composed of “atoms” of one
substance combined with “atoms” of another or of the same. A molecule
of water consists of two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen; they
can be separated by electrolysis. It was supposed, until radio-activity
was discovered, that atoms were indestructible and unchangeable.
Substances which were not compounds were called “elements”. The
Russian chemist Mendeleev discovered that the elements can be arranged
in a series by means of progressive changes in their properties; in his
time, there were gaps in this series, but most of them have since been
filled by the discovery of new elements. If all the gaps were filled,
there would be 92 elements; actually the number known is 87, or,
including three about which there is still some doubt, 90. The place of
an element in this series is called its “atomic number”. Hydrogen is
the first, and has the atomic number 1; helium is the second, and has
the atomic number 2; uranium is the last, and has the atomic number 92.
Perhaps in the stars there are elements with higher atomic numbers, but
so far none has been actually observed.

The discovery of radio-activity necessitated new views as to “atoms”.
It was found that an atom of one radio-active element can break up into
an atom of another element and an atom of helium, and that there is
also another way in which it can change. It was found also that there
can be different elements having the same place in the series; these
are called “isotopes”. For example, when radium disintegrates it gives
rise, in the end, to a kind of lead, but this is somewhat different
from the lead found in lead-mines. A great many “elements” have been
shown by Dr. F. W. Aston to be really mixtures of isotopes, which can
be sorted out by ingenious methods. All this, but more especially the
transmutation of elements in radio-activity, led to the conclusion that
what had been called “atoms” were really complex structures, which
could change into atoms of a different sort by losing a part. After
various attempts to imagine the structure of an atom, physicists were
led to accept the view of Sir Ernest Rutherford, which was further
developed by Niels Bohr.

In this theory, which, in spite of recent developments, remains
substantially correct, all matter is composed of two sorts of units,
electrons and protons. All electrons are exactly alike, and all protons
are exactly alike. All protons carry a certain amount of positive
electricity, and all electrons carry an equal amount of negative
electricity. But the mass of a proton is about 1835 times that of an
electron: it takes 1835 electrons to weigh as much as one proton.
Protons repel each other, and electrons repel each other, but an
electron and a proton attract each other. Every atom is a structure
consisting of electrons and protons. The hydrogen atom, which is the
simplest, consists of one proton with one electron going round it as
a planet goes round the sun. The electron may be lost, and the proton
left alone; the atom is then positively electrified. But when it has
its electron, it is, as a whole, electrically neutral, since the
positive electricity of the proton is exactly balanced by the negative
electricity of the electron.

The second element, helium, has already a much more complicated
structure. It has a nucleus, consisting of four protons, and two
electrons very close together, and in its normal state it has two
planetary electrons going round the nucleus. But it may lose either or
both of these, and it is then positively electrified.

All the latter elements consist, like helium, of a nucleus composed of
protons and electrons, and a number of planetary electrons going round
the nucleus. There are more protons than electrons in the nucleus,
but the excess is balanced by the planetary electrons when the atom
is unelectrified. The number of protons in the nucleus gives the
“atomic weight” of the element: the excess of protons over electrons
in the nucleus gives the “atomic number”, which is also the number of
planetary electrons when the atom is unelectrified. Uranium, the last
element, has 238 protons and 146 electrons in the nucleus, and when
unelectrified it has 92 planetary electrons. The arrangement of the
planetary electrons in atoms other than hydrogen is not accurately
known, but it is clear that, in some sense, they form different rings,
those in the outer rings being more easily lost than those nearer the
nucleus.

I come now to what Bohr added to the theory of atoms as developed
by Rutherford. This was a most curious discovery, introducing, in a
new field, a certain type of discontinuity which was already known
to be exhibited by some other natural processes. No adage had seemed
more respectable in philosophy than “natura non facit saltum”, Nature
makes no jumps. But if there is one thing more than another that the
experience of a long life has taught me, it is that Latin tags always
express falsehoods; and so it has proved in this case. Apparently
Nature does make jumps, not only now and then, but whenever a body
emits light, as well as on certain other occasions. The German
physicist Planck was the first to demonstrate the necessity of jumps.
He was considering how bodies radiate heat when they are warmer
than their surroundings. Heat, as has long been known, consists of
vibrations, which are distinguished by their “frequency”, _i.e._ by the
number of vibrations per second. Planck showed that, for vibrations
having a given frequency, not all amounts of energy are possible, but
only those having to the frequency a ratio which is a certain quantity
_h_ multiplied by 1 or 2 or 3 or some other whole number, in practice
always a small whole number. The quantity _h_ is known as “Planck’s
constant”; it has turned out to be involved practically everywhere
where measurement is delicate enough to know whether it is involved or
not. It is such a small quantity that, except where measurement can
reach a very high degree of accuracy, the departure from continuity is
not appreciable.[7]

      [7] The dimensions of _h_ are those of “action”, _i.e._
          energy multiplied by time, or moment of momentum, or
          mass multiplied by length multiplied by velocity. Its
          magnitude is about 6.55 × 10.27 erg secs.

Bohr’s great discovery was that this same quantity _h_ is involved
in the orbits of the planetary electrons in atoms, and that it
limits the possible orbits in ways for which nothing in Newtonian
dynamics had prepared us, and for which so far, there is nothing in
relativity-dynamics to account. According to Newtonian principles, an
electron ought to be able to go round the nucleus in any circle with
the nucleus in the centre, or in any ellipse with the nucleus in a
focus; among possible orbits, it would select one or another according
to its direction and velocity. But in fact only certain out of all
these orbits occur. Those that occur are among those that are possible
on Newtonian principles, but are only an infinitesimal selection from
among these. It will simplify the explanation if we confine ourselves,
as Bohr did at first, to circular orbits; moreover we will consider
only the hydrogen atom, which has one planetary electron and a nucleus
consisting of one proton. To define the circular orbits that are
found to be possible, we proceed as follows: multiply the mass of the
electron by the circumference of its orbit, and this again by the
velocity of the electron; the result will always be _h_ or 2_h_, or
3_h_, or some other small exact multiple of _h_, where _h_, as before,
is “Planck’s constant”. There is thus a smallest possible orbit, in
which the above product is _h_; the radius of the next orbit, in which
the above produce is 2_h_, will have a length four times this minimum;
the next, nine times; the next, sixteen times; and so on through the
“square numbers” (_i.e._ those got by multiplying a number by itself).
Apparently no other circular orbits than these are possible in the
hydrogen atom. Elliptic orbits are possible, and these again introduce
exact multiples of _h_: but we need not, for our purposes, concern
ourselves with them.

When a hydrogen atom is left to itself, if the electron is in the
minimum orbit it will continue to rotate in that orbit so long as
nothing from outside disturbs it; but if the electron is in any of
the larger possible orbits, it may sooner or later jump suddenly to a
smaller orbit, either the minimum or one of the intermediate possible
orbits. So long as the electron does not change its orbit, the atom
does not radiate energy, but when the electron jumps to a smaller
orbit, the atom loses energy, which is radiated out in the form of a
light-wave. This light-wave is always such that its energy divided by
its frequency is exactly _h_. The atom may absorb energy from without,
and it does so by the electron jumping to a larger orbit. It may then
afterwards, when the external source of energy is removed, jump back to
the smaller orbit; this is the cause of fluorescence, since, in doing
so, the atom gives out energy in the form of light.

The same principles, with greater mathematical complications, apply
to the other elements. There is, however, with some of the latest
elements, a phenomenon which cannot have any analogue in hydrogen, and
that is radio-activity. When an atom is radio-active, it emits rays of
three kinds, called respectively α-rays, β-rays, and γ-rays. Of these,
the γ-rays are analogous to light, but of much higher frequencies,
or shorter wave-lengths; we need not further concern ourselves with
them. The α-rays and β-rays, on the contrary, are important as our
chief source of knowledge concerning the nuclei of atoms. It is found
that the α-rays consist of helium nuclei, while the β-rays consist
of electrons. Both come out of the nucleus, since the atom after
radio-activity disruption is a different element from what it was
before. But no one knows just why the nucleus disintegrates when it
does, nor why, in a piece of radium, for example, some atoms break down
while others do not.

The three principal sources of our knowledge concerning atoms have been
the light they emit, X-rays and radio-activity. As everyone knows,
when the light emitted by a glowing gas is passed through a prism, it
is found to consist of well-defined lines of different colours, which
are characteristic for each element, and constitute what is called its
“spectrum”. The spectrum extends beyond the range of visible light,
both into the infra-red and into the ultra-violet. In the latter
direction, it extends right into the region of X-rays, which are only
ultra-ultra-violet light. By means of crystals, it has been found
possible to study X-ray spectra as exactly as those of ordinary light.
The great merit of Bohr’s theory was that it explained why elements
have the spectra they do have, which had, before, been a complete
mystery. In the cases of hydrogen and positively electrified helium,
the explanation, particularly as extended by the German physicist
Sommerfeld, gave the most minute numerical agreement between theory
and observation; in other cases, mathematical difficulties made
this completeness impossible, but there was every reason to think
that the same principles were adequate. This was the main reason for
accepting Bohr’s theory; and certainly it was a very strong one. It
was found that visible light enabled us to study the outer rings of
planetary electrons, X-rays enabled us to study the inner rings,
and radio-activity enabled us to study the nucleus. For the latter
purpose, there are also other methods, more particularly Rutherford’s
“bombardment”, which aims at breaking up nuclei by firing projectiles
at them, and sometimes succeeds in making a hit in spite of the
smallness of the target.

The theory of atomic structure that has just been outlined, like
everything in theoretical physics, is capable of expression in
mathematical formulæ; but like many things in theoretical physics, it
is also capable of expression in the form of an imaginative picture.
But here, as always, it is necessary to distinguish sharply between
the mathematical symbols and the pictorial words. The symbols are
pretty sure to be right, or nearly so; the imaginative picture, on
the other hand, should not be taken too seriously. When we consider
the nature of the evidence upon which the above theory of the atom is
based, we can see that the attempt to make a picture of what goes on
has led us to be far more concrete than we have any right to be. If
we want to assert only what we have good reason to believe, we shall
have to abandon the attempt to be concrete about what goes on in the
atom, and say merely something like this: An atom with its electrons
is a system characterised by certain integers, all small, and all
capable of changing independently. These integers are the multiples of
_h_ involved. When any of them changes to a smaller integer, energy
of a definite amount is emitted, and its frequency will be obtained
by dividing the energy of _h_. When any of the integers concerned
changes to a larger integer, energy is absorbed, and again the amount
absorbed is definite. But we cannot know what goes on when the atom is
neither absorbing nor radiating energy, since then it has no effects in
surrounding regions; consequently all evidence as to atoms is as to
their changes, not as to their steady states.

The point is not that the facts do not fit with the hypothesis of
the atom as a planetary system. There are, it is true, certain
difficulties which afford empirical grounds for the newer theory which
has superseded Bohr’s, and which we shall shortly consider. But even
if no such grounds existed, it would be obvious that Bohr’s theory
states more than we have a right to infer from what we can observe. Of
theories that state so much, there must be an infinite number that are
compatible with what is known, and it is only what all of these have in
common that we are really entitled to assert. Suppose your knowledge
of Great Britain were entirely confined to observing the people and
goods that enter and leave the ports; you could, in that case, invent
many theories as to the interior of Great Britain, all of which would
agree with all known facts. This is an exact analogy. If you delimit
in the physical universe any region, large or small, not containing a
scientific observer, all scientific observers will have exactly the
same experiences whatever happens inside this region, provided it
does not affect the flow of energy across the boundary of the region.
And so, if the region contains one atom, any two theories which give
the same results as to the energy that the atom radiates or absorbs
are empirically indistinguishable, and there can be no reason except
simplicity for preferring one of them to the other. On this ground,
even if on no other, prudence compels us to seek a more abstract theory
of the atom than that which we owe to Rutherford and Bohr.

The newer theory has been put forward mainly by two physicists already
mentioned, Heisenberg and Schrödinger, in forms which look different,
but are in fact mathematically equivalent. It is as yet an impossible
task to describe this theory in simple language, but something can be
said to show its philosophical bearing. Broadly speaking, it describes
the atom by means of the radiations that come out of it. In Bohr’s
theory, the planetary electrons are supposed to describe orbits over
and over again while the atom is not radiating; in the newer theory,
we say nothing at all as to what happens at these times. The aim
is to confine the theory to what is empirically verifiable, namely
radiations; as to what there is where the radiations come from, we
cannot tell, and it is scientifically unnecessary to speculate. The
theory requires modifications in our conception of space, of a sort not
yet quite clear. It also has the consequence that we cannot identify an
electron at one time with an electron at another, if in the interval,
the atom has radiated energy. The electron ceases altogether to have
the properties of a “thing” as conceived by common sense; it is merely
a region from which energy may radiate.

On the subject of discontinuity, there is disagreement between
Schrödinger and other physicists. Most of them maintain that quantum
changes--_i.e._ the changes that occur in an atom when it radiates or
absorbs energy--must be discontinuous. Schrödinger thinks otherwise.
This is a matter in debate among experts, as to which it would be rash
to venture an opinion. Probably it will be decided one way or other
before very long.

The main point for the philosopher in the modern theory is the
disappearance of matter as a “thing”. It has been replaced by
emanations from a locality--the sort of influences that characterise
haunted rooms in ghost stories. As we shall see in the next chapter,
the theory of relativity leads to a similar destruction of the solidity
of matter, by a different line of argument. All sorts of events happen
in the physical world, but tables and chairs, the sun and moon,
and even our daily bread, have become pale abstractions, mere laws
exhibited in the successions of events which radiate from certain
regions.




