PART IV

THE UNIVERSE




CHAPTER XXIII

SOME GREAT PHILOSOPHIES OF THE PAST


Our discussions, hitherto, have been concerned very largely with
Man, but Man on his own account is not the true subject-matter of
philosophy. What concerns philosophy is the universe as a whole; Man
demands consideration solely as the instrument by means of which we
acquire knowledge of the universe. And that is why it is human beings
as capable of knowledge that have concerned us mainly in past chapters,
rather than as centres of will or of emotion. We are not in the mood
proper to philosophy so long as we are interested in the world only as
it affects human beings; the philosophic spirit demands an interest in
the world for its own sake. But since we apprehend the world through
our own senses, and think about it with our own intellect, the picture
that we acquire is inevitably coloured by the personal medium through
which it comes to us. Consequently we have to study this medium,
namely ourselves, in order to find out, if we can, what elements in
our picture of the world are contributed by us, and what elements we
may accept as representative of outside fact. Previous chapters have
studied cognition, both as an outwardly observable reaction, and as
it appears to introspection. In the chapters that remain, we shall
be concerned with what we can know about the universe, in view of
the nature of the instrument that we have to employ. I do not think
we can know as much as many philosophers of the past have supposed,
but I think it is worth while to have in our minds an outline of
their systems. I shall therefore begin by setting forth a few typical
philosophical constructions of earlier centuries.

Modern philosophy is generally taken as beginning with Descartes,
who flourished in the first half of the seventeenth century. We have
already had occasion, in Chapter XVI, to consider his argument “I
think, therefore, I am”, but now we will deal with him somewhat more
generally. He inaugurated two movements, one in metaphysics, one in
theory of knowledge. In metaphysics, he emphasised the gulf between
mind and matter, or between soul and body; in theory of knowledge he
advocated a critical scrutiny of premises. These two movements had
different histories, each of them interesting. The science of dynamics
was rapidly developing in Descartes’ time, and seemed to show that the
motions of matter could be calculated mathematically, given sufficient
data. As the motions of matter include our bodily acts, even speaking
and writing, it seemed as if the consequence must be a materialistic
theory of human behaviour. This consequence, however, was distasteful
to most philosophers, and they therefore invented various ways of
escaping from it. Descartes himself thought that the will could have
certain direct physical effects. He thought that the brain contains a
fluid called the “animal spirits”, and that the will could influence
the direction of its motion, though not the velocity. In this way he
was still able to hold that the will is effective in the manner in
which common sense supposes it to be. But this view did not fit in at
all well with the rest of his philosophy. He held that, apart from the
Supreme Substance, namely God, there are two created substances, mind
and matter; that the essence of mind is thought, and that the essence
of matter is extension. He made these two substances so different
that interaction between them became difficult to understand, and his
followers decided that there is never any effect either of mind on
matter or of matter on mind.

The motives for this development were various; perhaps the most
important was the development of physics immediately after Descartes’
time. A law was discovered called the “conservation of momentum”. This
states that, if a system of bodies is in any sort of motion, and is
free from outside influences, the amount of motion _in any direction_
is constant. This showed that the kind of action of the will on the
“animal spirits” which Descartes had assumed was contrary to the
principles of dynamics. It seemed to follow that mind cannot influence
matter, and it was inferred that matter cannot influence mind, since
the two were regarded as co-equal substances. It was held that each
goes it own way, according to its own laws. The fact that our arm moves
when we will it to move was regarded as analogous to the fact that two
perfectly accurate clocks strike at the same moment, though neither
has any effect upon the other. The series of mental events and the
series of physical events were parallel, each going at the same rate as
the other, therefore they continued to synchronise, in spite of their
independence of each other.

Spinoza sought to make this parallelism less mysterious by denying
that there are two separate substances, mind and matter. He maintained
that there is only one substance, of which thought and extension are
attributes. But there seemed still no good reason why the events
belonging to the two attributes should develop along parallel lines.
Spinoza is in many ways one of the greatest philosophers, but his
greatness is rather ethical than metaphysical. Accordingly he was
regarded by contemporaries as a profound metaphysician but a very
wicked man.

The notion of the impossibility of interaction between mind and body
has persisted down to our own day. One still hears of “psychophysical
parallelism”, according to which to every state of the brain a state of
mind _corresponds_ and vice versa, without either acting on the other.
This whole point of view, though not exactly that of Descartes, derives
from him. It has a number of sources, religious, metaphysical, and
scientific; but there seems no ground whatever for regarding it as true.

Take, first, the rigid determinism of traditional physics, which was
to have been avoided. Spinoza rightly perceived that this could not
be avoided by such methods, and therefore accepted determinism in
the psychical as in the physical realm. If everything we _say_ is
determined by physical causes, our thoughts are only free when we
tell lies: so long as we say what we think, our thoughts also can be
inferred from physics. The philosophy which I advocate escapes this
consequence in several ways. In the first place, causality does not
involve _compulsion_, but only a law of sequence: if physical and
mental events run parallel, either may with equal justice be regarded
as causing the other, and there is no sense in speaking of them as
causally independent. Thus the Cartesian dualism does not have the
pleasant consequences which were intended. In the second place, modern
physics has become less deterministic than the physics of the past
few centuries. We do not know, _e.g._ what makes a radio-active atom
explode or an electron jump from a larger to a smaller orbit. In these
matters we only know statistical averages.

Take next the view that mind and matter are quite disparate. This we
have criticised already. It rests upon a notion that we know much
more about matter than we do, and in particular upon the belief that
the space of physics can be identified with the space of sensible
experience. This belief is absent in Leibniz, who, however, never quite
realised what his own view was. It is not absent in Kant, who realised
that the space of sensible experience is subjective, and inferred
that the space of physics is subjective. Since Kant, no one seems to
have thought clearly about space until Einstein and Minkowski. The
separation of physical and sensible space, logically carried out, shows
the groundlessness of traditional views about mind and matter. This
part of Descartes’ philosophy, therefore, though it accelerated the
progress of physics, must be regarded as metaphysically an aberration.

The other part of Descartes’ philosophy, namely, the emphasis upon
methodical doubt, and consequently upon theory of knowledge, has
been more fruitful. The beginning of a philosophic attitude is the
realisation that we do not know as much as we think we do, and to this
Descartes contributed notably. We have seen that he set to work to
doubt all he could, but found he could not doubt his own existence,
which he therefore took as the starting-point of his constructive
system. He supposed that the most certain fact in the world is “I
think”. This was unfortunate, since it gave a subjective bias to modern
philosophy. As a matter of fact, “I” seems to be only a string of
events, each of which separately is more certain than the whole. And
“think” is a word which Descartes accepted as indefinable, but which
really covers complicated relations between events. When is an event
a “thought”? Is there some intrinsic characteristic which makes it a
thought? Descartes would say yes, and so would most philosophers. I
should say no. Take, _e.g._ a visual and an auditory sensation. Both
are “thoughts” in Descartes’ sense, but what have they in common? Two
visual sensations _have_ an indefinable common quality, viz. that
which makes them visual. Two auditory sensations likewise. But a
visual and an auditory sensation have in common, if I am not mistaken,
no intrinsic property, but a certain capacity for being _known_
without inference. This amounts to saying that they are mnemic causes
of a certain kind of event, called a cognition, and that they have
moreover, a certain formal similarity to the cognition which they
cause. Therefore, instead of taking the general “I think” as our basis,
we ought to take the particular occurrences which are known without
inference, among which sensations (or rather “perceptions”) will be
included. These occurrences, as we have already seen, may be regarded
with equal justice as physical and mental: they are parts of chains of
physical causation, and they have mnemic effects which are cognitions.
The former fact makes us call them physical, the latter mental, both
quite truly. It is the particular events which are certain, not the
“I think” which Descartes made the basis of his philosophy. It is not
correct to regard the ultimate certainties as “subjective”, except in
the sense that they are events in that part of space-time in which our
body is--and our mind also, I should say.

A new turn was given to the Cartesian type of metaphysics by Leibniz
(1646–1716), who, like Descartes, was supremely eminent both in
mathematics and in philosophy. Leibniz rejected the view that there
is only one substance, as Spinoza held, or only two other than God,
as the orthodox followers of Descartes maintained. He also rejected
the dualism of mind and matter, holding that there are innumerable
substances all in a greater or less degree mental, and none in any
degree material. He maintained that every substance is immortal, and
that there is no interaction between one substance and another--this
last being a view derived from the Cartesian independence of mind
and matter. He also extended to his many substances the belief in
parallelism which had existed for the two substances of the Cartesians.
He called his substances “monads”, and maintained that every monad
mirrors the universe, and develops along lines which correspond, point
by point, with those along which every other monad is developing. A
man’s soul or mind is a single monad, while his body is a collection of
monads, each mental in some degree, but less so than the monad which
is his soul. Inferior monads mirror the world in a more confused way
than higher ones do, but there is some element of confusion in the
perceptions of even the most superior monads. Every monad mirrors the
world from its own point of view, and the difference between points of
view is compared to a difference of perspective. “Matter” is a confused
way of perceiving a number of monads; if we perceived clearly, we
should see that there is no such thing as matter.

Leibniz’s system had great merits and great demerits. The theory that
“matter” is a confused way of perceiving something non-material was
an advance upon anything to be found in his predecessors. He had,
though only semi-consciously, the distinction between physical and
perceptual space: there is space in each monad’s picture of the world,
and there is also the assemblage or pattern of “points of view”. The
latter corresponds to what I have called “physical space”, the former
to “perceptual space”. Leibniz maintained, as against Newton, that
space and time consists only of relations--a view which has achieved a
definitive triumph in Einstein’s theory of relativity. The weak point
of his system was what he called the “pre-established harmony”, in
virtue of which all the monads (so to speak) kept step, in spite of
the fact that they were “windowless” and never acted upon each other.
Perception, for Leibniz, was not an effect of the object perceived, but
a modification arising in the perceiving monad and running parallel
with what was happening in the perceived object. This view would
never have seemed plausible but for the anterior Cartesian theory of
the mutual independence of mind and matter. And if Leibniz himself
developed, as he believed, in complete independence of all other
created things, it is not clear what good reasons he could have had for
believing in the existence of anything except himself, since, by his
own theory, his experiences would remain unchanged if everything else
were annihilated. In fact, he was only able to refute this possibility
by bringing in theological considerations, which, whether valid or
not, are out of place in philosophy. For this reason, his doctrines,
ingenious as they were, found little acceptance in France and England,
though in Germany they prevailed, in a modified form, until the time of
Kant.

The systems of Descartes, Spinoza and Leibniz have one very important
characteristic in common, namely, that they all depend upon the
category of “substance”. This is a concept which has developed out of
the common-sense notion of “thing”. A “substance” is that which has
qualities, and is in general supposed to be indestructible, though
it is difficult to see why. It acquired its hold over metaphysicians
partly because both matter and the soul were held to be immortal, and
partly through a hasty transference to reality of ideas derived from
grammar. We say “Peter is running”, “Peter is talking”, “Peter is
eating”, and so on. We think that there is one entity, Peter, who does
all these things, and that none of them could be done unless there were
someone to do them, but that Peter might quite well do none of them.
Similarly we assign qualities to Peter: we say he is wise and tall
and blond and so on. All these qualities, we feel, cannot subsist by
themselves in the void, but only when there is a subject to which they
belong; but Peter would remain Peter even if he became foolish and
short and dyed his hair. Thus Peter, who is regarded as a “substance”,
is self-subsistent as compared with his qualities and states, and he
preserves his substantial identity throughout all sorts of changes.
Similarly in the material world an atom is supposed (or rather was
supposed until recently) to preserve its identity throughout all time,
however it might move and whatever combinations it might form with
other atoms. The concept of “motion”, upon which all physics seemed to
depend, was only strictly applicable to a substance which preserves
its identity while changing its spatial relations to other substances;
thus “substance” acquired an even firmer hold upon physics than upon
metaphysics.

Nevertheless, the notion of “substance”, at any rate in any sense
involving permanence, must be shut out from our thoughts if we are to
achieve a philosophy in any way adequate either to modern physics or
to modern psychology. Modern physics, both in the theory of relativity
and in the Heisenberg-Schrödinger theories of atomic structure, has
reduced “matter” to a system of events, each of which lasts only for a
very short time. To treat an electron or a proton as a single entity
has become as wrong-headed as it would be to treat the population of
London or New York as a single entity. And in psychology, equally,
the “ego” has disappeared as an ultimate conception, and the unity
of a personality has become a peculiar causal nexus among a series
of events. In this respect, grammar and ordinary language have been
shown to be bad guides to metaphysics. A great book might be written
showing the influence of syntax on philosophy; in such a book, the
author could trace in detail the influence of the subject-predicate
structure of sentences upon European thought, more particularly in
this matter of “substance”. And it must be understood that the same
reasons which lead to the rejection of substance lead also to the
rejection of “things” and “persons” as ultimately valid concepts. I
say “I sit at my table”, but I ought to say: “One of a certain string
of events causally connected in the sort of way that makes the whole
series that is called a ‘person’ has a certain spatial relation to one
of another string of events causally connected with each other in a
different way and having a spatial configuration of the sort denoted
by the word ‘table’”. I do not say so, because life is too short; but
that is what I should say if I were a true philosopher. Apart from
any other grounds, the inadequacy of the notion of “substance” would
lead us to regard the philosophy of Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz as
incompatible with modern science. There is of course in all three, a
great deal that does not depend upon “substance”, and that still has
value; but “substance” supplied the framework and a good deal of the
argumentation, and therefore introduces a fatal defect into these three
great systems.

I come now to the triad of British philosophers, Locke, Berkeley, and
Hume--English, Irish, and Scotch respectively. Perhaps from patriotic
bias or from community of national temperament, I find more that I
can accept, and regard as still important, in the writings of these
three than in the philosophy of their continental predecessors. Their
constructions are less ambitious, their arguments more detailed, and
their methods more empirical; in all these respects they show more
kinship with the modern scientific outlook. On the other hand, Locke
and Hume, if not Berkeley, approach philosophy too exclusively from
the side of psychology, and are concerned to study Man rather than the
universe.

Locke was a contemporary and friend of Newton; his great book, _An
Essay concerning Human Understanding_, was published at almost the
same moment as Newton’s _Principia_. His influence has been enormous,
greater, in fact, than his abilities would seem to warrant; and this
influence was not only philosophical, but quite as much political and
social. He was one of the creators of eighteenth century liberalism:
democracy, religious toleration, freedom of economic enterprise,
educational progress, all owe much to him. The English Revolution of
1688 embodied his ideas; the American Revolution of 1776 and the
French Revolution of 1789 expressed what had grown, in a century, out
of his teaching. And in all these movements, philosophy and politics
went hand in hand. Thus the practical success of Locke’s ideas has been
extraordinary.

When, knowing all this, one comes to read Locke himself, it is
difficult to resist a feeling of disappointment. He is sensible,
enlightened, minute, but uninspired and (to moderns) uninspiring.
One has to remember that his contemporaries found common sense
exhilarating after a century of wars of religion and a long struggle
with obscurantism. Locke combatted the doctrine of “innate ideas”,
according to which we learned only certain things by experience,
but possessed our abstract knowledge in virtue of our congenital
constitution. He regarded the mind at birth as a wax tablet, upon which
experience proceeded to write. Undoubtedly he was, in this matter,
more in the right than his opponents, although the terms in which the
controversy was waged are not such as a modern could employ. We should
say that the innate apparatus of man consists of “reflexes” rather than
“ideas”; also that our sense-organs, our glands, and our muscles lead
to responses of certain kinds, in which our own organisation plays a
part of the same importance as that played by the external stimulus.
The element in our knowledge-responses that corresponds to our own
bodily organisation might, perhaps, be regarded as representing what
Locke’s opponents meant by “innate”. But it does not represent this
at all accurately so far as our feelings towards it are concerned.
The “innate” ideas were the ideas to be proud of; they embraced pure
mathematics, natural theology, and ethics. But nobody is proud of
sneezing or coughing. And when Locke tried to show, in detail, how our
knowledge is generated by experience, he was liberating philosophy from
a great deal of useless lumber, even if his own doctrines were not
altogether such as we can now accept.

Locke used his own principles only in ways consistent with common
sense; Berkeley and Hume both pushed them to paradoxical conclusions.
The philosophy of Berkeley, to my mind, has not received quite the
attention and respect that it deserves--not that I agree with it,
but that I think it ingenious and harder to refute than is often
supposed. Berkeley, as everyone knows, denied the reality of matter,
and maintained that everything is mental. In the former respect I
agree with him, though not for his reasons; in the latter respect, I
think his argument unsound and his conclusion improbable, though not
certainly false. However, I will leave the development of my own views
to a later chapter, and confine myself to Berkeley’s argument.

Berkeley contended that when, for example, you “see a tree”, all
that you really _know_ to be happening is in you, and is mental. The
colour that you see, as Locke had already argued, does not belong to
the physical world, but is an effect upon you, produced, according
to Locke, by a physical stimulus. Locke held that the purely spatial
properties of perceived objects really belong to the objects, whereas
such things as colour, softness, sound, etc., are effects in us.
Berkeley went further, and argued that the spatial properties of
perceived objects are no exception. Thus the object perceived is
composed entirely of “mental” constituents, and there is no reason to
believe in the existence of anything not mental. He did not wish to
admit that a tree ceases to exist when we do not look at it, so he
maintained that it acquires permanence through being an idea in the
mind of God. It is still only an “idea”, but not one whose existence
depends upon the accidents of our perceptions.

The real objection to Berkeley’s view is rather physical than
metaphysical. Light and sound take time to travel from their sources
to the percipient, and one must suppose that something is happening
along the route by which they travel. What is happening along the route
is presumably not “mental”, for, as we have seen, “mental” events are
those that have peculiar mnemic effects which are connected with living
tissue. Therefore, although Berkeley is right in saying that the events
we know immediately are mental, it is highly probable that he is wrong
as to the events which we infer in places where there are no living
bodies. In saying this, however, we are anticipating the results of a
fuller discussion in a later chapter.

Hume, proceeding from a starting-point essentially similar to that
of Locke and Berkeley, arrived at conclusions so sceptical that all
subsequent philosophers have shied away from them. He denied the
existence of the Self, questioned the validity of induction, and
doubted whether causal laws could be applied to anything except our own
mental processes. He is one of the very few philosophers not concerned
to establish any positive conclusions. To a great extent, I think, we
must admit the validity of his reasons for refusing to feel the usual
certainties. As regards the Self, he was almost certainly right. As we
have already argued, a person is not a single entity, but a series of
events linked together by peculiar causal laws. As regards induction,
the question is very difficult, and I shall devote a subsequent chapter
to it. As regards causal laws, the question, as we shall find later, is
the same as the question of induction. On both points Hume’s doubts are
not to be lightly dismissed.

The usual modern criticism of Locke, Berkeley, and Hume is that they
were unduly “atomistic”. They thought of the mind as a collection of
“ideas”, each as hard and separate as a billiard-ball. They had not
the conception of continuous change or of integral processes; their
causal units were too small. As we have already seen in connection with
_Gestaltpsychologie_ and with sentences, the causal unit is often a
configuration which cannot be broken up without losing its distinctive
causal properties. In this sense, it is true that the traditional
British philosophy was too atomistic. But in another sense I do not
think it is true, and I think much modern philosophy is confused on
this point. Although a configuration may lose its _causal_ properties
when broken up into its elements, it nevertheless does consist of
these elements related in certain ways; analysis into “atoms” is
perfectly valid, so long as it is not assumed that the causal efficacy
of the whole is compounded out of the separate effects of the separate
atoms. It is because I hold this view that I call the philosophy which
I advocate “logical atomism”. And to this extent I regard Locke,
Berkeley, and Hume as in the right as against their modern critics. But
this also is a topic which will be resumed in a later chapter.

Hume’s criticism of the notion of cause was what led Kant to his new
departure. Kant’s philosophy is difficult and obscure, and philosophers
still dispute as to what he meant. Those who disagree with him are held
by his supporters to have misunderstood him; I must therefore warn the
reader that what follows is my view of what he meant, and that there is
no agreed view.

Kant maintained that, in virtue of our mental constitution, we deal
with the raw material of sense-impressions by means of certain
“categories” and by arranging it in space and time. Both the categories
and the space-time arrangement are supplied by us, and do not belong to
the world except as known by us. But since our mental constitution is
a constant datum, all phenomena _as known_ will be spatio-temporal and
will conform to the categories. Among the latter “cause” is the most
important. Thus although there may be no cause in the world as it is
in itself (a point on which Kant was inconsistent in the interest of
morals), yet phenomena, _i.e._ things as they seem to us, will always
have other phenomena as their causes. And although there is no time in
the real world, things as they appear to us will be some earlier and
some later. Space, again is supplied by us, and therefore geometry can
be known _a priori_, without our having to study the outer world. Kant
thought that Euclidean geometry was quite certainly true, although it
could not be proved by logic alone, since Euclid’s axioms could be
denied without self-contradiction.

It was on this question of geometry that the weakness of Kant’s
system first became obvious. It was found that we have no grounds for
regarding Euclidean geometry as quite true. Since Einstein, we have
positive grounds for regarding it as not quite true. It appears that
geometry is just as empirical as geography. We depend upon observation
if we want to know whether the sum of the angles of a triangle is two
right angles just as much as if we want to know how much land there is
in the western hemisphere.

With regard to the “categories” there are equally great difficulties.
Let us take “cause” as our illustration. We see lightning, and then we
hear thunder; as phenomena, our seeing and hearing are connected as
cause and effect. But we must not--if we are to take the subjectivity
of “cause” seriously--suppose that our seeing or our hearing has an
outside cause. In that case, we have no reason to suppose that there
is anything outside ourselves. Nay, more: what _really_ happens when
we see is not, according to Kant, what we perceive by introspection;
what really happens is something without a date, without a position
in space, without causes and without effects. Thus we do not know
ourselves any better than we know the outside world. Space and time
and the categories interpose a mirage of illusion which cannot be
penetrated at any point. As an answer to Hume’s scepticism, this
seems a somewhat unsuccessful effort. And Kant himself, later, in the
_Critique of Practical Reason_, demolished much of his own edifice,
because he thought that ethics at least must have validity in the
“real” world. This part of his philosophy, however, is usually ignored
by his followers or apologetically minimised.

Kant gave a new turn to an old philosophical controversy, as to how
far our knowledge is _a priori_ and how far it is based on experience.
Kant admitted that without experience we could know nothing, and that
what we know is only valid within the realm of experience. But he held
that the general framework of our knowledge is _a priori_ in the sense
that it is not proved by means of particular facts of experience, but
represents the conditions to which phenomena have to conform in order
to be capable of being experienced. Before his day, the tendency had
been for continental philosophers to regard almost everything as
_a priori_ while British philosophers regarded almost everything as
empirical. But both sides thought that what is _a priori_ can be proved
by logic, at least in theory, whereas Kant held that mathematics is
_a priori_ and yet “synthetic”, _i.e._ not capable of being proved
by logic. In this he was misled by geometry. Euclidean geometry,
considered as true, is “synthetic” but not _a priori_; considered
merely as deducing consequences from premisses, it is _a priori_
but not “synthetic”. The geometry of the actual world, as required
by engineers, is empirical; the geometry of pure mathematics, which
does not inquire into the truth of the axioms but merely shows their
implications, is an exercise in pure logic.

It should be said, however, that, if the correct analysis of knowledge
bears any resemblance at all to that which has been suggested in this
book, the whole controversy between empiricists and apriorists becomes
more or less unreal. All beliefs are _caused_ by external stimuli; when
they are as particular as the stimuli they are of the sort which an
empiricist might regard as _proved_ by experience, but when they are
more general difficulties arise. A foreigner arrives in America and
sees the immigration officials, who lead him to the generalisation that
all Americans are rude; but a few minutes later the porter upsets this
induction in the hope of a tip. Thus sometimes a given belief will be
caused by one event and destroyed by another. If all the events in a
man’s life, so far as they affect the belief in question, are such as
to cause it, he counts the belief true. The more general a belief is,
the more events are relevant to it, and therefore the more difficult
it is for it to be such as a man will long consider true. Roughly
speaking, the beliefs which count as _a priori_ will be those which
well might have been upset by subsequent events, but in fact were
confirmed. Here as elsewhere we are driven to the view that theory of
knowledge is not so fundamental as it has been considered since Kant.

There is one more traditional controversy which I wish to consider,
namely, that between monists and pluralists. Is the universe one,
or is it many? If many, how intimately are they interconnected? The
monistic view is very old: it is already complete in Parmenides (fifth
century B.C.). It is fully developed in Spinoza, Hegel, and Bradley.
The pluralistic view, on the other hand, is found in Heraclitus,
the atomists, Leibniz, and the British empiricists. For the sake of
definiteness, let us take the monistic view as found in Bradley, who
is in the main a follower of Hegel. He maintains that every judgment
consists in assigning a predicate to Reality as a whole: the whole is
the subject of every predicate. Suppose you start by saying “Tommy
has a cold in the head”. This may not _seem_ to be a statement about
the universe as a whole, but according to Bradley it is. If I may
be allowed to set forth his argument in popular language which his
followers might resent, I should put it something like this: First of
all, who is Tommy? He is a person with a certain nature, distinguished
from other persons by that nature; he may resemble others in many
respects, but not in all, so that you cannot really explain who Tommy
is unless you set forth all his characteristics. But when you try to
do this, you are taken beyond Tommy: he is characterised by relations
to his environment. He is affectionate or rebellious or thirsty, noisy
or quiet, and so on; all of these qualities involve his relations
to others. If you try to define Tommy without mentioning anything
outside him, you will find this quite impossible; therefore he is not a
self-subsistent being, but an unsubstantial fragment of the world. The
same thing applies even more obviously to his nose and his cold. How do
you know he has a cold? Because material substances of a certain kind
pass from his nose to his handkerchief, which would not be possible
if he alone existed. But now, when you take in the environment with a
view to defining Tommy and his nose and his cold, you find that you
cannot define his immediate environment without taking account of its
environment, and so on, until at last you have been forced to include
the whole world. Therefore Tommy’s cold is in reality a property of
the world, since nothing short of the world is sufficiently substantial
to have properties.

We may put the argument in a more abstract form. Everything which is
part of the world is constituted, in part, by its relations to other
things; but relations cannot be real. Bradley’s argument against
relations is as follows. First he argues that, if there are relations,
there must be qualities between which they hold. This part of the
argument need not detain us. He then proceeds:

“But how the relation can stand to the qualities is, on the other
side, unintelligible. If it is nothing to the qualities, then they
are not related at all; and, if so, as we saw, they have ceased to
be qualities, and their relation is a nonentity. But if it is to be
something to them, then clearly we shall require a _new_-connecting
relation. For the relation hardly can be the mere adjective of one or
both of its terms; or, at least, as such it seems indefensible. And,
being something itself, if it does not itself bear a relation to the
terms, in what intelligible way will it succeed in being anything to
them? But here again we are hurried off into the eddy of a hopeless
process, since we are forced to go on finding new relations without
end. The links are united by a link, and this bond of union is a link
which also has two ends; and these require each a fresh link to connect
them with the old. The problem is to find how the relation can stand to
its qualities, and this problem is insoluble.”

I cannot deal adequately with this argument without abstruse
technicalities which would be out of place. I will, however, point out
what seems to me the essential error. Bradley conceives a relation as
something just as substantial as its terms, and not radically different
in kind. The analogy of the chain with links should make us suspicious,
since it clearly proves, if it is valid, that chains are impossible,
and yet, as a fact, they exist. There is not a word in his argument
which would not apply to physical chains. The successive links are
united not by another link, but by a spatial relation. I think Bradley
has been misled, unconsciously, by a circumstance to which I alluded
in an earlier chapter, namely, the fact that the _word_ for a relation
is as substantial as the _words_ for its terms. Suppose A and B are
two events, and A precedes B. In the proposition “A precedes B”, the
word “precedes” is just as substantial as the words “A” and “B”. The
relation of the _two_ events A and B is represented, in language, by
the time or space order of the _three_ words “A”, “precedes”, and
“B”. But this order is an actual relation, not a word for relation.
The first step in Bradley’s regress does actually have to be taken in
giving verbal expression to a relation, and the word for a relation
does have to be related to the words for its terms. But this is a
linguistic, not a metaphysical, fact, and the regress does not have to
go any further.

It should be added that, as Bradley himself recognises, his
difficulties break out afresh when he comes to consider the relation of
subject and predicate when a character is assigned to Reality, and that
he is therefore compelled to conclude that _no_ truth is quite true.
A conclusion of this sort, based upon an extremely abstract argument,
makes it natural to suspect that there is some error in the argument.

Pluralism is the view of science and common sense, and is therefore
to be accepted if the arguments against it are not conclusive. For
my part, I have no doubt whatever that it is the true view, and that
monism is derived from a faulty logic inspired by mysticism. This logic
dominates the philosophy of Hegel and his followers; it is also the
essential basis of Bergson’s system, although it is seldom mentioned in
his writings. When it is rejected, ambitious metaphysical systems such
as those of the past are seen to be impossible.




