CHAPTER XIII

PHYSICAL AND PERCEPTUAL SPACE


Perhaps there is nothing so difficult for the imagination as to teach
it to feel about space as modern science compels us to think. This is
the task which must be attempted in the present chapter.

We said in Chapter XII that we know about what is happening in the
brain exactly what naive realism thinks it knows about what is
happening in the world. This remark may have seemed cryptic; it must
now be expanded and expounded.

The gist of the matter is that percepts, which we spoke about at the
end of last chapter, are in our heads; that percepts are what we can
know with most certainty; and that percepts contain what naive realism
thinks it knows about the world.

But when I say that my percepts are in my head, I am saying something
which is ambiguous until the different kinds of space have been
explained, for the statement is only true in connection with _physical_
space. There is also a space in our percepts, and of this space
the statement would not be true. When I say that there is space
in our percepts, I mean nothing at all difficult to understand. I
mean--to take the sense of sight, which is the most important in this
connection--that in what we see at one time there is up and down, right
and left, inside and outside. If we see, say, a circle on a blackboard,
all these relations exist within what we see. The circle has a top half
and a bottom half, a right-hand half and a left-hand half, an inside
and an outside. Those relations alone are enough to make up a space
of sorts. But the space of everyday life is filled out with what we
derive from touch and movement--how a thing feels when we touch it,
and what movements are necessary in order to grasp it. Other elements
also come into the genesis of the space in which everybody believes
who has not been troubled by philosophy; but it is unnecessary for
our purposes to go into this question any more deeply. The point that
concerns us is that a man’s percepts are private to himself: what I
see, no one else sees; what I hear, no one else hears; what I touch,
no one else touches; and so on. True, others hear and see something
very like what I hear and see, if they are suitably placed; but there
are always differences. Sounds are less loud at a distance; objects
change their visual appearance according to the laws of perspective.
Therefore it is impossible for two persons at the same time to have
exactly identical percepts. It follows that the space of percepts, like
the percepts, must be private; there are as many perceptual spaces as
there are percipients. My percept of a table is outside my percept of
my head, in my perceptual space; but it does not follow that it is
outside my head as a physical object in physical space. Physical space
is neutral and public: in this space, all my percepts are in my head,
even the most distant star _as I see it_. Physical and perceptual space
have relations, but they are not identical, and failure to grasp the
difference between them is a potent source of confusion.

To say that you see a star when you see the light that has come from it
is no more correct than to say that you see New Zealand when you see
a New Zealander in London. Your perception when (as we say) you see a
star is causally connected, in the first instance, with what happens
in the brain, the optic nerve, and the eye, then with a light-wave
which, according to physics, can be traced back to the star as its
source. Your sensations will be closely similar if the light comes from
a lamp at the top of a mast. The physical space in which you believe
the “real” star to be is an elaborate inference; what is given is the
private space in which the speck of light you see is situated. It is
still an open question whether the space of sight has depth, or is
merely a surface, as Berkeley contended. This does not matter for
our purposes. Even if we admit that sight alone shows a difference
between an object a few inches from the eyes and an object several feet
distant, yet you certainly cannot, by sight alone, see that a cloud
is less distant than a fixed star, though you may _infer_ that it is,
because it can hide the star. The world of astronomy, from the point of
view of sight, is a surface. If you were put in a dark room with little
holes cut in the ceiling in the pattern of the stars letting light come
through, there would be nothing in your immediate visual data to show
that you were not “seeing the stars”. This illustrates what I mean by
saying that what you see is _not_ “out there” in the sense of physics.

We learn in infancy that we can sometimes touch objects we see, and
sometimes not. When we cannot touch them at once, we can sometimes do
so by walking to them. That is to say, we learn to correlate sensations
of sight with sensations of touch, and sometimes with sensations of
movement followed by sensations of touch. In this way we locate our
sensations in a three-dimensional world. Those which involve sight
alone we think of as “external”, but there is no justification for this
view. What you see when you see a star is just as internal as what you
feel when you feel a headache. That is to say, it is internal from the
standpoint of _physical_ space. It is distant in your private space,
because it is not associated with sensations of touch, and cannot be
associated with them by means of any journey you can perform.

Your own body, as known to you through direct experience, is quite
different from your own body as considered in physics. You know more
about your own body than about any other through direct experience,
because your own body can give you a number of sensations that no other
body can, for instance all kinds of bodily pains. But you still know
it only through sensations; apart from inference, it _is_ a bundle of
sensations, and therefore quite different, _prima facie_, from what
physics calls a body.

Most of the things you see are outside what you see when (as one says)
you see your own body. That is to say: you see certain other patches of
colour, differently situated in visual space, and say you are seeing
things outside your body. But from the point of view of physics, all
that you see must count as inside your body; what goes on elsewhere
can only be inferred. Thus the whole space of your sensible world with
all its percepts counts as one tiny region from the point of view of
physics.

There is no direct spatial relation between what one person sees and
what another sees, because no two ever see exactly the same object.
Each person carries about a private space of his own, which can be
located in physical space by indirect methods, but which contains no
place in common with another person’s private space. This shows how
entirely physical space is a matter of inference and construction.

To make the matter definite, let us suppose that a physiologist is
observing a living brain--no longer an impossible supposition, as
it would have been formerly. It is natural to suppose that what the
physiologist sees is in the brain he is observing. But if we are
speaking of physical space, what the physiologist sees is in his
own brain. It is in no sense in the brain that he is observing,
though it is in the percept of that brain, which occupies part of
the physiologist’s perceptual space. Causal continuity makes the
matter perfectly evident: light-waves travel from the brain that is
being observed to the eye of the physiologist, at which they only
arrive after an interval of time, which is finite though short. The
physiologist sees what he is observing only after the light-waves have
reached his eye; therefore the event which constitutes his seeing comes
at the end of a series of events which travel from the observed brain
into the brain of the physiologist. We cannot, without a preposterous
kind of discontinuity, suppose that the physiologist’s percept,
which comes at the end of this series, is anywhere else but in the
physiologist’s head.

This question is very important, and must be understood if metaphysics
is ever to be got straight. The traditional dualism of mind and
matter, which I regard as mistaken, is intimately connected with
confusions on this point. So long as we adhere to the conventional
notions of mind and matter, we are condemned to a view of perception
which is miraculous. We suppose that a physical process starts from a
visible object, travels to the eye, there changes into another physical
process, causes yet another physical process in the optic nerve,
finally produces some effect in the brain, simultaneously with which
we see the object from which the process started, the seeing being
something “mental”, totally different in character from the physical
processes which precede and accompany it. This view is so queer
that metaphysicians have invented all sorts of theories designed to
substitute something less incredible. But nobody noticed an elementary
confusion.

To return to the physiologist observing another man’s brain: what the
physiologist sees is by no means identical with what happens in the
brain he is observing, but is a somewhat remote effect. From what he
sees, therefore, he cannot judge whether what is happening in the brain
he is observing is, or is not, the sort of event that he would call
“mental”. When he says that certain physical events in the brain are
accompanied by mental events, he is thinking of physical events as if
they were what he sees. He does not see a mental event in the brain he
is observing, and therefore supposes there is in that brain a physical
process which he can observe and a mental process which he cannot.
This is a complete mistake. In the strict sense, he cannot observe
anything in the other brain, but only the percepts which he himself has
when he is suitably related to that brain (eye to microscope, etc.).
We first identify physical processes with our percepts, and then,
since our percepts are not other people’s thoughts, we argue that the
physical processes in their brains are something quite different from
their thoughts. In fact, everything that we can directly observe of
the physical world happens inside our heads, and consists of “mental”
events in at least one sense of the word “mental”. It also consists
of events which form part of the physical world. The development of
this point of view will lead us to the conclusion that the distinction
between mind and matter is illusory. The stuff of the world may be
called physical or mental or both or neither, as we please; in fact,
the words serve no purpose. There is only one definition of the words
that is unobjectionable: “physical” is what is dealt with by physics,
and “mental” is what is dealt with by psychology. When, accordingly, I
speak of “physical” space, I mean the space that occurs in physics.

It is extraordinarily difficult to divest ourselves of the belief that
the physical world is the world we perceive by sight and touch; even
if, in our philosophic moments, we are aware that this is an error,
we nevertheless fall into it again as soon as we are off our guard.
The notion that what we see is “out there” in physical space is one
which cannot survive while we are grasping the difference between what
physics supposes to be really happening, and what our senses show us
as happening; but it is sure to return and plague us when we begin to
forget the argument. Only long reflection can make a radically new
point of view familiar and easy.

Our illustrations hitherto have been taken from the sense of sight;
let us now take one from the sense of touch. Suppose that, with your
eyes shut, you let your finger-tip press against a hard table. What
is really happening? The physicist says that your finger-tip and the
table consist, roughly speaking, of vast numbers of electrons and
protons; more correctly, each electron and proton is to be thought of
as a collection of processes of radiation, but we can ignore this for
our present purposes. Although you think you are touching the table,
no electron or proton in your finger ever really touches an electron
or proton in the table, because this would develop an infinite force.
When you press, repulsions are set up between parts of your finger and
parts of the table. If you try to press upon a liquid or a gas, there
is room in it for the parts that are repelled to get away. But if you
press a hard solid, the electrons and protons that try to get away,
because electrical forces from your finger repel them, are unable to
do so, because they are crowded close to others which elbow them back
to more or less their original position, like people in a dense crowd.
Therefore the more you press the more they repel your finger. The
repulsion consists of electrical forces, which set up in the nerves a
current whose nature is not very definitely known. This current runs
into the brain, and there has effects which, so far as the physiologist
is concerned, are almost wholly conjectural. But there is one effect
which is not conjectural, and that is the sensation of touch. This
effect, owing to physiological inference or perhaps to a reflex, is
associated by us with the finger-tip. But the sensation is the same
if, by artificial means, the parts of the nerve nearer the brain are
suitably stimulated--_e.g._ if your hand has been amputated and the
right nerves are skilfully manipulated. Thus our confidence that touch
affords evidence of the existence of bodies at the place which we think
is being touched is quite misplaced. As a rule we are right, but we can
be wrong; there is nothing of the nature of an infallible revelation
about the matter. And even in the most favorable case, the perception
of touch is something very different from the mad dance of electrons
and protons trying to jazz out of each other’s way, which is what
physics maintains is really taking place at your finger-tip. Or, at
least, it _seems_ very different. But as we shall see, the knowledge
we derive from physics is so abstract that we are not warranted
in saying that what goes on in the physical world is, or is not,
intrinsically very different from the events that we know through our
own experiences.




