CHAPTER XXV

THE VALIDITY OF INFERENCE


It is customary in science to regard certain facts as “data”, from
which laws and also other facts are “inferred”. We saw in Chapter VII
that the _practice_ of inference is much wider than the theories of any
logician would justify, and that it is nothing other than the law of
association or of “learned reactions”. In the present chapter, I wish
to consider what the logicians have evolved from this primitive form of
inference, and what grounds we have, as rational beings, for continuing
to infer. But let us first get as clear a notion as we can of what
should be meant by a “datum”.

The conception of a “datum” cannot be made absolute. Theoretically,
it should mean something that we know without inference. But before
this has any definite meaning, we must define both “knowledge” and
“inference”. Both these terms have been considered in earlier chapters.
For our present purpose it will simplify matters to take account only
of such knowledge as is expressed in words. We considered in Chapter
XXIV the conditions required in order that a form of words may be
“true”; for present purposes, therefore, we may say that “knowledge”
means “the assertion of a true form of words”. This definition is not
quite adequate, since a man may be right by chance; but we may ignore
this complication. We may then define a “datum” as follows: A “datum”
is a form of words which a man utters as the result of a stimulus, with
no intermediary of any learned reaction beyond what is involved in
knowing how to speak. We must, however, permit such learned reactions
as consist in adjustments of the sense-organs or in mere increase of
sensitivity. These merely improve the receptivity to data, and do not
involve anything that can be called inference.

If the above definition is accepted, all our data for knowledge of
the external world must be of the nature of percepts. The belief in
external objects is a learned reaction acquired in the first months of
life, and it is the duty of the philosopher to treat it as an inference
whose validity must be tested. A very little consideration shows that,
logically, the inference cannot be demonstrative, but must be at best
probable. It is not logically _impossible_ that my life may be one
long dream, in which I merely imagine all the objects that I believe
to be external to me. If we are to reject this view, we must do so on
the basis of an inductive or analogical argument, which cannot give
complete certainty. We perceive other people behaving in a manner
analogous to that in which we behave, and we assume that they have had
similar stimuli. We may hear a whole crowd say “oh” at the moment when
we see a rocket burst, and it is natural to suppose that the crowd
saw it too. Nor are such arguments confined to living organisms. We
can talk to a dictaphone and have it afterwards repeat what we said;
this is most easily explained by the hypothesis that at the surface
of the dictaphone events happened, while I was speaking, which were
closely analogous to those that were happening just outside my ears.
It remains _possible_ that there is no dictaphone and I have no ears
and there is no crowd watching the rocket; my percepts _may_ be all
that is happening in such cases. But, if so, it is difficult to arrive
at any causal laws, and arguments from analogy are more misleading
than we are inclined to think them. As a matter of fact, the whole
structure of science, as well as the world of common sense, demands
the use of induction and analogy if it is to be believed. These forms
of inference, therefore, rather than deduction, are those that must be
examined if we are to accept the world of science or any world outside
of our own dreams.

Let us take a simple example of an induction which we have all
performed in practice. If we are hungry, we eat certain things we see
and not others--it may be said that we infer edibility inductively
from a certain visual and olfactory appearance. The history of this
process is that children a few months old put everything into their
mouths unless they are stopped; sometimes the result is pleasant,
sometimes unpleasant; they repeat the former rather than the latter.
That is to say: given that an object having a certain visual and
olfactory appearance has been found pleasant to eat, an object having
a very similar appearance will be eaten; but when a certain appearance
has been found connected with unpleasant consequences when eaten, a
similar appearance does not lead to eating next time. The question is:
what logical justification is there for our behaviour? Given all our
past experience, are we more likely to be nourished by bread than by a
stone? It is easy to see why we think so, but can we, as philosophers
justify this way of thinking?

It is, of course, obvious that unless one thing can be a sign of
another both science and daily life would be impossible. More
particularly, reading involves this principle. One accepts printed
words as signs, but this is only justifiable by means of induction.
I do not mean that induction is necessary to establish the existence
of other people, though that also, as we have seen, is true. I mean
something simpler. Suppose you want your hair cut, and as you walk
along the street you see a notice “hair-cutting, first floor”. It
is only by means of induction that you can _establish_ that this
_notice_ makes it in some degree probable that there is a hair-cutter’s
establishment on the first floor. I do not mean that you employ the
principle of induction; I mean that you act in accordance with it,
and that you would have to appeal to it if you were accompanied by a
long-haired sceptical philosopher who refused to go upstairs till he
was persuaded there was some point in doing so.

The principle of induction, _prima facie_, is as follows: Let there
be two kinds of events, A and B (_e.g._ lightning and thunder), and
let many instances be known in which an event of the kind A has
been quickly followed by one of the kind B, and no instances of the
contrary. Then either a sufficient number of instances of this
sequence, or instances of suitable kinds will make it increasingly
probable that A is always followed by B, and in time the probability
can be made to approach certainty without limit provided the right
kind and number of instances can be found. This is the principle we
have to examine. Scientific theories of induction generally try to
substitute well-chosen instances for numerous instances, and represent
number of instances as belonging to crude popular induction. But in
fact popular induction depends upon the emotional interest of the
instances, not upon their number. A child who has burnt its hand
_once_ in a candle-flame establishes an induction, but words take
longer, because at first they are not emotionally interesting. The
principle used in primitive practice is: Whatever, on a given occasion,
immediately precedes something very painful or pleasant, is a sign
of that interesting event. Number plays a secondary part as compared
with emotional interest. That is one reason why rational thought is so
difficult.

The logical problem of induction is to show that the proposition “A
is always accompanied (or followed) by B” can be rendered probable by
knowledge of instances in which this happens, provided the instances
are suitably chosen or very numerous. Far the best examination of
induction is contained in Mr. J. M. Keynes’s _Treatise on Probability_.
There is a valuable doctor’s thesis by the late Jean Nicod, _Le
Problème logique de l’induction_, which is very ably reviewed by R. B.
Braithwaite in _Mind_, October 1925. A man who reads these three will
know most of what is known about induction. The subject is technical
and difficult, involving a good deal of mathematics, but I will attempt
to give the gist of the results.

We will begin with the condition in which the problem had been left by
J. S. Mill. He had four canons of induction, by means of which, given
suitable examples, it could be demonstrated that A and B were causally
connected, if the law of causation could be assumed. That is to say,
given the law of causation, the scientific use of induction could
be reduced to deduction. Roughly the method is this: We know that B
must have a cause; the cause cannot be C or D or E, etc., because we
find by experiment or observation that these may be present without
producing B. On the other hand, we never succeed in finding A without
its being accompanied (or followed) by B. If A and B are both capable
of quantity, we may find further that the more there is of A the more
there is of B. By such methods we eliminate all possible causes except
A; therefore, since B must have a cause, that cause must be A. All
this is not really induction at all; true induction only comes in in
proving the law of causation. This law Mill regards as proved by mere
enumeration of instances: we know vast numbers of events which have
causes, and no events which can be shown to be uncaused; therefore, it
is highly probable that all events have causes. Leaving out of account
the fact that the law of causality cannot have quite the form that Mill
supposed, we are left with the problem: Does mere number of instances
afford a basis for induction? If not, is there any other basis? This is
the problem to which Mr. Keynes addresses himself.

Mr. Keynes holds that an induction may be rendered more probable by
number of instances, not because of their mere number, but because of
the probability, if the instances are very numerous, that they will
have nothing in common except the characteristics in question. We want,
let us suppose, to find out whether some quality A is always associated
with some quality B. We find instances in which this is the case; but
it may happen that in all our instances some quality C is also present,
and that it is C that is associated with B. If we can so choose our
instances that they have nothing in common except the qualities A and
B, then we have better grounds for holding that A is always associated
with B. If our instances are very numerous, then, even if we do not
_know_ that they have no other common quality, it may become quite
likely that this is the case. This, according to Mr. Keynes, is the
sole value of many instances.

A few technical terms are useful. Suppose we want to establish
inductively that there is some probability in favour of the
generalisation: “Everything that has the property _F_ also has the
property _f_”. We will call this generalisation _g_. Suppose we have
observed a number of instances in which _F_ and _f_ go together, and
no instances to the contrary. These instances may have other common
properties as well; the sum-total of their common properties is called
the _total positive analogy_, and the sum-total of their _known_ common
qualities is called the _known positive analogy_. The properties
belonging to some but not to all of the instances in question are
called the _negative analogy_: all of them constitute the _total
negative analogy_, all those that are _known_ constitute the _known
negative analogy_. To strengthen an induction, we want to diminish the
positive analogy to the utmost possible extent; this, according to Mr.
Keynes, is why numerous instances are useful.

On “pure” induction, where we rely solely upon number of instances,
without _knowing_ how they affect the analogy, Mr. Keynes concludes
(_Treatise in Probability_, p. 236):

“We have shown that if each of the instances necessarily follows
from the generalisation, then each additional instance increases the
probability of the generalisation, so long as the new instance could
not have been predicted with certainty from a knowledge of the former
instances.... The common notion, that each successive verification of
a doubtful principle strengthens it, is formally proved, therefore
without any appeal to conceptions of law or of causality. _But we have
not proved_ that this probability approaches certainty as a limit, or
even that our conclusion becomes more likely than not, as the number of
verifications or instances is indefinitely increased.”

It is obvious that induction is not much use unless, with suitable
care, its conclusions can be rendered more likely to be true than
false. This problem therefore necessarily occupies Mr. Keynes.

It is found that an induction will approach certainty as a limit if two
conditions are fulfilled:

(1) If the generalisation is false, the probability of its being true
in a new instance when it has been found to be true in a certain
number of instances, however great that number may be, falls short of
certainty by a finite amount.

(2) There is a finite _a priori_ probability in favour of our
generalisation.

Mr. Keynes uses “finite” here in a special sense. He holds that not all
probabilities are numerically measurable; a “finite” probability is one
which exceeds some numerically measurable probability however small.
_E.g._ our generalisation has a finite _a priori_ probability if it is
less unlikely than throwing heads a billion times running.

The difficulty is, however, that there is no easily discoverable way of
estimating the _a priori_ probability of a generalisation. In examining
this question, Mr. Keynes is led to a very interesting postulate
which, if true, will, he thinks, give the required finite _a priori_
probability. His postulate as he gives it is not quite correct, but I
shall give his form first, and then the necessary modification.

Mr. Keynes supposes that the qualities of objects cohere in groups,
so that the number of _independent_ qualities is much less than the
total number of qualities. We may conceive this after the analogy
of biological species: a cat has a number of distinctive qualities
which are found in all cats, a dog has a number of other distinctive
qualities which are found in all dogs. The method of induction can, he
says, be justified if we assume “that the objects in the field, over
which our generalisations extend, do not have an infinite number of
independent qualities; that, in other words, their characteristics,
however numerous, cohere together in groups of invariable connection,
which are finite in number” (p. 256). Again (p. 258): “As a biological
foundation for Analogy, therefore, we seem to need some such assumption
as that the amount of variety in the universe is limited in such a way
that there is no one object so complex that its qualities fall into an
infinite number of independent groups ... or rather that none of the
objects about which we generalise are as complex as this; or at least
that, though some objects may be infinitely complex, we sometimes have
a finite probability that an object about which we seek to generalise
is not infinitely complex.”

This postulate is called the “principle of limitation of variety”. Mr.
Keynes again finds that it is needed in attempts to establish laws
by statistics; if he is right, it is needed for all our scientific
knowledge outside pure mathematics. Jean Nicod pointed out that it is
not quite sufficiently stringent. We need, according to Mr. Keynes,
a finite probability that the object in question has only a finite
number of independent qualities; but what we really need is a finite
probability that the number of its independent qualities is less than
some assigned finite number. This is a very different thing, as may be
seen by the following illustration. Suppose there is some number of
which we know only that it is finite; it is infinitely improbable that
it will be less than a million, or a billion, or any other assigned
finite number, because, whatever such number we take, the number
of smaller numbers is finite and the number of greater numbers is
infinite. Nicod requires us to assume that there is a finite number _n_
such that there is a finite probability that the number of independent
qualities of our object is less than _n_. This is a much stronger
assumption than Mr. Keynes’s, which is merely that the number of
independent qualities is finite. It is the stronger assumption which is
needed to justify induction.

This result is very interesting and very important. It is remarkable
that it is in line with the trend of modern science. Eddington has
pointed out that there is a certain finite number which is fundamental
in the universe, namely the number of electrons. According to the
quantum theory, it would seem that the number of possible arrangements
of electrons may well also be finite, since they cannot move in all
possible orbits, but only in such as make the action in one complete
revolution conform to the quantum principle. If all this is true, the
principle of limitation of variety may well also be true. We cannot,
however, arrive at a proof of our principle in this way, because
physics uses induction, and is therefore presumably invalid unless
the principle is true. What we can say, in a general way, is that
the principle does not refute itself, but, on the contrary, leads to
results which confirm it. To this extent, the trend of modern science
may be regarded as increasing the plausibility of the principle.

It is important to realise the fundamental position of probability in
science. At the very best, induction and analogy only give probability.
Every inference worthy of the name is inductive, therefore all inferred
knowledge is at best probable. As to what is meant by probability,
opinions differ. Mr. Keynes takes it as a fundamental logical category:
certain premisses may make a conclusion more or less probable, without
making it certain. For him, probability is a relation between a premiss
and a conclusion. A proposition does not have a definite probability
on its own account; in itself, it is merely true or false. But it has
probabilities of different amounts in regard to different premisses.
When we speak, elliptically, of _the_ probability of a proposition,
we mean its probability in relation to all our relevant knowledge.
A proposition in probability cannot be refuted by mere observation:
improbable things may happen and probable things may fail to happen.
Nor is an estimate of probability relevant to given evidence proved
wrong when further evidence alters the probability.

For this reason the inductive principle cannot be proved or disproved
by experience. We might prove validly that such and such a conclusion
was enormously probable, and yet it might not happen. We might
prove invalidly that it was probable, and yet it might happen.
What happens affects the probability of a proposition, since it is
relevant evidence; but it never alters the probability relative to
the previously available evidence. The whole subject of probability,
therefore, on Mr. Keynes’s theory, is strictly _a priori_ and
independent of experience.

There is however another theory, called the “frequency theory”, which
would make probability not indefinable, and would allow empirical
evidence to affect our estimates of probability relative to given
premisses. According to this theory in its crude form, the probability
that an object having the property _F_ will have the property _f_ is
simply the proportion of the objects having both properties to all
those having the property _F_. For example, in a monogamous country
the probability of a married person being male is exactly a half. Mr.
Keynes advances strong arguments against all forms of this theory that
existed when his book was written. There is however an article by R. H.
Nisbet on “The Foundations of Probability” in _Mind_ for January 1926,
which undertakes to rehabilitate the frequency theory. His arguments
are interesting, and suffice to show that the controversy is still an
open one, but they do not, in my opinion, amount to decisive proof.
It is to be observed, however, that the frequency theory, if it could
be maintained, would be preferable to Mr. Keynes’s, because it would
get rid of the necessity for treating probability as indefinable, and
would bring probability into much closer touch with what actually
occurs. Mr. Keynes leaves an uncomfortable gap between probability and
fact, so that it is far from clear why a rational man will act upon a
probability. Nevertheless, the difficulties of the frequency theory
are so considerable that I cannot venture to advocate it definitely.
Meanwhile, the details of the discussion are unaffected by the view
we may take on this fundamental philosophical question. And on either
view the principle of limitation of variety will be equally necessary
to give validity to the inferences by induction and analogy upon which
science and daily life depend.




