CHAPTER XIX

THE INTROSPECTIVE ANALYSIS OF PERCEPTION


We have considered perception already from the behaviourist standpoint,
and also from that of physics. In the present chapter we are to
consider it from the standpoint of self-observation, with a view to
discovering as much as we can about the intrinsic character of the
event in us when we perceive. I shall begin with certain traditional
doctrines as to mental events, and shall thence pass to the doctrines
that I wish to advocate.

The words “mind” and “matter” are used glibly, both by ordinary people
and by philosophers, without any adequate attempt at definition.
Philosophers are much to blame for this. My own feeling is that there
is not a sharp line, but a difference of degree; an oyster is less
mental than a man, but not wholly un-mental. And I think “mental” is a
character, like “harmonious” or “discordant”, that cannot belong to a
single entity in its own right, but only to a system of entities. But
before defending this view, I wish to spend some time on the theories
that have been current in the past.

Traditionally, there are two ways of becoming aware that something
exists, one by the senses, the other by what is called “introspection”,
or what Kant called the “inner sense”. By means of introspection, it is
maintained, we become aware of occurrences quite different in kind from
those perceived through the outer senses. Occurrences known through
introspection are traditionally called “mental”, and so are any other
occurrences which intrinsically resemble them.

Mental occurrences are traditionally of three main types, called
knowing, willing, and feeling. “Feeling”, in this connection, means
pleasure and unpleasure--we do not say “pleasure and pain”, because
“pain” is an ambiguous word: it may stand for painful sensation, as
when you say “I have a pain in my tooth”, or it may stand for the
unpleasant character of the sensation. Roughly pleasure is a quality
which makes you want an experience to continue, and unpleasure is the
opposite quality which makes you want an experience to stop. However, I
am not concerned to enlarge upon feeling at present.

As for the other two kinds of mental occurrence, “knowing” and
“willing” are recognised as too narrow to describe what is meant.
Philosophers wish to include not only knowledge but also error, and
not only the sort of knowledge that is expressed in beliefs but also
the sort that occurs in perception. The word “cognition” or “cognitive
state” is used to cover everything that could possibly be described as
either knowledge or error; perception is _prima facie_ included, but
pure sensation is more debatable.

“Willing”, again, is too narrow a term. A term is required which will
include desire and aversion, and generally those states of mind which
lead up to action. These are all included under the head of “conation”,
a technical term invented for this special purpose.

Cognition and conation both have, in the orthodox theory, the property
of being directed to an _object_. What you perceive or believe, what
you desire or will, is something different from your state of mind. To
take instances: you remember a past event, but your remembering occurs
now; therefore your remembering is a different occurrence from what you
remember. You will to move your arm, but the movement is a physical
occurrence, and therefore obviously different from your volition. Many
psychologists have taken this relation to an object as the essential
characteristic of mind--notably the two Austrians Brentano and Meinong.
Sometimes feeling also is regarded as having an object: it is held
that we are pleased or displeased _at_ something. This view, however,
has never won general acceptance, whereas the view that cognition and
conation are directed to objects may be regarded as orthodox.

It is undeniable that this characteristic of being directed to objects
is, in some sense, a property of cognition and conation, but there
is room for great difference of opinion as to the proper analysis of
the property. I think we cannot hope to understand the word “mental”
until we have undertaken this analysis, and I shall therefore proceed
to address myself to it. I shall confine myself to cognition, which is
more important for our present purposes than conation.

As regards cognition, though philosophers have disagreed widely, I
think that, until recently, most would have assented to at least the
following paragraph:

Cognition is of various sorts. Take, as important kinds, perception,
memory, conception, and beliefs involving concepts. Perception is the
ordinary awareness of sensible objects: seeing a table, hearing a
piano, and so on. Memory is awareness of a past occurrence, when this
awareness is direct, not inferred or derived from testimony. Conception
is more difficult to characterise. One may say, as a way of pointing
out what is intended, that we “conceive” whenever we understand the
meaning of an abstract word, or think of that which is in fact the
meaning of the word. If you see a white patch of snow, or recall it
by means of images, you do not have a concept; but if you think about
whiteness, you have a concept. Similarly if, after seeing a number of
coins, you think about roundness as a common characteristic of all of
them, you have a concept. The object of your thought, in such a case,
is a _universal_ or a Platonic idea. Every sentence must contain at
least one word expressing a concept, and therefore every belief that
can be expressed in words contains concepts.

Each of these kinds of cognitive attitude involves its own problems.
In the present chapter we are concerned with perception. This has to
be treated both introspectively and causally; it is the introspective
treatment that we have now to undertake.

When you have the experience called “seeing a table”, there is a
certain amount of difference between your unreflecting judgment and
what careful examination reveals as to the nature of your experience.
You judge that the table is rectangular, but the patch of colour in
your visual field is not a rectangle; when you learn to draw, you have
to draw the table as it really seems and not as it seems to seem. You
have images of sensations of touch; if you were to try to touch the
table and it turned out to be an optical illusion, you would get a
violent shock of surprise. You have also expectations of a certain
degree of permanence and weight. If you went to lift the table, you
would find your muscles quite wrongly adjusted if the table were much
lighter than it looked. All these elements must be included in the
perception, though not in the sensation.

“Sensation”, as opposed to perception, is more or less hypothetical.
It is supposed to be the core, in the perception, which is solely due
to the stimulus and the sense-organ, not to past experience. When
you judge that the table is rectangular, it is past experience that
enables and compels you to do so; if you had been born blind and just
operated upon, you could not make this judgment. Nor would you have
expectations of hardness, etc. But none of this can be discovered by
introspection. From an introspective point of view, the elements due
to past experience are largely indistinguishable from those due to the
stimulus alone. One supposes that past experience modifies the brain,
and thereby modifies the mental occurrence due to the stimulus. The
notion of sensation as opposed to perception belongs, therefore, to the
causal study of perception, not to the introspective study.

There is, however, a distinction to be made here. You can discover
by mere self-observation that visual objects are accompanied by
expectations or images of touch; and similarly if you touch an object
in the dark you will probably be led to form some visual image of
it. Here you can arrive at a certain degree of analysis of your
perception through the fact that images, as a rule, _feel_ different
from the immediate results of a sensory stimulus. On the other hand,
no amount of introspection alone will reveal such things as the blind
spot. The filling in of a sensation by elements belonging to the same
sense is much less discoverable by introspection than the filling
in by associated images belonging to other senses. Thus although
by introspection alone we could discover _part_ of the influence
of experience on perception, there is another part which we cannot
discover in this way.

Remaining in the introspective attitude, it is evident that the
contents of our minds at any given moment are very complex. Throughout
our normal waking life we are always seeing, hearing, and touching,
sometimes smelling and tasting, always having various bodily
sensations, always feeling pleasant or unpleasant feelings (usually
both), always having desires or aversions. We are not normally aware
of all these items, but we can become aware of any of them by turning
our attention in the right direction. I am not at present discussing
“unconscious mental states”, because they, obviously, can only be known
causally, and we are now considering what can be known introspectively.
There may be any number of perceptions that cannot be known by
introspection; the point for us, at the moment, is that those that can
be discovered by introspection at any one time are many and various.

I do not wish, just now, to discuss the nature of attention; I wish
only to point out that it enables us to take the first steps in
abstraction. Out of the whole multiplicity of objects of sense, it
enables us to single out a small selection, which is an indispensable
preliminary to abstraction. For example, attention will enable us to
discriminate a coloured pattern which we are seeing, and to separate
it from the other things we see and from images and other objects of
sense and thoughts which may exist simultaneously. For the sake of
simplicity, let us suppose that we discriminate a black and white
pattern in the form of a triangle. Within this pattern we can further
discriminate sides and angles and an inside and outside--of course the
sides are not mathematical lines nor the angles mathematical points.

We now come to a question of very great importance, upon which our
views of the relations of mind and matter largely depend. The question
is this:

What difference is there between the propositions “there is a triangle”
and “I see a triangle”?

Both these statements seem as certain as any statement can be--at least
if rightly interpreted. As always happens in such cases, we are quite
certain of something, but not quite certain what it is that we are
certain of. I want to ask whether this something that we are certain
of is really different in the above two statements, or whether the
difference between them is only as to surroundings of which we are not
certain. Most philosophers hold that there is a difference in what we
are certain of; Mach, James, Dewey, the American realists, and I hold
that the difference is in the uncertain context. Let us examine this
question.

The _suggestions_ of the two statements “I see a triangle” and “there
is a triangle” are obviously different. The first states an event in
my life, and suggests its possible effects upon me. The second aims at
stating an event in the world, supposed to be equally discoverable by
other people. You might say “there is a triangle” if you had seen it
a moment ago but now had your eyes shut; in this case you would not
say “I see a triangle”. On the other hand, one sometimes, under the
influence of indigestion or fatigue, sees little black dots floating in
the air; in such circumstances you would say “I see a black dot”, but
not “there is a black dot”. This illustration shows that when you say
“there is a black dot” you are making a stronger assertion than when
you say “I see a black dot”. In the other case, when you say “there is
a triangle” because you saw it a moment ago, though not now, you have
three stages: First, memory assures you of the proposition “I saw a
triangle”, and then you pass on to “there was a triangle”, and then,
further, to “there is a triangle, because nothing can have happened to
destroy it so quickly.” Here we have obviously passed far beyond the
region of immediate certainty.

It seems clear, therefore, that, of our two statements, the one which
comes nearest to expressing the fact of which we are immediately
certain is “I see a triangle”, because the other makes inferences to
something public, and thus goes beyond the bare datum. This is on the
assumption that we should not say “there is a black dot” when we see
a black dot which we attribute to eye-trouble and therefore suppose
that no one else can see. Let us therefore concentrate upon “I see a
triangle”, and ask ourselves whether the whole of this, or only part,
can be accepted as a primitive certainty.

A moment’s reflection shows that both “I” and “see” are words which
take us beyond what the momentary event reveals. Take “I” to begin
with. This is a word whose meaning evidently depends upon memory
and expectation. “I” means the person who had certain remembered
experiences and is expected to have certain future experiences. We
might say “I see a triangle now and I saw a square a moment ago.” The
word “I” has exactly the same meaning in its two occurrences in this
sentence, and therefore evidently has a meaning dependent upon memory.
Now it is our object to arrive at the contribution to your knowledge
which is made by seeing the triangle at the moment. Therefore, since
the word “I” takes you beyond this contribution, we must cut it out
if we want to find a correct verbal expression for what is added to
our knowledge by seeing the triangle. We will say “a triangle is being
seen”. This is at any rate one step nearer to what we are seeking.

But now we must deal with the word “seen”. As ordinarily used, this is
a causal word, suggesting something dependent upon the eyes. In this
sense, it obviously involves a mass of previous experience; a new-born
baby does not know that what it sees depends upon its eyes. However,
we could eliminate this. Obviously all objects of sight have a common
quality, which no objects of touch or hearing have; a visual object is
different from an auditory object, and so on. Therefore instead of
saying “a triangle is being seen”, we should say “there is a visual
triangle”. Of course the meanings of the words “visual” and “triangle”
can only be learnt by experience, but they are not _logically_
dependent upon experience. A being could be imagined which would know
the words at birth; such a being could express its datum in the words
“there is a visual triangle”. In any case, the problems remaining
belong to the study of concepts; we will therefore ignore them at
present.

Now in English the words “there is” are ambiguous. When I used them
before, saying, “there is a triangle”, I meant them in the sense of
“_voila_” or “_da ist_”. Now I mean them in the sense of “_il y a_”
or “_es giebt_”. One might express what is meant by saying “a visual
triangle exists”, but the word “exist” has all sorts of metaphysical
connotations that I wish to avoid. Perhaps it is best to say “occurs”.

We have now arrived at something which is just as true when your
perception is illusory as when it is correct. If you say “a visual
black dot is occurring”, you are speaking the truth, if there is one
in your field of vision. We have eliminated the suggestion that others
could see it, or that it could be touched, or that it is composed of
matter in the sense of physics. All these suggestions are present when
one says, in ordinary conversation, “there is a black dot”; they are
intended to be eliminated by the addition of the word “visual” and the
substitution of “is occurring” for “there is”. By these means we have
arrived at what is indubitable and intrinsic in the addition to your
knowledge derived from a visual datum.

We must now ask ourselves once more: Is there still a distinction,
within what is immediate and intrinsic, between the occurrence of a
visual datum and the cognition of it? Can we say, on the basis of
immediate experience, not only “a visual black dot occurs”, but also
“a visual black dot is cognised”? My feeling is that we cannot. When
we say that it is cognised, we seem to me to mean that it is part
of an experience, that is to say, that it can be remembered, or can
modify our habits, or, generally, can have what are called “mnemic”
effects. All this takes us beyond the immediate experience into the
realm of its causal relations. I see no reason to think that there is
any duality of subject and object in the occurrence itself, or that
it can properly be described as a case of “knowledge”. It gives rise
to knowledge, through memory, and through conscious or unconscious
inferences to the common correlates of such data. But in itself it
is not knowledge, and has no duality. The datum is a datum equally
for physics and for psychology; it is a meeting point of the two. It
is neither mental nor physical, just as a single name is neither in
alphabetical order nor in order of precedence; but it is part of the
raw material of both the mental and the physical worlds. This is the
theory which is called “neutral monism”, and is the one that I believe
to be true.




