PART III

MAN FROM WITHIN




CHAPTER XVI

SELF-OBSERVATION


It will be remembered that throughout Part I, we agreed to consider
only those facts about a man which can be discovered by external
observation, and we postponed the question whether this excluded any
genuine knowledge or not. The usual view is that we know many things
which could not be known without self-observation, but the behaviourist
holds that this view is mistaken. I might be inclined to agree wholly
with the behaviourist but for the considerations which were forced upon
us in Part II, when we were examining our knowledge of the physical
world. We were then led to the conclusion that, assuming physics to
be correct, the data for our knowledge of physics are infected with
subjectivity, and it is impossible for two men to observe the same
phenomenon except in a rough and approximate sense. This undermines the
supposed objectivity of the behaviourist method, at least in principle;
as a matter of degree, it may survive to some extent. Broadly speaking,
if physics is true and if we accept a behaviourist definition of
knowledge such as that of Chapter VIII, we ought, as a rule, to know
more about things that happen near the brain than about things that
happen far from it, and most of all about things that happen in the
brain. This _seemed_ untrue because people thought that what happens
in the brain is what the physiologist sees when he examines it; but
this, according to the theory of Chapter XII, happens in the brain of
the physiologist. Thus the _a priori_ objection to the view that we
know best what happens in our brains is removed, and we are led back
to self-observation as the most reliable way of obtaining knowledge.
This is the thesis which is to be expanded and sustained in the present
chapter.

As every one knows, the certainty of self-observation was the basis
of Descartes’ system, with which modern philosophy began. Descartes,
being anxious to build his metaphysic only upon what was absolutely
certain, set to work, as a preliminary, to doubt anything that he could
make himself doubt. He succeeded in doubting the whole external world,
since there might be a malicious demon who took pleasure in presenting
deceitful appearances to him. (For that matter, dreams would have
supplied a sufficient argument.) But he could not manage to doubt his
own existence. For, said he, I am really doubting; whatever else may be
doubtful, the fact that I doubt is indubitable. And I could not doubt
if I did not exist. He summed up the argument in his famous formula:
_I think, therefore I am_. And having arrived at this certainty, he
proceeded to build up the world again by successive inferences. Oddly
enough, it was very like the world in which he had believed before his
excursion into scepticism.

It is instructive to contrast this argument with Dr. Watson’s. Dr.
Watson, like Descartes, is sceptical of many things which others
accept without question; and, like Descartes, he believes that there
are some things so certain that they can be safely used as the basis
of a startling philosophy. But the things which Dr. Watson regards
as certain are just those which Descartes regarded as doubtful, and
the thing which Dr. Watson most vehemently rejects is just what
Descartes regarded as absolutely unquestionable. Dr. Watson maintains
that there is no such thing as thinking. No doubt he believes in
his own existence, but not because he thinks he can think. The
things that strike him as absolutely indubitable are rats in mazes,
time-measurements, physiological facts about glands and muscles, and so
on. What are we to think when two able men hold such opposite views?
The natural inference would be that _everything_ is doubtful. This may
be true, but there are degrees of doubtfulness, and we should like to
know which of these two philosophers, if either, is right as to the
region of minimum doubtfulness.

Let us begin by examining Descartes’ view. “I think, therefore I am” is
what he says, but this won’t do as it stands. What, from his own point
of view, he should profess to know is not “_I_ think”, but “there is
thinking”. He finds doubt going on, and says: There is doubt. Doubt
is a form of thought, therefore there is thought. To translate this
into “_I_ think” is to assume a great deal that a previous exercise
in scepticism ought to have taught Descartes to call in question. He
would say that thoughts imply a thinker. But why should they? Why
should not a thinker be simply a certain series of thoughts, connected
with each other by causal laws? Descartes believed in “substance”,
both in the mental and in the material world. He thought that there
could not be motion unless something moved, nor thinking unless some
one thought. No doubt most people would still hold this view; but in
fact it springs from a notion--usually unconscious--that the categories
of grammar are also the categories of reality. We have already seen
that “matter” is merely a name for certain strings of sets of events.
It follows that what we call motion of matter really means that the
centre of such a set of events at one time does not have the same
spatial relations to other events as the connected centre at another
time has to the connected other events. It does not mean that there is
a definite entity, a piece of matter, which is now in one place and
now in another. Similarly, when we say, “I think first this and then
that”, we ought not to mean that there is a single entity “I” which
“has” two successive thoughts. We ought to mean only that there are two
successive thoughts which have causal relations of the kind that makes
us call them parts of one biography, in the same sort of way in which
successive notes may be parts of one tune; and that these thoughts are
connected with the body which is speaking in the way (to be further
investigated) in which thoughts and bodies are connected. All this is
rather complicated, and cannot be admitted as part of any ultimate
certainty. What Descartes really felt sure about was a certain
occurrence, which he described in the words “I think”. But the words
were not quite an accurate representation of the occurrence; indeed,
words never can escape from certain grammatical and social requirements
which make them say at once more and less than we really mean. I think
we ought to admit that Descartes was justified in feeling sure that
there was a certain occurrence, concerning which doubt was impossible;
but he was not justified in bringing in the word “I” in describing this
occurrence, and it remains to be considered whether he was justified in
using the word “think”.

In using a general word such as “think”, we are obviously going beyond
the datum, from a logical point of view. We are subsuming a particular
occurrence under a heading, and the heading is derived from past
experience. Now all words are applicable to many occurrences; therefore
all words go beyond any possible datum. In this sense, it is impossible
ever to convey in words the particularity of a concrete experience; all
words are more or less abstract. Such, at least, is a plausible line
of argument, but I am by no means sure that it is valid. For example,
the sight of a particular dog may make the general word “dog” come
into your mind; you then know that it is a dog, but you may not notice
what sort of dog it is. In this sense, the knowledge with which we
start is abstract and general; that is to say, it consists of a learned
reaction to a stimulus of a certain sort. The reactions, at any rate
in so far as they are verbal, are more uniform than the stimuli. A
witness might be asked “Did you see a dog?” “Yes.” “What sort of dog?”
“Oh, just an ordinary dog; I don’t remember more about it.” That is to
say, the witness’s reaction consisted of the generalised word “dog”
and no more. One is almost reminded of quantum phenomena in the atom.
When light falls on a hydrogen atom, it may make the electron jump from
the first orbit to the second, or to the third, etc. Each of these
is a generalised reaction to a stimulus which has no corresponding
generality. So dogs and cats have each their individual peculiarities,
but the ordinary inobservant person responds with the generalised
reaction “dog” or “cat”, and the particularity of the stimulus leads to
no corresponding particularity in the knowledge-reaction.

To return to Descartes and his thinking: it is possible, according to
what we have just said, that Descartes knew he was thinking with more
certainty than he knew what he was thinking about. This possibility
requires that we should ask what he meant by “thinking”. And since, for
him, thinking was the primitive certainty, we must not introduce any
external stimulus, since he considered it possible to doubt whether
anything external existed.

Descartes used the word “thinking” somewhat more widely than we should
generally do nowadays. He included all perception, emotion, and
volition, not only what are called “intellectual” processes. We may
perhaps with advantage concentrate upon perception. Descartes would say
that, when he “sees the moon”, he is more certain of his visual percept
than he is of the outside object. As we have seen, this attitude is
rational from the standpoint of physics and physiology, because a given
occurrence in the brain is capable of having a variety of causes, and
where the cause is unusual common sense will be misled. It would be
theoretically possible to stimulate the optic nerve artificially in
just the way in which light coming from the moon stimulates it; in this
case, we should have the same experience as when we “see the moon”, but
should be deceived as to its external source. Descartes was influenced
by an argument of this sort, when he brought up the possibility of a
deceitful demon. Therefore what he felt certain about was not what
he had initially felt certain about, but what remained certain after
an argument as to the causes of perception. This brings us to a
distinction which is important, but difficult to apply; the distinction
between what we in fact do not doubt, and what we should not doubt if
we were completely rational. We do not in fact question the existence
of the sun and moon, though perhaps we might teach ourselves to do
so by a long course of Cartesian doubt. Even then, according to
Descartes, we could not doubt that we have the experiences which we
have hitherto called “seeing the sun” and “seeing the moon”, although
we shall need different words if we are to describe these experiences
correctly.

The question arises: Why should we not doubt everything? Why should we
remain convinced that we have these experiences? Might not a deceitful
demon perpetually supply us with false memories? When we say “a moment
ago I had the experience which I have hitherto called seeing the sun”,
perhaps we are deceived. In dreams we often remember things that never
happened. At best, therefore, we can be sure of our present momentary
experience, not of anything that happened even half a minute ago.
And before we can so fix our momentary experience as to make it the
basis of a philosophy, it will be past, and therefore uncertain. When
Descartes said “I think”, he may have had certainty; but by the time he
said “therefore I am”, he was relying upon memory, and may have been
deceived. This line of argument leads to complete scepticism about
everything. If we are to avoid such a result, we must have some new
principle.

In actual fact, we start by feeling certainty about all sorts of
things, and we surrender this feeling only where some definite argument
has convinced us that it is liable to lead to error. When we find any
class of primitive certainties which never leads to error, we retain
our convictions in regard to this class. That is to say, wherever we
feel initial certainty, we require an argument to make us doubt, not an
argument to make us believe. We may therefore take, as the basis of our
beliefs, any class of primitive certainties which cannot be shown to
lead us into error. This is really what Descartes does, although he is
not clear about it himself.

Moreover, when we have found an error in something of which we were
previously certain, we do not as a rule abandon entirely the belief
which misled us, but we seek, if we can, to modify it so that it
shall no longer be demonstrably false. This is what has happened
with perception. When we think we see an external object, we may be
deceived by a variety of causes. There may be a mirage or a reflection;
in this case, the source of the error is in the external world, and a
photographic plate would be equally deceived. There may be a stimulus
to the eye of the sort that makes us “see stars”, or we may see little
black dots owing to a disordered liver, in which case, the source of
the error is in the body but not in the brain. We may have dreams in
which we seem to see all sorts of things; in this case, the source
of the error is in the brain. Having gradually discovered these
possibilities of error, people have become somewhat wary as to the
objective significance of their perceptions; but they have remained
convinced that they really have the perceptions they thought they had,
although the common-sense interpretation of them is sometimes at fault.
Thus, while retaining the conviction that they are sure of something,
they have gradually changed their view as to what it is that they are
sure of. Nothing is known that tends to show error in the view that we
really have the percepts we think we have, so long as we are prudent
in interpreting them as signs of something external. That is the valid
basis for Descartes’ view that “thought” is more certain than external
objects. When “thought” is taken to mean the experiences which we
usually regard as percepts of objects, there are sound reasons for
accepting Descartes’ opinion to this extent.

Let us now take up Dr. Watson’s view. We shall find, if I am not
mistaken, that his position also is to a very large extent valid. That
being so, we shall seek to find an intermediate opinion, accepting what
seems valid and rejecting what seems doubtful in the contentions of
both protagonists.

Dr. Watson’s view as to what is most certain is one which is in entire
accordance with common sense. All psychological matters the plain man
regards as more or less open to question, but he has no doubts about
his office, his morning train, the tax-collector, the weather, and
the other blessings of this life. It may amuse him, in an idle hour,
to listen to some one playing with the idea that life is a dream, or
suggesting that the thoughts of the people in the train are more real
than the train. But unless he is a philosophical lecturer, he does not
countenance such notions in business hours. Who can imagine a clerk in
an office conceiving metaphysical doubts as to the existence of his
boss? Or would any railroad president regard with favour the theory
that his railroad is only an idea in the minds of the shareholders?
Such a view, he would say, though it is often sound as regards
gold-mines, is simply silly when it comes to a railroad: anybody can
see it, and can get himself run over if he wanders on the tracks under
the impression that they do not exist. Belief in the unreality of
matter is likely to lead to an untimely death, and that, perhaps, is
the reason why this belief is so rare, since those who entertained it
died out. We cannot dismiss the common-sense outlook as simply silly,
since it succeeds in daily life; if we are going to reject it in part,
we must be sure that we do so in favor of something equally tough as a
means of coping with practical problems.

Descartes says: I think, therefore I am. Watson says: There are rats in
mazes, therefore I don’t think. At least, a parodist might thus sum up
his philosophy. What Watson really says is more like this: (1) The most
certain facts are those which are public, and can be confirmed by the
testimony of a number of observers. Such facts form the basis of the
physical sciences: physics, chemistry, biology, anatomy, physiology,
to mention only those that are relevant to the matter in question. (2)
The physical sciences are capable of affording an explanation of all
the publicly observable facts about human behaviour. (3) There is no
reason to suppose that there are any facts about human beings that can
be known only in some other way. (4) In particular, “introspection”, as
a means of discovering by self-observation things that are in principle
undiscoverable by observation of others, is a pernicious superstition,
which must be swept away before any really sound knowledge of man
becomes possible. (5) And, as a corollary, there is no reason to
believe in the existence of “thought” as opposed to speech and other
bodily behaviour.

I have numbered the above propositions, as it is important to keep them
separate. On the whole, (1), (2), and (3) seem to me to be true, but
(4) and (5) seem to me to be false. Behaviourists, I think, incline to
the view that (4) and (5) follow from (1), (2), and (3); but this view
I attribute to what I should regard as errors concerning the basis of
physics. That is why it was necessary to discuss physics before coming
to a decision on this question of self-observation. But let us examine
each of the above propositions in turn.

(1) It is true that the facts upon which the physical sciences are
based are all of them public, in the sense that many men can observe
them. If a phenomenon is photographed, any number of people can inspect
the photograph. If a measurement is made, not only may several people
be present, but others can repeat the experiment. If the result does
not confirm the first observer, the supposed fact is rejected. The
publicity of physical facts is always regarded as one of the greatest
assets of physics. On a common-sense basis, therefore, the first of the
propositions in which we have summed up the behaviourist philosophy
must be admitted.

There are, however, some very important provisos which must be
mentioned. In the first place, a scientific observer is not expected
to note his integral reaction to a situation, but only that part of it
which experience leads him to regard as “objective”, _i.e._ the same as
the reaction of any other competent observer. This process of learning
to note only “objective” features in our reaction is, as we have seen,
begun in infancy; training in science only carries it further. A “good”
observer does not mention what is peculiar to himself in his reaction.
He does not say: “A boring speck of light danced about, causing me
eye-fatigue and irritation; finally it settled at such-and-such a
point.” He says simply: “The reading was such-and-such”. All this
objectivity is a result of training and experience. One may say, in
fact, that very few men have the “right” reaction to a scientific
situation. Therefore an immense amount of theory is mixed up with what
passes in science as pure observation. The nature and justification of
this theory is a matter requiring investigation.

In the second place, we must not misinterpret the nature of the
publicity in the case of physical phenomena. The publicity consists in
the fact that a number of people make closely similar reactions at a
given moment. Suppose, for example, that twelve men are told to watch a
screen for the appearance of a bright light, and to say “now” when it
appears. Suppose the experimenter hears them all just when he himself
sees the light; then he has good reason to believe that they have each
had a stimulus similar to his. But physics compels us to hold that they
have had twelve separate stimuli, so that when we say they have all
seen the same light we can only legitimately mean that their twelve
stimuli had a common causal origin. In attributing our perceptions to a
normal causal origin outside ourselves, we run a certain risk of error,
since the origin may be unusual: there may be reflection or refraction
on the way to the eye, there may be an unusual condition of the eye
or optic nerve or brain. All these considerations give a certain very
small probability that, on a given occasion, there is not such an
outside cause as we suppose. If, however, a number of people concur
with us, _i.e._ simultaneously have reactions which they attribute to
an outside cause that can be identified with the one we had inferred,
then the probability of error is enormously diminished. This is exactly
the usual case of concurrent testimony. If twelve men, each of whom
lies every other time that he speaks, independently testify that some
event has occurred, the odds in favour of their all speaking the truth
are 4095 to 1. The same sort of argument shows that our public senses,
when confirmed by others, are probably speaking the truth, except where
there are sources of collective illusion such as mirage or suggestion.

In this respect, however, there is no _essential_ difference between
matters of external observation and matters of self-observation.
Suppose, for example, that, for the first time in your life, you smell
assafœtida. You say to yourself “that is a most unpleasant smell”. Now
unpleasantness is a matter of self-observation. It may be _correlated_
with physiological conditions which can be observed in others, but it
is certainly not identical with these, since people knew that things
were pleasant and unpleasant before they knew about the physiological
conditions accompanying pleasure and its opposite. Therefore when
you say “that smell is unpleasant” you are noticing something that
does not come into the world of physics as ordinarily understood. You
are, however, a reader of psycho-analysis, and you have learned that
sometimes hate is concealed love and love is concealed hate. You say to
yourself, therefore: “Perhaps I really like the smell of assafœtida,
but am ashamed of liking it”. You therefore make your friends smell it,
with the result that you soon have no friends. You then try children,
and finally chimpanzees. Friends and children give verbal expression
to their disgust: chimpanzees are expressive, though not verbal. All
these facts lead you to state: “The smell of assafœtida is unpleasant”.
Although self-observation is involved, the result has the same kind of
certainty, and the same kind of objective verification, as if it were
one of the facts that form the empirical basis of physics.

(2) The second proposition, to the effect that the physical sciences
are capable of affording an explanation of all the publicly observable
facts about human behaviour, is one as to which it is possible to argue
endlessly. The plain fact is that we do not yet know whether it is true
or false. There is much to be said in its favour on general scientific
grounds, particularly if it is put forward, not as a dogma, but as a
methodological precept, a recommendation to scientific investigators
as to the direction in which they are to seek for solution of their
problems. But so long as much of human behaviour remains unexplained
in terms of physical laws, we cannot assert dogmatically that there is
no residue which is theoretically inexplicable by this method. We may
say that the trend of science, so far, seems to render such a view
improbable, but to say even so much is perhaps rash, though, for my
part, I should regard it as still more rash to say that there certainly
is such a residue. I propose, therefore, as a matter of argument, to
admit the behaviourist position on this point, since my objections to
behaviourism as an ultimate philosophy come from quite a different kind
of considerations.

(3) The proposition we are now to examine may be stated as follows:
“All facts that can be known about human beings are known by the
same method by which the facts of physics are known.” This I hold to
be true, but for a reason exactly opposite to that which influences
the behaviourist. I hold that the facts of physics, like those of
psychology, are obtained by what is really self-observation, although
common sense mistakenly supposes that it is observation of external
objects. As we saw in Chapter XIII, your visual, auditory, and other
percepts are all in your head, from the standpoint of physics.
Therefore, when you “see the sun”, it is, strictly speaking, an event
in yourself that you are knowing: the inference to an external cause
is more or less precarious, and is on occasion mistaken. To revert to
the assafœtida: it is by a number of self-observations that you know
that the smell of assafœtida is unpleasant, and it is by a number of
self-observations that you know that the sun is bright and warm. There
is no essential difference between the two cases. One may say that the
data of psychology are those private facts which are not very directly
linked with facts outside the body, while the data of physics are those
private facts which have a very direct causal connection with facts
outside the body. Thus physics and psychology have the same method;
but this is rather what is commonly taken to be the special method of
psychology than what is regarded as the method of physics. We differ
from the behaviourist in assimilating physical to psychological method,
rather than the opposite.

(4) Is there a source of knowledge such as is believed in by those
who appeal to “introspection”? According to what we have just been
saying, all knowledge rests upon something which might, in a sense, be
called “introspection”. Nevertheless, there may be some distinction to
be discovered. I think myself that the only distinction of importance
is in the degree of correlation with events outside the body of the
observer. Suppose, for example, that a behaviourist is watching a rat
in a maze, and that a friend is standing by. He says to the friend
“Do you see that rat?” If the friend says yes, the behaviourist is
engaged in his normal occupation of observing physical occurrences.
But if the friend says no, the behaviourist exclaims, “I must give up
this boot-legged whiskey”. In that case, if his horror still permits
him to think clearly, he will be obliged to say that in watching the
imaginary rat he was engaged in introspection. There was certainly
something happening, and he could still obtain knowledge by observing
what was happening, provided he abstained from supposing that it had
a cause outside his body. But he cannot, without outside testimony
or some other extraneous information, distinguish between the “real”
rat and the “imaginary” one. Thus in the case of the “real” rat also,
his primary datum ought to be considered introspective, in spite of
the fact that it does not seem so; for the datum in the case of the
“imaginary” rat also does not _seem_ to be merely introspective.

The real point seems to be this: some events have effects which radiate
all round them, and can therefore produce reactions in a number of
observers; of these, ordinary speech is an illustration. But other
events produce effects which travel linearly, not spherically; of
these, speech into a telephone from a sound-proof telephone box may
serve as an illustration. This can be heard by only one person beside
the speaker; if instead of a speaker we had an instrument at the
mouthpiece, only one person could hear the sound, namely the person
at the other end of the telephone. Events which happen inside a human
body are like the noise in the telephone: they have effects, in the
main, which travel along nerves to the brain, instead of spreading
out in all directions equally. Consequently, a man can know a great
deal about his own body which another man can only know indirectly.
Another man can see the hole in my tooth, but he cannot feel my
toothache. If he infers that I feel toothache, he still does not have
the very same knowledge that I have; he may use the same words, but
the stimulus to his use of them is different from the stimulus to
mine, and I can be acutely aware of the pain which is the stimulus to
my words. In all these ways a man has knowledge concerning his own
body which is obtained differently from the way in which he obtains
knowledge of other bodies. This peculiar knowledge is, in one sense,
“introspective”, though not quite in the sense that Dr. Watson denies.

(5) We come now to the real crux of the whole matter, namely to the
question: Do we think? This question is very ambiguous, so long as
“thinking” has not been clearly defined. Perhaps we may state the
matter thus: Do we know events in us which would not be included in
an absolutely complete knowledge of physics? I mean by a complete
knowledge of physics a knowledge not only of physical laws, but also
of what we may call geography, _i.e._ the distribution of energy
throughout space-time. If the question is put in this way, I think it
is quite clear that we do know things not included in physics. A blind
man could know the whole of physics, but he could not know what things
look like to people who can see, nor what is the difference between
red and blue as seen. He could know all about wave-lengths, but people
knew the difference between red and blue as seen before they knew
anything about wave-lengths. The person who knows physics and can see
knows that a certain wave-length will give him a sensation of red, but
this knowledge is not part of physics. Again, we know what we mean by
“pleasant” and “unpleasant”, and we do not know this any better when
we have discovered that pleasant things have one kind of physiological
effect and unpleasant things have another. If we did not already know
what things are pleasant and what unpleasant, we could never have
discovered this correlation. But the knowledge that certain things are
pleasant and certain others unpleasant is no part of physics.

Finally, we come to imaginations, hallucinations, and dreams. In all
these cases, we may suppose that there is an external stimulus, but
the cerebral part of the causal chain is unusual, so that there is not
in the outside world something connected with what we are imagining
in the same way as in normal perception. Yet in such cases we can
quite clearly know what is happening to us; we can, for example,
often remember our dreams. I think dreams must count as “thought”, in
the sense that they lie outside physics. They may be accompanied by
movements, but knowledge of them is not knowledge of these movements.
Indeed all knowledge as to movements of matter is inferential, and
the knowledge which a scientific man should take as constituting
his primary data is more like our knowledge of dreams than like our
knowledge of the movements of rats or heavenly bodies. To this extent,
I should say, Descartes is in the right as against Watson. Watson’s
position seems to rest upon naive realism as regards the physical
world, but naive realism is destroyed by what physics itself has to say
concerning physical causation and the antecedents of our perceptions.
On these grounds, I hold that self-observation can and does give us
knowledge which is not part of physics, and that there is no reason to
deny the reality of “thought”.




