CHAPTER XXIV

TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD


The question of truth and falsehood has been wrapped in unnecessary
mystery owing to a number of causes. In the first place, people wish to
think that their beliefs are more apt to be true than false, so that
they seek a theory that will show that truth is normal and falsehood
more or less accidental. In the second place, people are very vague as
to what they mean by “belief” or “judgment”, though persuaded that they
know beliefs or judgments to be the objects to which the predicates
“true” or “false” apply. In the third place, there is a tendency to
use “truth” with a big T in the grand sense, as something noble and
splendid and worthy of adoration. This gets people into a frame of mind
in which they become unable to think. But just as the grave-diggers in
_Hamlet_ became familiar with skulls, so logicians become familiar with
truth. “The hand of little employment hath the daintier sense,” says
Hamlet. Therefore it is not from the logician that awe before truth is
to be expected.

There are two questions in our present subject: (1) What are the
objects to which the predicates “true” and “false” apply? (2) What is
the difference between such as are true and such as are false? We will
begin with the first of these questions.

_Prima facie_, “true” and “false” apply to statements, whether in
speech or in writing. By extension, they are supposed to apply to the
beliefs expressed in those statements, and also to hypotheses which are
entertained without being believed or disbelieved. But let us first
consider the truth and falsehood of statements, following our practice
of going as far as we can with the behaviourists before falling back on
introspection. We considered the meaning of words earlier; now we have
to consider sentences. Of course a sentence may consist of a single
word, or of a wink; but generally it consists of several words. In
that case, it has a meaning which is a function of the meanings of the
separate words and their order. A sentence which has no meaning is not
true or false; thus it is only sentences as vehicles of a certain sort
of meaning that have truth or falsehood. We have therefore to examine
the meaning of a sentence.

Let us take some very humble example. Suppose you look in a time-table
and find it there stated that a passenger train leaves King’s Cross for
Edinburgh at 10 A.M. What is the meaning of this assertion? I shudder
when I think of its complexity. If I were to try to develop the theme
adequately, I should be occupied with nothing else till the end of
the present volume, and then I should have only touched the fringe of
the subject. Take first the social aspect: it is not essential that
anybody but the engineer and fireman should travel by the train, though
it is essential that others should be _able_ to travel by it if they
fulfil certain conditions. It is not essential that the train should
reach Edinburgh: the statement remains true if there is an accident or
breakdown on the way. But it is essential that the management of the
railway should intend it to reach Edinburgh. Take next the physical
aspect: it is not essential, or even possible, that the train should
start _exactly_ at ten; one might perhaps say that it must not start
more than ten seconds before its time or more than fifty seconds after,
but these limits cannot be laid down rigidly. In countries where
unpunctuality is common they would be much wider. Then we must consider
what we mean by “starting”, which no one can define unless he has
learnt the infinitesimal calculus. Then we consider the definitions of
King’s Cross and Edinburgh, both of which are more or less vague terms.
Then we must consider what is meant by a “train”. Here there will be
first of all complicated legal questions; what constitutes fulfilment
of a railway company’s obligations in the way of running “trains”? Then
there are questions as to the constitution of matter, since evidently
a train is a piece of matter; also of course there are questions as
to methods of estimating Greenwich time at King’s Cross. Most of the
above points have to do with the meaning of single words, not with the
meaning of the whole sentence. It is obvious that the ordinary mortal
does not trouble about such complications when he uses the words: to
him a word has a meaning very far from precise, and he does not try to
exclude marginal cases. It is the search for precision that introduces
complications. We think we attach a meaning to the word “man”, but we
don’t know whether to include Pithecanthropus Erectus. To this extent,
the meaning of the word is vague.

As knowledge increases, words acquire meanings which are more precise
and more complex; new words have to be introduced to express the less
complex constituents which have been discovered. A word is intended to
describe something in the world; at first it does so very badly, but
afterwards it gradually improves. Thus single words embody knowledge,
although they do not make assertions.

In an ideal logical language, there will be words of different kinds.
First, proper names. Of these, however, there are no examples in
actual language. The words which are _called_ proper names describe
collections, which are always defined by some characteristic;
thus assertions about “Peter” are really about everything that is
“Peterish”. To get a true proper name, we should have to get to a
single particular or a set of particulars defined by enumeration,
not by a common quality. Since we cannot acquire knowledge of actual
particulars, the words we use denote, in the best language we can make,
either adjectives or relations between two or more terms. In addition
to these, there are words indicative of structure: _e.g._ in “A is
greater than B”, the words “is” and “than” have no separate meaning,
but merely serve to show the “sense” of the relation “greater”, _i.e._
that it goes from A to B, not from B to A.

Strictly speaking, we are still simplifying. True adjectives and
relations will require particulars for their terms; the sort of
adjectives we can know, such as “blue” and “round”, will not be
applicable to particulars. They are therefore analogous to the
adjective “populous” applied to a town. To say “this town is populous”
means “many people live in this town”. A similar transformation would
be demanded by logic in all the adjectives and relations we can know
empirically. That is to say, no word that we can understand would occur
in a grammatically correct account of the universe.

Leaving on one side the vagueness and inaccuracy of words, let us ask
ourselves; in what circumstances do we feel convinced that we know a
statement to be true or false as the case may be? A present statement
will be regarded as true if, _e.g._ it agrees with recollection or
perception; a past statement, if it raised expectations now confirmed.
I do not mean to say that these are the only grounds upon which we
regard statements as true; I mean that they are simple and typical,
and worth examining. If you say “it was raining this morning”, I may
recollect that it was or that it wasn’t. One may perhaps say that the
words “this morning” are associated for me with the word “raining” or
with the words “not raining”. According to which occurs, I judge your
statement true or false. If I have neither association, I do not judge
your statement either true or false unless I have material for an
inference; and I do not wish to consider inference yet. If you say “the
lights have gone out”, when I can see the lights shining, I judge that
you speak falsely, because my perception is associated with the words
“lights shining”. If you say “the lights will go out in a minute”, you
produce a certain familiar kind of tension called “expectation”, and
after a time you produce a judgment that you spoke falsely (if the
lights do not go out). These are the ordinary _direct_ ways of deciding
on the truth or falsehood of statements about past, present, or future.

It is necessary to distinguish between direct and indirect grounds
for accepting or rejecting statements. Pragmatism considers only
indirect grounds. Broadly speaking, it considers a statement false when
the consequences of accepting it are unfortunate. But this belongs
to the region of inference. I ask you the way to the station, you
tell me wrong, and I miss my train; I then _infer_ that you told me
wrong. But if you say “the lights are out” when I see them shining,
I reject your statement without inference. In this case, something
in my present circumstances is associated with words different from
yours, and different in ways which I have learnt to regard as involving
incompatibility. The ultimate test of falsehood is _never_, so I think,
the nature of the consequences of a belief, but the association between
words and sensible or remembered facts. A belief is “verified” when a
situation arises which gives a feeling of expectedness in connection
with it; it is falsified when the feeling is one of surprise. But
this only applies to beliefs which await some future contingency for
verification or refutation. A belief which is an immediate reaction
to a situation--_e.g._ when you are waiting for a race to begin and
presently you say “they’re off”--has no need of verification, but
verifies other beliefs. And even where the confirmation of a belief is
in the future, it is the expectedness, not the pleasantness, of the
consequences that confirms the truth of the belief.

I think it is a mistake to treat “belief” as one kind of occurrence,
as is done in traditional psychology. The sort of belief which is
based upon memory or perception alone differs from the sort which
involves expectation. When you find in the time-table that a train
leaves King’s Cross at ten, your belief that this statement occurs in
the time-table does not await future confirmation, but your belief
about the train does: you may go to King’s Cross and see the train
start. A belief which concerns an event may be a recollection, a
perception, or an expectation. It may be none of these, in the case of
an event which you have not seen and do not expect to see--_e.g._ Cæsar
crossing the Rubicon, or the abolition of the House of Lords. But
such beliefs always involve inference. I do not at this stage consider
logical and mathematical beliefs, some of which must be, _in a sense_,
non-inferential. But I think we shall find that this sense is different
from that in which memories and perceptions are non-inferential.

A belief, I should say, interpreted narrowly, is a form of words
related to an emotion of one of several kinds. (I shall give a broader
meaning later.) The emotion is different according as the belief
embodies a reminiscence, a perception, an expectation, or something
outside the experience of the believer. Moreover, a form of words
is not essential. Where the emotion is present, and leads to action
relevant to some feature of the environment, there may be said to be
a belief. The fundamental test of a belief, of no matter what sort,
is that it causes some event which actually takes place to arouse
the emotion of expectedness or its opposite. I do not now attempt to
decide what an emotion is. Dr. Watson gives a behaviouristic account
of emotions, which would, if adopted, make my definition of “belief”
purely behaviouristic. I have framed the definition so as not to
involve a decision on the question of introspection.

The subject of truth and falsehood may be subdivided as follows:

  A. _Formal Theory._--Given the meanings of the component words, what
      decides whether a sentence is true or false?

  B. _Causal Theory._--Can we distinguish between truth and falsehood
      by (_a_) their causes, (_b_) their effects?

  C. _Individual and Social Elements._--A statement is a social
      occurrence, a belief is something individual.

      How can we define a belief, and what is it when not composed of
      words?

  D. _Consistency and Truth._--Can we get outside the circle of
      beliefs or statements to something else which shows them true,
      not merely consistent? In other words, what possible relation is
      there between propositions and facts?

It is very hard to disentangle these questions. The first question,
as to formal theories, leads to the fourth, as to the relations of
propositions to facts. _E.g._ “Brutus killed Cæsar” is true because
of a certain fact; what fact? The fact that Brutus killed Cæsar. This
keeps us in the verbal realm, and does not get us outside it to some
realm of non-verbal fact by which verbal statements can be verified.
Hence our fourth problem arises. But this leads us to our second
problem, as to causes and effects of what is true or false, for it
is here that we shall naturally look for the vital relation between
propositions and facts. And here again we must distinguish between
_thinking_ truly and _speaking_ truly. The former is an individual
affair, the latter a social affair. Thus all our problems hang together.

I will begin with C, the difference between a belief and a statement.
By a “statement” I mean a form of words, uttered or written, with a
view to being heard or read by some other person or persons, and not
a question, interjection, or command, but such as we should call an
assertion. As to the question what forms of words are assertions, that
is one for the grammarian and differs from language to language. But
perhaps we can say rather more than that. The distinction, however,
between an assertion and an imperative is not sharp. In England,
notices say “Visitors are requested not to walk on the grass”. In
America, they say “Keep off! This means you.” Effectively, the two have
the same meaning: yet the English notice consists only of a statement,
while the American notice consists of an imperative followed by a
statement which must be false if read by more than one person. In so
far as statements are intended to influence the conduct of others, they
partake of the nature of imperatives or requests. Their characteristic,
however, is that they endeavour to effect their aim by producing a
_belief_ which may or may not exist in the mind of the speaker. Often,
however, they _express_ a belief, without stopping to consider the
effect upon others. Thus a statement may be defined as a form of words
which either expresses a belief or is intended to create one. Our next
step, therefore, must be the definition of “belief”.

“Belief” is a word which will be quite differently defined if we take
an analytic point of view from the way in which we shall define it if
we regard the matter causally. From the point of view of science, the
causal point of view is the more important. Beliefs influence action
in certain ways; what influences action in these ways may be called a
belief, even if, analytically, it does not much resemble what would
ordinarily be so called. We may therefore widen our previous definition
of belief. Consider a man who goes to the house where his friend used
to live, and, finding he has moved, says, “I _thought_ he still lived
here”, whereas he acted merely from habit without thought. If we are
going to use words causally, we ought to say that this man had a
“belief” and therefore a “belief” will be merely a characteristic of
a string of actions. We shall have to say: A man “believes” a certain
proposition _p_ if, whenever he is aiming at any result to which _p_
is relevant, he acts in a manner calculated to achieve the result if
_p_ is true, but not otherwise. Sometimes this gives definite results,
sometimes not. When you call a telephone number, it is clear that you
believe that to be the number of the subscriber you want. But whether
you believe in the conservation of energy or a future life may be
harder to decide. You may hold a belief in some contexts and not in
others; for we do not think in accordance with the so-called “Laws
of Thought”. “Belief” like all the other categories of traditional
psychology, is a notion incapable of precision.

This brings me to the question whether the truth or falsehood of a
belief can be determined either by its causes or by its effects. There
is, however, a preliminary difficulty. I said just now that A believes
_p_ if he acts in a way which will achieve his ends if _p_ is _true_.
I therefore assumed that we know what is meant by “truth”. I assumed,
to be definite, that we know what is meant by “truth” as applied to
a form of words. The argument was as follows: From observation of
a person’s acts, you infer his beliefs, by a process which may be
elaborate as the discovery of Kepler’s Laws from the observed motions
of the planets. His “beliefs” are not assumed to be “states of mind”,
but merely characteristics of series of actions. These beliefs, when
ascertained by observation, can be expressed in words; you can say,
_e.g._ “This person believes that there is a train from King’s Cross at
10 A.M.” Having once expressed the belief in words of which the meaning
is known, you have arrived at the stage where formal theories are
applicable. Words of known meaning, put together according to a known
syntax, are true or false in virtue of some fact, and their relation to
this fact results logically from the meanings of the separate words and
the laws of syntax. This is where logic is strong.

It will be seen that, according to what we have said, truth is
applicable primarily to a form of words, and only derivatively to
a belief. A form of words is a social phenomenon, therefore the
fundamental form of truth must be social. A form of words is true when
it has a certain relation to a certain fact. What relation to what
fact? I think the fundamental relation is this: a form of words is true
if a person who knows the language is led to that form of words when
he finds himself in an environment which contains features that are
the meanings of those words, and these features produce reactions in
him sufficiently strong for him to use words which mean them. Thus “a
train leaves King’s Cross at 10 A.M.” is true if a person can be led
to say, “It is now 10 A.M., this is King’s Cross, and I see a train
starting”. The environment causes words, and words directly caused by
the environment (if they are statements) are “true”. What is called
“verification” in science consists in putting oneself in a situation
where words previously used for other reasons result directly from
the environment. Of course, given this basis, there are innumerable
indirect ways of verifying statements, but all, I think, depend upon
this direct way.

The above theory may be thought very odd, but it is partly designed
to meet the fourth of our previous questions, namely, “How can we get
outside words to the facts which make them true or false?” Obviously we
cannot do this within logic, which is imprisoned in the realm of words;
we can only do it by considering the relations of words to our other
experiences, and these relations, in so far as they are relevant, can
hardly be other than causal. I think the above theory, as it stands,
is too crude to be quite true. We must also bring in such things as
expectedness, which we discussed earlier. But I believe that the
definition of truth or falsehood will have to be sought along some such
lines as I have indicated.

I want in conclusion to indulge in two speculations. The first concerns
a possible reconciliation of behaviourism and logic. It is clear that,
when we have a problem to solve, we do not always solve it as the rat
does, by means of random movements; we often solve it by “thinking”,
_i.e._ by a process in which we are not making any overt movements.
The same thing was sometimes true of Köhler’s chimpanzees. Now what is
involved in the possibility of solving a problem by verbal thinking?
We put words together in various ways which are not wholly random, but
limited by previous knowledge of the _sort_ of phrase that is likely to
contain a solution of our problem. At last we hit upon a phrase which
seems to give what we want. We then proceed to an overt action of the
kind indicated by the phrase; if it succeeds, our problem is solved.
Now this process is only intelligible if there is some connection
between the laws of syntax and the laws of physics--using “syntax”
in a psychological rather than a grammatical sense. I think this
connection is _assumed_ in logic and ordinary philosophy, but it ought
to be treated as a problem requiring investigation by behaviourist
methods. I lay no stress on this suggestion, except as giving a hint
for future investigations. But I cannot think that the behaviourist has
gone far towards the solution of his problem until he has succeeded in
establishing a connection between syntax and physics. Without this,
the efficacy of “thought” cannot be explained on his principles.

My second speculation is as to the limitations which the structure
of language imposes upon the extent of our possible knowledge of
the world. I am inclined to think that quite important metaphysical
conclusions, of a more or less sceptical kind, can be drawn from simple
considerations as to the relation between language and things. A spoken
sentence consists of a temporal series of events; a written sentence
is a spatial series of bits of matter. Thus it is not surprising that
language can represent the course of events in the physical world;
it can, in fact, make a map of the physical world, preserving its
structure in a more manageable form, and it can do this because it
consists of physical events. But if there were such a world as the
mystic postulates, it would have a structure different from that of
language, and would therefore be incapable of being verbally described.
It is fairly clear that nothing verbal can conform or confute this
hypothesis.

A great deal of the confusion about relations which has prevailed in
practically all philosophies comes from the fact that relations are
indicated, not by relations, but by words which are as substantial as
other words. Consequently, in thinking about relations, we constantly
hover between the unsubstantiality of the relation itself and the
substantiality of the word. Take, say, the fact that lightning precedes
thunder. We saw earlier that to express this by a language closely
reproducing the structure of the fact, we should have to say simply:
“lightning, thunder”, where the fact that the first word precedes the
second means that what the first word means precedes what the second
word means. But even if we adopted this method for temporal order, we
should still need words for all other relations, because we could not
without intolerable ambiguity symbolise them also by the order of our
words. When we say “lightning precedes thunder”, the word “precedes”
has a quite different relation to what it means from that which the
words “lightning” and “thunder” have to what they respectively mean.
Wittgenstein[12] says that what really happens is that we establish a
relation between the word “lightning” and the word “thunder”, namely
the relation of having the word “precedes” between them. In this way he
causes relations to be symbolised by relations. But although this may
be quite correct, it is sufficiently odd to make it not surprising that
people have thought the word “precedes” means a relation in the same
sense in which “lightning” means a kind of event. This view, however,
must be incorrect. I think it has usually been held unconsciously, and
has produced many confusions about relations which cease when it is
exposed to the light of day--for example, those which lead Bradley to
condemn relations.

     [12] _Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus_ (Kegan Paul).

In all this I have been considering the question of the relation
between the structure of language and the structure of the world. It is
clear that anything that can be said in an inflected language can be
said in an uninflected language; therefore, everything that can be said
in language can be said by means of a temporal series of uninflected
words. This places a limitation upon what can be expressed in words.
It may well be that there are facts which do not lend themselves to
this very simple schema; if so, they cannot be expressed in language.
Our confidence in language is due to the fact that it consists of
events in the physical world, and, therefore, shares the structure of
the physical world, and therefore can express that structure. But if
there be a world which is not physical, or not in space-time, it may
have a structure which we can never hope to express or to know. These
considerations might lead us to something like the Kantian _a priori_,
not as derived from the structure of the mind, but as derived from the
structure of language, which is the structure of the physical world.
Perhaps that is why we know so much physics and so little of anything
else. However, I have lapsed into mystical speculation, and will leave
these possibilities, since, by the nature of the case, I cannot _say_
anything true about them.




