CHAPTER XIV

PERCEPTION AND PHYSICAL CAUSAL LAWS


In an earlier chapter we saw the inadequacy of the traditional notion
of cause, without adequately explaining the causal laws which are a
substitute in the practice of science. The time has now come when it
is possible to remedy this defect, and, in so doing, to fit perception
into its place in the chain of physical causation and recapitulate the
main points of previous arguments.

The old view was that an event A will always be followed by a certain
event B, and that the problem of discovering causal laws is the
problem, given an event B, of finding that event A which is its
invariable antecedent or _vice versa_. At an early stage of a science
this point of view is useful; it gives laws which are true usually,
though probably not always, and it affords the basis for more exact
laws. But it has no philosophical validity, and is superseded in
science as soon as we arrive at genuine laws. Genuine laws, in advanced
sciences, are practically always quantitative laws of _tendency_. I
will try to illustrate by taking the simplest possible case in physics.

Imagine a hydrogen atom, in which the electron is revolving not in
the minimum orbit, but in the next, which has four times the minimum
radius. So long as this state continues, the atom has no external
effects, apart from its infinitesimal gravitational action; we cannot,
therefore, obtain any evidence of its existence except when it changes
its state. In fact, our knowledge of atoms is like that which a ticket
collector has of the population of his town: he knows nothing of those
who stay quietly at home. Now at some moment, according to laws of
which we have only statistical knowledge, the electron in our atom
jumps to a smaller orbit, and the energy lost to the atom travels
outward in a light-wave. We know no causal law as to when the electron
will jump, though we know how far it will jump and exactly what will
happen in the neighbourhood when it does. At least, when I say we
know exactly what will happen, I ought to say that we know exactly
the mathematical laws of what will happen. A series of events, having
quantitative characteristics which obey certain equations, will travel
outward in all directions from the electron, and will proceed quite
regularly, like ripples on a pool, until other matter is encountered.
We have here one important and apparently fundamental kind of causal
law, the kind regulating the propagation of light _in vacuo_. This is
summed up in Maxwell’s equations, which enable us to calculate the
diffusion of an electro-magnetic disturbance starting from a source. So
long as two such disturbances do not meet, the matter is exceedingly
simple; but the equations also tell us what happens when they do
meet. We then have, as always in traditional physics, two separate
tendencies, which have a resultant compounded according to mathematical
laws, of which the parallelogram law is the oldest and simplest. That
is to say, each previous circumstance in the space-time neighbourhood
contributes a tendency, and the resulting event is obtained by
compounding these tendencies according to a mathematical law.

So far, we have been considering only electro-magnetic phenomena in
empty space. We have another set of facts about empty space, namely
those upon which gravitation depends. These have to do with the
structure of space-time, and show that this structure has singularities
in the regions where there is matter, which spread with diminishing
intensity as we get away from these regions. You may conceive the
structure of space-time on the analogy of a pond with a fountain
playing in it, so that wherever a spray falls from the fountain there
is a little hill of water which flattens quickly as you get away from
the spot where the spray falls. Here again the same sort of thing
applies: to infer the structure in a small region of space-time from
that in the neighbourhood, it will be necessary to superpose a number
of tendencies according to mathematical rules. Thus philosophically
this introduces no novelty.

But now consider what happens when the wave of light which started
from our hydrogen atom comes in contact with matter. Various things
may happen. The matter may absorb all or some of the energy of the
light-ray; this is the interesting case from our point of view. The
absorption may take the form of causing the electrons to move in larger
orbits, in which case, later, when they return to their previous
orbits, we get the phenomenon of fluorescence. Or the body may become
heated; or it may visibly move, like a radiometer. The effects upon
bodies depend upon the bodies as well as the light. Some of them can be
individually predicted, others can only be calculated in statistical
averages; this depends upon whether quantum considerations come in
or not. Where they do, we can enumerate possibilities, and state the
relative frequencies with which they will be realised, but we cannot
tell which will be realised in any given case.

So far, we have considered the radiation of energy from matter into
empty space, its propagation in empty space and its impact on matter
from empty space. We have not considered the history of a given piece
of matter, or the distinction between matter and empty space.

The essence of matter appears to be this: We can distinguish series of
events in space-time which have a certain kind of close resemblance
to each other, such that common sense regards them as manifestations
of one “thing”. But when we look closely at the question, it turns
out that what physics offers is something more abstract than this.
Take, _e. g._ the continued existence of a certain electron. This
means to say that events in a certain neighbourhood will be such as
can be calculated on the assumption that there is an electric charge
of a certain standard magnitude in the middle of that neighbourhood;
and that the neighbourhoods of which this is true form a tube in
space-time.

So long as we stick to the standpoint of pure physics there is a
certain air of taking in each other’s washing about the whole business.
Events in empty space are only known as regards their abstract
mathematical characteristics; matter is only an abstract mathematical
characteristic of events in empty space. This seems rather a cold
world. But as a matter of fact we know some things that are a little
more concrete. We know, _e.g._ what it feels like when we see things.
From the point of view of physics, when our light-wave starts out
through empty space, if it presently reaches our eye we know one link
in the causal chain, namely the visual sensation, otherwise than as a
term in an abstract mathematical formula. And it is this one term which
forms the basis for our belief in all the rest. Seeing is believing.

At this point I propose to make a brief digression on the subject of
our evidence for causal laws. The laws for which we first get evidence
are such as do not hold always, but only as a general rule. As a
rule, when you decide to move your arm, it moves: but sometimes it is
paralysed and remains motionless. As a rule, when you say how-do-you-do
to an old friend, he says the same to you; but he may have grown blind
and deaf since you last saw him, and not notice your words or gesture.
As a rule, if you put a match to gunpowder, it explodes; but it may
have got damp. It is such common but not invariable rules of sequence
that we notice first. But science is always seeking to replace them by
laws that may have no exceptions. We notice first that heavy bodies
fall, then that some bodies do not fall. Then we generalise both sets
of facts into the law of gravitation and the laws of resistance of the
air. These more general laws do not state that anything will actually
happen: they state a tendency, and lead to the conclusion that what
actually happens is the resultant of a number of tendencies. We cannot
know what the resultant will be unless we know a great deal about
the neighbourhood concerned. For example, I might, within the next
few seconds be hit on the head by a meteorite; to know whether this
is going to happen, I must know what matter is to be found in the
neighbourhood of the earth. This illustrates that actual predictions
based upon laws which are perfectly valid may always be falsified by
some unknown fact of what we may call geography. Moreover, we can
never be _sure_ that our scientific laws are quite right; of this the
Einsteinian modification of the law of gravitation has afforded a
notable instance.

Let us now return to the relation between perception and the causal
laws of physics.

Having realised the abstractness of what physics has to say, we no
longer have any difficulty in fitting the visual sensation into the
causal series. It used to be thought “mysterious” that purely physical
phenomena should end in something mental. That was because people
thought they knew a lot about physical phenomena, and were sure they
differed in quality from mental phenomena. We now realise that we know
nothing of the intrinsic quality of physical phenomena except when
they happen to be sensations, and that therefore there is no reason to
be surprised that some are sensations, or to suppose that the others
are totally unlike sensations. The gap between mind and matter has
been filled in, partly by new views of mind, but much more by the
realisation that physics tells us nothing as to the intrinsic character
of matter.

I conceive what happens when we see an object more or less on the
following lines. For the sake of simplicity, let us take a small
self-luminous object. In this object, a certain number of atoms are
losing energy and radiating it according to the quantum principle.
The resulting light-waves become superposed according to the usual
mathematical principles; each part of each light-wave consists of
events in a certain region of space-time. On coming in contact with the
human body, the energy in the light-wave takes new forms, but there
is still causal continuity. At last it reaches the brain, and there
one of its constituent events is what we call a visual sensation. This
visual sensation is popularly called seeing the object from which the
light-waves started--or from which they were reflected if the object
was not self-luminous.

Thus what is called a perception is only connected with its object
through the laws of physics. Its relation to the object is causal and
mathematical; we cannot say whether or not it resembles the object in
any intrinsic respect, except that both it and the object are brief
events in space-time.

I think we may lay down the following universal characteristics of
causal laws in an advanced science. Given any event, there are other
events at neighbouring places in space-time which will occur slightly
later if no other factors intervene; but in practice other factors
almost always do intervene, and, in that case, the event which actually
occurs at any point of space-time is a mathematical resultant of those
which would have followed the various neighbouring events if they had
been alone concerned. The equations of physics give the rules according
to which events are connected, but all are of the above sort.

Formerly it was thought that the equations of physics sufficed,
theoretically, to determine the course of affairs in the physical
world, given all the facts about some finite stretch of time, however
short. Now it appears that this is not the case, so far as the known
equations are concerned. The known equations suffice to determine what
happens in empty space, and statistical averages as to what happens to
matter; but they do not tell us when an individual atom will absorb or
radiate energy. Whether there are laws, other than those of statistics,
governing the behaviour of an individual atom in this respect, we do
not know.

It should be observed that there are causal laws of a different sort
from those of pure physics; such are the laws that light-waves “cause”
visual sensations and sound-waves “cause” auditory sensations. All the
empirical evidence for physics rests upon such laws, therefore nothing
in physics can have a higher degree of certainty than such laws have.
Let us stop a moment to ask what we mean by “cause” in this connection.

The connection of light-waves and visual sensations looks a little
different according as we start with physics or with psychology,
though, of course, ultimately the result must be the same. Let us
first start with physics. I say, then, that when a light-wave travels
outwards from a body there are successive events at successive places,
and that the corresponding event in a brain behind a normal eye is a
visual sensation. This is the only event in the whole series about
which I can say anything not purely abstract and mathematical.

Now let us start from the sensation. I say, then, that this sensation
is one of a vast series of connected events, travelling out from a
centre according to certain mathematical laws, in virtue of which the
sensation enables me to know a good deal about events elsewhere. That
is why the sensation is a source of physical knowledge.

It will be seen that, according to the view I have been advocating,
there is no difficulty about interaction between mind and body. A
sensation is merely one link in a chain of physical causation; when we
regard the sensation as the end of such a chain, we have what would
be regarded as an effect of matter on mind; when as the beginning,
an effect of mind on matter. But mind is merely a cross-section in a
stream of physical causation, and there is nothing odd about its being
both an effect and a cause in the physical world. Thus physical causal
laws are those that are fundamental.

There seems no reason to regard causation as _a priori_, though this
question is not simple. Given certain very general assumptions as to
the structure of space-time, there are bound to be what we have called
causal laws. These general assumptions must really replace causality
as our basic principles. But, general as they are, they cannot be
taken as _a priori_; they are the generalisation and abstract epitome
of the fact that there are causal laws, and this must remain merely
an empirical fact, which is rendered probable, though not certain, by
inductive arguments.




