CHAPTER XII

PHYSICS AND PERCEPTION


It will be remembered that we regarded perception, in Chapter V, as
a species of “sensitivity”. Sensitivity to a given feature of the
environment we defined as consisting in some characteristic reaction
which is exhibited whenever that feature is present, but not otherwise;
this property is possessed more perfectly, in given directions, by
scientific instruments than by living bodies, though scientific
instruments are more selective as to the stimuli to which they will
respond. We decided that what, from the standpoint of an external
observer, distinguishes perception from other forms of sensitivity is
the law of association or conditioned reflexes. But we also found that
this purely external treatment of perception presupposes our knowledge
of the physical world as a going concern. We have now to investigate
this presupposition, and to consider how we come to know about physics,
and how much we really do know.

According to the theory of Chapter V, it is possible to perceive things
that are not in a spatial contact with the body. There must be a
reaction to a feature of the environment, but that feature may be at a
greater or less distance from the body of the percipient; we can even
perceive the sun and stars, within the limits of the definition. All
that is necessary is that our reaction should depend upon the spatial
relation between our body and the feature of the environment. When our
back is towards the sun, we do not see it; when our face is towards it,
we do.

When we consider perception--visual or auditory--of an external event,
there are three different matters to be examined. There is first the
process in the outside world, from the event to the percipient’s body;
there is next the process in his body, in so far as this can be known
by an outside observer; lastly, there is the question, which must be
faced sooner or later, whether the percipient can perceive something of
the process in his body which no other observer could perceive. We will
take these points in order.

If it is to be possible to “perceive” an event not in the percipient’s
body, there must be a physical process in the outer world such that,
when a certain event occurs, it produces a stimulus of a certain kind
at the surface of the percipient’s body. Suppose, for example, that
pictures of different animals are exhibited on a magic lantern to a
class of children, and all the children are asked to say the name of
each animal in turn. We may assume that the children are sufficiently
familiar with animals to say “cat”, “dog”, “giraffe”, “hippopotamus”,
etc., at the right moments. We must then suppose--taking the physical
world for granted--that some process travels from each picture to the
eyes of the various children, retaining throughout these journeys such
peculiarities that, when the process reaches their eyes, it can in one
case stimulate the word “cat” and in another the word “dog”. All this
the physical theory of light provides for. But there is one interesting
point about language that should be noticed in this connection. If the
usual physical theory of light is correct, the various children will
receive stimuli which differ greatly according to their distance and
direction from the picture, and according to the way the light falls.
There are also differences in their reactions, for, though they all
utter the word “cat”, some say it loud, others soft, some in a soprano
voice, some in a contralto. But the differences in their reactions are
much less than the differences in the stimuli. This is still more the
case if we consider various different pictures of cats, to all of which
they respond with the word “cat”. Thus language is a means of producing
responses which differ less than the stimuli do, in cases where the
resemblances between the stimuli are more important to us than the
differences. This fact makes us apt to overlook the differences
between stimuli which produce nearly identical responses.

As appears from the above, when a number of people simultaneously
perceive a picture of a cat, there are differences between the stimuli
to their various perceptions, and these differences must obviously
involve differences in their reactions. The _verbal_ responses may
differ very little, but even the verbal responses could be made to
differ by putting more complicated questions than merely “What animal
is that?” One could ask: “Can the picture be covered by your thumb-nail
held at arm’s length?” Then the answer would be different according
as the percipient was near the picture or far off. But the normal
percipient, if left to himself, will not notice such differences,
that is to say, his verbal response will be the same in spite of the
differences in the stimuli.

The fact that it is possible for a number of people to perceive the
same noise or the same coloured pattern obviously depends upon the fact
that a physical process can travel outward from a centre and retain
certain of its characteristics unchanged, or very little changed. The
most notable of such characteristics is frequency in a wave-motion.
That, no doubt, affords a biological reason for the fact that our most
delicate senses, sight and hearing, are sensitive to frequencies, which
determine colour in what we see and pitch in what we hear. If there
were not, in the physical world, processes spreading out from centres
and retaining certain characters practically unchanged, it would be
impossible for different percipients to perceive the same object from
different points of view, and we should not have been able to discover
that we all live in a common world.

We come now to the process in the percipient’s body, in so far as
this can be perceived by an outside observer. This raises no new
philosophical problems, because we are still concerned, as before, with
the perception of events outside the observer’s body. The observer,
now, is supposed to be a physiologist, observing, say, what goes on
in the eye when light falls upon it. His means of knowing are, in
principle, exactly the same as in the observation of dead matter.
An event in an eye upon which light is falling causes light-waves
to travel in a certain manner until they reach the eye of the
physiologist. They there cause a process in the physiologist’s eye
and optic nerve and brain, which ends in what he calls “seeing what
happens in the eye he is observing”. But this event, which happens in
the physiologist, is not what happened in the eye he was observing;
it is only connected with this by a complicated causal chain. Thus
our knowledge of physiology is no more direct or intimate than our
knowledge of processes in dead matter; we do not know any more about
our eyes than about the trees and fields and clouds that we see by
means of them. The event which happens when a physiologist observes an
eye is an event in him, not on the eye that he is observing.

We come now at last to the question of self-observation, which we have
hitherto avoided. I say “self-observation” rather than “introspection”,
because the latter word has controversial associations that I wish to
avoid. I mean by “self-observation” anything that a man can perceive
about himself but that others, however situated, cannot perceive about
him. What follows is only preliminary, since the subject will be
discussed at length in Chapter XVI.

No one can deny that we know things about ourselves which others
cannot know unless we tell them. We know when we have toothache, when
we feel thirsty, what we were dreaming when we woke up, and so on.
Dr. Watson might say that the dentist can know we have toothache by
observing a cavity in a tooth. I will not reply that the dentist is
often mistaken; this may be merely because the art of dentistry has not
been sufficiently perfected. I will concede as possible, in the future,
a state of odontology in which the dentist could always know whether
I am feeling toothache. But even then his knowledge has a different
character from mine. His knowledge is an inference, based upon the
inducive law that people with such-and-such cavities suffer pain of
a certain kind. But this law cannot be established by observation of
cavities alone; it requires that, where these are observed, the people
who have them should tell us that they feel toothache. And, more than
that, they must be speaking the truth. Purely external observation can
discover that people with cavities _say_ they have toothache, but not
that they have it. Saying one has toothache is a different thing from
having it; if not we could cure toothache by not talking about it, and
so save our dentists’ bills. I am sure the expert opinion of dentists
will agree with me that this is impossible.

To this argument, however, it might be replied that having toothache is
a state of the body, and that knowing I have toothache is a response to
this bodily stimulus. It will be said that, theoretically, the state
of my body when I have toothache can be observed by an outsider, who
can then also know that I have toothache. This answer, however, does
not really meet the point. When the outside observer knows that I have
toothache, not only is his knowledge based upon an inductive inference,
as we have already seen, but his knowledge of the inferred term,
“toothache”, must be based upon personal experience. No knowledge of
dentistry could enable a man to know what toothache is if he had never
felt it. If, then, toothache is really a state of the body--which, at
the moment, I neither affirm nor deny--it is a state of the body which
only the man himself can perceive. In a word, whoever has experienced
toothache and can remember it has knowledge that cannot be possessed by
a man who has never experienced toothache.

Take next our knowledge of our own dreams. Dr. Watson has not, so far
as I know, ever discussed dreams, but I imagine he would say something
like this: In dreams, there are probably small laryngeal movements
such as, if they were greater, would lead to speech; indeed, people
do sometimes cry out in dreams. There may also be stimulations of the
sense-organs, which produce unusual reactions owing to the peculiar
physiological condition of the brain during sleep: but all these
reactions must consist of small movements, which could theoretically be
seen from outside, say by some elaboration of X-ray apparatus. This is
all very well, but meantime it is hypothetical, and the dreamer himself
knows his dreams without all this elaborate inference. Can we say that
he really knows these hypothetical small bodily movements, although
he thinks he knows something else? That would presumably be Dr.
Watson’s position, and it must be admitted that, with a definition of
“knowledge” such as we considered in Chapter VIII, such a view is not
to be dismissed offhand as obviously impossible. Moreover, if we are to
say the perception gives knowledge of the physical world, we shall have
to admit that what we are perceiving may be quite different from what
it seems to be. A table does not look like a vast number of electrons
and protons, nor like trains of waves meeting and clashing. Yet this
is the sort of thing a table is said to be by modern physicists. If,
then, what seems to us to be just a table such as may be seen any day
is really this odd sort of thing, it is possible that what seems to us
to be a dream is really a number of movements in the brain.

This again is all very well, but there is one point which it fails to
explain, namely, what is meant by “seeming”. If a dream or a table
“seems” to be one sort of thing while it is “really” another, we shall
have to admit that it _really_ seems, and that what it seems to be has
a reality of its own. Nay more, we only arrive at what it “really” is
by an inference, valid or invalid, from what it seems to be. If we are
wrong about the seeming, we must be doubly wrong about the reality,
since the sole ground for asserting the table composed of electrons and
protons is the table that we see, _i.e._ the “seeming” table. We must
therefore treat “seeming” with respect.

Let us consider Dr. Watson watching a rat in a maze. He means to be
quite objective, and report only what really goes on. Can he succeed?
In one sense he can. He can use words about what he sees which are
the same as any other scientifically trained observer will use if he
watches the same rat at the same time. But Dr. Watson’s objectivity
emphatically does not consist in using the same words as other people
use; his vocabulary is very different from that of most psychologists.
He cannot take as the sole test of truth the consensus of mankind.
“Securus judicat orbis terrarum” is another example of a Latin tag
which is false, and which certainly Dr. Watson would not consider
true. It has happened again and again in human history that a man who
said something that had never been said before turned out to be right,
while the people who repeated the wise saws of their forefathers were
talking nonsense. Therefore, when Dr. Watson endeavours to eliminate
subjectivity in observing rats, he does not mean that he says what
everybody else says. He means that he refrains from inferring anything
about the rat beyond its bodily movements. This is all to the good,
but I think he fails to realise that almost as long and difficult
an inference is required to give us knowledge of the rat’s bodily
movements as to give us knowledge of its “mind”. And what is more,
the data from which we must start in order to get to know the rat’s
bodily movements are data of just the sort that Dr. Watson wishes to
avoid, namely private data patent to self-observation but not patent to
anyone except the observer. This is the point at which, in my opinion,
behaviourism _as a final philosophy_ breaks down.

When several people simultaneously watch a rat in a maze, or any other
example of what we should naturally regard as matter in motion, there
is by no means complete identity between the physical events which
happen at the surface of their eyes and constitute the stimuli to
their perceptions. There are differences of perspective, of light and
shade, of apparent size, and so on, all of which will be reproduced
in photographs taken from the places where the eyes of the several
observers are. These differences produce differences in the reactions
of the observers--differences which a quite unthinking person may
overlook, but which are familiar to every artist. Now it is contrary
to all scientific canons to suppose that the object perceived, in
addition to affecting us in the way of stimulus and reaction, also
affects us directly by some mystical epiphany; certainly it is not what
any behaviourist would care to assert. Our knowledge of the physical
world, therefore, must be contained in our reaction to the stimulus
which reaches us across the intervening medium; and it seems hardly
possible that our reaction should have a more intimate relation to the
object than the stimulus has. Since the stimulus differs for different
observers, the reaction also differs; consequently, in all our
perceptions of physical processes there is an element of subjectivity.
If, therefore, physics is true in its broad outlines (as the above
argument supposes), what we call “perceiving” a physical process is
something private and subjective, at least in part, and is yet the only
possible starting-point for our knowledge of the physical world.

There is an objection to the above argument which might naturally be
made, but it would be in fact invalid. It may be said that we do not in
fact proceed to _infer_ the physical world from our perceptions, but
that we begin at once with a rough-and-ready knowledge of the physical
world, and only at a late stage of sophistication compel ourselves to
regard our knowledge of the physical world as an inference. What is
valid in this statement is the fact that our knowledge of the physical
world is not at first inferential, but that is only because we take our
percepts to _be_ the physical world. Sophistication and philosophy come
in at the stage at which we realise that the physical world cannot be
identified with our percepts. When my boy was three years old, I showed
him Jupiter, and told him that Jupiter was larger than the earth. He
insisted that I must be speaking of some other Jupiter, because, as he
patiently explained, the one he was seeing was obviously quite small.
After some efforts, I had to give it up and leave him unconvinced. In
the case of the heavenly bodies, adults have got used to the idea that
what is really there can only be _inferred_ from what they see; but
where rats in mazes are concerned, they still tend to think that they
are seeing what is happening in the physical world. The difference,
however, is only one of degree, and naive realism is as untenable in
the one case as in the other. There are differences in the perceptions
of two persons observing the same process; there are sometimes no
discoverable differences between two perceptions of the same persons
observing different processes, _e.g._ pure water and water full of
bacilli. The subjectivity of our perceptions is thus of practical as
well as theoretical importance.

I am not maintaining that what we primarily know is our own
perceptions. This is largely a verbal question; but with the definition
of knowledge given in Chapter VIII, it will be correct to say that
from the first we know external objects, the question is not as to
what are the objects we know, but rather as to how accurately we
know them. Our non-inferential knowledge of an object cannot be more
accurate than our reaction to it, since it is part of that reaction.
And our reaction cannot be more accurate than the stimulus. But what
on earth can you mean by the “accuracy” of a stimulus? I may be
asked. I mean just the same as by the accuracy of a map or a set of
statistics. I mean a certain kind of correspondence. One pattern is
an accurate representation of another if every element of the one can
be taken as the representative of just one element of the other, and
the relations that make the one set into a pattern correspond with
relations making the other set into a pattern. In this sense, writing
can represent speech with a certain degree of accuracy; to every spoken
word a written word corresponds, and to the time-order of the spoken
words the space-order of the written words corresponds. But there are
inflexions and tones of voice that cannot be represented in writing,
except, to some extent, by musical notation. A gramophone record is
a much more accurate representation of vocal sounds than any writing
can be; but even the best gramophone record fails to be completely
accurate. The impression made upon an observer is very analogous to
a gramophone record or a photograph, but usually less accurate owing
to the influence of the law of association, and the lack of delicacy
in our senses. And whatever limitations there are to the accuracy of
our impressions are limitations to the accuracy of our non-inferential
knowledge of the external world.

Another point: If we accept the definition of knowledge given
in Chapter VIII, which was framed so far as to be as favourable
as possible to behaviourism, a given reaction may be regarded as
knowledge of various different occurrences. When we see Jupiter, we
have, according to the definition, knowledge of Jupiter, but we also
have knowledge of the stimulus at the surface of the eye, and even
of the process in the optic nerve. For it is arbitrary at what point
we start in the process leading to a certain event in the brain:
this event, and the consequent bodily action, may be regarded as a
reaction to a process starting at any earlier point. And the nearer
our starting-point is to the brain, the more accurate becomes the
knowledge displayed in our reaction. A lamp at the top of a tall
building might produce the same visual stimulus as Jupiter, or at any
rate one practically indistinguishable from that produced by Jupiter.
A blow on the nose might make us “see stars”. Theoretically, it should
be possible to apply a stimulus direct to the optic nerve, which
should give us a visual sensation. Thus when we think we see Jupiter,
we may be mistaken. We are less likely to be mistaken if we say that
the surface of the eye is being stimulated in a certain way, and still
less likely to be mistaken if we say that the optic nerve is being
stimulated in a certain way. We do not eliminate the risk of error
completely unless we confine ourselves to saying that an event of a
certain sort is happening in the brain; this statement may still be
true if we see Jupiter in a dream.

But, I shall be asked, what do you know about what is happening in the
brain? Surely nothing. Not so, I reply. I know about what is happening
in the brain exactly what naive realism thinks it knows about what is
happening in the outside world. But this needs explaining, and there
are other matters that must be explained first.

When the light from a fixed star reaches me, I see the star if it is
night and I am looking in the right direction. The light started years
ago, probably many years ago, but my reaction is primarily to something
that is happening _now_. When my eyes are open, I see the star; when
they are shut, I do not. Children discover at a fairly early age
that they see nothing when their eyes are shut. They are aware of the
difference between seeing and not seeing, and also of the difference
between eyes open and eyes shut; gradually they discover that these
two differences are correlated--I mean that they have expectations of
which this is the intellectualist transcription. Again, children learn
to name the colours, and to state correctly whether a thing is blue
or red or yellow or what-not. They ought not to be sure that light of
the appropriate wave-length started from the object. The sun looks red
in a London fog, grass looks blue through blue spectacles, everything
looks yellow to a person suffering from jaundice. But suppose you ask:
What colour are you seeing? The person who answers, in these cases,
red for the sun, blue for the grass, and yellow for the sick-room of
the jaundiced patient, is answering quite truly. And in each of these
cases he is stating something that he _knows_. What he knows in such
cases is what I call a “percept”. I shall contend later that, from the
standpoint of physics, a percept is in the brain; for the present, I am
only concerned to say that a percept is what is most indubitable in our
knowledge of the world.

To behaviourism as a metaphysic one may put the following dilemma.
Either physics is valid in its main lines, or it is not. If it is
not, we know nothing about the movements of matter; for physics is
the result of the most serious and careful study of which the human
intelligence has hitherto been capable. If, on the other hand, physics
is valid in its main lines, any physical process starting either inside
or outside the body will, if it reaches the brain, be different if
the intervening medium is different; moreover two persons, initially
very different, may become indistinguishable as they spread and grow
fainter. On both grounds, what happens in the brain is not connected
quite accurately with what happens elsewhere, and our perceptions
are therefore infected with subjectivity on purely physical grounds.
Even, therefore, when we assume the truth of physics, what we know
most indubitably through perception is not the movements of matter,
but certain events in ourselves which are connected, in a manner not
quite invariable, with the movements of matter. To be specific, when
Dr. Watson watches rats in mazes, what he knows, apart from difficult
inferences, are certain events in himself. The behaviour of the rats
can only be inferred by the help of physics, and is by no means to be
accepted as something accurately knowable by direct observation.

I do not in fact entertain any doubts that physics is true in its main
lines. The interpretation of physical formulæ is a matter as to which
a considerable degree of uncertainty is possible; but we cannot well
doubt that there is an interpretation which is true roughly and in
the main. I shall come to the question of interpretation later; for
the present, I shall assume that we may accept physics in its broad
outlines, without troubling to consider how it is to be interpreted.
On this basis, the above remarks on perception seem undeniable. We
are often misled as to what is happening, either by peculiarities of
the medium between the object and our bodies, or by unusual states of
our bodies, or by a temporary or permanent abnormality in the brain.
But in all these cases _something_ is really happening, as to which,
if we turn our attention to it, we can obtain knowledge that is not
misleading. At one time when, owing to illness, I had been taking a
great deal of quinine, I became hypersensitive to noise, so that when
the nurse rustled the newspaper I thought she was spilling a scuttle
of coals on the floor. The interpretation was mistaken, but it was
quite true that I heard a loud noise. It is a commonplace that a man
whose leg has been amputated can still feel pains in it; here again,
he does really feel the pains, and is only mistaken in his belief that
they come from his leg. A percept is an observable event, but its
interpretation as knowledge of this or that event in the physical world
is liable to be mistaken, for reasons which physics and physiology can
make fairly clear.

The subjectivity of percepts is a matter of degree. They are more
subjective when people are drunk or asleep than when they are sober
and awake. They are more subjective in regard to distant objects than
in regard to such as are near. They may acquire various peculiar kinds
of subjectivity through injuries to the brain or to the nerves. When
I speak of a percept as “subjective” I mean that the physiological
inferences to which it gives rise are mistaken or vague. This is
always the case to some extent, but much more so in some circumstances
than in others. And the sort of defect that leads to mistakes must be
distinguished from the sort that leads to vagueness. If you see a man a
quarter of a mile away, you can see that it is a man if you have normal
eyesight, but you probably cannot tell who it is, even if in fact
it is some one you know well. This is vagueness in the percept: the
inferences you draw are correct so far as they go, but they do not go
very far. On the other hand, if you are seeing double and think there
are two men, you have a case of mistake. Vagueness, to a greater or
less extent, is universal and inevitable; mistakes, on the other hand,
can usually be avoided by taking trouble and by not always trusting
to physiological inference. Anybody can see double on purpose, by
focussing on a distant object and noticing a near one; but this will
not cause mistakes, since the man is aware of the subjective element in
his double vision. Similarly we are not deceived by after-images, and
only dogs are deceived by gramophones.

From what has been said in this chapter, it is clear that our knowledge
of the physical world, if it is to be made as reliable as possible,
must start from percepts, and must scrutinize the physiological
inferences by which percepts are accompanied. Physiological inference
is inference in the sense that it sometimes leads to error and physics
gives reason to expect that percepts will, in certain circumstances,
be more or less deceptive if taken as signs of something outside the
brain. It is these facts that give a subjective cast to the philosophy
of physics, at any rate in its beginnings. We cannot start cheerfully
with a world of matter in motion, as to which any two sane and sober
observers must agree. To some extent, each man dreams his own dream,
and the disentangling of the dream element in our percepts is no easy
matter. This is, indeed, the work that scientific physics undertakes to
do.




