CHAPTER VIII

KNOWLEDGE BEHAVIOURISTICALLY CONSIDERED


The word “knowledge”, like the word “memory”, is avoided by the
behaviourist. Nevertheless there is a phenomenon commonly called
“knowledge”, which is tested behaviouristically in examinations. I want
to consider this phenomenon in this chapter, with a view to deciding
whether there is anything in it that the behaviourist cannot deal with
adequately.

It will be remembered that, in Chapter II, we were led to the view that
knowledge is a characteristic of the complete process from stimulus to
reaction, or even, in the cases of sight and hearing, from an external
object to a reaction, the external object being connected with the
stimulus by a chain of physical causation in the outer world. Let us,
for the moment, leave on one side such cases as sight and hearing, and
confine ourselves, for the sake of definiteness, to knowledge derived
from touch.

We can observe touch producing reactions in quite humble animals, such
as worms and sea anemones. Are we to say that they have “knowledge”
of what they touch? In some sense, yes. Knowledge is a matter of
degree. When it is regarded in a purely behaviouristic manner, we
shall have to concede that it exists, in some degree, wherever there
is a characteristic reaction to a stimulus of a certain kind, and this
reaction does not occur in the absence of the right kind of stimulus.
In this sense, “knowledge” is indistinguishable from “sensitivity”,
which we considered in connection with perception. We might say that
a thermometer “knows” the temperature, and that a compass “knows” the
direction of the magnetic north. This is the only sense in which, on
grounds of observation, we can attribute knowledge to animals that
are low in the scale. Many animals, for example, hide themselves when
exposed to light, but as a rule not otherwise. In this, however, they
do not differ from a radiometer. No doubt the mechanism is different,
but the observed molar motion has similar characteristics. Wherever
there is a reflex, an animal may be said, in a sense, to “know” the
stimulus. This is, no doubt, not the usual sense of “knowledge”, but it
is the germ out of which knowledge in the usual sense has grown, and
without which no knowledge would be possible.

Knowledge in any more advanced sense is only possible as a result of
learning, in the sense considered in Chapter III. The rat that has
learned the maze “knows” the way out of it; the boy who has learned
certain verbal reactions “knows” the multiplication table. Between
these two cases there is no important difference. In both cases, we
say that the subject “knows” something because he reacts in a manner
advantageous to himself, in which he could not react before he had had
certain experiences. I do not think, however, that we ought to use such
a notion as “advantageous” in connection with knowledge. What we can
observe, for instance, with the rat in the maze, is violent activity
until the food is reached, followed by eating when it is reached; also
a gradual elimination of acts which do not lead to the food. Where this
sort of behaviour is observed, we may say that it is directed towards
the food, and that the animal “knows” the way to the food when he gets
to it by the shortest possible route.

But if this view is right, we cannot define any knowledge acquired
by learning except with reference to circumstances toward which an
animal’s activity is directed. We should say, popularly, that the
animal “desires” such circumstances. “Desire”, like “knowledge”,
is capable of a behaviouristic definition, and it would seem that
the two are correlative. Let us, then, spend a little time on the
behaviouristic treatment of “desire”.

The best example of desire, from this point of view, is hunger. The
stimulus to hunger is a certain well-ascertained bodily condition.
When in this condition, an animal moves restlessly; if he sees or
smells food, he moves in a manner which, in conditions to which he is
accustomed, would bring him to the food; if he reaches it, he eats it,
and if the quantity is sufficient he then becomes quiescent. This kind
of behaviour may be summarised by saying that a hungry animal “desires”
food. It is behaviour which is in various ways different from that of
inanimate matter, because restless movements persist until a certain
condition is realised. These movements may or may not be the best
adapted to realising the condition in question. Every one knows about
the pike that was put on one side of a glass partition, with minnows
on the other side. He continually bumped his nose on the glass, and
after six weeks gave up the attempt to catch them. When, after this,
the partition was removed, he still refrained from pursuing them. I do
not know whether the experiment was tried of leaving a possibility of
getting to the minnows by a roundabout route. To have learned to take a
roundabout route would perhaps have required a degree of intelligence
beyond the capacity of fishes; this is a matter, however, which offers
little difficulty to dogs or monkeys.

What applies to hunger applies equally to other forms of “desire”.
Every animal has a certain congenital apparatus of “desires”; that
is to say, in certain bodily conditions he is stimulated to restless
activities which tend towards the performance of some reflex, and
if a given situation is often repeated the animal arrives more and
more quickly at the performance of the reflex. This last, however, is
only true of the higher animals; in the lower, the whole process from
beginning to end is reflex, and can therefore only succeed in normal
circumstances. The higher animals, and more especially men, have a
larger proportion of learning and a smaller proportion of reflexes in
their behaviour, and are therefore better able to adapt themselves
to new circumstances. The helplessness of infants is a necessary
condition for the adaptability of adults; infants have fewer useful
reflexes than the young of animals, but have far more power of forming
useful habits, which can be adapted to circumstances and are not
fatally fixed from birth. This fact is intimately connected with the
superiority of the human intelligence above that of the brutes.

Desire is extremely subject to “conditioning”. If A is a primitive
desire and B has on many occasions been a means to A, B comes to be
desired in the same sense in which A was previously desired. It may
even happen, as in misers, that the desire for B completely displaces
the desire for A, so that B, when attained, is no longer used as a
means to A. This, however, is more or less exceptional. In general, the
desire for A persists, although the desire for B has a more or less
independent life.

The “conditioning” of primitive desires in human beings is the source
of much that distinguishes our life from that of animals. Most animals
only seek food when they are hungry; they may, then, die of starvation
before they find it. Men, on the contrary, must have early acquired
pleasure in hunting as an art, and must have set out on hunting
expeditions before they were actually hungry. A further stage in the
conditioning of hunger came with domestic animals; a still further
stage with agriculture. Nowadays, when a man sets to work to earn his
living, his activity is still connected, though not very directly,
with hunger and the other primitive desires that can be gratified by
means of money. These primitive desires are still, so to speak, the
power station, though their energy is widely distributed to all sorts
of undertakings that seem, at first sight, to have no connection with
them. Consider “freedom” and the political activities it inspires; this
is derivable, by “conditioning”, from the emotion of rage which Dr.
Watson observed in infants whose limbs are not “free”. Again we speak
of the “fall” of empires and of “fallen” women; this is connected with
the fear which infants display when left without support.

After this excursion into the realm of desire, we can now return to
“knowledge”, which, as we saw, is a term correlative to “desire”, and
applicable to another feature of the same kind of activity. We may say,
broadly, that a response to a stimulus of the kind involving desire
in the above sense shows “knowledge” if it leads by the quickest or
easiest route to the state of affairs which, in the above sense, is
behaviouristically the object of desire. Knowledge is thus a matter
of degree: the rat, during its progressive improvements in the maze,
is gradually acquiring more and more knowledge. Its “intelligence
quotient”, so far as that particular task is concerned, will be the
ratio of the time it took on the first trial to the time it takes now
to get out of the maze. Another point, if our definition of knowledge
is accepted, is, that there is no such thing as purely contemplative
knowledge: knowledge exists only in relation to the satisfaction of
desire, or, as we say, in the capacity to choose the right means to
achieve our ends.

But can such a definition as the above really stand? Does it represent
at all the sort of thing that would commonly be called knowledge? I
think it does in the main, but there is need of some discussion to make
this clear.

In some cases, the definition is obviously applicable. These are the
cases that are analogous to the rat in the maze, the consideration of
which led us to our definition. Do you “know” the way from Trafalgar
Square to St. Pancras? Yes, if you can walk it without taking any wrong
turnings. In practice, you can give verbal proof of such knowledge,
without actually having to walk the distance; but that depends upon
the correlation of names with streets, and is part of the process of
substituting words for things. There may, it is true, come doubtful
cases. I was once on a bus in Whitehall, and my neighbour asked “What
street is this?” I answered him, not without surprise at his ignorance.
He then said, “What building is that?” and I replied “The Foreign
Office”. To this he retorted, “but I thought the Foreign Office was in
Downing Street”. This time, it was his knowledge that surprised me.
Should we say that he knew where the Foreign Office is? The answer is
yes or no according to his purpose. From the point of view of sending a
letter to it, he knew; from the point of view of walking to it, he did
not know. He had, in fact, been a British Consul in South America, and
was in London for the first time.

But now let us come to cases less obviously within the scope of our
definition. The reader “knows” that Columbus crossed the ocean in
1492. What do we mean by saying that he “knows” this? We mean, no
doubt, primarily that writing down this statement is the way to pass
examinations, which is just as useful to us as getting out of the
maze is to the rat. But we do not mean only this. There is historical
evidence of the fact, at least I suppose there is. The historical
evidence consists of printed books and manuscripts. Certain rules have
been developed by historians as to the conditions in which statements
in books or manuscripts may be accepted as true, and the evidence in
our case is (I presume) in accordance with these rules. Historical
facts often have importance in the present; for example, wills, or
laws not yet repealed. The rules for weighing historical evidence
are such as will, in general bring out self-consistent results. Two
results are self-consistent when, in relation to a desire to which both
are relevant, they enjoin the same action, or actions which can form
part of the one movement towards the goal. At Coton, near Cambridge,
there is (or was in my time) a signpost with two arms pointing in
diametrically opposite directions, and each arm said “To Cambridge”.
This was a perfect example of self-contradiction, since the two arms
made statements representing exactly opposite actions. And this case
illustrates why self-contradiction is to be avoided. But the avoidance
of self-contradiction makes great demands upon us; Hegel and Bradley
imagined that we could know the nature of the universe by means of
this principle alone. In this they were pretty certainly mistaken,
but nevertheless a great deal of our “knowledge” depends upon this
principle to a greater or less extent.

Most of our knowledge is like that in a cookery book, maxims to be
followed when occasion arises, but not useful at every moment of every
day. Since knowledge may be useful at any time, we get gradually,
through conditioning, a general desire for knowledge. The learned man
who is helpless in practical affairs is analogous to the miser, in that
he has become absorbed in a means. It should be observed, also, that
knowledge is neutral as among different purposes. If you know that
arsenic is a poison, that enables you equally to avoid it if you wish
to remain in health, and to take it if you wish to commit suicide. You
cannot judge from a man’s conduct in relation to arsenic whether he
knows that it is a poison or not, unless you know his desires. He may
be tired of life, but avoid arsenic because he has been told that it
is a good medicine; in this case, his avoidance of it is evidence of
_lack_ of knowledge.

But to return to Columbus: surely, the reader will say, Columbus really
did cross the Atlantic in 1492, and that is why we call this statement
“knowledge”. This is the definition of “truth” as “correspondence with
fact”. I think there is an important element of correctness in this
definition, but it is an element to be elicited at a later stage,
after we have discussed the physical world. And it has the defect--as
pragmatists have urged--that there seems no way of getting at “facts”
and comparing them with our beliefs: all that we ever reach consists of
other beliefs. I do not offer our present behaviouristic and pragmatic
definition of “knowledge” as the only possible one, but I offer it as
the one to which we are led if we wish to regard knowledge as something
causally important, to be exemplified in our reactions to stimuli. This
is the appropriate point of view when we are studying man from without,
as we have been doing hitherto.

There is, however, within the behaviourist philosophy, one important
addition to be made to our definition. We began this chapter with
sensitivity, but we went on to the consideration of learned reactions,
where the learning depended upon association. But there is another
sort of learning--at least it is _prima facie_ another sort--which
consists of increase of sensitivity. All sensitivity in animals and
human beings must count as a sort of knowledge; that is to say, if an
animal behaves, in the presence of a stimulus of a certain kind, as it
would not behave in the absence of that stimulus then, in an important
sense, it has “knowledge” as regards the stimulus. Now it appears that
practice--_e.g._ in music--very greatly increases sensitivity. We
learn to react differently to stimuli which only differ sightly; what
is more, we learn to react to differences. A violin-player can react
with great precision to an interval of a fifth; if the interval is very
slightly greater or less, his behaviour in tuning is influenced by the
difference from a fifth. And as we have already had occasion to notice,
we become, through practice, increasingly sensitive to form. All this
increased sensitivity must count as increase of knowledge.

But in saying this we are not saying anything inconsistent with our
earlier definition of knowledge. Sensitivity is essential to choosing
the right reaction in many cases. To take the cookery-book again; when
it says “take a pinch of salt”, a good cook knows how much to take,
which is an instance of sensitivity. Accurate scientific observation,
which is of great practical importance, depends upon sensitivity. And
so do many of our practical dealings with other people: if we cannot
“feel” their moods, we shall be always getting at cross purposes.

The extent to which sensitivity is improved by practice is astonishing.
Town-bred people do not know whether the weather is warm or cold until
they read the weather reports in the paper. An entomologist perceives
vastly more beetles in the course of a country walk than other people
do. The subtlety with which connoisseurs can distinguish among wines
and cigars is the despair of youths who wish to become men of the
world. Whether this increase of sensitivity can be accounted for by
the law of association, I do not know. In many cases, probably, it can,
but I think sensitiveness to form, which is the essential element in
the more difficult forms of abstract thought as well as in many other
matters, cannot be regarded as derivative from the law of association,
but is more analogous to the development of a new sense. I should
therefore include improvement in sensitivity as an independent element
in the advancement of knowledge. But I do so with some hesitation.

The above discussion does not pretend to cover the whole of the ground
that has to be covered in discussing the definition of “knowledge”.
There are other points of view, which are also necessary to a complete
consideration of the question. But these must wait until, after
considering the physical world, we come to the discussion of man as
viewed from within.




