CHAPTER XXI

EMOTION, DESIRE, AND WILL


Hitherto, in our investigation of man from within, we have considered
only the cognitive aspect, which is, in fact, the most important to
philosophy. But now we must turn our attention to the other sides of
human nature. If we treat them more briefly than the cognitive side,
it is not because they are less important, but because their main
importance is practical and our task is theoretical. Let us begin with
the emotions.

The theory of the emotions has been radically transformed by the
discovery of the part played by the ductless glands. Cannon’s _Bodily
Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear and Rage_ is a book whose teaching
has come to be widely known, though not more so than its importance
warrants. It appears that certain secretions from the glands into the
blood are the essential physiological conditions of the emotions.
Some people say that the physiological changes correlated with these
secretions _are_ the emotions. I think this view must be received with
some caution. As everyone knows, the adrenal glands secrete adrenin,
which produces the bodily symptoms of fear or rage. On one occasion my
dentist injected a considerable amount of this substance into my blood,
in the course of administering a local anæsthetic. I turned pale and
trembled, and my heart beat violently; the bodily symptoms of fear were
present, as the books said they should be, but it was quite obvious to
me that I was not actually feeling fear. I should have had the same
bodily symptoms in the presence of a tyrant about to condemn me to
death, but there would have been something extra which was absent when
I was in the dentist’s chair. What was different was the cognitive
part: I did not feel fear because I knew there was nothing to be afraid
of. In normal life, the adrenal glands are stimulated by the perception
of an object which is frightful or enraging; thus there is already a
cognitive element present. The fear or rage attaches itself to the
object which has stimulated the glands, and the full emotion arises.
But when adrenin is artificially administered, this cognitive element
is absent, and the emotion in its entirety fails to arise. Probably if
it were administered in sleep it would produce a dream of terror, in
which the dreamer’s imagination would supply an object for fear. The
same thing might happen on waking life with animals or young children.
But with an adult of average rationality, the knowledge that there is
nothing to be afraid of inhibits the full development of the emotion.
Fear and rage are both active emotions, demanding a certain kind of
behaviour towards an object; when this behaviour is obviously not
called for, it is impossible to feel either emotion fully.

There are, however, other emotions, such as melancholy, which do not
demand an object. These, presumably, can be caused in their entirety
by administering the proper secretions. A disordered liver may cause
melancholy which is not relieved by knowledge of its source. The
emotions which do not require an object are those which do not call for
any appropriate line of action.

Emotions are subject to “conditioning”, so that the stimuli which call
them out become more various as a result of experience. Dr. Watson has
found only two original stimuli to fear in young infants, namely loud
noises, and lack of support; but anything associated with either of
these may become terrifying.

The separation of an emotional element in our integral reaction to a
situation is more or less artificial. No doubt there is a definite
physiological concomitant, namely stimulation of a gland; but fear,
for example, involves a mode of action towards an object, for which
mode of action the secretion of adrenin is helpful. There is,
however, something in common among a number of occasions that have a
given emotional tone; this may be seen from the fact that they are
associated. When we are feeling some emotion strongly, we tend to think
of other occasions when we have had similar feelings. Association by
means of emotional similarity is a characteristic of a great deal of
poetry. And this accounts for the fact that, if our blood is in a state
usually associated with terror, we shall, if our critical faculty is in
abeyance, be very likely to imagine some cause of fear so vividly as to
believe that it is really present:

    In the night, imagining some fear,
    How easy is a bush supposed a bear.

But in a rational man, if he is not drunk or sleepy, other associations
are too strong for this production of imaginary terrors. That is why it
is possible to show the physical symptoms of fear under the influence
of adrenin, without actually feeling the emotion.

The emotions are what makes life interesting, and what makes us feel it
important. From this point of view, they are the most valuable element
in human existence. But when, as in philosophy, we are trying to
understand the world, they appear rather as a hindrance. They generate
irrational opinions, since emotional associations seldom correspond
with collocations in the external world. They cause us to view the
universe in the mirror of our moods, as now bright, now dim, according
to the state of the mirror. With the sole exception of curiosity, the
emotions are on the whole a hindrance to the intellectual life, though
the degree of vigour required for successful thinking is likely to be
correlated with a considerable susceptibility to emotion. If I say
little about the emotions in this book, it is not from under-estimating
their human importance, but solely because the task upon which we are
engaged is theoretical rather than practical: to understand the world,
not to change it. And if emotion determines the ends we shall pursue,
knowledge is what gives us the power to realise them. Even from the
practical point of view, the advancement of knowledge is more useful
than anything else that lies within human power.

I come now to the subject of _desire_, which we considered from a
behaviourist standpoint in Chapter III. I want now to ask whether there
is anything to be added from an introspective point of view.

Let us again remind ourselves that there is an element of artificiality
in isolating elements within the one process leading from stimulus to
reaction. Whenever a stimulus produces a reaction, we may consider the
reaction as the effect of the stimulus, or as the cause of further
effects. The former is the natural way of viewing the reaction when we
are concerned with knowledge; the latter is the natural way when we are
concerned with desire and will. In desire, we wish to change something
in ourselves or in our environment or both. The question is: What can
we discover introspectively about desire?

I think that here, as in the case of knowledge, the purely
behaviouristic account is more important causally than the
introspective account, and applies over a much wider range. Desire as
a characteristic of behaviour, as considered in Chapter III, begins
very low in the scale of evolution, and remains, even in human beings,
the whole of what can be discovered in a large number of instances.
The Freudian “unconscious” desires give a formula which is useful as
explaining causally a number of acts, but these desires do not exist as
anything except ways of behaving. Some desires, on the other hand, are
conscious and explicit. What, exactly, is added in these last that is
not present in the others?

Let us take some stock instance, say, Demosthenes desiring to become
a great orator. This was a desire of which he was conscious, and
in accordance with which he deliberately moulded his actions. One
may suppose, to begin with, a merely behaviouristic tendency to do
such things as seemed likely to impress his companions. This is
a practically universal characteristic of human nature, which is
displayed naively by children. Then come attempts, just like those of
rats in mazes, to reach the goal; wrong turnings, leading to derision;
right turnings, leading to a brief nibble at the cheese of admiration.
Self-observation, still of a behaviourist kind, may lead to the
formula: I want to be admired. At this point the desire has become
“conscious”. When this point has been reached, knowledge can be brought
to bear on the problem of achieving the desired end. By association,
the means come to be desired also. And so Demosthenes arrives at the
decision to subject himself to a difficult training as an orator, since
this seems the best way of achieving his end. The whole development
is closely analogous to that of explicit knowledge out of mere
sensitivity; it is, indeed, part of the very same evolution. We cannot,
in our integral reaction to a situation, separate out one event as
knowledge and another as desire; both knowledge and desire are features
which characterise the reaction, but do not exist in isolation.

In explicit conscious desire there is always an object, just as there
is in explicit conscious perception; we desire some event or some state
of affairs. But in the primitive condition out of which explicit desire
is evolved, this is not the case. We have a state of affairs which may
be said to involve discomfort, and activities of various sorts until a
certain different state of affairs is achieved, or fatigue supervenes,
or some other interest causes a distraction. These activities will
be such as to achieve the new state of affairs quickly if there has
been previous experience of a relevant kind. When we reach the level
of explicit conscious desire, it seems as if we were being attracted
to a goal, but we are really still pushed from behind. The attraction
to the goal is a shorthand way of describing the effects of learning
together with the fact that our efforts will continue till the goal
is achieved, provided the time required is not too long. There are
feelings of various kinds connected with desire, and in the case of
familiar desires, such as hunger, these feelings become associated
with what we know will cause the desire to cease. But I see no more
reason in the case of desire than in the case of knowledge to admit
an _essentially_ relational occurrence such as many suppose desire to
be. Only experience, memory and association--so I should say--confer
objects upon desire, which are initially blind tendencies to certain
kinds of activity.

It remains to say a few words about “will”. There is a sense in
which will is an observable phenomena, and another in which it is a
metaphysical superstition. It is obvious that I can say, “I will hold
my breath for thirty seconds”, and proceed to do so; that I can say, “I
will go to America”, and proceed to do so; and so on. In this sense,
will is an observable phenomenon. But as a faculty, as a separable
occurrence, it is, I think, a delusion. To make this clear, it will be
necessary to examine the observable phenomenon.

Very young infants do not appear to have anything that could be called
“will”. Their movements, at first, are reflexes, and are explicable,
where they first cease to be reflexes, by the law of conditioned
reflexes. One observes, however, something that looks very like will
when the child learns control over fingers and toes. It seems clear,
in watching this process, that, after some experience of involuntary
movements, the child discovers how to think of a movement first
and then make the movement, and that this discovery is exceedingly
pleasurable. We know that, in adult life, a deliberate movement is one
which we think of before we make it. Obviously we cannot think of a
movement unless we have previously made it; it follows that no movement
can be voluntary unless it has previously been involuntary. I think
that, as William James suggested, a voluntary movement is merely one
which is preceded by the thought of it, and has the thought of it as an
essential part of its cause.

When I say this, I do not mean to take any particular view as to what
constitutes “thinking”. It may consist almost entirely of talking, as
Dr. Watson holds; or it may be something more. That is not the point
at present. The point is that, whatever philosophy one may adopt, there
certainly is an occurrence which is described by ordinary people as
“thinking of getting up in the morning”, or “thinking of” any other
bodily movement. Whatever the analysis of this occurrence may be, it is
an essential part of the cause of any movement which can be attributed
to the “will”.

It is true, of course, that we may think of a movement without
performing it. This is analogous to imagining a state of affairs
without believing in it; each is a rather sophisticated and late
development. Each will only happen when we think of several things
at once, and one of them interferes with another. It may, I think,
be assumed that, whenever we think of a possible movement, we have a
tendency to perform it, and are only restrained, if at all, by some
thought, or other circumstance, having a contrary tendency.

If this is the case, there is nothing at all mysterious about the will.
Whatever may constitute “thinking of” a movement, it is certainly
something associated with the movement itself; therefore, by the usual
law of learned reactions we should expect that thinking of a movement
would tend to cause it to occur. This, I should say, is the essence of
will.

Emphatic cases of volition, where we decide after a period of
deliberation, are merely examples of conflicting forces. You may have
both pleasant and unpleasant associations with some place that you are
thinking of going to; this may cause you to hesitate, until one or
other association proves the stronger. There may be more than this in
volition, but I cannot see any good ground for believing that there is.




