CHAPTER X

RELATIVITY


We have seen that the world of the atom is a world of revolution rather
than evolution: the electron which has been moving in one orbit hops
quite suddenly into another, so that the motion is what is called
“discontinuous”, that is to say, the electron is first in one place and
then in another, without having passed over any intermediate places.
This sounds like magic, and there may be some way of avoiding such a
disconcerting hypothesis. At any rate, nothing of the sort seems to
happen in the regions where there are no electrons and protons. In
these regions, so far as we can discover, there is continuity, that
is to say, everything goes by gradual transitions, not by jumps. The
regions in which there are no electrons and protons may be called
“æther” or “empty space” as you prefer: the difference is only verbal.
The theory of relativity is especially concerned with what goes on in
these regions, as opposed to what goes on where there are electrons
and protons. Apart from the theory of relativity, what we know about
these regions is that waves travel across them, and that these waves,
when they are waves of light or electromagnetism (which are identical),
behave in a certain fashion set forth by Maxwell in certain formulæ
called “Maxwell’s equations”. When I say we “know” this, I am saying
more than is strictly correct, because all we know is what happens
when the waves reach our bodies. It is as if we could not see the sea,
but could only see the people disembarking at Dover, and inferred the
waves from the fact that the people looked green. It is obvious, in any
case, that we can only know so much about the waves as is involved in
their having such-and-such causes at one end and such-and-such effects
at the other. What can be inferred in this way will be, at best,
something wholly expressible in terms of mathematical structure. We
must not think of the waves as being necessarily “in” the æther or “in”
anything else; they are to be thought of merely as progressive periodic
processes, whose laws are more or less known, but whose intrinsic
character is not known and never can be.

The theory of relativity has arisen from the study of what goes on in
the regions where there are no electrons and protons. While the study
of the atom has led us to discontinuities, relativity has produced
a completely continuous theory of the intervening medium--far more
continuous than any theory formerly imagined. At the moment, these
two points of view stand more or less opposed to each other, but no
doubt before long they will be reconciled. There is not, even now, any
logical contradiction between them; there is only a fairly complete
lack of connection.

For philosophy, far the most important thing about the theory of
relativity is the abolition of the one cosmic time and the one
persistent space, and the substitution of space-time in place of both.
This is a change of quite enormous importance, because it alters
fundamentally our notion of the structure of the physical world, and
has, I think, repercussions in psychology. It would be useless, in our
day, to talk about philosophy without explaining this matter. Therefore
I shall make the attempt, in spite of some difficulty.

Common-sense and pre-relativity physicists believed that, if two events
happen in different places, there must always be a definite answer, in
theory, to the question whether they were simultaneous. This is found
to be a mistake. Let us suppose two persons A and B a long way apart,
each provided with a mirror and means of sending out light-signals. The
events that happen to A still have a perfectly definite time-order, and
so have those that happen to B; the difficulty comes in connecting A’s
time with B’s. Suppose A sends a flash to B, B’s mirror reflects it,
and it returns to A after a certain time. If A is on the earth and B
on the sun, the time will be about sixteen minutes. We shall naturally
say that the time when B received the light-signal is half way between
the times when A sent it out and received it back. But this definition
turns out to be not unambiguous; it will depend upon how A and B are
moving relatively to each other. The more this difficulty is examined,
the more insuperable it is seen to be. Anything that happens to A after
he sends out the flash and before he gets it back is neither definitely
before nor definitely after nor definitely simultaneous with the
arrival of the flash at B. To this extent, there is no unambiguous way
of correlating times in different places.

The notion of a “place” is also quite vague. Is London a “place”? But
the earth is rotating. Is the earth a “place”? But it is going round
the sun. Is the sun a “place”? But it is moving relatively to the
stars. At best you could talk of a place at a given time; but then it
is ambiguous what is a given time, unless you confine yourself to one
place. So the notion of “place” evaporates.

We naturally think of the universe as being in one state at one time
and in another at another. This is a mistake. There is no cosmic time,
and so we cannot speak of the state of the universe at a given time.
And similarly we cannot speak unambiguously of the distance between
two bodies at a given time. If we take the time appropriate to one of
the two bodies, we shall get one estimate; if the time of the other,
another. This makes the Newtonian law of gravitation ambiguous, and
shows that it needs restatement, independently of empirical evidence.

Geometry also goes wrong. A straight line, for example, is supposed to
be a certain track in space whose parts all exist simultaneously. We
shall now find that what is a straight line for one observer is not a
straight line for another. Therefore geometry ceases to be separable
from physics.

The “observer” need not be a mind, but may be a photographic plate.
The peculiarities of the “observer” in this region belong to physics,
not to psychology.

So long as we continue to think in terms of bodies moving, and try to
adjust this way of thinking to the new ideas by successive corrections,
we shall only get more and more confused. The only way to get clear is
to make a fresh start, with _events_ instead of bodies. In physics, an
“event” is anything which, according to the old notions, would be said
to have both a date and a place. An explosion, a flash of lightning,
the starting of a light-wave from an atom, the arrival of the
light-wave at some other body, any of these would be an “event”. Some
strings of events make up what we regard as the history of one body;
some make up the course of one light-wave; and so on. The unity of a
body is a unity of history--it is like the unity of a tune, which takes
time to play, and does not exist whole in any one moment. What exists
at any one moment is only what we call an “event”. It may be that the
word “event”, as used in physics, cannot be quite identified with the
same word as used in psychology; for the present we are concerned
with “events” as the constituents of physical processes, and need not
trouble ourselves about “events” in psychology.

The events in the physical world have relations to each other which
are of the sort that have led to the notions of space and time. They
have relations of order, so that we can say that one event is nearer
to a second than to a third. In this way we can arrive at the notion
of the “neighbourhood” of an event: it will consist roughly speaking
of all the events that are very near the given event. When we say that
neighbouring events have a certain relation, we shall mean that the
nearer two events are to each other, the more nearly they have this
relation, and that they approximate to having it without limit as they
are taken nearer and nearer together.

Two neighbouring events have a measurable quantitative relation
called “interval”, which is sometimes analogous to distance in space,
sometimes to lapse of time. In the former case it is called space-like,
in the latter time-like. The interval between two events is time-like
when one body might be present at both--for example, when both are
parts of the history of your body. The interval is space-like in the
contrary case. In the marginal case between the two, the interval is
zero; this happens when both are parts of one light-ray.

The interval between two neighbouring events is something objective,
in the sense that any two careful observers will arrive at the same
estimate of it. They will not arrive at the same estimate for the
distance in space or the lapse of time between the two events, but the
interval is a genuine physical fact, the same for all. If a body can
travel freely from one event to the other, the interval between the two
events will be the same as the time between them as measured by a clock
travelling with the body. If such a journey is physically impossible,
the interval will be the same as the distance as estimated by an
observer to whom the two events are simultaneous. But the interval is
only definite when the two events are very near together; otherwise
the interval depends upon the route chosen for travelling from the one
event to the other.

Four numbers are needed to fix the position of an event in the world;
these correspond to the time and the three dimensions of space in the
old reckoning. These four numbers are called the co-ordinates of the
event. They may be assigned on any principle which gives neighbouring
co-ordinates to neighbouring events; subject to this condition, they
are merely conventional. For example, suppose an aeroplane has had an
accident. You can fix the position of the accident by four numbers:
latitude, longitude, altitude above sea-level, and Greenwich Mean Time.
But you cannot fix the position of the explosion in space-time by means
of less than four numbers.

Everything in relativity-theory goes (in a sense) from next to
next; there are no direct relations between distant events, such as
distance in time or space. And of course there are no forces acting
at a distance; in fact, except as a convenient fiction, there are
no “forces” at all. Bodies take the course which is easiest at each
moment, according to the character of space-time in the particular
region where they are; this course is called a _geodesic_.

Now it will be observed that I have been speaking freely of bodies and
motion, although I said that bodies were merely certain strings of
events. That being so, it is of course necessary to say what strings of
events constitute bodies, since not all continuous strings of events
do so, not even all geodesics. Until we have defined the sort of thing
that makes a body, we cannot legitimately speak of motion, since this
involves the presence of one body on different occasions. We must
therefore set to work to define what we mean by the persistence of a
body, and how a string of events constituting a body differs from one
which does not. This topic will occupy the next chapter.

But it may be useful, as a preliminary, to teach our imagination to
work in accordance with the new ideas. We must give up what Whitehead
admirably calls the “pushiness” of matter. We naturally think of an
atom as being like a billiard-ball; we should do better to think of it
as like a ghost, which has no “pushiness” and yet can make you fly. We
have to change our notions both of substance and of cause. To say that
an atom persists is like saying that a tune persists. If a tune takes
five minutes to play, we do not conceive of it as a single thing which
exists throughout that time, but as a series of notes, so related as
to form a unity. In the case of the tune, the unity is æsthetic; in
the case of the atom, it is causal. But when I say “causal” I do not
mean exactly what the word naturally conveys. There must be no idea of
compulsion or “force”, neither the force of contact which we imagine
we see between billiard-balls nor the action at a distance which
was formerly supposed to constitute gravitation. There is merely an
observed law of succession from next to next. An event at one moment
is succeeded by an event at a neighbouring moment, which, to the first
order of small quantities, can be calculated from the earlier event.
This enables us to construct a string of events, each, approximately,
growing out of a slightly earlier event according to an intrinsic law.
Outside influences only affect the second order of small quantities. A
string of events connected, in this way, by an approximate intrinsic
law of development is called one piece of matter. This is what I mean
by saying that the unity of a piece of matter is causal. I shall
explain this notion more fully in later chapters.




