CHAPTER XVII

IMAGES


In this chapter we shall consider the question of images. As the reader
doubtless knows, one of the battle-cries of behaviourism is “death
to images”. We cannot discuss this question without a good deal of
previous clearing of the ground.

What are “images” as conceived by their supporters? Let us take this
question first in the sense of trying to know some of the phenomena
intended, and only afterwards in the sense of seeking a formal
definition.

In the ordinary sense, we have visual images if we shut our eyes and
call up pictures of scenery or faces we have known; we have auditory
images when we recall a tune without actually humming it; we have
tactual images when we look at a nice piece of fur and think how
pleasant it would be to stroke it. We may ignore other kinds of images,
and concentrate upon these, visual, auditory, and tactual. There is no
doubt that we have such experiences as I have suggested by the above
words; the only question is as to how these experiences ought to be
described. Then we have another set of experiences, namely dreams,
which feel like sensations at the moment, but do not have the same kind
of relation to the external world as sensations have. Dreams, also,
indubitably occur, and again it is a question of analysis whether we
are to say that they contain “images” or not.

The behaviourist does not admit images, but he equally does not
admit sensations and perceptions. Although he does not say so quite
definitely, he may be taken to maintain that there is nothing but
matter in motion. We cannot, therefore, tackle the question of images
by contrasting them with sensations or perceptions, unless we have
first clearly proved the existence of these latter and defined their
characteristics. Now it will be remembered that in Chapter V we
attempted a behaviourist definition of perception, and decided that its
most essential feature was “sensitivity”. That is to say, if a person
always has a reaction of a certain kind B when he has a certain spatial
relation to an object of a certain kind A, but not otherwise, then we
say that the person is “sensitive” to A. In order to obtain from this a
definition of “perception”, it is necessary to take account of the law
of association; but for the moment we will ignore this complication,
and say that a person “perceives” any feature of his environment, or
of his own body, to which he is sensitive. Now, however, as a result
of the discussion in Chapter XVI, we can include in his reaction, not
only what others can observe, but also what he alone can observe.
This enlarges the known sphere of perception, practically if not
theoretically. But it leaves unchanged the fact that the essence
of perception is a causal relation to a feature of the environment
which, except in astronomy, is approximately contemporaneous with the
perception, though always at least slightly earlier, owing to the
time taken by light and sound to travel and the interval occupied in
transmitting a current along the nerves.

Let us now contrast with this what happens when you sit still with
your eyes shut, calling up pictures of places you have seen abroad,
and perhaps ultimately falling asleep. Dr. Watson, if I understand
him aright, maintains that either there is actual stimulation of the
retina, or your pictures are mere word-pictures, the words being
represented by small actual movements such as would, if magnified and
prolonged, lead to actual pronunciation of the words. Now if you are
in the dark with your eyes shut, there is no stimulation of the retina
from without. It may be that, by association, the eye can be affected
through stimuli to other senses; we have already had an example in the
fact that the pupil can be taught to contract at a loud noise if this
had been frequently experienced along with a bright light. We cannot,
therefore, dismiss the idea that a stimulus to one sense may, as a
result of past events, have an effect upon the organs of another sense.
“Images” might be definable as effects produced in this way. It may be
that, when you see a picture of Napoleon, there is an effect upon your
aural nerves analogous to that of having the word “Napoleon” pronounced
in your presence, and that that is why, when you see the picture, the
word “Napoleon” comes into your head. And similarly, when you shut
your eyes and call up pictures of foreign scenes, you may actually
pronounce, completely or incipiently, the word “Italy”, and this may,
through association, stimulate the optic nerve in a way more or less
similar to that in which some actual place in Italy stimulated it on
some former occasion. Thence association alone may carry you along
through a series of journeys, until at last, when you fall asleep, you
think you are actually making them at the moment. All this is quite
possible, but so far as I know there is no reason to hold that it is
more than possible, apart from an _a priori_ theory excluding every
other explanation.

What I think is clearly untenable is the view, sometimes urged by Dr.
Watson, that when we are, as we think, seeing imaginary pictures with
the eyes shut, we are really only using such words as would describe
them. It seems to me as certain as anything can be that, when I
visualise, something is happening which is connected with the sense of
sight. For example, I can call up quite clear mental pictures of the
house in which I lived as a child; if I am asked a question as to the
furniture of any of the rooms in that house, I can answer it by first
calling up an image and then looking to see what the answer is, just
as I should look to see in an actual room. It is quite clear to me
that the picture comes first and that words after; moreover, the words
need not come at all. I cannot tell what is happening in my retina or
optic nerve at these moments of visualisation, but I am quite sure
that something is happening which has a connection with the sense of
sight that it does not have with other senses. And I can say the same
of aural and tactual images. If this belief were inconsistent with
anything else that seems to me equally certain, I might be induced to
abandon it. But so far as I can see, there is no such inconsistency.

It will be remembered that we decided in favour of perceptions as
events distinct from those which they perceive, and only causally
connected with them. There is, therefore, no reason why association
should not work in this region as well as in the region of muscles
and glands; in other words, there is no reason to deny what used to
be called “association of ideas”, in spite of the fact that bodily
changes can also be associated. If a physical basis is wanted, it can
be assumed to exist in the brain. The state of the brain which causes
us to hear the word “Napoleon” may become associated with the state of
brain which causes us to see a picture of Napoleon, and thus the word
and the picture will call each other up. The association _may_ be in
the sense-organs or nerves, but may equally well be in the brain. So
far as I know, there is no conclusive evidence either way, nor even
that the association is not purely “mental.”

When we try to find a definition of the difference between a sensation
and an image, it is natural to look first for intrinsic differences.
But intrinsic differences between ordinary sensations and ordinary
images, for example as to “liveliness”, are found to be subject to
exceptions, and therefore unsuitable for purposes of definition. Thus
we are brought to differences as to causes and effects.

It is obvious that, in an ordinary case, you perceive a table because
(in some sense) the table is there. That is to say, there is a causal
chain leading backwards from your perception to something outside your
body. This alone, however, is hardly sufficient as a criterion. Suppose
you smell peat smoke and think of Ireland, your thought can equally be
traced to a cause outside your body. The only real difference is that
the outside cause (peat smoke) would not have had the effect (images
of Ireland) upon every normal person, but only upon such as had smelt
peat smoke in Ireland, and not all of them. That is to say, the normal
cerebral apparatus does not cause the given stimulus to produce the
given effect except where certain previous experiences have occurred.
This is a very vital distinction. Part of what occurs in us under the
influence of a stimulus from without depends upon past experience; part
does not. The former part includes images, the latter consists of pure
sensations. This, however, as we shall see later, is inadequate as a
definition.

Mental occurrences which depend upon past experience are called
“mnemic” occurrences, following Semon. Images are thus to be included
among mnemic occurrences, at least so far as human experience goes.
This, however, does not suffice to define them, since there are others,
_e.g._ recollections. What further defines them is their similarity
to sensations. This only applies strictly to simple images; complex
ones may occur without a prototype, though all their parts will have
prototypes among sensations. Such, at least, is Hume’s principle, and
on the whole it seems to be true. It must not, however, be pressed
beyond a point. As a rule, an image is more or less vague, and has a
number of similar sensations as its prototypes. This does not prevent
the connection with sensation in general, but makes it a connection
with a number of sensations, not with one only.

It happens that, when a complex of sensations has occurred at some
time in a person’s experience, the recurrence of part of the whole
tends to produce images of the remaining parts or some of them. This is
association, and has much to do with memory.

It is common to speak of images as “centrally excited”, as opposed to
sensations, which are excited by a stimulus to some sense organ. In
essence this is quite correct, but there is need of some caution in
interpreting the phrase. Sensations also have _proximate_ causes in
the brain; images also may be due to some excitement of a sense-organ,
when they are roused by a sensation through association. But in such
cases there is nothing to explain their occurrence except the past
experience and its effect on the brain. They will not be aroused by
the same stimulus in a person with similar sense-organs but different
past experience. The connection with past experience is clearly known;
it is, however, an explanatory hypothesis, not directly verifiable in
the present state of knowledge, to suppose that this connection works
through an effect of the past experience on the brain. This hypothesis
must be regarded as doubtful, but it will save circumlocution to adopt
it. I shall therefore not repeat, on each occasion, that we cannot feel
sure it is true. In general, where the causal connection with past
experience is obvious, we call an occurrence “mnemic”, without implying
this or that hypothesis as to the explanation of mnemic phenomena.

It is perhaps worth while to ask how we know that images are like the
sensations which are their prototypes. The difficulty of this question
arises as follows. Suppose you call up an image of the Brooklyn
Bridge, and you are convinced that it is like what you see when you
look at Brooklyn Bridge. It would seem natural to say that you know
the likeness because you remember Brooklyn Bridge. But remembering is
often held to involve, as an essential element, the occurrence of an
image which is regarded as referring to a prototype. Unless you can
remember without images, it is difficult to see how you can be sure
that images resemble prototypes. I think that in fact you cannot be
sure, unless you can find some indirect means of comparison. You might,
for example, have photographs of Brooklyn Bridge taken from a given
place on two different days, and find them indistinguishable, showing
that Brooklyn Bridge has not changed in the interval. You might see
Brooklyn Bridge on the first of these days, remember it on the second,
and immediately afterwards look at it. In looking at it, you might find
every detail coming to you with a feeling of expectedness, or you might
find some details coming with a feeling of surprise. In this case you
would say that your image had been wrong as regards the details which
were surprising. Or, again, you might make a picture of Brooklyn Bridge
on paper, from memory, and then compare it with the original or a
photograph. Or you might content yourself by writing down a description
of it in words, and verifying its accuracy by direct observation.
Innumerable methods of this kind can be devised by which you can test
the likeness of an image to its prototype. The result is that there is
often a great likeness, though seldom complete accuracy. The belief in
the likeness of an image to its prototype is, of course, not generated
in this way, but only tested. The belief exists prior to evidence as to
its correctness, like most of our beliefs. I shall have more to say on
this subject in the next chapter, which will be concerned with memory.
But I think enough has been said to show that it is not unreasonable
to regard images as having a greater or less degree of resemblance to
their prototypes. To claim more is hardly justifiable.

We can now reach a definite conclusion about perception, sensation, and
images. Let us imagine a number of people placed, as far as possible,
in the same environment; we will suppose that they sit successively in
a certain chair in a dark room, in full view of illuminated pictures
of two eminent politicians of opposite parties whose names are written
underneath them. We will suppose that all of them have normal eyesight.
Their reactions will be partly similar, partly different. If any of
these observers are babies too young to have learnt to focus, they will
not see sharp outlines, but a mere blurr, not from an optical defect,
but from a lack of cerebral control over muscles. In this respect,
experience has an effect even upon what must count as pure sensation.
But this difference is really analogous to the difference between
having one’s eyes open and having them shut; the difference is in the
sense-organ, although it may be due to a difference in the brain. We
will therefore assume that all the spectators know how to adjust the
eyes so as to see as well as possible, and all try to see. We shall
then say that, if the spectators differ as widely as is possible for
normal human beings, what is common to the reactions of all of them
is sensation, provided it is connected with the sense of sight, or,
more correctly, provided it has that quality which we observe to be
common and peculiar to visual objects. But probably all of them, if
they are over three months old, will have tactile images while they
see the pictures. And if they are more than about a year old, they
will interpret them as pictures, which represent three-dimensional
objects; before that age, they may see them as coloured patterns,
not as representations of faces. Most animals, though not all, are
incapable of interpreting pictures as representations. But in an adult
human being this interpretation is not deliberate; it has become
automatic. It is, I think, mainly a question of tactile images: the
images you have in looking at a picture are not those appropriate to a
smooth flat surface, but those appropriate to the object represented.
If the object represented is a large one, there will also be images of
movement--walking round the object, or climbing up it, or what not.
All these are obviously a product of experience, and therefore do not
count as part of the sensation. This influence of experience is still
more obvious when it comes to reading the names of the politicians,
considering whether they are good likenesses, and feeling what a fine
fellow one of them looks and what unmitigated villainy is stamped upon
the features of the other. None of this counts as sensation, yet it is
part of a man’s spontaneous reaction to an outside stimulus.

It is evidently difficult to avoid a certain artificiality in
distinguishing between the effects of experience and the rest in a
man’s reaction to a stimulus. Perhaps we could tackle the matter in a
slightly different way. We can distinguish stimuli of different sorts:
to the eye, the ear, the nose, the palate, etc. We can also distinguish
elements of different sorts in the reaction: visual elements, auditory
elements, etc. The latter are defined, not by the stimulus, but by
their intrinsic quality. A visual sensation and a visual image have
a common quality which neither shares with an auditory sensation or
an auditory image. We may then say: a visual image is an occurrence
having the visual quality but not due to a stimulus to the eye, _i.e._
not having as a direct causal antecedent the incidence of light-waves
upon the retina. Similarly an auditory image will be an occurrence
having the auditory quality but not due to sound-waves reaching the
ear, and so on for the other senses. This means a complete abandonment
of the attempt to distinguish psychologically between sensations and
images; the distinction becomes solely one as to physical antecedents.
It is true that we can and do arrive at the distinction without
scientific physics, because we find that certain elements in our
integral reactions have the correlations that make us regard them as
corresponding to something external while others do not--correlations
both with the experience of others and with our own past and future
experiences. But when we refine upon this common-sense distinction and
try to make it precise, it becomes the distinction in terms of physics
as stated just now.

We might therefore conclude that an image is an occurrence having the
quality associated with stimulation by some sense-organ, but not due
to such stimulation. In human beings, images seem to depend upon past
experience, but perhaps in more instinctive animals they are partly due
to innate cerebral mechanisms. In any case dependence upon experience
is not the mark by which they are to be defined. This shows how
intimate is the dependence of traditional psychology upon physics, and
how difficult it is to make psychology into an autonomous science.

There is, however, still a further refinement necessary. Whatever is
included under our present definition is an image, but some things
not included are also images. The sight of an object may bring with
it a visual image of some other object frequently associated with it.
This latter is called an image, not a sensation, because, though also
visual, it is not appropriate to the stimulus in a certain sense: it
would not appear in a photograph of the scene, or in a photograph
of the retina. Thus we are forced to say: the sensation element in
the reaction to a stimulus is that part which enables you to draw
inferences as to the nature of the extra-cerebral event (if any)
which was the stimulus;[9] the rest is images. Fortunately, images
and sensations _usually_ differ in intrinsic quality; this makes it
possible to get an approximate idea of the external world by using the
usual intrinsic differences, and to correct it afterwards by means of
the strict causal definition. But evidently the matter is difficult
and complicated, depending upon physics and physiology, not upon pure
psychology. This is the main thing to be realised about images.

      [9] _I.e._ the immediate stimulus, not the “physical object”.

The above discussion has suggested a definition of the word “image”.
We might have called an event an “image” when it is recognisably of
the same kind as a “percept”, but does not have the stimulus which it
would have if it were a percept. But if this definition is to be made
satisfactory, it will be necessary to substitute a different word in
place of “percept”. For example, in the percept of a visible object
it would be usual to include certain associated tactual elements, but
these must, from our point of view, count as images. It will be better
to say, therefore, that an “image” is an occurrence recognisably visual
(or auditory, etc., as the case may be), but not caused by a stimulus
which is of the nature of light (or sound etc., as the case may be), or
at any rate only indirectly so caused as a result of association. With
this definition, I do not myself feel any doubt as to the existence of
images. It is clear that they constitute most of the material of dreams
and day-dreams, that they are utilised by composers in making music,
that we employ them when we get out of a familiar room in the dark
(though here the rats in mazes make a different explanation possible),
and that they account for the shock of surprise we have when we take
salt thinking it is sugar or (as happened to me recently) vinegar
thinking it is coffee. The question of the causation of images--_i.e._
whether it is in the brain or in other parts of the body--is not one
which it is necessary to our purposes to decide, which is fortunate,
since, so far as I know, there is not at present any adequate evidence
on the point. But the existence of images and their resemblance to
perception is important, as we shall see in the next chapter.

Images come in various ways, and play various parts. There are
those that come as accretions to a case of sensation, which are not
recognised as images except by the psychologist; these form, for
example, the tactual quality of things we only see, and the visual
quality of things we only touch. I think dreams belong, in part, to
this class of images: some dreams result from misinterpreting some
ordinary stimulus, and in these cases the images are those suggested
by a sensation, but suggested more uncritically than if we were awake.
Then there are images which are not attached to a present reality, but
to one which we locate in the past; these are present in memory, not
necessarily always, but sometimes. Then there are images not attached
to reality at all so far as our feeling about them goes: images which
merely float into our heads in reverie or in passionate desire.
And finally there are images which are called up voluntarily, for
example, in considering how to decorate a room. This last kind has its
importance, but I shall say nothing more about it at present, since we
cannot profitably discuss it until we have decided what we are to mean
by the word “voluntary”. The first kind, which comes as an accretion
to sensation, and gives to our feeling of objects a certain rotundity
and full-bloodedness which the stimulus alone would hardly warrant, has
been considered already. Therefore what remains for the present is the
use of images in memory and imagination; and of these two I shall begin
with memory.




