CHAPTER XV

THE NATURE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE OF PHYSICS


In this chapter, we shall seek an answer to two questions: First, _how_
do we know about the world dealt with in physics? Secondly, _what_ do
we know about it, assuming the truth of modern physics?

First: How do we know about the physical world? We have already seen
that this question cannot have a simple answer, since the basis of
inference is something that happens in our own heads, and our knowledge
of anything outside our own heads must be more or less precarious. For
the present, I shall take it for granted that we may accept testimony,
with due precautions. In other words, I shall assume that what we hear
when, as we believe, others are speaking to us, does in fact have
“meaning” to the speaker, and not only to us; with a corresponding
assumption as regards writing. This assumption will be examined at a
later stage. For the present, I will merely emphasise that it _is_ an
assumption, and that it may possibly be false, since people seem to
speak to us in dreams, and yet, on waking, we become persuaded that
we invented the dream. It is impossible to prove, by a demonstrative
argument, that we are not always dreaming; the best we can hope is a
proof that this is improbable. But for the present let us leave this
discussion on one side, and assume that the words we hear and read
“mean” what they would if we spoke or wrote them.

On this basis, we have reason to know that the worlds of different
people are alike in certain respects and different in certain others.
Take, for example, the audience at a theatre: they all, we say, hear
the same words and see the same gestures, which, moreover, are those
that the actors wish them to hear and see. But those who are near the
stage hear the words more loudly than those further off; they also
hear them somewhat earlier. And those who sit on the right do not see
quite what is seen by those who sit on the left or in the centre. These
differences are of two sorts: on the one hand, some people can see
something invisible to others; on the other hand, when two people, as
we say, see the “same” thing, they see it differently owing to effects
of perspective and of the way the light is reflected. All this is a
question of physics, not of psychology; for if we place a camera in an
empty seat in the theatre, the perspective in the resultant photograph
is intermediate between the perspectives that are seen by persons
sitting on either side; indeed the whole matter of perspective is
determined by quite simple geometrical laws. These laws show also what
is common to the shapes that two people see when they see the “same”
thing from different points of view: what is common is what is studied
by projective geometry, which is concerned with what is independent of
measurement in geometrical figures. All the differences in appearance
due to perspective have to be learned in learning to draw: for this
purpose, it is necessary to learn to see things as they really seem,
and not as they seem to seem.

But, it will be said, what can you mean by how things “really” seem
and how they “seem” to seem? We come here upon an important fact about
learning. When, in early infancy, we are learning to correlate sight
and touch, we acquire the habit of reacting to a visual stimulus in a
manner which is more “objective” than that in which a camera reacts.
When we see a coin not directly in front of us, we judge it to be
circular, although the camera would show it as oval, and a man would
have to make it oval in a picture of a scene which contained it. We
learn, therefore, to react to a visual shape in a manner corresponding
to how it would appear if it were in the centre of the field of vision,
provided we do not immediately focus upon it, which is what we
naturally do when anything visible interests us. As a matter of fact,
we are constantly looking in different directions, and, as a rule, only
noticing what, at the moment, is in the centre of our field of vision.
Thus our visual world consists rather of a synthesis of things viewed
directly in succession than of things seen simultaneously while the
centre of the field is kept fixed. This is one reason why the rules of
perspective have to be learned, although a picture which ignores them
makes an impression of being “wrong”.

Another reason for the objectivity of the impressions we derive from
sight is correlation with other senses, especially touch. Through
this correlation we soon get to “know” that a man twenty yards away
is “really” just as big as a man one yard away. When children are
learning to draw, they find it very difficult to make distant objects
sufficiently small, because they know they are not “really” small. We
soon learn to judge the distance of a visual object, and to react to
it according to the size that it would have if touched--or travelled
over--in the case of very large objects such as mountains. Our sense
of size is not derived from sight, but from such sources as touch and
locomotion; our metrical judgments, when the stimulus is only visual,
are a result of previous experience.

By the time a child can speak well, he has had a great deal of this
kind of experience. Consequently our verbal reactions contain a great
deal more objectivity than they would if they came at an earlier stage
of infancy. The result is that a number of people can view a scene
simultaneously, and use exactly the same words about it. The words
which we naturally use in describing what we see are those describing
features that will also be evident to others in our neighbourhood. We
say, “there is a man”, not, “there is a coloured shape whose visual
dimensions are such-and-such an angle vertically, and such another
horizontally”. The inference is a physiological inference, and only
subsequent reflection makes us aware that it has taken place. We
can, however, become aware of it through occasional mistakes; a dot
on the window-pane may be mistaken for a man in a distant field. In
this case, we can discover our error by opening the window, or by
moving the head. In general, however, physiological inferences of this
sort are correct, since they have resulted from correlations which
are very common, and are likely to be present on a given occasion.
Consequently our words tend to conceal what is private and peculiar in
our impressions, and to make us believe that different people live in a
common world to a greater extent than is in fact the case.

We have been using the word “objectivity” in the preceding pages,
and it is time to consider exactly what we mean by it. Suppose some
scene--say in a theatre--is simultaneously seen by a number of people
and photographed by a number of cameras. The impression made upon
a person or a camera is in some respects like that made upon other
persons and cameras, in other respects different. We shall call the
elements which are alike “objective” elements in the impression,
and those which are peculiar we shall call “subjective”. Thus those
features of shapes which are considered in projective geometry will
be objective, whereas those considered in metrical geometry (where
lengths and angles are measured) cannot be made objective through sight
alone, but demand the use of other senses. In the photographs, a man
on the stage will be longer if the camera is near the stage than if it
is far off, assuming all the cameras to be alike. But if four actors
are standing in a row in one photograph, they will be standing in a
row in another; this is an “objective” feature of the impression. And
the differences in the visual impressions of a number of spectators
with normal eyesight are exactly analogous to the differences in the
photographs; so also are the likenesses. Thus the “subjectivity” that
we are speaking about at present is something belonging to the physical
world, not to psychology. It marks the fact that the stimulus, whether
to an eye or to a camera, is not exactly the same wherever the eye or
the camera may be placed; there are features of the stimulus which are
constant (within limits), but there are others which are different from
any two different points of view.

The tendency of our perceptions is to emphasise increasingly the
objective elements in an impression, unless we have some special
reason, as artists have, for doing the opposite. This tendency begins
before speech, is much accentuated after speech has been acquired,
and is prolonged by scientific physics. The theory of relativity is
only the last term, so far, in the elimination of subjective elements
from impressions. But it must not be supposed that the subjective
elements are any less “real” than the objective elements; they are
only less important. They are less important because they do not point
to anything beyond themselves as the others do. We want our senses to
give us information, _i.e._ to tell us about something more than our
own momentary impression. We acquire information through our senses
if we attend to the objective elements in the impression and ignore
the others; but the subjective elements are just as truly part of the
actual impression. This is obvious as soon as we realise that the
camera is as subjective as we are.

Such considerations lead irresistibly to the scientific view that,
when an object can be seen or photographed from a number of points
of view, there is a connected set of events (light-waves) travelling
outward from a centre; that, moreover, there are some respects in
which all these events are alike, and others in which they differ one
from another. We must not think of a light-wave as a “thing”, but as a
connected group of rhythmical events. The mathematical characteristics
of such a group can be inferred by physics, within limits; but the
intrinsic character of the component events cannot be inferred. The
events constituting light-waves are only known through their effects
upon our eyes, optic nerves, and brains, and these effects are not
themselves light-waves, as is obvious from the fact that nerves and
brains are not transparent. Light in the physical world, therefore,
must consist of events which are in some way different from the events
which happen when we see; but we cannot say more than this as to the
intrinsic quality of these external events. Moreover, when a number of
people, as we say, “see the same thing”, what we have reason to believe
is that light-waves emanating from a certain region have reached the
eyes of all these people. As to what is in the region from which the
light-waves come, we cannot tell.

But--so the plain man is tempted to argue--we can tell quite well,
because we can touch objects that we see, and discover that there is
something hard and solid in the place from which the light-waves come.
Or, again, we may find that there is something there which, though not
solid, is very hot, and burns us when we try to touch it. We all feel
that touch gives more evidence of “reality” than sight; ghosts and
rainbows can be seen but not touched. One reason for this greater sense
of reality is that our spatial relation to an object when we touch it
with our finger-tips is given, and therefore an object does not give
such different impressions of touch to different people as it does of
sight. Another reason is that there are a number of objects that can be
seen but not touched--reflections, smoke, mist, etc.--and that these
objects are calculated to surprise the inexperienced. None of these
facts, however, justify the plain man in supposing that touch makes him
know real things as they are, though we are verbally forced to admit
that it brings him into “contact” with them.

We have seen on an earlier occasion how complex is the physical and
physiological process leading from the object to the brain when we
touch something; and we have seen that illusions of touch can be
produced artificially. What we experience when we have a sensation
of touch is, therefore, no more a revelation of the real nature of
the object touched than what we experience when we look at it. As a
matter of fact, if modern physics is to be believed, sight, prudently
employed, gives us a more delicate knowledge concerning objects
than touch can ever do. Touch, as compared with sight, is gross and
massive. We can photograph the path of an individual electron. We
perceive colours which indicate the changes happening in atoms. We can
see faint stars even though the energy of the light that reaches us
from them is inconceivably minute. Sight may deceive the unwary more
than touch, but for accurate scientific knowledge it is incomparably
superior to any of the other senses.

It is chiefly through ideas derived from sight that physicists have
been led to the modern conception of the atom as a centre from which
radiations travel. We do not know what happens in the centre. The idea
that there is a little hard lump there, which _is_ the electron or
proton, is an illegitimate intrusion of common-sense notions derived
from touch. For aught we know, the atom may consist entirely of the
radiations which come out of it. It is useless to argue that radiations
cannot come out of nothing. We know that they come, and they do not
become any more really intelligible by being supposed to come out of a
little lump.

Modern physics, therefore, reduces matter to a set of events which
proceed outward from a centre. If there is something further in the
centre itself, we cannot know about it, and it is irrelevant to
physics. The events that take the place of matter in the old sense are
inferred from their effect on eyes, photographic plates, and other
instruments. What we know about them is not their intrinsic character,
but their structure and their mathematical laws. Their structure is
inferred chiefly through the maxim “same cause, same effect”. It
follows from this maxim that if the effects are different, the causes
must be different; if, therefore, we see red and blue side by side,
we are justified in inferring that in the direction where we see
red something different is happening from what is happening in the
direction where we see blue. By extensions of this line of argument
we arrive at the mathematical laws of the physical world. Physics is
mathematical, not because we know so much about the physical world,
but because we know so little: it is only its mathematical properties
that we can discover. For the rest, our knowledge is negative. In
places where there are no eyes or ears or brains there are no colours
or sounds, but there are events having certain characteristics which
lead them to cause colours and sounds in places where there are eyes
and ears and brains. We cannot find out what the world looks like from
a place where there is nobody, because if we go to look there will be
somebody there; the attempt is as hopeless as trying to jump on one’s
own shadow.

Matter as it appears to common sense, and as it has until recently
appeared in physics, must be given up. The old idea of matter was
connected with the idea of “substance”, and this, in turn, with a view
of time that the theory of relativity shows to be untenable. The old
view was that there is one cosmic time, and that, given any two events
in any two parts of the universe, either they are simultaneous, or the
first is earlier than the second, or the second earlier than the first.
It was thought that the time-order of the two events must always be
objectively definite, although _we_ might be unable to determine it.
We now find that this is not the case. Events which can be regarded as
all in one place, or all parts of the history of one piece of matter,
still have a definite time-order. So do events in different places if a
person situated where the second takes place can see the first before
the second happens, or, more exactly, if light can travel from the
place of the one to the place of the other so as to reach the other
place before the second event. (Here we mean by a “place” the position
of a given piece of matter: however the matter may move relatively
to other matter, it is always in the same “place” from its own point
of view.) But if light travelling from the place of the one event to
the place of the other event arrives at the place of the other event
after the other event has taken place, and conversely, then there is
no definite objective time-order of the two events, and there is no
reason for regarding either as earlier than the other; nor yet for
regarding the two as simultaneous; ideally careful observers will judge
differently according to the way in which they are moving. Thus time
is not cosmic, but is to some extent individual and personal for each
piece of matter.

What do we mean by a “piece of matter” in this statement? We do not
mean something that preserves a simple identity throughout its history,
nor do we mean something hard and solid, nor even a hypothetical
thing-in-itself known only through its effects. We mean the “effects”
themselves, only that we no longer invoke an unknowable cause for
them. We find that energy in various forms spreads outwards from
various centres; we find also that such centres have a certain degree
of persistence, though this persistence is not absolute--the modern
physicist faces cheerfully the possibility that an electron and a
proton may mutually annihilate each other, and even suggests that this
may be the main source of the radiant energy of the stars, because
when it happens it makes an explosion. What is asserted may be put as
follows: When energy radiates from a centre, we can describe the laws
of its radiation conveniently by imagining something in the centre,
which we will call an electron or a proton according to circumstances,
and for certain purposes it is convenient to regard this centre as
persisting, _i.e._ as not a single point in space-time but a series
of such points, separated from each other by time-like intervals. All
this, however, is only a convenient way of describing what happens
elsewhere, namely the radiation of energy away from the centre. As to
what goes on in the centre itself, if anything, physics is silent.

What Dr. Whitehead calls the “pushiness” of matter disappears
altogether on this view. “Matter” is a convenient formula for
describing what happens where it isn’t. I am talking physics, not
metaphysics; when we come to metaphysics, we may be able, tentatively,
to add something to this statement, but science alone can hardly add
to it. Materialism as a philosophy becomes hardly tenable in view of
this evaporation of matter. But those who would formerly have been
materialists can still adopt a philosophy which comes to much the
same thing in many respects. They can say that the type of causation
dealt with in physics is fundamental, and that all events are subject
to physical laws. I do not wish, as yet, to consider how far such a
view should be adopted; I am only suggesting that it must replace
materialism as a view to be seriously examined.




