CHAPTER XI

CAUSAL LAWS IN PHYSICS


In the last chapter we spoke about the substitution of space-time for
space and time, and the effect which this has had in substituting
strings of events for “things” conceived as substances. In this chapter
we will deal with cause and effect as they appear in the light of
modern science. It is at least as difficult to purge our imagination
of irrelevances in this matter as in regard to substance. The
old-fashioned notion of cause appeared in dynamics as “force”. We still
speak of forces just as we still speak of the sunrise, but we recognise
that this is nothing but a convenient way of speaking, in the one case
as in the other.

Causation is deeply embedded in language and common sense. We say that
people build houses or make roads: to “build” and to “make” are both
notions involving causality. We say that a man is “powerful”, meaning
that his volitions are causes over a wide range. Some examples of
causation seem to us quite natural, others less so. It seems natural
that our muscles should obey our will, and only reflection makes us
perceive the necessity of finding an explanation of this phenomenon. It
seems natural that when you hit a billiard-ball with a cue it moves.
When we see a horse pulling a cart, or a heavy object being dragged by
a rope, we _feel_ as if we understood all about it. It is events of
this sort that have given rise to the common-sense belief in causes and
forces.

But as a matter of fact the world is incredibly more complicated than
it seems to common sense. When we think we understand a process--I mean
by “we” the non-reflective part in each of us--what really happens
is that there is some sequence of events so familiar through past
experience that at each stage we expect the next stage. The whole
process seems to us peculiarly intelligible when human desires enter
in, for example, in watching a game: what the ball does and what the
players do seem “natural”, and we feel as if we quite understood how
the stages succeed each other. We thus arrive at the notion of what is
called “necessary” sequence. The text-books say that A is the cause of
B if A is “necessarily” followed by B. This notion of “necessity” seems
to be purely anthropomorphic, and not based upon anything that is a
discoverable feature of the world. Things happen according to certain
rules; the rules can be generalised, but in the end remain brute facts.
Unless the rules are concealed conventions or definitions, no reason
can be given why they should not be completely different.

To say that A is “necessarily” followed by B is thus to say no more
than that there is some general rule, exemplified in a very large
number of observed instances, and falsified in none, according to which
events such as A are followed by events such as B. We must not have any
notion of “compulsion”, as if the cause _forced_ the effect to happen.
A good test for the imagination in this respect is the reversibility
of causal laws. We can just as often infer backwards as forwards.
When you get a letter, you are justified in inferring that somebody
wrote it, but you do not feel that your receiving it _compelled_
the sender to write it. The notion of compulsion is just as little
applicable to effects as to causes. To say that causes compel effects
is as misleading as to say that effects compel causes. Compulsion is
anthropomorphic: a man is compelled to do something when he wishes to
do the opposite, but except where human or animal wishes come in the
notion of compulsion is inapplicable. Science is concerned merely with
what happens, not with what _must_ happen.

When we look for invariable rules of sequence in nature, we find that
they are not such as common sense sets up. Common sense says: thunder
follows lightning, waves at sea follow wind, and so on. Rules of
this sort are indispensable in practical life, but in science they
are all only approximate. If there is any finite interval of time,
however short, between the cause and the effect, something may happen
to prevent the effect from occurring. Scientific laws can only be
expressed in differential equations. This means that, although you
cannot tell what may happen after a finite time, you can say that, if
you make the time shorter and shorter, what will happen will be more
and more nearly according to such-and-such a rule. To take a very
simple case: I am now in this room; you cannot tell where I shall be
in another second, because a bomb may explode and blow me sky-high,
but if you take any two small fragments of my body which are now very
close together, you can be sure that, after _some_ very short finite
time, they will still be very close together. If a second is not short
enough, you must take a shorter time; you cannot tell in advance how
short a time you may have to take, but you may feel fairly certain that
there is a short enough time.

The laws of sequence in physics, apart from quantum phenomena, are of
two sorts, which appeared in traditional dynamics as laws of velocity
and laws of acceleration. In a very short time, the velocity of a
body alters very little, and if the time is taken short enough, the
change of velocity diminishes without limit. This is what, in the last
chapter, we called an “intrinsic” causal law. Then there is the effect
of the outer world, as it appeared in traditional dynamics, which
is shown in acceleration. The small change which does occur in the
velocity in a short time is attributed to surrounding bodies, because
it is found to vary as they vary, and to vary according to ascertained
laws. Thus we think of surrounding bodies as exerting an influence,
which we call “force”, though this remains as mysterious as the
influence of the stars in astrology.

Einstein’s theory of gravitation has done away with this conception in
so far as gravitational forces are concerned. In this theory, a planet
moving round the sun is moving in the nearest approach to a straight
line that the neighbourhood permits. The neighbourhood is supposed to
be non-Euclidean, that is to say, to contain no straight lines such
as Euclid imagined. If a body is moving freely, as the planets do, it
observes a certain rule. Perhaps the simplest way to state this rule
is as follows: Suppose you take any two events which happen on the
earth, and you measure the time between them by ideally accurate clocks
which move with the earth. Suppose some traveller on a magic carpet had
meanwhile cruised about the universe, leaving the earth at the time of
the first event and returning at the time of the second. By his clocks
the period elapsed will be less than by the terrestial clocks. This is
what is meant by saying that the earth moves in a “geodesic”, which
is the nearest approach to a straight line to be found in the region
in which we live. All this is, so to speak, geometrical, and involves
no “forces”. It is not the sun that makes the earth go round, but the
nature of space-time where the earth is.

Even this is not quite correct. Space-time does not make the earth go
round the sun; it makes us _say_ the earth goes round the sun. That is
to say, it makes this the shortest way of describing what occurs. We
could describe it in other language, which would be equally correct,
but less convenient.

The abolition of “force” in astronomy is perhaps connected with the
fact that astronomy depends only upon the sense of sight. On the
earth, we push and pull, we touch things, and we experience muscular
strains. This all gives us a notion of “force”, but this notion is
anthropomorphic. To imagine the laws of motion of heavenly bodies,
think of the motions of objects in a mirror; they may move very fast,
although in the mirror world there are no forces.

What we really have to substitute for force is laws of correlation.
Events can be collected in groups by their correlations. This is
all that is true in the old notion of causality. And this is not a
“postulate” or “category”, but an observed fact--lucky, not necessary.

As we suggested before, it is these correlations of events that lead
to the definition of permanent “things”. There is no essential
difference, as regards substantiality, between an electron and a
light-ray. Each is really a string of events or of sets of events. In
the case of the light-ray, we have no temptation to think otherwise.
But in the case of the electron, we think of it as a single persistent
entity. There _may_ be such an entity, but we can have no evidence that
there is. What we can discover is (_a_) a group of events spreading
outwards from a centre--say, for definiteness, the events constituting
a wave of light--and attributed, hypothetically, to a “cause” in that
centre; (_b_) more or less similar groups of events at other times,
connected with the first group according to the laws of physics, and
therefore attributed to the same hypothetical cause at other times. But
all that we ought to assume is series of groups of events, connected by
discoverable laws. These series we may _define_ as “matter”. Whether
there is matter in any other sense, no one can tell.

What is true in the old notion of causality is the fact that events at
different times are connected by laws (differential equations). When
there is a law connecting an event A with an event B, the two have a
definite unambiguous time-order. But if the events are such that a ray
of light starting from A would arrive at any body which was present at
B after B had occurred, and _vice versa_, then there is no definite
true order, and no possible causal law connecting A and B. A and B must
then be regarded as separate facts of geography.

Perhaps the scope and purpose of this and the foregoing chapters may
be made clearer by showing their bearing upon certain popular beliefs
which may seem self-evident but are really in my opinion either false
or likely to lead to falsehood. I shall confine myself to objections
which have actually been made to me when trying to explain the
philosophical outcome of modern physics.[8]

      [8] These objections are quoted (with kind permission) from a
          letter written to me by a well-known engineer, Mr. Percy
          Griffith, who is also a writer on philosophical subjects.

“We cannot conceive of movement apart from some _thing_ as moving.”
This is, in a sense, a truism; but in the sense in which it is usually
meant, it is a falsehood. We speak of the “movement” of a drama or
piece of music, although we do not conceive either as a “thing” which
exists complete at every moment of the performance. This is the sort of
picture we must have in our minds when we try to conceive the physical
world. We must think of a string of events, connected together by
certain causal connections, and having enough unity to deserve a single
name. We then begin to imagine that the single name denotes a single
“thing”, and if the events concerned are not all in the same place, we
say the “thing” has “moved.” But this is only a convenient shorthand.
In the cinema, we seem to see a man falling off a skyscraper, catching
hold of the telegraph wires, and reaching the ground none the worse.
We know that, in fact, there are a number of different photographs,
and the appearance of a single “thing” moving is deceptive. In this
respect, the real world resembles the cinema.

In connection with motion one needs to emphasise the very difficult
distinction between _experience_ and _prejudice_. Experience, roughly,
is what you see, and prejudice is what you only think you see.
Prejudice tells you that you see the _same_ table on two different
occasions; you _think_ that experience tells you this. If it really
were experience, you could not be mistaken; yet a similar table may be
substituted without altering the experience. If you look at a table
on two different occasions, you have very similar sensations, and
memory tells you that they are similar; but there is nothing to show
that one identical entity causes the two sensations. If the table is
in a cinema, you know that there is not such an entity, even though
you can watch it changing with apparent continuity. The experience is
just like that with a “real” table; so in the case of a “real” table
also, there is nothing in the actual experience to show whether there
is a persistent entity or not. I say, therefore: I do not know whether
there is a persistent entity, but I do know that my experiences can be
explained without assuming that there is. Therefore it can be no part
of legitimate science to assert or deny the persistent entity; if it
does either, it goes beyond the warrant of experience.

The following is a verbally cited passage in the letter referred to
objecting to what was said above about “force”:

“The concept of Force is not of physical but of psychological origin.
Rightly or wrongly it arises in the most impersonal contemplation of
the Stellar Universe, where we observe an infinite number of spherical
bodies revolving on their own axes and gyrating in orbits round each
other. Rightly or wrongly, we naturally conceive of these as having
been so constituted and so maintained by some Force or Forces.”

We do not, in fact, “observe” what it is here said that we observe; all
this is _inferred_. What we observe, in astronomy, is a two-dimensional
pattern of points of light, with a few bright surfaces of measurable
size when seen through the telescope (the planets), and of course
the larger bright surfaces that we call the sun and moon. Most of
this pattern (the fixed stars) rotates round the earth once in every
twenty-three hours and fifty-six minutes. The sun rotates in varying
periods, which average twenty-four hours and never departs very far
from the average. The moon and planets have apparent motions which are
more irregular. These are the _observed_ facts. There is no logical
impossibility about the formulæ doctrine of spheres rotating round the
earth, one for each planet and one for the stars. The modern doctrines
are simpler, but not one whit more in accordance with observed facts;
it is our passion for _simple_ laws that has made us adopt them.

The last sentence of the above quotation raises some further points of
interest. “Rightly or wrongly”, the writer says, “we naturally conceive
of these as having been so constituted and so maintained by some Force
or Forces.” I do not deny this. It is “natural”, and it is “right or
wrong”--more specifically, it is wrong. “Force” is part of our love of
explanations. Everyone knows about the Hindu who thought that the world
does not fall because it is supported by an elephant, and the elephant
does not fall because it is supported by a tortoise. When his European
interlocutor said “But how about the tortoise?” he replied that he was
tired of metaphysics and wanted to change the subject. “Force”, as an
explanation, is no better than the elephant and the tortoise. It is
an attempt to get at the “why” of natural processes, not only at the
“how”. What we observe, to a limited extent, is what happens, and we
can arrive at laws according to which observable things happen, but
we cannot arrive at a reason for the laws. If we invent a reason, it
needs a reason in its turn, and so on. “Force” is a rationalising of
natural processes, but a fruitless one since “force” would have to be
rationalised also.

When it is said, as it often is, that “force” belongs to the world of
experience, we must be careful to understand what can be meant. In
the first place, it may be meant that calculations which employ the
notion of force work out right in practice. This, broadly speaking,
is admitted: no one would suggest that the engineer should alter his
methods, or should give up working out stresses and strains. But that
does not prove that there are stresses and strains. A British medical
man renders his accounts in guineas, although they have long since
ceased to exist except as a name; he obtains a real payment, though he
employs a fictitious coin. Similarly, the engineer is concerned with
the question whether his bridge will stand: the fact of experience is
that it stands (or does not stand), and the stresses and strains are
only a way of explaining what sort of bridge will stand. They are as
useful as guineas, but equally imaginary.

But when it is said that force is a fact of experience, there is
something quite different that may be meant. It may be meant that we
experience force when we experience such things as pressure or muscular
exertion. We cannot discuss this contention adequately without going
into the relation of physics to psychology, which is a topic we shall
consider at length at a later stage. But we may say this much: if
you press your finger-tip upon a hard object, you have an experience
which you attribute to your finger-tip, but there is a long chain of
intermediate causes in nerves and brain. If your finger were amputated
you could still have the same experience by a suitable operation on
the nerves that formerly connected the finger with the brain, so that
the force between the finger-tip and the hard object, as a fact of
experience, may exist when there is no finger-tip. This shows that
force, in this sense, cannot be what concerns physics.

As the above example illustrates, we do not, in fact, experience
many things that we think we experience. This makes it necessary to
ask, without too much assurance, in what sense physics can be based
upon experience, and what must be the nature of its entities and its
inferences if it is to make good its claim to be empirically grounded.
We shall begin this inquiry in the next chapter.




