CHAPTER VI.

HEAT--SOLAR AND TERRESTRIAL.

  Solar and Terrestrial Heat--Position of the Earth in the Solar
    System--Heat and Light associated in the Sunbeam--Transparency
    of Bodies to Heat--Heating Powers of the Coloured Rays of
    the Spectrum--Undulatory Theory--Conducting Property of the
    Earth’s Crust--Convection--Radiation--Action of the Atmosphere
    on Heat Rays--Peculiar Heat Rays--Absorption and Radiation
    of Heat by dissimilar Bodies--Changes in the Constitution of
    Solar Beam--Differences between Transmitted and Reflected
    Solar Heat--Phenomena of Dew--Action of Solar Heat on the
    Ocean--Circulation of Heat by the Atmosphere and the Ocean--Heat
    of the Earth--Mean Temperature--Central Heat--Constant Radiation
    of Heat Rays from all Bodies--Thermography--Action of Heat on
    Molecular Arrangements--Sources of Terrestrial Heat--Latent
    Heat of Bodies--Animal Heat--Eremacausis--Spheroidal State
    Cold--Condensation--Freezing--Theories of Heat--Natural
    Phenomena--and Philosophical Conclusion.


We receive heat from the sun, associated with light; and we have the
power of developing this important principle by physical, mechanical,
and chemical excitation, from every kind of matter. Our convictions
are, that the calorific element, whether derived from a solar or a
terrestrial source, presents no essential difference in its physical
characters; but as there are some remarkable peculiarities in the
phenomena, as they arise from either one or the other source, it will
assist our comprehension of this great principle, if we consider it
under the two heads.

Untutored man finds health and gladness in the warmth and light of the
sun; he rears a rugged altar, and bows his soul in prayer, to the
principle of fire, which in his ignorance he regards as the giver and
the supporter of life. The philosopher finds life and organization
dependent upon the powers combined in the sunbeam; and, examining
the phenomena of this wonderful band of forces, he is compelled to
acknowledge that the flame upon the altar--on the Persian hills,--was
indeed a dim shadow of the infinite wisdom which abides behind the veil.

The present condition of our earth is directly dependent upon the
amount of heat we receive from the sun. It has frequently been said,
that if it were possible to move this planet so much nearer that orb
that the quantity of heat would be increased, the circumstances of
life would necessarily be so far changed, that all the present races
of animals must perish; and that the same result would happen from
any alteration which threw us yet further from our central luminary,
when, owing to the extremity of cold and the wretchedness of gloom, all
living creatures would equally fail to support their organization.

To move the earth nearer to, or more distant from the sun, is an
impossibility; but it has been argued that those planets which are near
to the sun must possess a temperature which would melt our solid rocks,
and vaporize the ocean,--while Uranus and Neptune must, from their
distance from the source of heat, have so small an amount, that water
must become solid as the rock, and such an atmosphere as that of the
earth exist as a dense liquid.

It will be shown that according to the physical condition of the
material substances, so are their powers regulated of absorbing and
retaining the heat which falls as a radiant power upon their surfaces.
Heat rays, in passing through the attenuated medium of planetary space,
lose none of their power--this we know from the fact that even the less
dense upper region of the earth’s atmosphere takes from the solar rays
but an exceedingly small quantity of heat. Therefore, whether a solar
heat ray traverses through one million, or one hundred million miles of
space, it still retains its power equally of imparting warmth to the
solid matter by which it is intercepted. There is no law of variation
as the inverse square of the distance of those radiating powers.
Consequently, there is no reason why the physical conditions, alike
of the nearest and the most remote planetary bodies, should not be so
adjusted that they all enjoy that life promoting temperature which
belongs to the earth.

All the objects around us are adapted to the circumstances of the
earth’s position in relation to the sun, to which we are bound by the
principle of gravitation; opposed to that centrifugal force which tends
constantly to drive the moving planetary mass off from the centre of
power. The balance maintains its perfect equilibrium, although we have
one power constantly drawing the earth towards the sun, and the other
as constantly exerting itself to move it off into space at a tangent
to the orbit in which the planet moves. In our examination it will be
found that one common system of harmony runs through all the cosmical
phenomena, by which everything is produced that is so beautiful and
joyous in this world.

Heat, and the other elementary radiant principles, are often combined
as the common cause of effects evident to our senses. The warmth of the
solar rays, and their luminous influence, are not, however, commonly
associated in the mind as the results of a single cause. It is only
when we come to examine the physical phenomena connected with these
radiations that we discover the complexity of the inquiry. Yet it is
out of these very subtle researches that we draw the most refined
truths. The high inferences to which the analysis of the subtile
agencies of creation leads us, render science, pursued in the spirit of
truth, a great system of religious instruction.

Although we do not fear that heat and light can be confounded in the
mind, so different are their phenomena,--we have heat rays, as from
dark hot iron, which give no light, while in the full flood of the
lunar rays the heat is scarcely appreciable by the most delicate
instruments;--yet it is important to show how far these two principles
have--been separated from each other. Transparent bodies have varied
powers of calorific transparency, or transcalescence: some obstructing
the heat radiated from bodies of the highest temperatures almost
entirely even in the thinnest layers; whilst others will allow the
warmth of the hand to pass through a thickness of several inches.
Liquid chloride of sulphur, which is of a deep red colour, will allow
63 out of 100 rays of heat to pass, and a solution of carmine in
ammonia, or glass stained with oxides of gold, or copper, rather a
greater number; yet these transparent media obstruct a large quantity
of light. Colourless media obstructing scarcely any light, will, on
the contrary, prevent the passage of calorific rays. Out of every
hundred rays, oil of turpentine will only transmit 31, sulphuric ether
21, sulphuric acid 17, and distilled water only 11. Pure flint glass,
however, is permeated by 67 per cent. of the thermic rays, and crown
glass by 49 per cent. The body possessing the most perfect transparency
to the rays of heat is diaphanous salt-rock, which transmits 92, while
alum, equally translucent, admits the passage of only 12 per cent.[43]

Black mica, obsidian, and black glass, are nearly opaque to light, but
they allow 90 per cent. of radiant heat to pass through them; whereas
a pale green glass, coloured by oxide of copper,[44] covered with a
layer of water, or a very thin plate of alum, will, although perfectly
transparent to light, almost entirely obstruct the permeation of heat
rays.

We thus arrive at the fact that heat and light may be separated from
each other; and if we examine the solar beam by that analysis which the
prism affords, we shall find that there is no correspondence between
intense light and ardent heat. By careful observation, it has been
proved, when we have a temperature of 62° F. in the yellow ray, which
ray has the greatest illuminating power; that below the red ray, out of
the point of visible light, the temperature is found to be 79°, while
at the other end of the spectrum, in the blue ray, it is 56°, and at
the end of the violet ray no thermic action can be detected.[45]

From the circumstance, that as we, by artificial means, raise the
temperature of any body, and produce intense heat, so after a
certain point of thermic elevation has been obtained, we occasion a
manifestation of _light_.[46] It has been concluded, somewhat hastily,
that heat and light differ from each other only in the rapidity of the
undulations of an hypothetical ether.

It must be admitted that the mathematical demonstrations of many of the
phenomena of calorific and luminous power are sufficiently striking to
convince us that a wave-movement is common to both heat and light. The
undulatory theory, however, requires the admission of so many premises
of which we have no proof; its postulates are, indeed, in many cases
so gratuitous, that notwithstanding the array of talent which stands
forward in its support, we must not allow ourselves to be deceived by
the deductions of its advocates, or dazzled by the brilliancy of their
displays of learning.

Radiant heat appears to move in waves; but that calorific effects in
material bodies are established by any system of undulation, is a
deduction without a proof; and the thermic phenomena of matter are as
easily explained by the hypothesis of a diffusive subtile fluid.

We have not, however, to prove the correctness of either of the
opposing views; indeed, it is acknowledged that many phenomena require
for their explanation conditions which are not indicated by either
theory.

The earth receives its heat from the sun; a portion of it is
_conducted_ from particle to particle into the interior of the rocky
crust. Another portion produces warmth in the atmosphere around us,
by _convection_, or the circulation of particles; those warmed by
contact with the surface becoming lighter, and ascending to give place
to the colder and heavier ones. A third portion is radiated off into
space, according to laws which have not been sufficiently investigated,
but which are dependent upon the colour, chemical composition, and
mechanical structure of the surface.

It cannot but be instructive to contemplate the indications which we
have of the dependence of all that is beautiful on earth, on the heat
and light radiations which we receive from the sun. Let us endeavour
to realise some of the effects which arise from even the temporary
deprivation of solar heat.

It is winter, the vegetable world appears chilled to its centre. The
trees, except a few of the hardy evergreens, are bare of leaves, and
stretching forth their branches into the cold air, they realise the
condition of vegetable skeletons. The lowly plants of the hedge-row,
and the grasses of the field, show that their vital power is subdued
to that minimum degree of action which is but a few slight removes
from death. The life of the running stream is suspended, it is cased
in the “thick-ribbed ice,” and the waters beneath no longer send forth
their joyous music to the genial breeze. Even within the temperate
limits of our own land, the aspect of winter convinces the ordinary
observer, that the loss of heat has been followed by diminished
activity in the powers of life; and the philosopher discovers that the
lessened energies of solar light, and the weaker action of the radiant
heat, have aided in producing that repose which is a little more than
sleep--a little less than death.

It is night, and winter: the earth is parting with its heat,--with
the absence of light, there is a still greater loss of vigour, a yet
further diminution of the powers of life. Even the animal races,
sustained by vital influences of a more exalted kind, sink under the
temporary deprivation of the solar rays to a monotonous, a melancholy
repose. All animals undergo different degrees of hybernation, and
each in his winter retreat supports vitality by preying upon himself.
The world is hung in mourning black; there is no play of colours to
harmonize the human spirit by sending their ethereal pulsations to the
human eye, and it is only the consciousness that when the night is at
the darkest, the day is nearest, that even man’s soul is sustained
against the depressing influences of the absence of the sun.

The conditions which we must observe at our own doors cannot fail to
convey as a conviction to the least imaginative mind, that a slightly
prolonged continuance of darkness, with its consequent increase of
coldness, would be fatal to the existence of the organic world.

The sun has entered Aries: it is spring. The length of the day and
night are equal, the powers of light and darkness are now exactly
balanced against each other, and light, like the Archangel, triumphs
over the sombre spirit. The organic world awakes. Chemical action
commences in the seed, the vital spark is kindled in the embryo, and
under the impulsive force of some solar radiations the plant struggles
into light and life. The same invigorating force impels the circulation
of the sap through the capillary tubes of the forest tree, until the
topmost branch trembles with the new flow of life. The buds burst forth
into leaf, and a fresh and lively covering spreads over those branches
which, in their nakedness, could scarcely be distinguished from the
dead.

The animal races are no less sensible of the new influence which is
diffused around. The birds float joyously upon the breeze, and give
to heaven their trilling songs of praise. The beasts come forth from
the clefts of the rocks and the tangled shelters of the forests, and
gambol in the full luxury of their renewed vigour. Man, even man, the
inhabitant of cities, trained and tempered to an artificial state,
awakes of a spring morning with a fuller consciousness of mind, and a
deeper and more pleased sense of his intelligence, than when the fogs
and gloom of winter hung like the charmed robe upon the limbs of the
giant. Now, the dormant poetry of man seeks expression. As the morning
sun is said to have awakened the musical undulations of the Memnonian
statue, so the sun of the vernal morning produces in the mind of the
most earthly, faint pulsations of that heaven-born music, which neither
sin nor sorrow can entirely destroy. The psychologist, in studying the
peculiar phenomena of the human mind, must associate himself with the
natural philosopher, and learn to appreciate the influence of physical
causes in determining effects which our elder philosophers and the
poets of every age have attributed to spiritual agencies.

Summer, with its increased heat and light, reigns over the land. The
work of life is now at its maximum, and every energy is quickened
throughout the organic creation. The laws of nature are arranged
on the principle of antagonistic forces, the constant struggle to
maintain them in equilibrium constituting the sensible phenomena of
existence. Heat and light, with chemical power and electricity, have
been quickening the unknown principle of life, until it has become
exhausted in the production of new parts--in the strange phenomenon of
growth--the formation of organized matter from the inorganic stores of
creation.

The autumn, with its tempered sunlight, comes, but in the solar
radiance we discover new powers, and under the influence of these the
flower and the fruit have birth. The store of a new life is centered in
the seed, and though the leaf falls, and the flower fades, a new set
of organisms are produced, by which the continuance of the species is
secured.

Let any man examine himself as the seasons change, and he will soon be
convinced that every alternation of light and darkness, of heat and
its absence, produces new sets of influences equally on the mind and
on the body, showing the entire dependence of the animal and vegetable
kingdoms upon those causes which appear to flow from the centre of our
planetary system.

The phenomena which connect themselves with the changes of the seasons
cannot fail to convince the most superficial thinker that there is an
intimate connection between the sun and the earth which deserves our
close attention.

Indeed, if we examine the most ancient of histories, we find one great
fact at the base of all their philosophies. Moses connects darkness
with a void and formless earth, and light with the creation of harmony
and life. Menis sings of a fearful world by “many formed darkness
encircled,” and links the idea of a “life-breathing divinity” with the
awakening of light upon created things. The Egyptian Isis, the Grecian
Apollo, who,

    The Lord of boundless light
    Ascending calm o’er the empyrean sails,
    And with ten-thousand beams his awful beauty veils,

the fire-worshipper of the Persian hills and the sun-god of the
Peruvian mountains, exhibit, through time and space, the full
consciousness of man to the influences of solar light and heat upon the
organic creations of which he is himself the chief exemplar.

The investigations of modern philosophers have extended these
influences to the inorganic masses which constitute the Planet
EARTH:--and we now know that the physical forces, ever active in
determining the chemical condition and the electrical relations of
matter, are directly influenced by the solar radiations.

Few things within the range of our inquiry are more striking than
the phenomena of calorific radiation and absorption. They display so
perfectly the most refined system of order, and exhibit so strikingly
the admirable adaptation of every formation to its particular
conditions, and for its part in the great economy of being, that they
claim most strongly the study of all who would seek to discover a
poetry in the inferences of science.

Owing to the nature of our atmosphere, we are protected from the
influence of the full flood of solar heat. The absorption of caloric by
the air has been calculated at about one-fifth of the whole in passing
through a column of 6,000 feet. This estimate is, of course, made near
the earth’s surface; but we are enabled, knowing the increasing rarity
of the upper regions of our gaseous envelope in which the absorption
is constantly diminishing, to prove, that about one-third of the solar
heat is lost by vertical transmission through the whole extent of our
atmosphere.[47]

Experience has proved that the conditions of the sun’s rays are not
always the same; and there are few persons who have not observed that
a more than usual scorching influence prevails under some atmospheric
circumstances. This is also evidenced in the effects produced on the
foliage of trees, which, though often attributed to electricity, is
evidently due to heat. An examination of the solar radiations, as
exhibited in the prismatic spectrum, has proved the existence of a
class of heat rays, which manifest themselves by a very peculiar
deoxidizing power quite independent of their caloric properties,
to which the name of _parathermic rays_ has been given.[48] We are
protected from the severe effects of these rays by the ordinary state
of the medium through which the solar heat passes. Our atmosphere is a
mixture of gases and aqueous vapour; and it has been found, as already
stated, that even a thin film of water, however transparent, prevents
the passage of many calorific radiations, and the rays retarded are,
for the most part, of that class which have this peculiar scorching
power. The air is, in this way, the great equaliser of the solar
heat, rendering the earth agreeable to all animals, who, but for this
peculiar absorbent medium, would have to endure, even in our temperate
clime, the burning rays of a more than African sun.

The surface of the earth during the sunshine--and, though in a less
degree, even when the sun is obscured by clouds--is constantly
receiving heat; but the rate of its absorption varies. Benjamin
Franklin showed, by a set of simple but most conclusive experiments,
that a piece of black cloth was warmed much sooner than cloth of a
lighter colour;[49] and we know, from observations of a similar class,
that the bare brown soil receives heat more readily than the bright
green grassy carpet of the earth. Consequently, during the winter
season, relatively to the quantity poured from its source, more heat
penetrates the uncovered soil, than during the spring or summer.

There is a constant tendency to an equilibrium; and, during the night,
the surface is robbed of more heat, by the colder air, than by day; as,
when the earth is not receiving heat, it is constantly radiating it
back into space. Even in these processes of convection and radiation, a
similar law prevails to that which is discovered in examining into the
rate of calorific absorption.

Every tree spreading its green leaves to the sunshine, or exposing
its brown branches to the air--every flower which lends its beauty to
the earth--possesses different absorbing and radiating powers. The
chalice-like cup of the pure white lily floating on the lake--the
variegated tulip--the brilliant anemony--the delicate rose--and the
intensely coloured peony or dahlia--have each powers peculiar to
themselves for drinking in the warming life-stream of the sun, and
for radiating it back again to the thirsting atmosphere. These are
no conceits of a scientific dreamer; they are the truths of direct
induction; and, by experiments of a simple character, they may be put
to a searching test.[50]

A thermometric examination of the various coloured flowers, by
enclosing a delicate thermometer amongst their leaves, will readily
establish the correctness of the one; and by a discovery of recent
date, connected with calorific radiation, which must be particularly
described presently, we can, with equal ease and certainty, test the
truth of the other;[51] the absorption and radiation of heat being
directly regulated by the colours of the surfaces upon which the sun
rays fall.

It follows, as a natural consequence of the position of the sun, as
it regards any particular spot on the earth at a given time, that the
amount of heat is constantly varying during the year. This variation
regulates the seasons.

When it is remembered that the earth is, in the winter, nearly three
millions of miles nearer the sun than in the summer, some explanation
is required to account for our suffering more cold when nearer the
source of heat, than when at the remotest distance.

The earth in her path around the sun describes an ellipse, the
sun’s place being one of its foci. In obedience to the law, already
described, of the conservation of the axis of rotation, the axis of
the earth constantly points towards the star in the constellation of
the Little Bear. Recollecting this, and also the two facts, that a
dense solid body absorbs heat more readily than a fluid one, and that
radiation from the surface is constantly going on when absorption is
not taking place, let us follow the earth in her orbit.

It is the time of the vernal equinox--we have equal day and
night--therefore the periods of absorption and radiation of heat are
alike. But at this time of the year the southern hemisphere is opposite
to the sun, consequently the degree of absorption by the wide-spread
oceans small.

It is the summer solstice--we have sixteen hours of daylight, when the
absorption of heat is going on--and but eight hours of night, during
which heat is passing off. The northern hemisphere is now presented
to the sun, and as here we have the largest portion of dry land, the
powers of absorption are at their maximum.

The autumnal equinox has arrived, with its equal day and night, as in
the spring, but now the whole northern hemisphere is opposite the sun;
hence, according to the laws already explained, we see the causes of
the increased heat of the autumnal season.

The winter solstice has come, with its long night and shortened day.
The time during which radiation is going on is nearly twice that in
which absorption takes place, and the earth is in her worst position
for receiving heat, as that half which has the largest surface of water
is towards the sun.

These are the causes which lead to the variations of the seasons, and
through these we learn why we are colder when near the sun than when at
a considerably greater distance.

An analysis of the spectrum shows us that there are some changes
regularly taking place in the state of the solar beam, which cannot
be referred to the mere alteration of position. It may be inferred,
from facts by long-continued observations, that the three classes of
phenomena--light, heat, and chemical power, distinguished by the term
Actinism--which we detect in the sun’s rays, are constantly changing
their relative proportions. In spring, the chemical agency prevails; in
summer, the luminous principle is the most powerful; and in the autumn,
the calorific forces are in a state of the greatest activity.[52] The
importance of these variations, to the great economy of vegetable life,
will be shown when we come to examine the phenomena connected with
organisation.

A remarkable change takes place in the character of heat in being
reflected from material substances. In nature we often see this fact
curiously illustrated. Snow which lies near the trunks of trees or
wooden poles melts much quicker than that which is at a distance from
them, the sun shining equally on both--the liquefaction commencing on
the side facing the sun, and gradually extending. We see, therefore,
that the direct rays of solar heat produce less effect upon the snow
than those which are radiated from coloured surfaces. By numerous
experiments, it has been shown that these secondary radiations are
more abundantly absorbed by snow or white bodies than the direct solar
rays themselves. Here is one of the many very curious evidences, which
science lays open to us, of the intimate connection between the most
ethereal and the grosser forms of matter. Heat, by touching the earth,
becomes more earth-like. The subtile principle which, like the spirit
of superstition, has the power of passing, unfelt, through the crystal
mass, is robbed of its might by embracing the things of earth; and
although it still retains the evidences of its refined origin, its
movements are shackled as by a clog of clay, and its wings are heavy
with the dust of this rolling ball. It has, however, acquired new
properties, which fit it for the requirements of creation, and by which
its great tasks are facilitated. Matter and heat unite in a common
bond, and, harmoniously pursuing the necessities of some universal law,
the result is the extension of beautiful forms in every kingdom of
nature.

An easy experiment pleasingly illustrates this remarkable change. If a
blackened card is placed upon snow or ice in the sunshine, the frozen
mass underneath it will be gradually thawed, and the card sink into
it, while that by which it is surrounded, although exposed to the full
power of solar heat, is but little disturbed. If, however, we reflect
the sun’s rays from a metal surface, an exactly contrary result takes
place; the uncovered parts are the first to melt, and the blackened
card stands high above the surrounding portion.

The evidences of science all indicate the sun as the source, not only
of that heat which we receive directly through our atmosphere, but
even of that which has been stored by our planet, and which we can,
by several methods, develope. We have not to inquire if the earth was
ever an intensely heated sphere;--this concerns not our question; as
we should, even were this admitted, still have to speculate on the
origin--the primitive source of this caloric.

Before, however, we proceed to the examination of the phenomena of
terrestrial heat, a few of the great results of the laws of radiation
and convection claim our attention.

Nearly all the heat which the sun pours upon the ocean is employed in
converting its water into vapour at the very surface, or is radiated
back from it, to perform the important office of producing those
disturbing influences in the atmosphere, which are essential to the
preservation of the healthful condition of the great aërial envelope in
which we live.

Currents of air are generally due to the unequal degrees in which the
atmosphere is warmed. Heat, by expanding, increases the elasticity,
and lessens the density, of a given mass. Consequently, the air heated
by the high temperature of the tropics, ascends charged with aqueous
vapours, whilst the colder air of the temperate and the frigid zones
flows towards the equator to supply its place. These great currents of
the atmosphere are, independent of the minor disturbances produced by
local causes, in constant flow, and by them a uniformity of temperature
is produced, which could not in any other way be accomplished. By these
currents, too, the equalisation of the constituents of the “breath
of life” is effected, and the purer oxygen of the “land of the sunny
south” is diffused in healthful gales over the colder climes of the
north. The waters, too, evaporated from the great central Atlantic
Ocean, or the far Pacific, are thus carried over the wide-spread
continents, and poured in fertilising showers upon distant lands.

How magnificent are the operations of nature! The air is not much
warmed by the radiations of caloric passing from the sun to the earth;
but the surface soil is heated by its power of absorbing these rays.
The temperature of the air next the earth is raised, and we thus have
the circulation of those beneficial currents which are so remarkably
regular in the Trade Winds. The air heated within the tropics would
ascend directly to the poles, were the earth at rest, but being in
motion, those great aërial currents--the Trade Winds--are produced,
and the periodical monsoons are due to the same cause. A similar
circulation, quite independent of the ordinary tidal movement,
takes place also in the earth-girdling ocean. The water, warmed, by
convection, from the hot surface of the tropical lands, sets across
the Atlantic from the Gulf of Mexico; and being under the influence of
the two forces--gravity and motion--it illustrates the parallelogram
of forces, and flowing along the diagonal, reaches our own shores: the
genial influences of the gulf stream produce that tempered climate
which distinguishes our insular home. Here we have two immense
influences produced by one agency, rendering those parts of the earth
habitable and fertile, which but for these great results would sorrow
in the cheerless aspect of an eternal winter.

The beautiful phenomenon of the formation of dew is also distinctly
connected with the peculiar properties which we have been studying.
When from the bright blue vault of heaven, the sparkling constellations
shower their mild light over the earth, the flowers of the garden
and the leaves of the forest become moist with a fluid of the most
translucid nature. Well might the ancients imagine that the dews were
actually shed from the stars; and the alchemists and physicians of the
middle ages conceive that this pure distillation of the night possessed
subtile and penetrating powers beyond most other things; and the
ladies of those olden times endeavour to preserve their charms in the
perfection of their youthful beauty through the influences of washes
procured from so pure a source.[53]

Science has removed the veil of mystery with which superstition had
invested the formation of dew; and, in showing to us that it is
a condensation of vapour upon bodies according to a fixed law of
radiation, it has also developed so many remarkable facts connected
with the characters of material creations, that a much higher order of
poetry is opened to the mind than that which, though beautiful, sprang
merely from the imagination.

Upon the radiation of heat depends the formation of dew, and bodies
must become colder than the atmosphere before it will be deposited
upon them. At whatever temperature the air may be, it is charged to
saturation with watery vapour, the quantity varying uniformly with
the temperature. Supposing the temperature of the air to be 70° F.,
and that a bottle of water at 60° is placed in it, the air around
the bottle will be cooled, and will deposit on the glass exactly
that quantity of moisture which is due to the difference between the
temperature of the two bodies. Different substances, independent of
colour, have the property of parting with heat from their surfaces at
different rates. Rough and porous surfaces radiate heat more rapidly
than smooth ones, and are consequently reduced in temperature; and, if
exposed, are covered with dew sooner than such as are smooth and dense.
The grass parterre glistens with dew, whilst the hard and stony walk is
unmoistened.[54]

Colourless glass is very readily suffused with dampness, but polished
metals are not so, even when dews are heavily condensed on other
bodies. To comprehend fully the phenomena of the formation of dew,
we must remember that the entire surface of the earth is constantly
radiating heat into space; and that, as by night no absorption is
taking place, it naturally cools.[55] As the substances spread over
the earth become colder than the air, they acquire the power of
condensing the vapour with which the atmosphere is always charged. The
bodies which cover this globe are very differently constituted; they
possess dissimilar radiating powers, and consequently present, when
examined by delicate thermometers, varying degrees of temperature. By
the researches of Dr. Wells,[56] which may be adduced as an example of
the best class of inductive experiments, we learn that the following
differences in sensible heat were observed at seven o’clock in the
evening:--

    The air four feet above the grass      60-3/4
    Wool on a raised board                 54-1/2
    Swandown on ditto                      53
    The surface of the raised board        57
    Grass plat                             51

Dew is most abundantly deposited on clear, calm nights, during which
the radiation from the surface of the earth is uninterrupted. The
increased cold of such nights over those obscured by clouds is well
known. The clouds, it has been proved, act in the same way as the
screens used by gardeners to protect their young plants from the
frosts of the early spring, which obstruct the radiation, and, in all
probability, reflect a small quantity of heat back to the earth.

It is not improbable that the observed increase in grass crops, when
they have been strewn with branches of trees or any slight shades, may
be due to a similar cause.[57]

There are many remarkable results dependent entirely on the colours
of bodies, which are not explicable upon the idea of difference in
mechanical arrangement. We know that different colours are regulated
by the powers which structures have of absorbing and reflecting light;
consequently a blue surface must have a different order of molecular
arrangement from a red one. But there are some physical peculiarities
which also influence heat radiation, quite independently of this
_surface_ condition. If we take pieces of red, black, green, and yellow
glass, and expose them when the dew is condensing, we shall find that
moisture will show itself first on the yellow, then on the green glass,
and last of all upon the black or red glasses. The same thing takes
place if we expose coloured fluids in white glass bottles or troughs,
in which case the surfaces are all alike. If against a sheet of
glass, upon which moisture has been slightly frozen, we place glasses
similarly coloured to those already described, it will be found that
the earliest heat-rays will so warm the red and the black glasses, that
the ice will be melted opposite to them, long before any change will be
seen upon the frozen film covered by the other colours.

The order in which heat permeates coloured media, it has already been
shown, very nearly agrees with their powers of radiation.

These most curious results have engaged the attention of Melloni,
to whose investigations we owe so much; and from the peculiar order
of radiations, which present phenomena of an analogous character to
those of the coloured rays of light, obtained by him from dissimilarly
coloured bodies, he has been led to imagine the existence of a
“heat-colouration.” That is, the heat-rays are supposed to possess
properties like luminous colour although invisible; and, consequently,
that a blue surface has a strong affinity for the blue heat-rays,
a red surface for the red ones, and so on through the scale. The
ingenuity of this hypothesis has procured it much attention; but now,
when the Newtonian hypothesis of the refrangibility of light is nearly
overturned, we must not, upon mere analogy, rush to the conclusion
that the rays of heat have different orders of refrangibility, which
Melloni’s hypothesis requires.[58]

Can anything be more calculated to impress the mind with the
consciousness of the high perfection of natural phenomena, than the
fact, that the colour of a body should powerfully influence the
transmission of a principle which is diffused through all nature,
and also determine the rate with which it is to pass off from its
surface. Some recent experiments have brought us acquainted with other
facts connected with these heat-radiations, and the power of heat,
as influenced by the calorific rays, to produce molecular changes in
bodies, which bear most importantly on our subject.

If we throw upon a plate of polished metal a prismatic spectrum
(deprived, as nearly as possible, of its chemical power, by being
passed through a deep yellow solution--which possesses this property
in a very remarkable manner, as will be explained when we come to the
examination of the chemical action of the sun’s rays)--it will be
found, if we afterwards expose the plate to the action of vapour, very
slowly raised from mercury, that the space occupied by the red rays,
and those which lie without the spectrum below it, will condense the
vapour thickly, while the portion corresponding with the other rays
will be left untouched. This affords us evidence of the power of solar
heat to produce, very readily, a change in the molecular structure of
solid bodies. If we allow the sun’s rays to permeate coloured glasses,
and then fall upon a polished metallic surface, the result, on exposing
the plate to vapourisation, will be similar to that just described.
Under yellow and green glasses no vapour will be condensed; but on the
space on which the rays permeating a red glass, or even a blackened
one, fall, a very copious deposit of vapour will mark with distinctness
the spaces these glasses covered. More remarkable still, if these or
any other coloured bodies are placed in a box, and a polished metal
plate is suspended a few lines above them, the whole being kept _in
perfect darkness_ for a few hours, precisely the same effect takes
place as when the arrangement is exposed to the full rays of the sun.
Here we have evidence of the radiating heat of bodies, producing even
in darkness the same phenomena as the transmitted heat-rays of the sun.
We must, however, return to the examination of some of these and other
analogous influences under the head of actino-chemistry.

From these curious discoveries of inductive research we learn some high
truths. Associated with light--obeying many of the same laws--moving
in a similar manner--we receive a power which is essential to the
constitution of our planet. This power is often manifested in such
intimate combination with the luminous principle of the solar rays,
that it has been suspected to be but another form of the same agency.
While, however, we are enabled to show the phenomena of one without
producing those which distinguish the other, we are constrained to
regard heat as something dissimilar to light. It is true that we
appear to be tending towards some point of proof on this problem; but
we are not in a position to declare them to be forms of one common
power, or “particular solutions of one great physical equation.”[59]
In many instances it would certainly appear that one of these forces
was directly necessary to the production of the other; but we have also
numerous examples in which they do not stand in any such correlation.

We learn, from the scientific facts which we have been discussing, a
few of the secrets of natural magic. In their relations to heat, every
flower, which adds to the adornment of the wilds of nature or the
carefully-tended garden of the florist, possesses a power peculiar to
itself;

    “Naiad-like lily of the vale,”

and,

    “---- The pied wind-flowers, and the tulip tall,
    And narcissi, the fairest among them all,”

are, by their different colours, prevented from ever having the same
temperatures under the same sunshine.

Every plant bears within itself the measure of the heat which is
necessary for its well-being, and is endued with functions which mutely
determine the relative amount of dew which shall wet its coloured
leaves. Some of the terrestrial phenomena of this remarkable principle
will still further illustrate the title of this volume.

To commence with the most familiar illustrations, let us consider the
consequences of change of temperature. However slight the additional
heat may be to which a body is subjected, it expands under its
influence; consequently, every atom which goes to form the mass of
the earth moves under the excitation, and the first heat ray of the
morning which touches the earth’s surface, sets up a vibration which
is continued as a tremor to its very centre. The differences between
the temperature of day and night are considerable; therefore all bodies
expand under the influence of the higher, and contract under that of
the lower temperature. During the day, any cloud obscuring the sun
produces, in every solid, fluid, or aëriform body, within the range
of solar influence, a check: the particles which had been expanding
under the force of heat suddenly contract. Thus there must of necessity
be, during the hours of sunshine, a tendency in all bodies to dilate,
and during the hours of night they must be resuming their original
conditions.

Not only do dissimilar bodies radiate heat in different degrees, but
they conduct it also with constantly varying rates. Heat passes along
silver or copper with readiness, compared to its progress through
platinum. It is conducted by glass but slowly, and still more slowly
by wood and charcoal. We receive some important intimations of the
molecular structure of matter, from those experiments which prove that
heat is conducted more readily along some lines than others. In some
planes, wood and other substances are better conductors than in others.
The metallic oxides or earths are bad conductors of heat, by which
provision the caloric absorbed by the sun’s rays is not carried away
from the surface of this planet so rapidly as it would have been had
it been of metal, but is retained in the superficial crust to produce
the due temperature for healthful germination and vegetable growth. The
wool and hair of animals are still inferior conductors, and thus, under
changes of climate and of seasons, the beasts of the field are secured
against those violent transitions from heat to cold which would be
fatal to them. Hair is a better conductor than wool: hence, by nature’s
alchemy, hair changed into wool in the animals of some countries on the
approach of winter, and feathers into down.

It is therefore evident that the rate at which solar heat is conducted
into the crust of the earth must alter with the condition of the
surface upon which it falls. The conducting power of all the rocks
which have been examined is found to vary in some degree.[60]

It follows, as a natural consequence of the position of the sun to
the earth, that the parts near the equator become more heated than
those remote from it. As this heat is conducted into the interior of
the mass, it has a tendency to move to the colder portions of it, and
thus the heat absorbed at the equator flows towards the poles, and
from these parts is carried off by the atmosphere, or radiated into
space. Owing to this, there is a certain depth beneath the surface of
our globe at which an equal temperature prevails, the depth increasing
as we travel north or south from the equator, and conforming to the
contour of the earth’s surface, the line sinking under the valleys and
rising under the hills.[61]

A question of great interest, in a scientific point of view, is the
temperature of the centre of the earth. We are, of course, without the
means of solving this problem; but we advance a little way onwards
in the inquiry by a careful examination of subterranean temperature
at such depths as the enterprise of man enables us to reach. These
researches show us, that where the mean temperature of the climate
is 50°, the temperature of the rock at 59 fathoms from the surface
is 60°; at 132 fathoms it is 70°; at 239 fathoms it is 80°: being an
increase of 10° at 59 fathoms deep, or 1° in 35·4 feet; of 10° more at
73 fathoms deeper, or 1° in 43·8 feet; and of 10° more at 114 fathoms
still deeper, or 1° in 64·2 feet.[62]

Although this would indicate an increase to a certain depth of about
one degree in every fifty feet, yet it would appear that the rate of
increase diminishes with the depth. It appears therefore probable, that
the heat of the earth, so far as man can examine it, is due to the
absorption of the solar rays by the surface. The evidences of intense
igneous action at a great depth cannot be denied, but the doctrine of
a cooling mass, and of the existence of an incandescent mass, at the
earth’s centre, remains but one of those guesses which active minds
delight in. The mean annual temperature of this planet is subject to
variations, which are probably dependent upon some physical changes in
the sun himself, or in the atmospheric envelope by which that orb is
surrounded. The variations over the earth’s surface are great. At the
equator we may regard the temperature as uniformly existing at 80°,
while at the poles it is below the freezing point of water; and as far
as observations have been made, the subterranean temperatures bear a
close relation to the thermic condition of the climate of the surface.
The circulation of water through faults or fissures in the strata is,
without doubt, one means of carrying heat downwards much quicker than
it would be conducted by the rocks themselves. It is not, however,
found that the quantity of water increases with the depth. In the mines
of Cornwall, unless where the ground is very loose, miners find that,
after about 150 fathoms (900 feet), the quantity of water rapidly
diminishes. That water must ascend from very much greater depths is
certain, from the high temperatures at which many springs flow out at
the surface. In the United Mines in Cornwall, water rises from one part
of the lode at 90°; and one of the levels in these workings is so hot
that, notwithstanding a stream of cold water is purposely brought into
it to reduce the temperature, the miners work nearly naked, and will
bathe in water at 80° to cool themselves. At the bottom of Tresavean
Mine, in the same county, about 320 fathoms from the surface, the
temperature is 100°.

One cause of the great heat of many of our deep mines, which appears
to have been entirely lost sight of, is the chemical action going
on upon large masses of pyritic matter in their vicinity. The heat,
which is so oppressive in the United Mines, is, without doubt, due to
the decomposition of immense quantities of the sulphurets of iron and
copper known to be in this condition at a short distance from these
mineral works.

The heat which man is enabled to measure beneath the earth’s surface,
appears to be alone due to the conducting powers of the rocks
themselves; it has been observed that the line of equal temperature
follows, as nearly as possible, the elevations and depressions which
prevail upon the surface, and the diminishing rate of increase beyond
this line, certainly is such as would arise, was all the heat so
measured, the result of the passage of the heat by conduction through
the crust of rocks.

Whether or not the subterranean bands of equal heat have any strict
relation, upon a large scale, to the isothermic lines which have been
traced around most portions of our globe, is a point which has not yet
been so satisfactorily determined as to admit of any general deductions.

The Oriental story-teller makes the inner world a place of rare
beauty--a cavern temple, bestudded with self-luminous gems, in which
reside the spiritual beings to whom the direction of the inorganic
world is confided.

The Philosopher, in the height of his knowledge, has had dreams as
absurd as this; and amid the romances of science, there are not to be
found any more strange visions than those which relate to the centre
of our globe. At the same time it must be admitted, that many of the
peculiar phenomena which modern geological researches have brought to
light, are best explained on the hypothesis of a cooling sphere, which
necessarily involves the existence of a very high temperature towards
the centre.

We have already noticed some remarkable differences between solar and
terrestrial heat; but a class of observations by Delaroche[63] still
requires our attention. Solar heat passes freely through colourless
glass, whereas the radiations from a bright fire or a mass of
incandescent metal are entirely obstructed by this medium. If we place
a lamp or a ball of glowing hot metal before a metallic reflector, the
focus of accumulated heat is soon discovered; but if a glass mirror
be used, the light is reflected, but not the heat; whereas, with the
solar rays, but little difference is detected, whether vitreous or
metallic reflectors are employed. It is well known that glass lenses
refract both the light and heat of the sun, and they are commonly known
as burning-glasses: the heat accumulated at their focal point being
of the highest intensity. If, instead of the solar beam, we employ,
in our experiments, an intense heat produced by artificial means,
the passage of it is obstructed, and the most delicate thermometers
remain undisturbed in the focus of the lens. Glass exposed in front
of a fire becomes warm, and by conduction the heat passes through it,
and a secondary radiation takes place from the opposite side.[64] It
has been found that glass is transcalescent, or _diathermic_, to some
rays of terrestrial heat, and _adiathemic_, or opaque for heat, to
others[65]--that the capability of permeating glass increases with the
temperature of the ignited body--and that rays which have passed one
screen traverse a second more readily. It would, however, appear that
something more than a mere elevation of temperature is necessary to
give terrestrial heat-radiations the power of passing through glass
screens, or, in other words, to acquire the properties of solar heat.

To give an example. The heat of the oxy-hydrogen flame is most intense,
yet glass obstructs it, although it may be assisted by a parabolic
reflector. If this flame is made to play upon a ball of lime, by which
a most intense light is produced, the heat, which has not been actually
increased, acquires the power of being refracted by a glass lens, and
combustible bodies may be ignited in its focus.

It certainly appears from these results, that the undulatory hypothesis
holds true, so far as the motion of the calorific power is concerned.
At a certain rate the vibrations are thrown back or stopped by the
opposing body, while in a state of higher excitation, moving with
increased rapidity, they permeate the screen.[66] This does not,
indeed, interfere with the refined theory of Prévost,[67] which
supposes a mutual and equal interchange of caloric between all bodies.

The most general effect of heat is the expansion of matter; solids,
liquids, and airs, all expand under its influence. If a bar of metal
is exposed to calorific action, it increases in size, owing to its
particles being separated farther from each other: by continuing this
influence, after a certain time the cohesion of the mass is so reduced
that it melts, or becomes liquid, and, under the force of a still
higher temperature, this molten metal may be dissipated in vapour. It
would appear as if, under the agency of the heat applied to a body, its
atoms expanded, until at last, owing to the tenuity of the outer layer
or envelope of each atom, they were enabled to move freely over each
other, or to interpenetrate without difficulty. That heat does really
occasion a considerable disturbance in the corpuscular arrangement
of bodies, may be proved by a very interesting experiment. A bar of
heated metal is placed to cool, with one end supported upon a wedge
or a ring of a different metal the other resting on the ground. In
cooling, a distinct musical sound is given out, owing to the vibratory
action set up among the particles of matter moving as the temperature
declines.[68]

Heat is diffused through all bodies in nature, and, as we shall
presently see, may be developed in many different ways. We may,
therefore, infer, that in converting a sphere of ice into water, and
that again into steam, we have done nothing more than interpenetrate
the mass with a larger quantity of heat, by which its atoms are more
widely separated, and that thus its molecules become free to move
about each other. Hence, from a solid state, the water becomes fluid;
and then, if the expansive force is continued, an invisible vapour.
If these limits are passed by the powers of any greatly increased
thermic action, the natural consequence, it must be seen, will be the
separation of the atoms from each other, to such an extent that the
molecule is destroyed, and chemical decomposition takes place.

By the agency of the electricity of the voltaic battery, we are enabled
to produce the most intense heat with which we are acquainted, and by a
peculiarly ingenious arrangement Mr. Grove has succeeded in resolving
water by the mere action of heat into its constituent elements--oxygen
and hydrogen gases. That this decomposition is not due to the voltaic
current, but to the heat produced by it, was subsequently proved by
employing platina heated by the oxy-hydrogen flame.[69]

This interesting question has been examined with great care by Dr.
Robinson of Armagh, who has shown that, as the temperature of water is
increased, the affinity of its elements is lessened, until at a certain
point it is eventually destroyed. This new and startling fact appears
scarcely consistent with our knowledge that a body heated so as to
be luminous has the power of causing the combination of the elements
of water with explosive violence.[70] But as this acute experimental
philosopher somewhat boldly but still most reasonably inquires: “Is
it not probable that, if not light, some other actinic power (like
that which accompanies light in the spectrum, and is revealed to us
by its chemical effects in the processes of photography) is evolved
by the heat, and, though invisible, determines, in conjunction with
the affinity, that atomic change which transforms the three volumes of
oxygen and hydrogen into two of steam?”[71]

This speculation explains, in a very satisfactory manner, some
results which were obtained by Count Rumford, in 1798. In a series of
experiments instituted for the purpose of examining “those chemical
properties of light which have been attributed to it,” he has shown
that many cases of chemical decomposition occur in perfect darkness,
under the influence of heat, which are precisely similar to those
produced by exposure to the sun’s rays.[72]

It must, however, be remembered, that both solar light and heat are
sometimes found in direct antagonism to actinic power, and that the
most decided chemical changes are produced by those rays in which
neither heat nor light can be detected. The most remarkable phenomena
of this class will be explained under the head of actinism.

One of the most curious relations which as yet have been discovered
between light and heat is, that, the temperature at which all bodies
become incandescent, excepting such as are phosphorescent, is uniform.
The point on the thermometer (Fahrenheit’s scale) when the eye by
perfect repose is enabled to detect the first luminous influence, may
probably be regarded as, or very near, 1000°. Daniel has fixed this
point at 980°, Wedgwood at 947°, and Draper at 977°.[73] Dr. Robinson
and Dr. Draper, by independent observations, have both arrived at the
conclusion, that the first gleam of light which appears from heated
platina is not red, but of a lavender gray, the same in character of
colour as that detected by Sir John Herschel among the most refrangible
rays of the solar spectrum.[74]

It must be admitted, that the question of the identity, or otherwise,
of light and radiant heat, is beset with difficulties. Many of their
phenomena are very similar--many of their modes of action are alike:
they are often found as allied agencies; but they as frequently exhibit
extreme diversity of action, and they may be separated from each other.

We have now examined the physical conditions and properties of this
most important element, and we must proceed to learn something of the
means by which it may be developed, independently of its solar source.

This extraordinary principle exists in a latent state in all bodies,
and may be pressed out of them. The blacksmith hammers a nail until it
becomes red hot, and from it he lights the match with which he kindles
the fire of his forge. The iron has by this process become more dense,
and percussion will not again produce incandescence until the bar has
been exposed in fire to a red heat. The only inference we can draw
from this result is, that by hammering the particles have been driven
closer together, and the heat driven out; now further hammering will
not force the atoms nearer, and consequently no additional quantity of
heat can be developed; the iron is made hot in a fire, it absorbs heat,
the particles are restored to their former state, and we can now again
by hammering develope both heat and light. The Indian produces a spark
by the attrition of two pieces of wood. By friction, two pieces of ice
may be made to melt each other; and could we, by mechanical pressure,
force water into a solid state, an immense quantity of heat would be
set free. By the condensation of hydrogen and oxygen gases, pulverulent
platinum will become glowing red-hot, and, with certain precautions,
even the compact metal, platinum, itself; the heat being derived from
the gases, the union of which it has effected. A body passing from the
solid to the fluid state absorbs heat from all surrounding substances,
and hence a degree of cold is produced. The heat which is thus removed
is not destroyed--it is held combined with the fluid; it exists in a
latent state. Fluids, in passing into a gaseous form, also rob all
surrounding bodies of an amount of heat necessary to maintain the
aëriform condition. From the air or from the fluid, this heat may,
as we have shown above, be again extracted. Locked in a pint measure
of air, there exists sufficient heat to raise several square inches
of metal to glowing redness. By the compression of atmospheric air
this may be shown, and with a small condensing syringe a sufficient
quantity of heat may be set free to fire the _Boletus igniarius_,
which, impregnated with nitre, is known as _amadou_. We are acquainted
with various sources from which heat may be developed for artificial
purposes: the flint-and-steel is an example of the production of heat
by mechanical force, and the modern lucifer-match, of the combined
action of friction and chemical affinity. These of themselves would
admit of a lengthened discourse; but it is necessary that we carefully
examine some of the less familiar phenomena of heat under the
influences of changes of chemical condition.

If spirits of wine and water are mixed together, a considerable degree
of heat is given out, and by mixing sulphuric acid and water, an
infinitely larger quantity. If sulphuric acid (oil of vitriol) and
spirit of wine, or nitric acid (aquafortis) and spirits of turpentine,
at common temperatures, be suddenly mixed, so much heat is set free
as to ignite the spirit. In each of these instances there is a
condensation of the fluid. In nearly all cases of solution, cold is
produced by the absorption of the heat necessary to sustain the salt
in a liquid form; but when potash dissolves in water, heat is given
out, which is a fact we cannot yet explain. If potassium is placed on
water, it seizes the oxygen of the water and sets fire to the hydrogen
gas liberated by the heat produced in the change of form. Antimony
and many other metals thrown into chlorine gas ignite and burn with
brilliancy: the same phenomenon takes place in the vapours of iodine or
bromine. Many chemical combinations, as the chloride of potassium and
sulphur explode with a blow; whilst the slightest friction occasions
the detonation of the fulminating salts of silver, mercury, and
gold. Compounds of nitrogen and chlorine, or iodine, are still more
delicately combined--the former exploding with fearful violence on
the contact of any oleaginous body, and the latter by the smallest
elevation of temperature: both of them destroying the vessels in which
they may be contained.

Gun cotton presents some peculiar phenomena which may merit brief
attention. This peculiar compound is prepared by the action of nitric
acid on cotton fibre. The general appearance of the cotton is not
altered, but a remarkable physical change has taken place. It is
now soluble in ether, and forms a gelatinous compound:--it explodes
violently at a temperature which is insufficient for the combustion
of gunpowder. Indeed, from, as it would appear, slight electrical
disturbances taking place in the gun cotton itself, it not unfrequently
explodes spontaneously. These fearful disturbances of the forces
which hold bodies in combination are explained with difficulty. May
it not be, that an enormous quantity of the calorific and chemical
principles is held in a state of extreme tension around the particles
of the compound, and that the equilibrium being destroyed, the whole is
developed in destructive rapidity?

The fact of great heat being evolved during the conversion of a body
from a solid to a gaseous state, as in the explosion of gunpowder or
gun cotton, which is a striking exception to the law of latent heat, as
it prevails in most cases, admits of no more satisfactory explanation.

As mechanical force produces calorific excitation, so we find that
every movement of sap in vegetables, and of the blood and fluids in
the animal economy, causes a sensible increase of heat. The chemical
processes constantly going on in plants and animals are another source
of heat, in addition to which nervous energy and muscular movement must
be regarded as producing the caloric which is essential to the health
and life of the latter. Digestion has been considered as a process
of combustion; and the action between the elements of food, and the
oxygen conveyed by the circulation of the blood to every part of the
body, regarded as the source of animal heat; and, without doubt, it
is one great source, although it can scarcely be regarded as the only
one.[75]

The _vis vitæ_, or vital power, influences the delicate and beautiful
system of nerves; and as life (an essence of the rarest and most
subtile order, a diffusive influence) runs through them, from the brain
to the extremities of the members of the body, it sets those tender
threads in rapid vibration, and heat is developed. By this action,
the circulation of the blood is effected; the muscle is maintained
in an elastic condition, ready to perform the tasks of the will; and
through these agencies is the warm and fluid blood fitted to receive
its chemical restoratives in the lungs, and the stomach to support
changes for which it is designed--chemical also--by which more heat
is liberated. Was digestion--_Eremacausis_, as the slow combustion
produced by combination with oxygen is called--the only source of
animal heat, why should the injury of one filmy nerve place a member of
the body for ever in the condition of stony coldness? Or why, chemical
action being most actively continued after a violent death, by the
action of the gastric juices upon the animal tissues, should not animal
heat be maintained for a much longer period than it is found to be
after respiration has ceased?[76]

In studying the influences of caloric upon the conditions of matter,
we must regard the effects of extreme heat, and also of the greatest
degrees of cold which have been obtained.

There are a set of experiments by the Baron Cagniard de la Tour, which
appear to have a very important bearing on some conditions that may
be supposed to prevail in nature, particularly if we adopt the view of
a constantly increasing temperature towards the centre of our earth.
If water, alcohol, or ether, is put into a strong glass tube of small
bore, the ends hermetically sealed, and the whole exposed to a strong
heat, the fluid disappears, being converted into a transparent gas;
but, upon cooling, it is again condensed, without loss, into its
original fluid state.[77] In this experiment, fluid bodies have been
converted into elastic transparent gases with but small change of
volume, under the pressure of their own atmospheres. We can readily
conceive a similar result occurring upon a far more extensive scale.
In volcanic districts, at great depths, and consequently under the
pressure of the superincumbent mass, the siliceous rocks, or even
metals, may, from the action of intense heat, be brought into a fluid,
or even a gaseous condition, without any change of volume, since
the elastic force of heat is opposed by the rigid resistance of the
pressure of the surrounding rocks. Some beautiful experiments by Mr.
Hopkins, of Cambridge, have proved that the temperature necessary to
melt a body must be considerably elevated as the mechanical pressure to
which it is subjected is increased.

Directly connected with the results of Cagniard de la Tour are a yet
more remarkable set of phenomena, which have been investigated by
M. Boutigny,[78] and generally known as the “spheroidal condition”
of bodies. If water is projected upon very hot metal it instantly
assumes a spheroidal form--an internal motion of its particles may
be observed--it revolves with rapidity, and evaporates very slowly.
If a silver or platinum capsule, when brought to a bright red heat,
is filled with cold water, the whole mass assumes the spheroidal
state, the temperature of the fluid remaining considerably below the
boiling point, so long as the red heat is maintained. If we allow the
vessel to cool below redness in the dark, the water then bursts into
active ebullition, and is dissipated into vapour with almost explosive
violence. An equal quantity of water being projected into two similar
vessels, over the fire, one cold and the other red hot, it will be
found that the water in the cold vessel will boil and evaporate long
before that in the one which is red hot.

Another form of this experiment is exceedingly instructive. If a mass
of white hot metal is suddenly plunged into a vessel of cold water, the
incandescence is not quenched, the metal shines with a bright white
light, and the water is seen to circulate around, but at some distance
from the glowing mass, being actually repelled by calorific agency. At
length, when the metal cools, the water comes in contact with it, and
boils with energy.

A result similar to this was observed by Perkins, but its correctness
most unjustly doubted. Having made an iron shell containing water, and
carefully plugged up, white hot, it was found that the steam never
exerted sufficient force to burst the vessel, as it was expected
it would do. He caused a hole to be drilled into the bottom of the
white-hot shell, and he was surprised to find that no water flowed
through the orifice, until the iron was considerably cooled, when it
issued forth with violence in the form of steam. Here we have the
_Cagniard de la Tour state_ first induced, and the calorific repulsion
of the spheroidal state supervenes. If water is poured upon an iron
sieve, the wires of which are made red hot, it will not percolate;
but on cooling, it runs through rapidly. M. Boutigny, pursuing this
curious inquiry, has recently proved that the moisture upon the skin
is sufficient to protect it from disorganization, if the arm is plunged
into baths of melted metal. The resistance of the surfaces is so great,
that little elevation of temperature is experienced.[79] Professor
Plücker, of Bonn, has stated that by washing the arm with ether
previously to plunging it into melted metal, the sensation produced,
while in the molten mass, is that of freezing coldness.

We have now seen that heat at different degrees of intensity appears
to produce chemical composition--that it decomposes combined
elements--that it alters the conditions of bodies, and actually
maintains so powerfully a repellent force, that fluids cannot touch the
heated body. More than this, it exerts a most powerful antagonistic
influence over all chemical relations. If, to give one example,
the volatile element iodine is put into a glowing hot capsule, it
resolves itself immediately into a spheroid. Potash rapidly combines
with iodine; but if a piece of this alkali is thrown upon it in
the capsule, it also takes the spheroidal form, and both bodies
revolve independently of each other, their chemical affinities being
entirely suspended;--but allow the capsule to cool, and they combine
immediately. Science teaches us that a temperature so exalted as not to
burn organic bodies may be produced, and points to us this remarkable
fact, that the destructive limits of heat are measured between certain
degrees--beyond which a fire, by reason of its intensity, ceases to
develope heat. What is the radiant force into which this principle
changes?

The experiments of Cagniard de la Tour and of Boutigny (d’Evreux),
connect themselves, in a striking manner, with those of Mr. Grove and
Dr. Robinson; and they teach us that but a very slight alteration in
the proportions of the calorific principle given to this planet would
completely change the character of every material substance of which it
is composed, unless there was an alteration in the physical condition
of the elements themselves.

Supposing the ordeal of fiery purification to take place upon this
earth, these experiments appear to indicate the mighty changes which
would thence result. There would be no annihilation, but everything
would be transformed from the centre of the globe to the verge of its
atmosphere--old things would pass away, all things become new, and the
beautiful mythos of the phœnix be realized in the fresh creation.

The deductions to be drawn from the results obtained by abstracting
heat from bodies are equally instructive. By taking advantage of the
cooling produced by the rapid solution of salts of several kinds in
water, an intense degree of coldness may be produced.[80] Indeed, the
absorption of heat by liquefaction may be shown by the use of metallic
bodies alone. If lead, tin, and bismuth, are melted together, and
reduced to a coarse powder by being poured into water, and the alloy
then dissolved in a large quantity of quicksilver, the thermometer will
sink nearly 50 degrees. An intense amount of cold will result from
the mixture of muriate of lime and snow, by which a temperature of
50° below the zero of Fahrenheit, or 82° below the freezing point of
water, is produced. By such a freezing mixture as this, mercury will
be rendered solid. A degree of cold, however, far exceeding it, has
lately been obtained by the use of solid carbonic acid and ether.[81]
Solid carbonic acid is itself procured from the gas liquefied by
pressure; which liquid, when allowed to escape into the air, evaporates
so rapidly that a large quantity of it is congealed by being robbed of
its combined heat by the vaporizing portion. When this solid acid is
united with ether, a bath is formed in which the carbonic acid will
remain solid for twenty or thirty minutes. By a mixture of this kind,
placed under the receiver of an air-pump, a good exhaustion being
sustained, a degree of cold 166° below zero is secured. By this intense
cold, many of the bodies which have hitherto been known to us only in
the gaseous state have been condensed into liquids and solids. Olefiant
gas, a compound of hydrogen and carbon, was brought into a liquid
form. Hydriodic and hydrobromic acids could be condensed into either a
liquid or a solid form. Phosphuretted hydrogen, a gas which inflames
spontaneously when brought into contact with the air or with oxygen,
became a transparent liquid at this great reduction of temperature.
Sulphurous acid may be condensed, by pressure and a reduction of
temperature, into a liquid which boils at 14° Fahrenheit, but by the
carbonic acid bath it is converted into a solid body, transparent and
without colour. Sulphuretted hydrogen gas solidifies at 122° below
zero, and forms a white substance resembling a mass of crystals of
sea-salt.

A combination of the two gases, chlorine and oxygen, becomes solid at
-75°, and the protoxide of nitrogen at -150°. Cyanogen, a compound
of carbon and nitrogen--the base of prussic acid--is solidified at
30° below the zero of our thermometric scale. The well-known pungent
compound, ammonia, so exceedingly volatile at common temperatures,
is converted into a crystalline, translucent, white substance at the
temperature of -103°. The difficulties which necessarily attend the
exposure of a body to extreme cold and great pressure at the same time,
appear to be the only obstacle to the condensation of oxygen, hydrogen,
and nitrogen gases. A sufficient amount of condensation was, however,
effected by Dr. Faraday, to lead him to the conclusion, arrived at
also by other evidences, that hydrogen, the lightest of the ponderable
bodies, partakes of the nature of a metal.[82]

During the solidification of water by freezing, some remarkable facts
may be noticed.

Water, in cooling, gradually condenses in volume until it arrives at
40° Fahr., which appears to be the point of greatest density. From this
temperature to that of 32°, the point at which it begins to solidify,
its volume remains unchanged,[82] as crystallisation (freezing) begins,
the bulk increases, the mass becomes specifically lighter, and it swims
on the surface of the fluid. From 40° to 32° the particles of water
must be taking up that new position which is essential to the formation
of the solid--ice; and while this is taking place, every substance held
in solution by the water is rejected.

If we mix with water the deepest colouring matter--the strongest acid
or the most acrid poison--they are each and all rejected during the
process of freezing, and if the water has been kept in a state of
agitation during the process--so that the liberated particles may not
be mechanically entangled--the ice will be transparent, colourless,
tasteless, and inert--the substances rejected being gathered together
in the centre of the frozen mass in a state of intense concentration.
In like manner, even the atmospheric air, which is always held in
solution, is rejected, and hence the reason why all the ice which
forms upon still ponds is full of air-bubbles, while the ice which is
produced in agitated water is perfectly free from them. This in itself
is a remarkable condition, the entire bearing of which is not clearly
understood; but a still more singular fact has been discovered in
intimate connection with the rejection of all matter from a freezing
solution. Water, which in this way is freed entirely of air, will not
boil at 212° F., the ordinary boiling point of water.

If a mass of ice formed in the manner described is placed in a vessel,
and being just covered with a film of oil, to prevent the absorption of
air, is melted over a lamp or fire, and the heat continued, it will,
so far from being converted into steam at 212°, continue to increase
in temperature up to 270° or more, and then burst into ebullition with
such explosive violence as to rend the vessel in which it is confined.

From this experiment we learn that did water exist in any other
condition than that in which we find it--even with the apparently
simple difference of containing no air--it would not be safe to employ
it in any culinary or manufacturing operation, since its use would be
followed by explosions as dangerous as those of gunpowder.

Such researches as these prove to us the admirable adaptation of all
things to their especial ends--the beautiful adjustment of the balance
of forces throughout creation.

The refinements of Grecian philosophy saw, without the aids of
inductive science, that the outward vesture of nature covered a host
of mysterious agencies to which its characteristics were directly
due. In their dream of the four elements, fire, the external and
visible form of heat, was regarded as the cause of vitality, and the
disposer of every organised and unorganised condition of matter. Their
idealisations have assumed another form, but the researches of modern
science have only established their universality and truth.

The great agents at work in nature--the mighty spirits bound to
never-ending tasks, which they pursue with unremitting toil, are of so
refined a character, that they will probably remain for ever unknown
to us. The arch-evocator, with the wand of induction, calls; but the
only answer to his evocation is the manifestation of power in startling
effects. Science pursues her inquiries with zeal and care: she tries
and tortures nature to compel her to reveal her secrets. Bounds are,
however, set to the powers of mortal search: we may not yet have
reached the limits within which we are free to exercise our mental
strength; but, those limits reached, we shall find an infinite region
beyond us, into which even conjecture wanders eyeless and aimless, as
the blind Cyclops groping in his melancholy cave.[83]

All we know of heat is, that striking effects are produced which we
measure by sensation, and by instruments upon which we have observed
that given results will be produced under certain conditions: of
anything approaching to the cause of these we are totally ignorant.
The wonder-working mover of some of the grandest phenomena in
nature--giving health to the organic world, and form to the inorganic
mass--producing genial gales and dire tornadoes--earthquake strugglings
and volcanic eruptions--ministering to our comforts in the homely fire,
and to advancement in civilisation in the mighty furnace, and the
ingenious engine which drains our mines, or traverses our country with
bird-like speed,--will, in all probability, remain for ever unknown to
man. The immortal Newton, many of whose guesses have a prophetic value,
thus expresses himself:--“Heat consists in a minute vibratory motion in
the particles of bodies, and this motion is communicated through an
apparent vacuum by the undulations of a very subtile elastic medium,
which is also concerned in the phenomena of light.”

Our experimental labours and our mathematical investigations have
considerably advanced our knowledge since the time of Newton; yet still
each theory of heat strangely resembles the mystic lamp which the
Rosicrucian regarded as a type of eternal life--a dim and flickering
symbol, in the tongue-like flame of which imagination, like a child,
can conjure many shapes.

Modern theory regards heat as a manifestation of motion, and experiment
proves that a body falling through a certain space generates a definite
quantity of heat, while observation shows that the waters at the base
of the Falls of Niagara possess a temperature 1° higher than when they
first glide over the edge of the precipice.

This increase of temperature is due to the mechanical force due to
the fall, and is no more an evidence of the conversion of motion into
heat, than is the old experiment of rubbing a button until it becomes
hot. At all events, the fact that a given amount of mechanical force
always produces an equivalent of heat is as applicable to the idea of
a “subtile elastic medium” which is diffused through all matter, as to
the, at present, favourite hypothesis.

So far has this view been strained, that the temperature of the planets
has been referred to their motions, and speculation has aided the
mathematician in determining the cessation of planetary motion, by
the conversion of it into heat. It is true that other theorists have
supposed points in space upon which this heat might be concentrated and
reflected back again to produce motion.

There may be much of the poetic element in such speculations, but it is
of that order which belongs rather to the romantic than to the real.

A speculation which has more of truth, and which is, indeed,
demonstrable, cannot fail to impress every mind with its beauty, and
probable correctness.

In the growth of a tree, its wood and all its products are the result
of certain external forces effecting chemical changes. Carbonic acid
is decomposed, the carbon is retained, and oxygen given off, and
assimilations of a complex character are in constant progress to
produce the various compounds of oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, and carbon.

Every condition of organised forms is due to the external excitation
of light and heat, and in the chemical changes which take place, an
equivalent of these principles, or powers--it signifies but little
according to which view we may regard them--is absorbed, and retained
as essential to the condition of the matter formed. Let us confine
our attention to wood--although the position applies equally to every
organic product. A cubic foot of wood is formed by the decomposition
of a certain quantity of carbonic acid, by the vital function of the
plant, excited by the solar rays, which are involved in the mass which
nature by “her wondrous alchemy” has made. Eventually this cubic foot
of wood is subjected to a process of chemical change--combustion; by
the application of a single spark,--and in the disintegration of the
wood, its carbon combining with oxygen to form carbonic acid, its
hydrogen to form water, which is returned to the air, a large amount of
light and heat is produced. This is exactly equivalent to the amount
which was engaged in its formation. Indeed, the sunshine which fell
upon the leaves of the forest tree, of which the log formed a part, has
been hoarded up, and we again develope it in its original state of heat
and light.

The vast coal beds of England were formed by the rapid growth and quick
decay of a peculiar class of plants under the influence of a tropical
sun. They have been buried myriads of ages, under hundreds of feet of
sandy rock. By the industry of the miner the coal is brought again
to the surface, and we develope from it those powers by which it was
formed.

In the fire which gives comfort to our homes--in the furnace which
generates force for the purposes of manufacture, or to propel the
railway engine and its ponderous train--in the gas with which we
illumine our streets and gladden during the long winter nights our
apartments, we are developing that heat and light which fell upon
the earth with all its quickening influences millions of ages before
yet the Creator had called into existence the monarch Man, for whose
necessities these wondrous formations were designed.


FOOTNOTES:

[43] The following table of the rays penetrating coloured glass has
been given by Melloni, in his memoir _On the Free Transmission of
Radiant Heat through Different Bodies_:--

    Deep violet               53
    Yellowish red (flaked)    53
    Purple red (flaked)       51
    Vivid red                 47
    Pale violet               45
    Orange red                44
    Clear blue                42
    Deep yellow               40
    Bright yellow             34
    Golden yellow             33
    Deep blue                 33
    Apple green               26
    Mineral green             23
    Very deep blue            19

Translated in the Scientific Memoirs, vol. i. p. 30.

[44] “The physical characters of this species of glass, which acts
so differently from the other species of coloured glass in all the
phenomena of calorific absorption, are, 1st, its intercepting almost
totally the rays which pass through alum; 2nd, its entirely absorbing
the red rays of the solar spectrum. I have already stated that their
colouration is produced almost entirely by the oxide of copper.

“Thus, the colouring matters of the coloured glasses, while they
so powerfully affect the relations of quantity which the different
rays of ordinary light bear to each other, exercise no elective
action on the concomitant calorific rays. This curious phenomenon is
the more remarkable as the colouring matters absorb almost always
a very considerable portion of the heat _naturally transmitted by
the glass_. The following are, in fact, the calorific transmissions
of the seven coloured glasses referred to; the transmission of the
common glass being represented by 100; red glass, 82·5; orange, 72·5;
yellow, 55; bluish-green, 57·5; blue, 52·5; indigo, 30; violet, 85.
The quantity of heat absorbed through the action of the colouring
substances is, therefore, 17·5 in the red glass, 27·5 in the orange,
45 in the yellow, 42·5 in the green, 47·5 in the blue, 70 in the
indigo, and 15 in the violet. Now, as these absorptions extinguish a
proportional part of each of the rays which constitute the calorific
stream transmitted by common glass, they may be compared, as we said
before, with the absorbent action exercised on light by matters more
or less deeply brown or dark, when they are immersed in water, or some
other colourless liquid which dissolves, but does not affect them
chemically.”--_Annales de Chimie et de Physique_, tom. xl. p. 382.

Guided by these principles, the author selected the glass employed in
glazing the Royal Palm-House, at Kew Botanical Gardens, where it was
desired to obstruct the passage of those rays which have a particular
scorching influence. Of this glass a description was given at the
meeting of the British Association at Oxford, which appears in the
Transactions for that year. The result has been all that could be
desired--not a single instance of scorching having occurred during the
three years which have elapsed.

[45] In the _Philosophical Transactions_, vol. xc., the following
papers, by Sir William Herschel, may be consulted:--

_Investigation of the powers of the prismatic colours to heat
and illuminate objects; with remarks that prove the different
refrangibility of radiant heat. To which is added, an inquiry into the
method of viewing the sun advantageously, with telescopes of large
apertures and high magnifying powers_, p. 255. _Experiments on the
refrangibility of the invisible rays of the sun_, p. 284. _Experiments
on the solar and on the terrestrial rays that occasion heat; with a
comparative view of the laws to which light and heat, or rather the
rays which occasion them, are subject; in order to determine whether
they are the same or different_, pp. 293, 437.

In connection with this inquiry, Sir William Herschel remarks, that
since a _red glass_ stops no less than 692 out of 1,000 such rays as
are of the refrangibility of red light, we have a direct and simple
proof, in the case of the red glass, that the rays of light are
transmitted, while those of heat are stopped, and that thus they have
nothing in common but a certain equal degree of refrangibility, which
by the power of the glass must occasion them to be thrown together into
the place which is pointed out to us by the visibility of the rays of
light.

On the same subject, a Memoir, by Sir Henry Englefield, in the Journal
of the Royal Institution for 1802, p. 202, may be consulted; and
_Researches on Light_, by the Author.

[46] Dr. Draper, _On the production of light by heat_, in the Phil.
Mag. for 1847.

Sir Isaac Newton fixed the temperature at which bodies become
self-luminous at 635°; Sir Humphry Davy at 812°; Mr. Wedgewood at 947°;
and Mr. Daniell at 980°; whilst Dr. Draper from his experiments gives
977°; and Dr. Robinson 865°.

In a review of the above paper by Melloni, entitled _Researches on the
Radiations of Incandescent Bodies, and on the Elementary Colours of the
Solar Spectrum_, translated for Silliman’s Journal for August, 1847, he
remarks:--

“I say that they conduct, as do others heretofore known on light and
radiant heat, to a perfect analogy between the general laws which
govern these two great agents of nature. I will add that I regard
the theory of their identity as the only one admissible by the rules
of philosophy; and that I consider myself obliged to adopt it, until
it shall have been proved to me that there is a necessity of having
recourse to two different principles, for the explanation of a series
of phenomena which at present appear to belong to a solitary agent.”

Reference should also be made to a paper by Dr. Robinson, _On the
effects of Heat in lessening the Affinities of the Elements of Water_,
in the Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy, 1848, where he says
that “when a platinum wire is traversed by a current gradually
increased till it produces ignition, the first gleam that appears is
not red, but of a colour which, when I first saw it, I compared to
the ‘lavender ray’ discovered by Sir John Herschel beyond the violet,
though I was surprised at seeing the tint of that most refrangible ray
preceding the ray which is least so. It is quite conspicuous at about
865°; and as the mode in which it makes its appearance presents nothing
abrupt or discontinuous, it seems likely that it is merely a transition
from invisible rays excited at a lower temperature to ordinary
light.”--p. 310.

[47] In the _Bakerian Lecture_ for 1842, _On the transparency of the
Atmosphere, and the law of extinction of the solar rays in passing
through it_, by James D. Forbes, Esq., F.R.S., &c., will be found a
most complete investigation of this subject.

The experiments were, for the most part, made in Switzerland with Sir
John Herschel’s actinometer, and they prove satisfactorily,--“That
the absorption of the solar rays by the strata of air to which we
have immediate access, is considerable in amount for even moderate
thicknesses.”

[48] After referring to several curious and instructive experiments, in
which peculiar chemical changes are produced under the influence of the
solar rays by their HEAT, Sir John Herschel says:--

“These rays are distinguished from those of Light by being invisible;
they are also distinguished from the pure calorific rays beyond the
spectrum, by their possessing properties (_of a peculiar character,
referred to in former papers_) either exclusively of the calorific
rays, or in a much higher degree. They may perhaps not improperly be
regarded as bearing the same relation to the calorific spectrum which
the photographic rays do to the luminous ones. If the restriction
to these rays of the term _thermic_, as distinct from _calorific_,
be not (as I think, in fact, it is not) a sufficient distinction, I
would propose the term _parathermic rays_ to designate them. These are
the rays which I conceive to be active in producing those singular
molecular affections which determine the precipitation of vapours in
the experiments of Messrs. Draper, Moser, and Hunt, and which will
probably lead to important discoveries as to the intimate nature of
those forces resident on the surfaces of bodies, to which M. Dutrochet
has given the name of epipolic forces.”--_On certain improvements in
Photographic Processes, described in a former communication_ (Phil.
Trans, vol. cxxxiii.); and _On the Parathermic Rays of the Solar
Spectrum_, Phil. Trans, vol. cxxxiv.

The experiments of Mrs. Somerville, _On the Action of the Rays of the
Spectrum on Vegetable Juices_ (Phil. Transactions, vol. cxxxvii.),
appear to connect themselves with this particular class of rays in a
curious manner.

[49] Experiments on the influence of heat on differently-coloured
bodies were first made by Dr. Hooke; and it was not until long after
that Franklin made his ingenious experiments. Davy exposed to sunshine
six equal pieces of copper, painted white, yellow, red, green, blue,
and black, in such a manner that one side only was illuminated. To
the dark side he attached a bit of cerate, ascertained by experiment
to melt at 700. The cerate attached to the black became fluid first,
the blue next, then the green and red, and lastly the yellow and
white.--Beddoes’s _Contributions to Physical Knowledge_, and collected
works of Sir Humphry Davy, vol. ii. p. 27.

[50] By reference to the Treatise on Heat, in the _Encyclopædia
Metropolitana_, numerous suggestive experiments will be found, all
bearing on this subject. Peschel’s _Elements of Physics_ may also be
consulted with advantage. The fact is, however, simply proved, as
stated in the text, by placing the bulbs of delicate thermometers,
so as to be completely involved in the petals of flowers exposed to
sunshine, shading the upper portion of the stem of the instrument.

[51] Moser, _On Vision, and on the Action of Light on Bodies_: and also
_On Latent Light_: Scientific Memoirs, vol. iii. Draper, _On certain
Spectral Appearances, and on the Discovery of Latent Light_: Phil.
Mag., Nov. 1842.

[52] A particular examination of this curious question will be found in
the Author’s report _On the Influence of the Solar Rays on the Growth
of Plants_: Reports of the British Association for 1847.

[53] Ammianus Marcellinus ascribes the longevity and robust health of
mountaineers to their exposure to the dews of night. Dew was employed
by the alchemists in their experiments on the solution of gold. The
ladies of old collected the “celestial wash,” which they imagined had
the virtue of preserving their fine forms, by exposing heaps of wool
to the influences of night radiation. It was supposed that the lean
features of the grasshopper arose from that insect feeding entirely on
dew: “Dumque thymo pascentur apes, dum rore cicadæ,” Virgil, Eclog.

See some curious remarks by Boyle, _On the Power of Dew in Working on
Solid Bodies_: Works of the Honourable R. Boyle, vol. v. p. 121. 1744.

[54] See the _Researches on Heat_, by Professor James Forbes, in the
Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh; also Melloni’s papers
on the same subject in the _Annales de Chimie_, several of which have
been translated into the _Scientific Memoirs_, edited by Mr. Richard
Taylor.

[55] The phenomena of dew have constantly engaged the attention of
man. Aristotle, in his book _De Mundo_, puts forth some just notions
on its nature. An opinion has almost always prevailed that dew falls.
Gersten appears to have been the first who opposed this motion. He was
followed by Musschenbroek, and then by Du Fay. The researches of Leslie
were of a far more exact character. Dr. Wilson, in the Transactions of
the Royal Society of Edinburgh, 1st vol., published a _Memoir on Hoar
Frost_ of much interest; but the questions involved remained unsettled
until the researches of Dr. Wells, which were published in his _Essay
on Dew_.

[56] By far the most complete set of experiments on the radiation
of heat from the surface at night, which have been published since
Dr. Wells’s memoir _On Dew_, are those of Mr. Glaisher, of the Royal
Observatory at Greenwich. Instruments of the most perfect kind were
employed, and the observations made with sedulous care. The results
will be found in a memoir _On the Amount of the Radiation of Heat, at
night, from the Earth, and from various bodies placed on or near the
Surface of the Earth_, by James Glaisher, Esq., Philosophical Trans.
for 1847, part 2.

[57] Dr. Wells noticed the practical fact that very light shades
protected delicate plants from frost, by preventing radiation. Mr.
Goldsworthy Gurney has made a series of interesting experiments, and
he imagines that by shading grasslands with boughs of trees, or any
light litter, a more abundant crop is produced. The subject has been
discussed in the journals of the Royal Agricultural Society. May not
the apparent increase be due entirely to the succulent condition in
which a plant always grows in the shade?

[58] This paper of Melloni’s will be found in the _Bibliothèque
Universelle de Genève_, for 1843. The conclusions are highly ingenious,
but they rest entirely on the analogy supposed to be discovered
between the relations of heat, like light, to the coloured rays of the
spectrum. This, it must be remembered, is not the case, since even Sir
William Herschel showed that red light might exist with only a minimum
of calorific power, notwithstanding the fact, that the maximum heat-ray
of the spectrum coincides with the red rays.

[59] Dr. Robinson, of Armagh, in his Memoir _On the Effects of Heat in
lessening the Affinities of the Elements of Water_.--Transactions of
the Royal Irish Academy, vol. xxi. part 2.

[60] On this subject consult Robert Were Fox, _On the Temperature of
the Mines of Cornwall_.--Cornwall Geological Transactions, vol. ii.; W.
J. Henwood, on the same subject, _Ib._ vol. v.; Reports of the British
Association, 1840, p. 315; Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal, vol.
xxiv. p. 140.

[61] _On the causes of the temperature of Hot and Thermal Springs;
and on the bearings of this subject as connected with the general
question regarding the internal temperature of the Earth_: by Professor
Gustav Bischoff, of Bonn.--Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal, vol.
xx. p. 376; vol. xxiii. p. 330. Some interesting information on
the temperature of the ground will be found in Erman’s _Travels in
Siberia_, translated by W. D. Cooley, vol. i. p. 339; vol. ii. p.
366. _Sur la Profondeur à laquelle se trouve la couche de Température
invariable entre les Tropiques_, by Boussingault: Annales de Chimie et
de Physique, 1833, p. 225. Reference may also be made to Humboldt’s
_Cosmos_, Otto’s translation; and to the excellent article on
_Meteorology_, by George Harvey, in the Encyclopædia Metropolitana.
These chthonisothermal lines, as they are called, have been traced by
Humboldt and others over extensive districts.

[62] These results are obtained from the valuable observations
of Robert Were Fox, Esq., made with great care by that gentleman
in several of the Cornish mines: _Report on some observations on
Subterranean Temperature_.--British Association Reports, vol. ix. p.
309; Philosophical Magazine, 1837, vol. ii. p. 520.

[63] From his experiments, the following conclusions were arrived at by
M. Delaroche:--

1. Invisible radiant heat may, in some circumstances, pass directly
through glass.

2. The quantity of radiant heat which passes directly through glass
is so much greater, relative to the whole heat emitted in the same
direction, as the temperature of the source of heat is more elevated.

3. The calorific rays which have already passed through a screen of
glass, experience, in passing through a second glass screen of a
similar nature, a much smaller diminution of their intensity than they
did in passing through the first screen.

4. The rays emitted by a hot body differ from each other in their
faculty to pass through glass.

5. A thick glass, though as much or more permeable to light than a thin
glass of worse quality, allows a much smaller quantity of radiant heat
to pass. The difference is so much the less as the temperature of the
radiating source is more elevated.

6. The quantity of heat which a hot body yields in a given time, by
radiation to a cold body situate at a distance, increases, _cæteris
paribus_, in a greater ratio than the excess of temperature of the
first body above the second.--Journal de Physique, vol. lxxv.

[64] Sir David Brewster differs from the conclusions arrived at by
Delaroche. He thus explains his views:--“The inability of radiant
heat to pass through glass, may be considered as a consequence of its
refusing to yield to the refractive force; for we can scarcely conceive
a particle of radiant matter freely permeating a solid body, without
suffering some change in its velocity and direction. The ingenious
experiments of M. Prévost, of Geneva, and the more recent ones of
M. Delaroche, have been considered as establishing the permeability
of glass to radiant heat. M. Prévost employed moveable screens of
glass, and renewed them continually, in order that the result which
he obtained might not be ascribed to the heating of the screen; but
such is the rapidity with which heat is propagated through a thin
plate of glass, that it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to
observe the state of the thermometer before it has been affected by
the secondary radiation from the screen. The method employed by M.
Delaroche, of observing the difference of effect, when a blackened
glass screen and a transparent one were made successively to intercept
the radiant heat, is liable to an obvious error. The radiant heat would
find a quicker passage through the transparent screen; and, therefore,
the difference of effect was not due to the transmitted heat, but to
the heat radiated from the anterior surface. The truth contained in M.
Delaroche’s fifth proposition is almost a demonstration of the fallacy
of all those that precede it. He found that ‘a thick plate of glass,
though as much or more permeable to light than a thin glass of worse
quality, allowed a much smaller quantity of radiant heat to pass.’ If
he had employed very thick plates of the purest flint glass, or thick
masses of fluid that have the power of transmitting light copiously,
he would have found that not a single particle of heat was capable of
passing directly through transparent media.”--Sir D. Brewster, _On new
properties of heat as exhibited in its propagation along plates of
glass_. Philosophical Transactions, vol. cvi. p. 107.

[65] _Proposal of a New Nomenclature for the Science of Calorific
Radiations_, by M. Melloni. Bibliothèque Universelle de Genève, No.
70. Scientific Memoirs, vol. iii. part 12. Many of the terms, as
_Diathermasy_, or transparency for heat; _Adiathermasy_, opacity for
heat; _Thermochroic_, coloured for heat, and others, are valuable
suggestions of forms of expression which are required in dealing with
these physical phenomena.

[66] For a careful examination of the several theories of heat consult
Dr. Young’s Course of Lectures on Natural Philosophy, &c., Lecture 52,
_On the Measures and the Nature of Heat_; also Powell’s very excellent
_Reports on Radiant Heat_--Reports of the British Association, 1832,
1840. The transcendental view which the immaterial theory leads to,
cannot be better exemplified than by the following quotation from that
inexplicable dream of a talented man, _Elements of Physiophilosophy_,
by Lorenz Oken, M.D. (translated for the Ray Society, by Alfred Tulk):--

“Heat is not matter itself any more than light is; but it is only the
act of motion in the primary matter. In heat, as well as in light,
there certainly resides a material substratum; yet, this substratum
does not give out heat and light; but the _motion_ only of the
substratum gives out heat, and the _tension_ only of the substratum
light. There is no body of heat; nitrogen is the body of heat, just
as oxygen may be called the body of fire. Heat is real space; into it
all forms have been resolved, as all materiality has been resolved
into gravity, and all activity, all polarity, into light. Heat is the
universal form, consequently the want of form.”

[67] Mémoires de la Société Physique, &c., de Genève, tom. ii. art. 2.

[68] This curious phenomenon was first observed by Mr. Trevelyan, whose
_Notice regarding some Experiments on the Vibration of Heated Metals_
will be found in the Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh,
vol. xii., 1837. In a Memoir in the same volume, entitled _Experimental
Researches regarding certain vibrations which take place between
metallic masses having different temperatures_, Professor Forbes draws
the following conclusions:--

1. “The vibrations never take place between substances of the same
nature.

2. “Both substances must be metallic. (This is now proved not to be
necessary.)

3. “The vibrations take place with an intensity proportional (within
certain limits) to the difference of the conducting powers of the
metals for heat or electricity; the metal having the least conducting
power being necessarily the coldest.

4. “The time of contact of two points of the metals must be longer than
that of the intermediate portions.

5. “The impulse is received by a distinct and separate process at each
contact of the bar and block, and in no case is the metallic connection
of the bearing points in the bar, or those of the block, in any way
essential.

6. “The intensity of the vibration is (under certain exceptions)
proportional to the difference of temperature of the
metals.”--Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, vol. xii.

[69] The Bakerian Lecture. _On certain Phenomena of Voltaic Ignition,
and the Decomposition of Water into its Constituent Gases by Heat_: by
W. R. Grove, Esq.--Philosophical Transactions, 1847. Part 1.

[70] Davy’s _Researches on Flame_. Works, vol. vi.--Philosophical
Transactions for 1817.

[71] _On the Effect of Heat in lessening the affinities of the Elements
of Water_: by the Rev. Thomas Romney Robinson, D.D.--Transactions of
the Royal Irish Academy, vol. xxi. part 2.

[72] _An Inquiry concerning the Chemical Properties that have been
attributed to Light_: by Benjamin, Count of Rumford.--Philosophical
Transactions, vol. lxxxviii. p. 449.--The results obtained by Count
Rumford were probably due to the non-luminous heat-rays--parathermic
rays--which are known to be given off by boiling water.

[73] For Dr. Drapers paper, see Philosophical Magazine for May, 1847,
vol. xxx. 3rd series.

[74] _On the Action of the Rays of the Solar Spectrum on Vegetable
Colours_: by Sir J. F. W. Herschel, Bart.

The proof of the continuation of the visible prismatic spectrum beyond
the extreme violet may be witnessed in the following manner:--“Paper
stained with tincture of turmeric is of a yellow colour; and, in
consequence, the spectrum thrown in it, if exposed in open daylight,
is considerably affected in its apparent colours, the blue portion
appearing violet, and the violet very pale and faint; but beyond the
region occupied by the violet rays, is distinctly to be seen a faint
prolongation of the spectrum, terminated laterally, like the rest of
it, by straight and sharp outlines, and which, in this case, affects
the eye with the sensation of a pale yellow colour.”--Philosophical
Transactions, p. 133.

[75] The most complete exposition of the theory that animal heat is
derived from chemical action only, will be found in _Animal Chemistry,
or Chemistry in its applications to Physiology and Pathology_, by
Justus Liebig: translated by Dr. Gregory. The conclusions arrived at
by the author, notwithstanding his high--and deservedly high--position
in chemical science, must, however, be received with great caution,
many of them being founded on most incorrect premises, and his
generalizations being of the most hasty and imperfect character. At
page 22 the following passage occurs:--“If we were to go naked, like
certain savage tribes, or if in hunting or fishing we were exposed
to the same degree of cold as the Samoiedes, we should be able, with
ease, to consume ten pounds of flesh, and, perhaps, a dozen of tallow
candles into the bargain, daily, as warmly clad travellers have related
with astonishment of these people. We should then also be able to take
the same quantity of brandy or train-oil without bad effects, because
the carbon and hydrogen of these substances would only suffice to keep
up the equilibrium between the external temperature and that of our
bodies.”

A brief examination will exhibit the error of this. The analysis of
Beef, by D. Lyon Playfair, is as follows:--

    Carbon      51·83
    Hydrogen     7·57
    Nitrogen    15·01
    Oxygen      21·37
    Ashes        4·23

And the following has been given by Chevreul as the composition of
mutton tallow:--

    Carbon   96
    Hydrogen 16
    Nitrogen 16
    Oxygen   48

About three times the quantity of oxygen to the carbon eaten, is
required to convert it into carbonic acid; hence, the Samoiede, eating
more highly carbonized matter, must inspire 288 oz. of oxygen daily,
or nearly eight times as much as the “ordinary adult.” By the lungs
he must take into the body 2,304 cubic feet of air besides what will
be absorbed by the skin. His respirations must be so much quickened,
that at the lowest possible calculation he must have 500 pulsations a
minute. Under such conditions it is quite clear man could not exist.
There is no disputing the fact of the enormous appetites of these
people; but all the food is not removed from the system as carbonic
acid gas.

[76] An interesting paper by Dr. Davy, _On the Temperature of Man_,
will be found in the Philosophical Transactions, vol. cxxxvi. p.
319.--Sir Humphry Davy, in his _Consolations in Travel, or the Last
Days of a Philosopher_, in his fourth dialogue, _The Proteus_, has
several ingenious speculations on this subject.

[77] _Exposé de quelques résultats obtenus par l’action combinée de la
chaleur et de la compression sur certains liquides, tels que l’eau,
l’alcool, l’éther sulfurique, et l’essence de pétrole rectifiée_: par
M. le Baron Cagniard de la Tour.

The three following conclusions are arrived at:--

1. Que l’alcool à 36 degrés, l’essence de pétrole rectifiée à 42
degrés, et l’éther sulfurique soumis à l’action de la chaleur et de la
compression, sont susceptibles de se réduire complètement en vapeur
sous un volume un peu plus que double de celui de chaque liquide.

2. Qu’une augmentation de pression, occasionnée par la présence de
l’air dans plusieurs des experiences qui viennent d’être citées, n’a
point apporté d’obstacle à l’évaporation du liquide dans le même
espace; qu’elle a seulement rendu sa dilatation plus calme et plus
facile à suivre jusqu’au moment où le liquide semble s’évanouir
tout-à-coup.

3. Que l’eau, quoique susceptible sans doute d’être réduite en vapeur
très-comprimée, n’a pu être soumise à des experiences complètes,
faute de moyens suffisans pour assurer l’exacte fermeture de la
marmite de compression, non plus que dans les tubes de verre dont elle
altère la transparence en s’emparant de l’alcali qui entre dans leur
composition.--Annales de Chimie, vol. xxi.

[78] _Sur les phénomènes qui présentent les corps projetés sur des
surfaces chaudes_: par M. Boutigny (d’Evreux).--Annales de Chimie et de
Physique, vol. xi. p. 16. _Congélation du mercure en trois secondes,
en vertu de l’état sphéroïdal dans un creuset incandescent_: by M.
Faraday.--Ibid., vol. xix. p. 383.

_Spheroidal Condition of Bodies_ (Extrait d’une Note de M. Boutigny
d’Evreux).

“Au nombre des propriétés des corps à l’état sphéroïdal, il en est cinq
qui me paraissent caractéristiques et fondamentales, et c’est sur ces
cinq propriétés que je base la définition que je soumets aujourd’hui au
jugement de l’Académie. Ces cinq propriétés sont:--

“1. La forme arrondie que prend la matière sur une surface chauffée à
une certaine température.

“2. Le fait de la distance permanente qui existe entre le corps à
l’état sphéroïdal et le corps sphéroïdalisant.

“3. La propriété de réfléchir le calorique rayonnant.

“4. La suspension de l’action chimique.

“5. La fixité de la température des corps à l’état sphéroïdal.

“Cela posé, voici la définition que je propose: un corps projeté sur
une surface chaude est à l’état sphéroïdal quand il revêt la forme
arrondie et qu’il se maintient sur cette surface au delà du rayon de sa
sphère d’activité physique et chimique; alors il réfléchit le calorique
rayonnant, et ses molécules sont, quant à la chaleur, dans un état
d’équilibre stable; c’est-à-dire, à une température invariable, ou qui
ne varie que dans des limites étroites.”--Comptes Rendus, 6 Mars, 1848.

[79] _Some Facts relative to the Spheroidal State of Bodies, Fire
Ordeal, Incombustible Man, &c._: by P. H. Boutigny (d’Evreux),
Philosophical Magazine, No. 233 (third, series), p. 80; Comptes Rendus,
May 14, 1849.

[80] The theory of freezing mixtures is deduced from the doctrine of
latent caloric. These are mixtures of saline substances which, at the
common temperature, by their mutual chemical action, pass rapidly into
the fluid form, or are capable of being rapidly dissolved in water,
and, by this quick transition to fluidity, absorb caloric, and produce
degrees of cold more or less intense.--Rev. Francis Lunn, _On Heat_:
Encyclopædia Metropolitana.

[81] _Propriétés de l’Acide Carbonique liquide_, par M. Thilorier,
Annales de Chimie, vol. lx. p. 427. _Solidification de l’Acide
Carbonique_: Ibid. p. 432.

[82] _On the Liquefaction and Solidification of Bodies generally
existing as Gases_, by Michael Faraday, D.C.L., F.R.S., &c.;
Philosophical Transactions, vol. cxxxvi, p. 155.

[83] Burns, in one of his most natural and pathetic letters.




