CHAPTER VII.

THE ROMANS.


The Romans had no philosophy but that which they borrowed from the
Greeks; and what they thus received, they hardly made entirely their
own. The vast and profound question of which we have been speaking,
the relation between Existence and our Knowledge of what exists, they
never appear to have fathomed, even so far as to discern how wide and
deep it is. In the development of the ideas by which nature is to be
understood, they went no further than their Greek masters had gone,
nor indeed was more to be looked for. And in the practical habit of
accumulating observed facts as materials for knowledge, they were much
less discriminating and more credulous than their Greek predecessors.
The descent from Aristotle to Pliny, in the judiciousness of the
authors and the value of their collections of facts, is immense.

Since the Romans were thus servile followers of their Greek teachers,
and little acquainted with any example of new truths collected from
the world around them, it was not to be expected that they could have
any just conception of that long and magnificent ascent from one set
of truths to others of higher order and wider compass, which the
history of science began to exhibit when the human mind recovered
its progressive habits. Yet some dim presentiment of the splendid
career thus destined for the intellect of man appears from time to
time to have arisen in their minds. Perhaps the circumstance which
most powerfully contributed to suggest this vision, was the vast
intellectual progress which they were themselves conscious of having
made, through the introduction of the Greek philosophy; and to this
may be added, perhaps, some other features of national character. Their
temper was too stubborn to acquiesce in the absolute authority of the
Greek philosophy, although their minds were not inventive enough to
establish a rival by its side. And the wonderful progress of their
political power had given them a hope in the progress of man which
the Greeks never possessed. The Roman, as he believed the fortune of
his State to be destined for eternity, believed also in the immortal
destiny and endless advance of that Intellectual Republic of which he
had been admitted a denizen.

It is easy to find examples of such feelings as I have endeavoured
to describe. The enthusiasm with which Lucretius and Virgil speak of
physical knowledge, manifestly arises in a great measure from the
delight which they had felt in becoming acquainted with the Greek
theories.

    Me vero primum dulces ante omnia Musæ
    Quarum sacra fero ingenti perculsus amore
    Accipiant, cœlique vias et sidera monstrent,
    Defectus Solis varios, Lunæque labores!...
    Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas!

    Ye sacred Muses, with whose beauty fir'd,
    My soul is ravisht and my brain inspir'd:
    Whose Priest I am, whose holy fillets wear,
    Would you your Poet's first petition hear,
    Give me the ways of wand'ring stars to know,
    The depth of Heaven above and Earth below;
    Teach me the various labours of the Moon,
    And whence proceed th' eclipses of the Sun;
    Why flowing Tides prevail upon the main,
    And in what dark abyss they shrink again;
    What shakes the solid Earth; what cause delays
    The Summer Nights; and shortens Winter Days....
      Happy the man who, studying Nature's Laws,
    Through known effects can trace the secret cause!

Ovid[40] expresses a similar feeling.

    Felices animos quibus hæc cognoscere primis
      Inque domos superas scandere cura fuit!...
    Admovere oculis distantia sidera nostris
      Ætheraque ingenio supposuere suo.
    Sic petitur cœlum: non ut ferat Ossam Olympus
      Summaque Peliacus sidera tanget apex.

    Thrice happy souls! to whom 'twas given to rise
    To truths like these, and scale the spangled skies!
    Far distant stars to clearest view they brought,
    And girdled ether with their chain of thought.
    So heaven is reached:--not as of old they tried
    By mountains piled on mountains in their pride.


And from the whole tenour of these and similar passages, it is evident
that the intellectual pleasure which arises from our first introduction
to a beautiful physical theory had a main share in producing this
enthusiasm at the contemplation of the victories of science; although
undoubtedly the moral philosophy, which was never separated from the
natural philosophy, and the triumph over superstitious fears, which
a knowledge of nature was supposed to furnish, added warmth to the
feeling of exultation.

We may trace a similar impression in the ardent expressions which
Pliny[41] makes use of in speaking of the early astronomers, and which
we have quoted in the _History_. "Great men! elevated above the common
standard of human nature, by discovering the laws which celestial
occurrences obey, and by freeing the wretched mind of man from the
fears which eclipses inspired."

This exulting contemplation of what science had done, naturally led the
mind to an anticipation of further achievements still to be performed.
Expressions of this feeling occur in Seneca, and are of the most
remarkable kind, as the following example will show[42]:

"Why do we wonder that comets, so rare a phenomenon, have not yet had
their laws assigned?--that we should know so little of their beginning
and their end, when their recurrence is at wide intervals? It is not
yet fifteen hundred years since Greece,

  Stellis numeros et nomina fecit,

'reckoned the stars, and gave them names.' There are still many nations
which are acquainted with the heavens by sight only; which do not yet
know why the moon disappears, why she is eclipsed. It is but lately
that among us philosophy has reduced these matters to a certainty. The
day shall come when the course of time and the labour of a maturer age
shall bring to light what is yet concealed. One generation, even if it
devoted itself to the skies, is not enough for researches so extensive.
How then can it be so, when we divide this scanty allowance of years
into no equal shares between our studies and our vices? These things
then must be explained by a long succession of inquiries. We have but
just begun to know how arise the morning and evening appearances,
the stations, the progressions, and the retrogradations of the fixed
stars which put themselves in our way;--which appearing perpetually
in another and another place compel us to be curious. Some one will
hereafter demonstrate in what region the comets wander; why they move
so far asunder from the rest; of what size and nature they are. Let
us be content with what we have discovered: let posterity contribute
its share to truth." Again he adds[43] in the same strain: "Let us
not wonder that what lies so deep is brought out so slowly. How many
animals have become known for the first time in this age! And the
members of future generations shall know many of which we are ignorant.
Many things are reserved for ages to come, when our memory shall
have passed away. The world would be a small thing indeed, if it did
not contain matter of inquiry _for_ all the world. Eleusis reserves
something for the second visit of the worshipper. _So too Nature
does not at once disclose all_ HER _mysteries_. We think ourselves
initiated; we are but in the vestibule. The arcana are not thrown open
without distinction and without reserve. This age will see some things;
that which comes after us, others."

While we admire the happy coincidence of these conjectures with the
soundest views which the history of science teaches us, we must not
forget that they are merely conjectures, suggested by very vague
impressions, and associated with very scanty conceptions of the laws
of nature. Seneca's _Natural Questions_, from which the above extract
is taken, contains a series of dissertations on various subjects of
Natural Philosophy; as Meteors, Rainbows, Lightnings, Springs, Rivers,
Snow, Hail, Rain, Wind, Earthquakes and Comets. In the whole of these
dissertations, the statements are loose, and the explanations of little
or no value. Perhaps it may be worth our while to notice a case in
which he refers to an observation of his own, although his conclusion
from it be erroneous. He is arguing[44] against the opinion that
Springs arise from the water which falls in rain. "In the first place,"
he says, "I, a very diligent digger in my vineyard, affirm that no rain
is so heavy as to moisten the earth to the depth of more than ten feet.
All the moisture is consumed in this outer crust, and descends not to
the lower part." We have here something of the nature of an experiment;
and indeed, as we may readily conceive, the instinct which impels man
to seek truth by experiment can never be altogether extinguished.
Seneca's experiment was deprived of its value by the indistinctness of
his ideas, which led him to rest in the crude conception of the water
being "consumed" in the superficial crust of the earth.

It is unnecessary to pursue further the reasonings of the Romans on
such subjects, and we now proceed to the ages which succeeded the fall
of their empire.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 40: Lib. i. _Fast._]

[Footnote 41: _Hist. Nat._ i. 75.]

[Footnote 42: _Quæst. Nat._ vii. 25.]

[Footnote 43: _Quæst. Nat._ vii. 30, 31.]

[Footnote 44: _Ibid._ iii. 7.]




