CHAPTER XIV.

THE PRACTICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE.


1. _Character of the Practical Reformers._--We now come to a class
of speculators who had perhaps a greater share in bringing about the
change from stationary to progressive knowledge, than those writers who
so loudly announced the revolution. The mode in which the philosophers
of whom we now speak produced their impressions on men's minds, was
very different from the procedure of the theoretical reformers. What
these talked of, they did; what these promised, they performed. While
the theorists concerning knowledge proclaimed that great advances
were to be made, the practical discoverers went steadily forwards.
While one class spoke of a complete Reform of scientific Methods, the
other, boasting little, and often thinking little of Method, proved
the novelty of their instrument by obtaining new results. While the
metaphysicians were exhorting men to consult experience and the senses,
the physicists were examining nature by such means with unparalleled
success. And while the former, even when they did for a moment refer
to facts, soon rushed back into their own region of ideas, and tried
at once to seize the widest generalizations, the latter, fastening
their attention upon the phenomena, and trying to reduce them to
laws, were carried forwards by steps measured and gradual, such as no
conjectural view of scientific method had suggested; but leading to
truths as profound and comprehensive as any which conjecture had dared
to anticipate. The theoretical reformers were bold, self-confident,
hasty, contemptuous of antiquity, ambitious of ruling all future
speculations, as they whom they sought to depose had ruled the past.
The practical reformers were cautious, modest, slow, despising no
knowledge, whether borrowed from tradition or observation, confident in
the ultimate triumph of science, but impressed with the conviction that
each single person could contribute a little only to its progress. Yet
though thus working rather than speculating,--dealing with particulars
more than with generals,--employed mainly in adding to knowledge, and
not in defining what knowledge is, or how additions are to be made
to it,--these men, thoughtful, curious, and of comprehensive minds,
were constantly led to important views on the nature and methods of
science. And these views, thus suggested by reflections on their own
mental activity, were gradually incorporated with the more abstract
doctrines of the metaphysicians, and had a most important influence
in establishing an improved philosophy of science. The indications of
such views we must now endeavour to collect from the writings of the
discoverers of the times preceding the seventeenth century.

Some of the earliest of these indications are to be found in those who
dealt with Art rather than with Science. I have already endeavoured
to show that the advance of the arts which give us a command over the
powers of nature, is generally prior to the formation of exact and
speculative knowledge concerning those powers. But Art, which is thus
the predecessor of Science, is, among nations of acute and active
intellects, usually its parent. There operates, in such a case, a
speculative spirit, leading men to seek for the reasons of that which
they find themselves able to do. How slowly, and with what repeated
deviations men follow this leading, when under the influence of a
partial and dogmatical philosophy, the late birth and slow growth of
sound physical theory shows. But at the period of which we now speak,
we find men, at length, proceeding in obedience to the impulse which
thus drives them from practice to theory;--from an acquaintance with
phenomena to a free and intelligent inquiry concerning their causes.


2. _Leonardo da Vinci._--I have already noted, in the History of
Science, that the Indistinctness of Ideas, which was long one main
impediment to the progress of science in the middle ages, was first
remedied among architects and engineers. These men, so far at least as
mechanical ideas were concerned, were compelled by their employments
to judge rightly of the relations and properties of the materials with
which they had to deal; and would have been chastised by the failure
of their works, if they had violated the laws of mechanical truth. It
was not wonderful, therefore, that these laws became known to _them_
first. We have seen, in the _History_, that Leonardo da Vinci, the
celebrated painter, who was also an engineer, is the first writer in
whom we find the true view of the laws of equilibrium of the lever in
the most general case. This artist, a man of a lively and discursive
mind, is led to make some remarks[128] on the formation of our
knowledge, which may show the opinions on that subject that already
offered themselves at the beginning of the sixteenth century[129]. He
expresses himself as follows:--"Theory is the general, Experiments are
the soldiers. The interpreter of the artifices of nature is Experience:
she is never deceived. Our judgment sometimes is deceived, because it
expects effects which Experience refuses to allow." And again, "We
must consult Experience, and vary the circumstances till we have drawn
from them general rules; for it is she who furnishes true rules. But
of what use, you ask, are these rules; I reply, that they direct us in
the researches of nature and the operations of art. They prevent our
imposing upon ourselves and others by promising ourselves results which
we cannot obtain.

"In the study of the sciences which depend on mathematics, those who do
not consult nature but authors, are not the children of nature, they
are only her grandchildren. She is the true teacher of men of genius.
But see the absurdity of men! They turn up their noses at a man who
prefers to learn from nature herself rather than from authors who are
only her clerks."

In another place, in reference to a particular case, he says, "Nature
begins from the Reason and ends in Experience; but for all that, we
must take the opposite course; begin from the Experiment and try to
discover the Reason."

Leonardo was born forty-six years before Telesius; yet we have here
an estimate of the value of experience far more just and substantial
than the Calabrian school ever reached. The expressions contained in
the above extracts, are well worthy our notice;--that experience is
never deceived;--that we must vary our experiments, and draw from them
general rules;--that nature is the original source of knowledge, and
books only a derivative substitute;--with a lively image of the sons
and grandsons of nature. Some of these assertions have been deemed,
and not without reason, very similar to those made by Bacon a century
later. Yet it is probable that the import of such expressions, in
Leonardo's mind, was less clear and definite than that which they
acquired by the progress of sound philosophy. When he says that theory
is the general and experiments the soldiers, he probably meant that
theory directs men what experiments to make; and had not in his mind
the notion of a theoretical Idea ordering and brigading the Facts. When
he says that Experience is the interpreter of Nature, we may recollect,
that in a more correct use of this image, Experience and Nature are the
writing, and the Intellect of man the interpreter. We may add, that
the clear apprehension of the importance of Experience led, in this as
in other cases, to an unjust depreciation of the value of what science
owed to books. Leonardo would have made little progress, if he had
attempted to master a complex science, astronomy for instance, by means
of observation alone, without the aid of books.

But in spite of such criticism, Leonardo's maxims show extraordinary
sagacity and insight; and they appear to us the more remarkable, when
we see how rare such views are for a century after his time.


3. _Copernicus._--For we by no means find, even in those practical
discoverers to whom, in reality, the revolution in science, and
consequently in the philosophy of science, was due, this prompt and
vigorous recognition of the supreme authority of observation as a
ground of belief; this bold estimate of the probable worthlessness
of traditional knowledge; and this plain assertion of the reality of
theory founded upon experience. Among such discoverers, Copernicus must
ever hold a most distinguished place. The heliocentric theory of the
universe, established by him with vast labour and deep knowledge, was,
for the succeeding century, the field of discipline and exertion of all
the most active speculative minds. Men, during that time, proved their
freedom of thought, their hopeful spirit, and their comprehensive view,
by adopting, inculcating, and following out the philosophy which this
theory suggested. But in the first promulgation of the theory, in the
works of Copernicus himself, we find a far more cautious and reserved
temper. He does not, indeed, give up the reality of his theory, but
he expresses himself so as to avoid shocking those who might (as some
afterwards did) think it safe to speak of it as an _hypothesis_ rather
than a truth. In his preface addressed to the Pope[130], after speaking
of the difficulties in the old and received doctrines, by which he
was led to his own theory, he says, "Hence I began to think of the
mobility of the earth; and although the opinion seemed absurd, yet
because I knew that to others before me this liberty had been conceded,
of imagining any kinds of circles in order to explain the phenomena
of the stars, I thought it would also be readily granted me, that I
might try whether, by supposing the earth to be in motion, I might
not arrive at a better explanation than theirs, of the revolutions of
the celestial orbs." Nor does he anywhere assert that the seeming
absurdity had become a certain truth, or betray any feeling of triumph
over the mistaken belief of his predecessors. And, as I have elsewhere
shown, his disciples[131] indignantly and justly defended him from the
charge of disrespect towards Ptolemy and other ancient astronomers. Yet
Copernicus is far from compromising the value or evidence of the great
truths which he introduced to general acceptance; and from sinking in
his exposition of his discoveries below the temper which had led to
them. His quotation from Ptolemy, that "He who is to follow philosophy
must be a freeman in mind," is a grand and noble maxim, which it well
became him to utter.


4. _Fabricius._--In another of the great discoverers of this period,
though employed on a very different subject, we discern much of the
same temper. Fabricius of Acquapendente[132], the tutor and forerunner
of our Harvey, and one of that illustrious series of Paduan professors
who were the fathers of anatomy[133], exhibits something of the same
respect for antiquity, in the midst of his original speculations.
Thus in a dissertation[134] _On the Action of the Joints_, he quotes
Aristotle's Mechanical Problems to prove that in all animal motion
there must be some quiescent fulcrum; and finds merit even in
Aristotle's ignorance. "Aristotle," he says[135], "did not know that
motion was produced by the muscle; and after staggering about from one
supposition to another, at last is compelled by the facts themselves
to recur to an innate spirit, which, he conceives, is contrasted, and
which pulls and pushes. And here we cannot help admiring the genius of
Aristotle, who, though ignorant of the muscle, invents something which
produces nearly the same effect as the muscle, namely, contraction and
pulling." He then, with great acuteness, points out the distinction
between Aristotle's opinions, thus favourably interpreted, and those of
Galen. In all this, we see something of the wish to find all truths in
the writings of the ancients, but nothing which materially interferes
with freedom of inquiry. The anatomists have in all ages and countries
been practically employed in seeking knowledge from observation. Facts
have ever been to them a subject of careful and profitable study; while
the ideas which enter into the wider truths of the science, are, as we
have seen, even still involved in obscurity, doubt, and contest.


5. _Maurolycus._--Francis Maurolycus of Messana, whose mathematical
works were published in 1575, was one of the great improvers of the
science of optics in his time. In his Preface to his Treatise on
the Spheres, he speaks of previous writers on the same subject; and
observes that as they have not superseded one another, they have not
rendered it unfit for any one to treat the subject afresh. "Yet," he
says, "it is impossible to amend the errors of all who have preceded
us. This would be a task too hard for Atlas, although he supports the
heavens. Even Copernicus is tolerated, who makes the sun to be fixed,
and the earth to move round it in a circle, and who is more worthy
of a whip or a scourge than of a refutation." The mathematicians and
astronomers of that time were not the persons most sensible of the
progress of physical knowledge; for the basis of their science, and
a great part of its substance, were contained in the writings of the
ancients; and till the time of Kepler, Ptolemy's work was, very justly,
looked upon as including all that was essential in the science.


6. _Benedetti._--But the writers on Mechanics were naturally led to
present themselves as innovators and experimenters; for all that the
ancients had taught concerning the doctrine of motion was erroneous;
while those who sought their knowledge from experiment, were constantly
led to new truths. John Baptist Benedetti, a Venetian nobleman, in
1599, published his _Speculationum Liber_, containing, among other
matter, a treatise on Mechanics, in which several of the Aristotelian
errors were refuted. In the Preface to this Treatise, he says, "Many
authors have written much, and with great ability, on Mechanics; but
since nature is constantly bringing to light something either new,
or before unnoticed, I too wished to put forth a few things hitherto
unattempted, or not sufficiently explained." In the doctrine of motion
he distinctly and at some length condemns and argues against all the
Aristotelian doctrines concerning motion, weight, and many other
fundamental principles of physics. Benedetti is also an adherent of
the Copernican doctrine. He states[136] the enormous velocity which
the heavenly bodies must have, if the earth be the centre of their
motions; and adds, "which difficulty does not occur according to the
beautiful theory of the Samian Aristarchus, expounded in a divine
manner by Nicolas Copernicus; against which the reasons alleged by
Aristotle are of no weight." Benedetti throughout shows no want of the
courage or ability which were needed in order to rise in opposition
against the dogmas of the Peripatetics. He does not, however, refer to
experiment in a very direct manner; indeed most of the facts on which
the elementary truths of mechanics rest, were known and admitted by the
Aristotelians; and therefore could not be adduced as novelties. On the
contrary, he begins with _à priori_ maxims, which experience would not
have confirmed. "Since," he says[137], "we have undertaken the task
of proving that Aristotle is wrong in his opinions concerning motion,
there are certain absolute truths, the objects of the intellect known
of themselves, which we must lay down in the first place." And then, as
an example of these truths, he states this: "Any two bodies of equal
size and figure, but of different materials, will have their natural
velocities in the same proportion as their weights;" where by their
natural velocities, he means the velocities with which they naturally
fall downwards.


7. _Gilbert._--The greatest of these practical reformers of science
is our countryman, William Gilbert; if, indeed, in virtue of the
clear views of the prospects which were then opening to science,
and of the methods by which her future progress was to be secured,
while he exemplified those views by physical discoveries, he does not
rather deserve the still higher praise of being at the same time a
theoretical and a practical reformer. Gilbert's physical researches
and speculations were employed principally upon subjects on which the
ancients had known little or nothing; and on which therefore it could
not be doubtful whether tradition or observation was the source of
knowledge. Such was magnetism; for the ancients were barely acquainted
with the attractive property of the magnet. Its polarity, including
repulsion as well as attraction, its direction towards the north,
its limited variation from this direction, its declination from the
horizontal position, were all modern discoveries. Gilbert's work[138]
on the magnet and on the magnetism of the earth, appeared in 1600;
and in this, he repeatedly maintains the superiority of experimental
knowledge over the physical philosophy of the ancients. His preface
opens thus: "Since in making discoveries and searching out the hidden
causes of things, stronger reasons are obtained from trustworthy
experiments and demonstrable arguments, than from probable conjectures
and the dogmas of those who philosophize in the usual manner," he has,
he says, "endeavoured to proceed from common magnetical experiments to
the inward constitution of the earth." As I have stated in the History
of Magnetism[139], Gilbert's work contains all the fundamental facts
of that science, so fully stated, that we have, at this day, little to
add to them. He is not, however, by the advance which he thus made,
led to depreciate the ancients, but only to claim for himself the same
liberty of philosophizing which they had enjoyed[140]. "To those
ancient and first parents of philosophy, Aristotle, Theophrastus,
Ptolemy, Hippocrates, Galen, be all due honour; from them it was that
the stream of wisdom has been derived down to posterity. But our age
has discovered and brought to light many things which they, if they
were yet alive, would gladly embrace. Wherefore we also shall not
hesitate to expound, by probable hypotheses, those things which by long
experience we have ascertained."

In this work the author not only adopts the Copernican doctrine of the
earth's motion, but speaks[141] of the contrary supposition as utterly
absurd, founding his argument mainly on the vast velocities which such
a supposition requires us to ascribe to the celestial bodies. Dr.
Gilbert was physician to Queen Elizabeth and to James the First, and
died in 1603. Some time after his death the executors of his brother
published another work of his, _De Mundo nostro Sublunari Philosophia
Nova_, in which similar views are still more comprehensively presented.
In this he says, "The two lords of philosophy, Aristotle and Galen,
are held in worship like gods, and rule the schools;--the former by
some destiny obtained a sway and influence among philosophers, like
that of his pupil Alexander among the kings of the earth;--Galen, with
like success, holds his triumph among the physicians of Europe." This
comparison of Aristotle to Alexander was also taken hold of by Bacon.
Nor is Gilbert an unworthy precursor of Bacon in the view he gives of
the History of Science, which occupies the first three chapters of his
Philosophy. He traces this history from "the simplicity and ignorance
of the ancients," through "the fabrication of the fable of the four
elements," to Aristotle and Galen. He mentions with due disapproval the
host of commentators which succeeded, the alchemists, the "shipwreck
of science in the deluge of the Goths," and the revival of letters
and genius in the time of "our grandfathers." "This later age," he
says, "has exploded the Barbarians, and restored the Greeks and Latins
to their pristine grace and honour. It remains, that if they have
written aught in error, this should be remedied by better and more
productive processes (_frugiferis_ institutis), not to be contemned
for their novelty; (for nothing which is true is really new, but is
perfect from eternity, though to weak man it may be unknown;) and that
thus Philosophy may bear her fruit." The reader of Bacon will not fail
to recognize, in these references to "fruit-bearing" knowledge, a
similarity of expression with the _Novum Organon_.

Bacon does not appear to me to have done justice to his contemporary.
He nowhere recognizes in the labours of Gilbert a community of
purpose and spirit with his own. On the other hand, he casts upon
him a reflection which he by no means deserves. In the _Advancement
of Learning_[142], he says, "Another error is, that men have used to
infect their meditations, opinions, and doctrines, with some conceits
which they have most admired, or some sciences to which they have
most applied; and given all things else a tincture according to
them, utterly untrue and improper.... So have the alchemists made a
philosophy out of a few experiments of the furnace; and Gilbertus,
our countryman, hath made a philosophy out of the observations of a
loadstone," (in the Latin, philosophiam etiam e magnete elicuit).
And in the same manner he mentions him in the _Novum Organon_[143],
as affording an example of an empirical kind of philosophy, which
appears to those daily conversant with the experiments, probable, but
to other persons incredible and empty. But instead of blaming Gilbert
for disturbing and narrowing science by a too constant reference to
magnetical rules, we might rather censure Bacon, for not seeing how
important in all natural philosophy are those laws of attraction
and repulsion of which magnetical phenomena are the most obvious
illustration. We may find ground for such a judgment in another passage
in which Bacon speaks of Gilbert. In the Second Book[144] of the _Novum
Organon_, having classified motions, he gives, as one kind, what he
calls, in his figurative language, _motion for gain_, or _motion of
need_, by which a body shuns heterogeneous, and seeks cognate bodies.
And he adds, "The Electrical operation, concerning which Gilbert and
others since him have made up such a wonderful story, is nothing less
than the appetite of a body, which, excited by friction, does not well
tolerate the air, and prefers another tangible body if it be found
near." Bacon's notion of an appetite in the body is certainly much
less philosophical than Gilbert's, who speaks of light bodies as drawn
towards amber by certain material radii[145]; and we might perhaps
venture to say that Bacon here manifests a want of clear mechanical
ideas. Bacon, too, showed his inferior aptitude for physical research
in rejecting the Copernican doctrine which Gilbert adopted. In the
_Advancement of Learning_[146], suggesting a history of the opinions
of philosophers, he says that he would have inserted in it even recent
theories, as those of Paracelsus; of Telesius, who restored the
philosophy of Parmenides; or Patricius, who resublimed the fumes of
Platonism; or Gilbert, who brought back the dogmas of Philolaus. But
Bacon quotes[147] with pleasure Gilbert's ridicule of the Peripatetics'
definition of heat. They had said, that heat is that which separates
heterogeneous and unites homogeneous matter; which, said Gilbert, is
as if any one were to define _man_ as that which sows wheat and plants
vines.

Galileo, another of Gilbert's distinguished contemporaries, had a
higher opinion of him. He says[148], "I extremely admire and envy this
author. I think him worthy of the greatest praise for the many new and
true observations which he has made, to the disgrace of so many vain
and fabling authors; who write, not from their own knowledge only,
but repeat everything they hear from the foolish and vulgar, without
attempting to satisfy themselves of the same by experience; perhaps
that they may not diminish the size of their books."


8. _Galileo._--Galileo was content with the active and successful
practice of experimental inquiry; and did not demand that such
researches should be made expressly subservient to that wider and
more ambitious philosophy, on which the author of the _Novum Organon_
employed his powers. But still it now becomes our business to trace
those portions of Galileo's views which have reference to the theory,
as well as the practice, of scientific investigation. On this subject,
Galileo did not think more profoundly, perhaps, than several of his
contemporaries; but in the liveliness of expression and illustration
with which he recommended his opinions on such topics, he was
unrivalled. Writing in the language of the people, in the attractive
form of dialogue, with clearness, grace, and wit, he did far more than
any of his predecessors had done to render the new methods, results,
and prospects of science familiar to a wide circle of readers, first
in Italy, and soon, all over Europe. The principal points inculcated
by him were already becoming familiar to men of active and inquiring
minds; such as,--that knowledge was to be sought from observation, and
not from books;--that it was absurd to adhere to, and debate about,
the physical tenets of Aristotle and the rest of the ancients. On
persons who followed this latter course, Galileo fixed the epithet of
Paper Philosophers[149]; because, as he wrote in a letter to Kepler,
this sort of men fancied that philosophy was to be studied like the
_Æneid_ or _Odyssey_, and that the true reading of nature was to be
detected by the collation of texts. Nothing so much shook the authority
of the received system of Physics as the experimental discoveries,
directly contradicting it, which Galileo made. By experiment, as I
have elsewhere stated[150], he disproved the Aristotelian doctrine that
bodies fall quickly or slowly in proportion to their weight. And when
he had invented the telescope, a number of new discoveries of the most
striking kind (the inequalities of the moon's surface, the spots in
the sun, the moon-like phases of Venus, the satellites of Jupiter, the
ring of Saturn,) showed, by the evidence of the eyes, how inadequate
were the conceptions, and how erroneous the doctrines of the ancients,
respecting the constitution of the universe. How severe the blow was to
the disciples of the ancient schools, we may judge by the extraordinary
forms of defence in which they tried to intrench themselves. They would
not look through Galileo's glasses; they maintained that what was seen
was an illusion of witchcraft; and they tried, as Galileo says[151],
with logical arguments, as if with magical incantations, to charm the
new planets out of the sky. No one could be better fitted than Galileo
for such a warfare. His great knowledge, clear intellect, gaiety, and
light irony, (with the advantage of being in the right,) enabled him to
play with his adversaries as he pleased. Thus when an Aristotelian[152]
rejected the discovery of the irregularities in the moon's surface,
because, according to the ancient doctrine, her form was a perfect
sphere, and held that the apparent cavities were filled with an
invisible crystal substance, Galileo replied, that he had no objection
to assent to this, but that then he should require his adversary in
return to believe that there were on the same surface invisible crystal
mountains ten times as high as those visible ones which he had actually
observed and measured.

We find in Galileo many thoughts which have since become established
maxims of modern philosophy. "Philosophy," he says[153], "is written
in that great book, I mean the Universe, which is constantly open
before our eyes; but it cannot be understood, unless we first know the
language and learn the characters in which it is written." With this
thought he combines some other lively images. One of his interlocutors
says concerning another, "Sarsi perhaps thinks that philosophy is
a book made up of the fancies of men, like the _Iliad_ or _Orlando
Furioso_, in which the matter of least importance is, that what is
written be true." And again, with regard to the system of authority, he
says, "I think I discover in him a firm belief that, in philosophizing,
it is necessary to lean upon the opinion of some celebrated author;
as if our mind must necessarily remain unfruitful and barren till it
be married to another man's reason."--"No," he says, "the case is not
so.--When we have the decrees of Nature, authority goes for nothing;
reason is absolute[154]."

In the course of Galileo's controversies, questions of the logic of
science came under discussion. Vincenzio di Grazia objected to a proof
from induction which Galileo adduced, because _all_ the particulars
were not enumerated; to which the latter justly replies[155], that
if induction were required to pass through all the cases, it would
be either useless or impossible;--impossible when the cases are
innumerable; useless when they have each already been verified, since
then the general proposition adds nothing to our knowledge.

One of the most novel of the characters which Science assumes in
Galileo's hands is, that she becomes cautious. She not only proceeds
leaning upon Experience, but she is content to proceed a little way
at a time. She already begins to perceive that she must rise to the
heights of knowledge by many small and separate steps. The philosopher
is desirous to know much, but resigned to be ignorant for a time of
that which cannot yet be known. Thus when Galileo discovered the true
law of the motion of a falling body[156], that the velocity increases
proportionally to the time from the beginning of the fall, he did
not insist upon immediately assigning the cause of this law. "The
cause of the acceleration of the motions of falling bodies is not,"
he says, "a necessary part of the investigation." Yet the conception
of this acceleration, as the result of the continued action of the
force of gravity upon the falling body, could hardly fail to suggest
itself to one who had formed the idea of force. In like manner, the
truth that the velocities, acquired by bodies falling down planes of
equal heights, are all equal, was known to Galileo and his disciples,
long before he accounted for it[157], by the principle, apparently
so obvious, that the momentum generated is as the moving force which
generates it. He was not tempted to rush at once, from an experimental
truth to a universal system. Science had learnt that she must move step
by step; and the gravity of her pace already indicated her approaching
maturity and her consciousness of the long path which lay before her.

But besides the genuine philosophical prudence which thus withheld
Galileo from leaping hastily from one inference to another, he had
perhaps a preponderating inclination towards facts; and did not feel,
so much as some other persons of his time, the need of reducing them to
ideas. He could bear to contemplate laws of motion without being urged
by an uncontrollable desire to refer them to conceptions of force.


9. _Kepler._--In this respect his friend Kepler differed from him;
for Kepler was restless and unsatisfied till he had reduced facts to
laws, and laws to causes; and never acquiesced in ignorance, though
he tested with the most rigorous scrutiny that which presented itself
in the shape of knowledge to fill the void. It may be seen in the
History of Astronomy[158] with what perseverance, energy, and fertility
of invention, Kepler pursued his labours, (enlivened and relieved by
the most curious freaks of fancy,) with a view of discovering the
rules which regulate the motions of the planet Mars. He represents
this employment under the image of a warfare; and describes[159] his
object to be "to triumph over Mars, and to prepare for him, as for one
altogether vanquished, tabular prisons and equated eccentric fetters;"
and when, "the enemy, left at home a despised captive, had burst all
the chains of the equations, and broken forth of the prisons of the
tables;"--when "it was buzzed here and there that the victory is vain,
and that the war is raging anew as violently as before;"--that is, when
the rules which he had proposed did not coincide with the facts;--he
by no means desisted from his attempts, but "suddenly sent into the
field a reserve of new physical reasonings on the rout and dispersion
of the veterans," that is, tried new suppositions suggested by such
views as he then entertained of the celestial motions. His efforts
to obtain the formal laws of the planetary motions resulted in some
of the most important discoveries ever made in astronomy; and if his
physical reasonings were for the time fruitless, this arose only from
the want of that discipline in mechanical ideas which the minds of
mathematicians had still to undergo; for the great discoveries of
Newton in the next generation showed that, in reality, the next step
of the advance was in this direction. Among all Kepler's fantastical
expressions, the fundamental thoughts were sound and true; namely,
that it was his business, as a physical investigator, to discover a
mathematical rule which governed and included all the special facts;
and that the rules of the motions of the planets must conform to some
conception of causation.

The same characteristics,--the conviction of rule and cause,
perseverance in seeking these, inventiveness in devising hypotheses,
love of truth in trying and rejecting them, and a lively Fancy playing
with the Reason without interrupting her,--appear also in his work
on Optics; in which he tried to discover the exact law of optical
refraction[160]. In this undertaking he did not succeed entirely;
nor does he profess to have done so. He ends his numerous attempts by
saying, "Now, reader, you and I have been detained sufficiently long
while I have been attempting to _collect into one fagot_ the measures
of different refractions."

In this and in other expressions, we see how clearly he apprehended
that _colligation of facts_ which is the main business of the practical
discoverer. And by his peculiar endowments and habits, Kepler exhibits
an essential portion of this process, which hardly appears at all in
Galileo. In order to bind together facts, theory is requisite as well
as observation,--the cord as well as the fagots. And the true theory
is often, if not always, obtained by trying several and selecting the
right. Now of this portion of the discoverer's exertions, Kepler is
a most conspicuous example. His fertility in devising suppositions,
his undaunted industry in calculating the results of them, his entire
honesty and candour in resigning them if these results disagreed with
the facts, are a very instructive spectacle; and are fortunately
exhibited to us in the most lively manner in his own garrulous
narratives. Galileo urged men by precept as well as example to begin
their philosophy from observation; Kepler taught them by his practice
that they must proceed from observation by means of hypotheses. The
one insisted upon facts; the other dealt no less copiously with ideas.
In the practical, as in the speculative portion of our history, this
antithesis shows itself; although in the practical part we cannot have
the two elements separated, as in the speculative we sometimes have.

In the _History of Science_[161], I have devoted several pages to the
intellectual character of Kepler, inasmuch as his habit of devising so
great a multitude of hypotheses, so fancifully expressed, had led some
writers to look upon him as an inquirer who transgressed the most fixed
rules of philosophical inquiry. This opinion has arisen, I conceive,
among those who have forgotten the necessity of Ideas as well as Facts
for all theory; or who have overlooked the impossibility of selecting
and explicating our ideas without a good deal of spontaneous play of
the mind. It must, however, always be recollected that Kepler's genius
and fancy derived all their scientific value from his genuine and
unmingled love of truth. These qualities appeared, not only in the
judgment he passed upon hypotheses, but also in matters which more
immediately concerned his reputation. Thus when Galileo's discovery of
the telescope disproved several opinions which Kepler had published
and strenuously maintained, he did not hesitate a moment to retract
his assertions and range himself by the side of Galileo, whom he
vigorously supported in his warfare against those who were incapable of
thus cheerfully acknowledging the triumph of new facts over their old
theories.


10. _Tycho._--There remains one eminent astronomer, the friend and
fellow-labourer of Kepler, whom we must not separate from him as one
of the practical reformers of science. I speak of Tycho Brahe, who is,
I think, not justly appreciated by the literary world in general, in
consequence of his having made a retrograde step in that portion of
astronomical theory which is most familiar to the popular mind. Though
he adopted the Copernican view of the motion of the planets about the
sun, he refused to acknowledge the annual and diurnal motion of the
earth. But notwithstanding this mistake, into which he was led by his
interpretation of Scripture rather than of nature, Tycho must ever be
one of the greatest names in astronomy. In the philosophy of science
also, the influence of what he did is far from inconsiderable; and
especially its value in bringing into notice these two points:--that
not only are observations the beginning of science, but that the
progress of science may often depend upon the observer's pursuing his
task regularly and carefully for a long time, and with well devised
instruments; and again, that observed facts offer a _succession_ of
laws which we discover as our observations become better, and as our
theories are better adapted to the observations. With regard to the
former point, Tycho's observatory was far superior to all that had
preceded it[162], not only in the optical, but in the mechanical
arrangements; a matter of almost equal consequence. And hence it was
that his observations inspired in Kepler that confidence which led him
to all his labours and all his discoveries. "Since," he says[163], "the
divine goodness has given us in Tycho Brahe an exact observer, from
whose observations this error of eight minutes in the calculations of
the Ptolemaic hypothesis is detected, let us acknowledge and make use
of this gift of God: and since this error cannot be neglected, these
eight minutes alone have prepared the way for an entire reform of
Astronomy, and are to be the main subject of this work."

With regard to Tycho's discoveries respecting the moon, it is to be
recollected that besides the first inequality of the moon's motion,
(the _equation of the centre_, arising from the elliptical form of her
orbit,) Ptolemy had discovered a second inequality, the _evection_,
which, as we have observed in the History of this subject[164], might
have naturally suggested the suspicion that there were still other
inequalities. In the middle ages, however, such suggestions, implying
a constant progress in science, were little attended to; and, we have
seen, that when an Arabian astronomer[165] had really discovered
another inequality of the moon, it was soon forgotten, because it had
no place in the established systems. Tycho not only rediscovered the
lunar inequality, (the _variation_,) thus once before won and lost, but
also two other inequalities; namely[166], the _change of inclination_
of the moon's orbit as the line of nodes moves round, and an inequality
in the motion of the line of nodes. Thus, as I have elsewhere said,
it appeared that the discovery of a rule is a step to the discovery
of deviations from that rule, which require to be expressed in other
rules. It became manifest to astronomers, and through them to all
philosophers, that in the application of theory to observation, we
find, not only the stated phenomena, for which the theory does account,
but also _residual phenomena_, which are unaccounted for, and remain
over and above the calculation. And it was seen further, that these
residual phenomena might be, altogether or in part, exhausted by new
theories.

These were valuable lessons; and the more valuable inasmuch as men
were now trying to lay down maxims and methods for the conduct of
science. A revolution was not only at hand, but had really taken place,
in the great body of real cultivators of science. The occasion now
required that this revolution should be formally recognized;--that
the new intellectual power should be clothed with the forms of
government;--that the new philosophical republic should be acknowledged
as a sister state by the ancient dynasties of Aristotle and Plato.
There was needed some great Theoretical Reformer, to speak in the name
of the Experimental Philosophy; to lay before the world a declaration
of its rights and a scheme of its laws. And thus our eyes are turned to
Francis Bacon, and others who like him attempted this great office. We
quit those august and venerable names of discoverers, whose appearance
was the prelude and announcement of the new state of things then
opening; and in doing so, we may apply to them the language which Bacon
applies to himself[167]:--

  Χαίρετε Κήρυκες Διὸ ς ἄγγελοι ἠδὲ καὶ ἀνδρῶν.

  Hail, Heralds, Messengers of Gods and Men!


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 128: His works have never been published, and exist in
manuscript in the library of the Institute at Paris. Some extracts were
published by Venturi, _Essai sur les Ouvrages de Leonard da Vinci_.
Paris, 1797.]

[Footnote 129: Leonardo died in 1520, at the age of 78.]

[Footnote 130: Paul III. in 1543.]

[Footnote 131: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. v. c. ii.]

[Footnote 132: Born 1537, died 1619.]

[Footnote 133: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xvii. c. ii. sect. 1.]

[Footnote 134: Fabricius, _De Motu Locali_, p. 182.]

[Footnote 135: p. 199.]

[Footnote 136: _Speculationum Liber_, p. 195.]

[Footnote 137: _Ibid._ p. 169.]

[Footnote 138: Gulielmi Gilberti, _Colcestriensis, Medici Londinensis,
De Magnete, Magneticisque Corporibus, et de Magno Magnete Tellure,
Physiologia Nova, plurimis et Argumentis et Experimentis demonstrata_.]

[Footnote 139: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xii. c. i.]

[Footnote 140: Pref.]

[Footnote 141: _De Magnete_, lib. vi. c. 3, 4.]

[Footnote 142: _Nov. Org._ b. i.]

[Footnote 143: B. i. Aph. 64.]

[Footnote 144: Vol. ix. 185.]

[Footnote 145: _De Magnete_, p. 60.]

[Footnote 146: B. iii. c. 4.]

[Footnote 147: _Nov. Org._ b. ii. Aph. 48.]

[Footnote 148: Drinkwater's _Life of Galileo_, p. 18.]

[Footnote 149: _Life of Galileo_, p. 9.]

[Footnote 150: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. vi. c. ii. sect. 5.]

[Footnote 151: _Life of Galileo_, p. 29.]

[Footnote 152: _Ibid._ p. 33.]

[Footnote 153: _Il Saggiatore_, ii. 247.]

[Footnote 154: _Il Saggiatore_, ii. 200.]

[Footnote 155: _Ibid._ i. 501.]

[Footnote 156: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. vi. c. ii. sect. 2.]

[Footnote 157: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. vi. c. ii. sect. 4.]

[Footnote 158: _Ibid._ b. v. c. iv. sect. 1.]

[Footnote 159: _De Stell. Mart._ p. iv. c. 51 (1609); Drinkwater's
_Kepler_, p. 33.]

[Footnote 160: Published 1604. _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. ix. c. ii.]

[Footnote 161: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. v. c. iv. sect. 1.]

[Footnote 162: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. vii. c. vi. sect 1.]

[Footnote 163: _De Stell. Mart._ p. 11. c. 19.]

[Footnote 164: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. ii. c. iv. sect. 6.]

[Footnote 165: _Ibid._ sect. 8.]

[Footnote 166: Montucla, i. 566.]

[Footnote 167: _De Augm._ lib. iv. c. 1.]




