CHAPTER XVIII.

NEWTON.


1. Bold and extensive as had been the anticipations of those whose
minds were excited by the promise of the new philosophy, the
discoveries of Newton respecting the mechanics of the universe,
brought into view truths more general and profound than those earlier
philosophers had hoped or imagined. With these vast accessions to human
knowledge, men's thoughts were again set in action; and philosophers
made earnest and various attempts to draw, from these extraordinary
advances in science, the true moral with regard to the conduct and
limits of the human understanding. They not only endeavoured to verify
and illustrate, by these new portions of science, what had recently
been taught concerning the methods of obtaining sound knowledge;
but they were also led to speculate concerning many new and more
interesting questions relating to this subject. They saw, for the first
time, or at least far more clearly than before, the distinction between
the inquiry into the _laws_, and into the _causes_ of phenomena. They
were tempted to ask, how far the discovery of causes could be carried;
and whether it would soon reach, or clearly point to, the ultimate
cause. They were driven to consider whether the properties which they
discovered were essential properties of all matter, necessarily and
primarily involved in its essence, though revealed to us at a late
period by their derivative effects. These questions even now agitate
the thoughts of speculative men. Some of them have already, in this
work, been discussed, or arranged in the places which our view of the
philosophy of these subjects assigns to them. But we must here notice
them as they occurred to Newton himself and his immediate followers.


2. The general Baconian notion of the method of philosophizing,--that
it consists in ascending from phenomena, through various stages of
generalization, to truths of the highest order,--received, in Newton's
discovery of the universal mutual gravitation of every particle of
matter, that pointed actual exemplification, for want of which it had
hitherto been almost overlooked, or at least very vaguely understood.
That great truth, and the steps by which it was established, afford,
even now, by far the best example of the successive ascent, from one
scientific truth to another,--of the repeated transition from less to
more general propositions,--which we can yet produce; as may be seen
in the Table which exhibits the relation of these steps in Book II. of
the _Novum Organon Renovatum_. Newton himself did not fail to recognize
this feature in the truths which he exhibited. Thus he says[217], "By
the way of Analysis we proceed from compounds to ingredients, as from
motions to the forces producing them; and in general, from effects
to their causes, and from particular causes to more general ones,
till the argument ends in the most general." And in like manner in
another Query[218]: "The main business of natural philosophy is to
argue from phenomena without feigning hypotheses, and to deduce causes
from effects, till we come to the First Cause, which is certainly not
mechanical."


3. Newton appears to have had a horror of the term _hypothesis_,
which probably arose from his acquaintance with the rash and illicit
general assumptions of Descartes. Thus in the passage just quoted,
after declaring that gravity must have some other cause than matter,
he says, "Later philosophers banish the consideration of such a cause
out of Natural Philosophy, feigning hypotheses for explaining all
things mechanically, and referring other causes to metaphysics." In the
celebrated Scholium at the end of the _Principia_ he says, "Whatever
is not deduced from the phenomena, is to be termed _hypothesis_;
and hypotheses, whether metaphysical or physical, or occult causes,
or mechanical, have no place in experimental philosophy. In this
philosophy, propositions are deduced from phenomena, and rendered
general by induction." And in another place, he arrests the course
of his own suggestions, saying, "Verum hypotheses non fingo." I have
already attempted to show that this is, in reality, a superstitious and
self-destructive spirit of speculation. Some hypotheses are necessary,
in order to connect the facts which are observed; some new principle
of unity must be applied to the phenomena, before induction can be
attempted. What is requisite is, that the hypothesis should be close
to the facts, and not connected with them by the intermediation of
other arbitrary and untried facts; and that the philosopher should be
ready to resign it as soon as the facts refuse to confirm it. We have
seen in the _History_[219], that it was by such a use of hypotheses,
that both Newton himself, and Kepler, on whose discoveries those of
Newton were based, made their discoveries. The suppositions of a force
tending to the sun and varying inversely as the square of the distance;
of a mutual force between all the bodies of the solar system; of the
force of each body arising from the attraction of all its parts; not to
mention others, also propounded by Newton,--were all hypotheses before
they were verified as theories. It is related that when Newton was
asked how it was that he saw into the laws of nature so much further
than other men, he replied, that if it were so, it resulted from his
keeping his thoughts steadily occupied upon the subject which was to be
thus penetrated. But what is this occupation of the thoughts, if it be
not the process of keeping the phenomena clearly in view, and trying,
one after another, all the plausible hypotheses which seem likely to
connect them, till at last the true law is discovered? Hypotheses so
used are a necessary element of discovery.


4. With regard to the details of the process of discovery, Newton
has given us some of his views, which are well worthy of notice, on
account of their coming from him; and which are real additions to the
philosophy of this subject. He speaks repeatedly of the _analysis_
and _synthesis_ of observed facts; and thus marks certain steps in
scientific research, very important, and not, I think, clearly pointed
out by his predecessors. Thus he says[220], "As in Mathematics, so
in Natural Philosophy, the investigation of difficult things by the
method of analysis ought ever to precede the method of composition.
This analysis consists in making experiments and observations, and
in drawing general conclusions from them by induction, and admitting
of no objections against the conclusions, but such as are taken from
experiments or other certain truths. And although the arguing from
experiments and observations by induction be no demonstration of
general conclusions; yet it is the best way of arguing which the nature
of things admits of, and may be looked upon as so much the stronger,
by how much the induction is more general." And he then observes, as
we have quoted above, that by this way of analysis we proceed from
compounds to ingredients, from motions to forces, from effects to
causes, and from less to more general causes. The _analysis_ here
spoken of includes the steps which in _our_ Novum Organon we call the
_decomposition_ of facts, the exact _observation_ and _measurement_
of the phenomena, and the _colligation_ of facts; the necessary
intermediate step, the _selection_ and _explication_ of the appropriate
conception, being passed over by Newton, in the fear of seeming to
encourage the fabrication of hypotheses. The _synthesis_ of which
Newton here speaks consists of those steps of _deductive reasoning_,
proceeding from the conception once assumed, which are requisite for
the comparison of its consequences with the observed facts. This, his
statement of the process of research, is, as far as it goes, perfectly
exact.


5. In speaking of Newton's precepts on the subject, we are naturally
led to the celebrated "Rules of Philosophizing," inserted in the second
edition of the _Principia_. These rules have generally been quoted and
commented on with an almost unquestioning reverence. Such Rules, coming
from such an authority, cannot fail to be highly interesting to us; but
at the same time, we cannot here evade the necessity of scrutinizing
their truth and value, according to the principles which our survey of
this subject has brought into view. The Rules stand at the beginning of
that part of the _Principia_ (the Third Book) in which he infers the
mutual gravitation of the sun, moon, planets, and all parts of each.
They are as follows:

"Rule I. We are not to admit other causes of natural things than such
as both are true, and suffice for explaining their phenomena.

"Rule II. Natural effects of the same kind are to be referred to the
same causes, as far as can be done.

"Rule III. The qualities of bodies which cannot be increased or
diminished in intensity, and which belong to all bodies in which we
can institute experiments, are to be held for qualities of all bodies
whatever.

"Rule IV. In experimental philosophy, propositions collected from
phenomena by induction, are to be held as true either accurately
or approximately, notwithstanding contrary hypotheses; till other
phenomena occur by which they may be rendered either more accurate or
liable to exception."

In considering these Rules, we cannot help remarking, in the first
place, that they are constructed with an intentional adaptation to
the case with which Newton has to deal,--the induction of Universal
Gravitation; and are intended to protect the reasonings before which
they stand. Thus the first Rule is designed to strengthen the inference
of gravitation from the celestial phenomena, by describing it as a
_vera causa_, a true cause; the second Rule countenances the doctrine
that the planetary motions are governed by mechanical forces, as
terrestrial motions are; the third rule appears intended to justify the
assertion of gravitation, as a _universal_ quality of bodies; and the
fourth contains, along with a general declaration of the authority of
induction, the author's usual protest against hypotheses, levelled at
the Cartesian hypotheses especially.


6. _Of the First Rule._--We, however, must consider these Rules in
their general application, in which point of view they have often been
referred to, and have had very great authority allowed them. One of the
points which has been most discussed, is that maxim which requires that
the causes of phenomena which we assign should be true causes, _veræ
causæ_. Of course this does not mean that they should be _the_ true
or right cause; for although it is the philosopher's aim to discover
such causes, he would be little aided in his search of truth, by being
told that it is truth which he is to seek. The rule has generally
been understood to prescribe that in attempting to account for any
class of phenomena, we must assume such causes only, as _from other
considerations_, we know to exist. Thus gravity, which was employed in
explaining the motions of the moon and planets, was already known to
exist and operate at the earth's surface.

Now the Rule thus interpreted is, I conceive, an injurious limitation
of the field of induction. For it forbids us to look for a cause,
except among the causes with which we are already familiar. But if we
follow this rule, how shall we ever become acquainted with any new
cause? Or how do we know that the phenomena which we contemplate do
really arise from some cause which we already truly know? If they do
not, must we still insist upon making them depend upon some of our
known causes; or must we abandon the study of them altogether? Must we,
for example, resolve to refer the action of radiant heat to the air,
rather than to any peculiar fluid or ether, because the former is known
to exist, the latter is merely assumed for the purpose of explanation?
But why should we do this? Why should we not endeavour to learn the
cause from the effects, even if it be not already known to us? We
can infer causes, which are new when we first become acquainted with
them. Chemical Forces, Optical Forces, Vital Forces, are known to us
only by chemical and optical and vital phenomena; must we, therefore,
reject their existence or abandon their study? They do not conform to
the double condition, that they shall be sufficient and _also_ real:
they are true, only so far as they explain the facts, but are they,
therefore, unintelligible or useless? Are they not highly important
and instructive subjects of speculation? And if the gravitation which
rules the motions of the planets had not existed at the earth's
surface;--if it had been there masked and concealed by the superior
effect of magnetism, or some other extraneous force,--might not Newton
still have inferred, from Kepler's laws, the tendency of the planets to
the sun; and from their perturbations, their tendency to each other?
His discoveries would still have been immense, if the cause which he
assigned had not been a _vera causa_ in the sense now contemplated.


7. But what do we mean by calling gravity a "true cause"? How do
we learn its reality? Of course, by its effects, with which we are
familiar;--by the weight and fall of bodies about us. These strike even
the most careless observer. No one can fail to see that all bodies
which we come in contact with are heavy;--that gravity acts in our
neighbourhood here upon earth. Hence, it may be said, this cause is at
any rate a true cause, whether it explains the celestial phenomena or
not.

But if this be what is meant by a _vera causa_, it appears strange to
require that in all cases we should find such a one to account for
all classes of phenomena. Is it reasonable or prudent to demand that
we shall reduce every set of phenomena, however minute, or abstruse,
or complicated, to causes so obviously existing as to strike the most
incurious, and to be familiar among men? How can we expect to find
_such veræ causæ_ for the delicate and recondite phenomena which
an exact and skilful observer detects in chemical, or optical, or
electrical experiments? The facts themselves are too fine for vulgar
apprehension; their relations, their symmetries, their measures require
a previous discipline to understand them. How then can their causes be
found among those agencies with which the common unscientific herd of
mankind are familiar? What likelihood is there that causes held for
real by such persons, shall explain facts which such persons cannot see
or cannot understand?

Again: if we give authority to such a rule, and require that the causes
by which science explains the facts which she notes and measures and
analyses, shall be causes which men, without any special study, have
already come to believe in, from the effects which they casually
see around them, what is this, except to make our first rude and
unscientific persuasions the criterion and test of our most laborious
and thoughtful inferences? What is it, but to give to ignorance and
thoughtlessness the right of pronouncing upon the convictions of
intense study and long-disciplined thought? "Electrical atmospheres"
surrounding electrized bodies, were at one time held to be a "true
cause" of the effects which such bodies produce. These atmospheres, it
was said, are obvious to the senses; we feel them like a spider's web
on the hands and face. Æpinus had to answer such persons, by proving
that there are no atmospheres, no effluvia, but only repulsion. He
thus, for a _true cause_ in the vulgar sense of the term, substituted
an _hypothesis_; yet who doubts that what he did was an advance in the
science of electricity?


8. Perhaps some persons may be disposed to say, that Newton's Rule
does not enjoin us to take those causes only which we clearly know, or
suppose we know, to be really existing and operating, but only causes
_of such kinds_ as we have already satisfied ourselves do exist in
nature. It may be urged that we are entitled to infer that the planets
are governed in their motions by an attractive force, because we find,
in the bodies immediately subject to observation and experiment,
that such motions are produced by attractive forces, for example, by
that of the earth. It may be said that we might on similar grounds
infer forces which unite particles of chemical compounds, or deflect
particles of light, because we see adhesion and deflection produced by
forces.

But it is easy to show that the Rule, thus laxly understood, loses all
significance. It prohibits no hypothesis; for all hypotheses suppose
causes _such as_, in some case or other, we have seen in action. No
one would think of explaining phenomena by referring them to forces
and agencies altogether different from any which are known; for on
this supposition, how could he pretend to reason about the effects
of the assumed causes, or undertake to prove that they would explain
the facts? Some close similarity with some known kind of cause is
requisite, in order that the hypothesis may have the appearance of
an explanation. No forces, or virtues, or sympathies, or fluids, or
ethers, would be excluded by _this_ interpretation of _veræ causæ_.
Least of all, would such an interpretation reject the Cartesian
hypothesis of vortices; which undoubtedly, as I conceive, Newton
intended to condemn by his Rule. For that _such_ a case as a whirling
fluid, carrying bodies round a centre in orbits, does occur, is too
obvious to require proof. Every eddying stream, or blast that twirls
the dust in the road, exhibits examples of such action, and would
justify the assumption of the vortices which carry the planets in their
courses; as indeed, without doubt, such facts suggested the Cartesian
explanation of the solar system. The vortices, in this mode of
considering the subject, are at the least as _real_ a cause of motion
as gravity itself.


9. Thus the Rule which enjoins "true causes," is nugatory, if we take
_veræ causæ_ in the extended sense of any causes of a real _kind_,
and unphilosophical, if we understand the term of _those very_ causes
which we familiarly suppose to exist. But it may be said that we are to
designate as "true causes," not those which are collected in a loose,
confused and precarious manner, by undisciplined minds, from obvious
phenomena, but those which are justly and rigorously inferred. Such
a cause, it may be added, gravity is; for the facts of the downward
pressures and downward motions of bodies at the earth's surface lead
us, by the plainest and strictest induction, to the assertion of such
a force. Now to this interpretation of the Rule there is no objection;
but then, it must be observed, that on this view, terrestrial gravity
is inferred by the same process as celestial gravitation; and the
cause is no more entitled to be called "true," because it is obtained
from the former, than because it is obtained from the latter class of
facts. We thus obtain an intelligible and tenable explanation of a
_vera causa_; but then, by this explanation, its _verity_ ceases to be
distinguishable from its other condition, that it "suffices for the
explanation of the phenomena." The assumption of universal gravitation
accounts for the fall of a stone; it also accounts for the revolutions
of the Moon or of Saturn; but since both these explanations are of the
same kind, we cannot with justice make the one a criterion or condition
of the admissibility of the other.


10. But still, the Rule, so understood, is so far from being unmeaning
or frivolous, that it expresses one of the most important tests which
can be given of a sound physical theory. It is true, the explanation of
one set of facts may be of the same nature as the explanation of the
other class: but then, that the cause explains _both_ classes, gives it
a very different claim upon our attention and assent from that which
it would have if it explained one class only. The very circumstance
that the two explanations coincide, is a most weighty presumption in
their favour. It is the testimony of two witnesses in behalf of the
hypothesis; and in proportion as these two witnesses are separate
and independent, the conviction produced by their agreement is more
and more complete. When the explanation of two kinds of phenomena,
distinct, and not apparently connected, leads us to the same cause,
such a coincidence does give a reality to the cause, which it has
not while it merely accounts for those appearances which suggested
the supposition. This coincidence of propositions inferred from
separate classes of facts, is exactly what we noticed in the _Novum
Organon Renovatum_ (b. ii. c. 5, sect. 3), as one of the most decisive
characteristics of a true theory, under the name of _Consilience of
Inductions_.

That Newton's First Rule of Philosophizing, so understood, authorizes
the inferences which he himself made, is really the ground on which
they are so firmly believed by philosophers. Thus when the doctrine
of a gravity varying inversely as the square of the distance from
the body, accounted at the same time for the relations of times and
distances in the planetary orbits and for the amount of the moon's
deflection from the tangent of her orbit, such a doctrine became most
convincing: or again, when the doctrine of the universal gravitation of
all parts of matter, which explained so admirably the inequalities of
the moon's motions, also gave a satisfactory account of a phenomenon
utterly different, the precession of the equinoxes. And of the same
kind is the evidence in favour of the undulatory theory of light, when
the assumption of the length of an undulation, to which we are led by
the colours of thin plates, is found to be identical with that length
which explains the phenomena of diffraction; or when the hypothesis of
transverse vibrations, suggested by the facts of polarization, explains
also the laws of double refraction. When such a convergence of two
trains of induction points to the same spot, we can no longer suspect
that we are wrong. Such an accumulation of proof really persuades us
that we have to do with a _vera causa_. And if this kind of proof be
multiplied;--if we again find other facts of a sort uncontemplated in
framing our hypothesis, but yet clearly accounted for when we have
adopted the supposition;--we are still further confirmed in our belief;
and by such accumulation of proof we may be so far satisfied, as to
believe without conceiving it possible to doubt. In this case, when the
validity of the opinion adopted by us has been repeatedly confirmed by
its sufficiency in unforeseen cases, so that all doubt is removed and
forgotten, the theoretical cause takes its place among the realities
of the world, and becomes _a true cause_.


11. Newton's Rule then, to avoid mistakes, might be thus expressed:
That "we may, provisorily, assume such hypothetical cause as will
account for any given class of natural phenomena; but that when two
different classes of facts lead us to the same hypothesis, we may hold
it to be a _true cause_." And this Rule will rarely or never mislead
us. There are no instances, in which a doctrine recommended in this
manner has afterwards been discovered to be false. There have been
hypotheses which have explained many phenomena, and kept their ground
long, and have afterwards been rejected. But these have been hypotheses
which explained only one class of phenomena; and their fall took place
when another kind of facts was examined and brought into conflict with
the former. Thus the system of eccentrics and epicycles accounted
for all the observed _motions_ of the planets, and was the means of
expressing and transmitting all astronomical knowledge for two thousand
years. But then, how was it overthrown? By considering the _distances_
as well as motions of the heavenly bodies. Here was a second class of
facts; and when the system was adjusted so as to agree with the one
class, it was at variance with the other. These cycles and epicycles
could not be true, because they could not be made a just representation
of the facts. But if the measures of distance as well as of position
had conspired in pointing out the cycles and epicycles, as the paths of
the planets, the paths so determined could not have been otherwise than
their real paths; and the epicyclical theory would have been, at least
geometrically, true.


12. _Of the Second Rule._--Newton's Second Rule directs that "natural
events of the _same kind_ are to be referred to the _same causes_, so
far as can be done." Such a precept at first appears to help us but
little; for all systems, however little solid, profess to conform to
such a rule. When any theorist undertakes to explain a class of facts,
he assigns causes which, according to him, will by their natural
action, as seen in other cases, produce the effects in question. The
events which he accounts for by his hypothetical cause, are, he holds,
of the same kind as those which such a cause is known to produce.
Kepler, in ascribing the planetary motions to magnetism, Descartes, in
explaining them by means of vortices, held that they were referring
celestial motions to the causes which give rise to terrestrial motions
of the same kind. The question is, _Are_ the effects of the same kind?
This once settled, there will be no question about the propriety of
assigning them to the same cause. But the difficulty is, to determine
_when_ events are of the same kind. Are the motions of the planets of
the same kind with the motion of a body moving freely in a curvilinear
path, or do they not rather resemble the motion of a floating body
swept round by a whirling current? The Newtonian and the Cartesian
answered this question differently. How then can we apply this Rule
with any advantage?


13. To this we reply, that there is no way of escaping this uncertainty
and ambiguity, but by obtaining a clear possession of the ideas which
our hypothesis involves, and by reasoning rigorously from them. Newton
asserts that the planets move in free paths, acted on by certain
forces. The most exact calculation gives the closest agreement of
the results of this hypothesis with the facts. Descartes asserts
that the planets are carried round by a fluid. The more rigorously
the conceptions of force and the laws of motion are applied to this
hypothesis, the more signal is its failure in reconciling the facts
to one another. Without such calculation, we can come to no decision
between the two hypotheses. If the Newtonian hold that the motions
of the planets are _evidently_ of the _same kind_ as those of a body
describing a curve in free space, and therefore, like that, to be
explained by a force acting upon the body; the Cartesian denies that
the planets do move in free space. They are, he maintains, immersed
in a plenum. It is only when it appears that comets pass through this
plenum in all directions with no impediment, and that no possible form
and motion of its whirlpools can explain the forces and motions which
are observed in the solar system, that he is compelled to allow the
Newtonian's classification of events of the _same kind_.

Thus it does not appear that this Rule of Newton can be interpreted in
any distinct and positive manner, otherwise than as enjoining that, in
the task of induction, we employ clear ideas, rigorous reasoning, and
close and fair comparison of the results of the hypothesis with the
facts. These are, no doubt, important and fundamental conditions of a
just induction; but in this injunction we find no peculiar or technical
criterion by which we may satisfy ourselves that we are right, or
detect our errors. Still, of such general prudential rules, none can be
more wise than one which thus, in the task of connecting facts by means
of ideas, recommends that the ideas be clear, the facts, correct, and
the chain of reasoning which connects them, without a flaw.


14. _Of the Third Rule._--The Third Rule, that "qualities which are
observed without exception be held to be universal," as I have already
said, seems to be intended to authorize the assertion of gravitation
as a universal attribute of matter. We formerly stated, in treating of
Mechanical Ideas[221], that this application of such a Rule appears
to be a mode of reasoning far from conclusive. The assertion of the
universality of any property of bodies must be grounded upon the
reason of the case, and not upon any arbitrary maxim. Is it intended
by this Rule to prohibit any further examination how far gravity is
an original property of matter, and how far it may be resolved into
the result of other agencies? We know perfectly well that this was not
Newton's intention; since the cause of gravity was a point which he
proposed to himself as a subject of inquiry. It would certainly be very
unphilosophical to pretend, by this Rule of Philosophizing, to prejudge
the question of such hypotheses as that of Mosotti, That gravity is
the excess of the electrical attraction over electrical repulsion, and
yet to adopt this hypothesis, would be to suppose electrical forces
more truly universal than gravity; for according to the hypothesis,
gravity, being the inequality of the attraction and repulsion, is only
an accidental and partial relation of these forces. Nor would it be
allowable to urge this Rule as a reason of assuming that double stars
are attracted to each other by a force varying according to the inverse
square of the distance; without examining, as Herschel and others have
done, the orbits which they really describe. But if the Rule is not
available in such cases, what is its real value and authority? and in
what cases are they exemplified?


15. In a former work[222], it was shown that the fundamental laws of
motion, and the properties of matter which these involve, are, after a
full consideration of the subject, unavoidably assumed as universally
true. It was further shown, that although our knowledge of these laws
and properties be gathered from experience, we are strongly impelled,
(some philosophers think, authorized,) to look upon these as not only
universally, but necessarily true. It was also stated, that the law
of gravitation, though its universality may be deemed probable, does
not apparently involve the same necessity as the fundamental laws of
motion. But it was pointed out that these are some of the most abstruse
and difficult questions of the whole of philosophy; involving the
profound, perhaps insoluble, problem of the identity or diversity of
Ideas and Things. It cannot, therefore, be deemed philosophical to
cut these Gordian knots by peremptory maxims, which encourage us to
decide without rendering a reason. Moreover, it appears clear that
the reason which is rendered for this Rule by the Newtonians is quite
untenable; namely, that we know extension, hardness, and inertia, to
be universal qualities of bodies by experience alone, and that we have
the same evidence of experience for the universality of gravitation.
We have already observed that we cannot, with any propriety, say that
we _find_ by experience all bodies are extended. This could not be a
just assertion, unless we conceive the possibility of our finding the
contrary. But who can conceive our finding by experience some bodies
which are not extended? It appears, then, that the reason given for
the Third Rule of Newton involves a mistake respecting the nature and
authority of experience. And the Rule itself cannot be applied without
attempting to decide, by the casual limits of observation, questions
which necessarily depend upon the relations of ideas.


16. _Of the Fourth Rule._--Newton's Fourth Rule is, that "Propositions
collected from phenomena by induction, shall be held to be true,
notwithstanding contrary hypotheses; but shall be liable to be rendered
more accurate, or to have their exceptions pointed out, by additional
study of phenomena." This Rule contains little more than a general
assertion of the authority of induction, accompanied by Newton's usual
protest against hypotheses.

The really valuable part of the Fourth Rule is that which implies
that a constant verification, and, if necessary, rectification,
of truths discovered by induction, should go on in the scientific
world. Even when the law is, or appears to be, most certainly exact
and universal, it should be constantly exhibited to us afresh in the
form of experience and observation. This is necessary, in order to
discover exceptions and modifications if such exist: and if the law be
rigorously true, the contemplation of it, as exemplified in the world
of phenomena, will best give us that clear apprehension of its bearings
which may lead us to see the ground of its truth.

The concluding clause of this Fourth Rule appears, at first, to
imply that all inductive propositions are to be considered as merely
provisional and limited, and never secure from exception. But to judge
thus would be to underrate the stability and generality of scientific
truths; for what man of science can suppose that we shall hereafter
discover exceptions to the universal gravitation of all parts of the
solar system? And it is plain that the author did not intend the
restriction to be applied so rigorously; for in the Third Rule, as
we have just seen, he authorizes us to infer universal properties of
matter from observation, and carries the liberty of inductive inference
to its full extent. The Third Rule appears to encourage us to assert a
law to be universal, even in cases in which it has not been tried; the
Fourth Rule seems to warn us that the law may be inaccurate, even in
cases in which it has been tried. Nor is either of these suggestions
erroneous; but both the universality and the rigorous accuracy of our
laws are proved by reference to Ideas rather than to Experience; a
truth, which, perhaps, the philosophers of Newton's time were somewhat
disposed to overlook.


17. The disposition to ascribe all our knowledge to Experience, appears
in Newton and the Newtonians by other indications; for instance, it
is seen in their extreme dislike to the ancient expressions by which
the principles and causes of phenomena were described, as the _occult
causes_ of the Schoolmen, and the _forms_ of the Aristotelians, which
had been adopted by Bacon. Newton says[223], that the particles of
matter not only possess inertia, but also active principles, as
gravity, fermentation, cohesion; he adds, "These principles I consider
not as Occult Qualities, supposed to result from the Specific Forms of
things, but as General Laws of Nature, by which the things themselves
are formed: their truth appearing to us by phenomena, though their
causes be not yet discovered. For these are manifest qualities, and
their causes only are occult. And the Aristotelians gave the name of
_occult qualities_, not to manifest qualities, but to such qualities
only as they supposed to lie hid in bodies, and to the unknown causes
of manifest effects: such as would be the causes of gravity, and of
magnetick and electrick attractions, and of fermentations, if we
should suppose that these forces or actions arose from qualities
unknown to us, and incapable of being discovered and made manifest.
Such occult qualities put a stop to the improvement of Natural
Philosophy, and therefore of late years have been rejected. To tell
us that every species of things is endowed with an occult specific
quality by which it acts and produces manifest effects, is to tell us
nothing: but to derive two or three general principles of motion from
phenomena, and afterwards to tell us how the properties and actions
of all corporeal things follow from these manifest principles, would
be a great step in philosophy, though the causes of those principles
were not yet discovered: and therefore I scruple not to propose the
principles of motion above maintained, they being of very general
extent, and leave their causes to be found out."


18. All that is here said is highly philosophical and valuable; but we
may observe that the investigation of _specific forms_ in the sense in
which some writers had used the phrase, was by no means a frivolous
or unmeaning object of inquiry. Bacon and others had used _form_ as
equivalent to _law_[224]. If we could ascertain that arrangement of
the particles of a crystal from which its external crystalline form
and other properties arise, this arrangement would be the _internal
form_ of the crystal. If the undulatory theory be true, the _form_ of
light is transverse vibrations: if the emission theory be maintained,
the _form_ of light is particles moving in straight lines, and
deflected by various forces. Both the terms, _form_ and _law_, imply
an ideal connexion of sensible phenomena; form supposes matter which
is moulded to the form; law supposes objects which are governed by
the law. The former term refers more precisely to existences, the
latter to occurrences. The latter term is now the more familiar, and
is, perhaps, the better metaphor: but the former also contains the
essential antithesis which belongs to the subject, and might be used in
expressing the same conclusions.

But occult causes, employed in the way in which Newton describes,
had certainly been very prejudicial to the progress of knowledge, by
stopping inquiry with a mere word. The absurdity of such pretended
explanations had not escaped ridicule. The pretended physician in the
comedy gives an example of an occult cause or virtue.

        Mihi demandatur
        A doctissimo Doctore
      _Quare_ Opium facit dormire:
        Et ego respondeo,
        _Quia_ est in eo
        _Virtus dormitiva_,
    Cujus natura est sensus assoupire.


19. But the most valuable part of the view presented to us in
the quotation just given from Newton is the distinct separation,
already noticed as peculiarly brought into prominence by him, of the
determination of the _laws_ of phenomena, and the investigation of
their _causes_. The maxim, that the former inquiry must precede the
latter, and that if the general laws of facts be discovered, the result
is highly valuable, although the causes remain unknown, is extremely
important; and had not, I think, ever been so strongly and clearly
stated, till Newton both repeatedly promulgated the precept, and added
to it the weight of the most striking examples.

We have seen that Newton, along with views the most just and important
concerning the nature and methods of science, had something of the
tendency, prevalent in his time, to suspect or reject, at least
speculatively, all elements of knowledge except observation. This
tendency was, however, in him so corrected and restrained by his own
wonderful sagacity and mathematical habits, that it scarcely led to
any opinion which we might not safely adopt. But we must now consider
the cases in which this tendency operated in a more unbalanced manner,
and led to the assertion of doctrines which, if consistently followed,
would destroy the very foundations of all general and certain knowledge.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 217: _Optics_, qu. 31, near the end.]

[Footnote 218: Qu. 28.]

[Footnote 219: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. v. and b. vii.]

[Footnote 220: _Optics_, qu. 31.]

[Footnote 221: _History of Ideas_, b. iii. c. x.]

[Footnote 222: _Ibid._ b. iii. c. ix. x. xi.]

[Footnote 223: _Opticks_, qu. 31.]

[Footnote 224: _Nov. Org._ l. ii. Aph. 2. "Licet enim in natura nihil
existet præter corpora individua, edentia actus puros individuos
ex lege; in doctrinis tamen illa ipsa lex, ejusque inquisitio, et
inventio, et explicatio, pro fundamento est tam ad sciendum quam ad
operandum. Eam autem _legem_, ejusque _paragraphos, formarum_ nomine
intelligimus; præsertim cum hoc vocabulum invaluerit, et familiariter
occurrat."

Aph. 17. "Eadem res est _forma_ calidi vel _forma_ luminis, et _lex_
calidi aut _lex_ luminis."]




