CHAPTER II.

PLATO.


There would be small advantage in beginning our examination earlier
than the period of the Socratic School at Athens; for although the
spirit of inquiry on such subjects had awakened in Greece at an earlier
period, and although the peculiar aptitude of the Grecian mind for
such researches had shown itself repeatedly in subtle distinctions
and acute reasonings, all the positive results of these early efforts
were contained in a more definite form in the reasonings of the
Platonic age. Before that time, the Greeks did not possess plain and
familiar examples of exact knowledge, such as the truths of Arithmetic,
Geometry, Astronomy and Optics became in the school of Plato; nor
were the antitheses of which we spoke above, so distinctly and fully
unfolded as we find them in Plato's works.

The question which hinges upon one of these antitheses, occupies
a prominent place in several of the Platonic dialogues; namely,
whether our knowledge be obtained by means of Sensation or of Ideas.
One of the doctrines which Plato most earnestly inculcated upon his
countrymen was, that we do not _know_ concerning sensible objects, but
concerning ideas. The first attempts of the Greeks at metaphysical
analysis had given rise to a school which maintained that material
objects are the only realities. In opposition to this, arose another
school, which taught that material objects have no permanent reality,
but are ever waxing and waning, constantly changing their substance.
"And hence," as Aristotle says[1], "arose the doctrine of ideas which
the Platonists held. For they assented to the opinion of Heraclitus,
that all sensible objects are in a constant state of flux. So that if
there is to be any knowledge and science, it must be concerning some
permanent natures, different from the sensible natures of objects;
for there can be no permanent science respecting that which is
perpetually changing. It happened that Socrates turned his speculations
to the moral virtues, and was the first philosopher who endeavoured
to give universal definitions of such matters. He wished to reason
systematically, and therefore he tried to establish definitions, for
definitions are the basis of systematic reasoning. There are two things
which may justly be looked upon as steps in philosophy due to Socrates;
inductive reasonings, and universal definitions;--both of them steps
which belong to the foundations of science. Socrates, however, did not
make universals, or definitions separable from the objects; but his
followers separated them, and these essences they termed _Ideas_." And
the same account is given by other writers[2]. "Some existences are
sensible, some intelligible: and according to Plato, if we wish to
understand the principles of things, we must first separate the _ideas_
from the _things_, such as the ideas of Similarity, Unity, Number,
Magnitude, Position, Motion: second, that we must assume an absolute
Fair, Good, Just, and the like: third, that we must consider the ideas
of relation, as Knowledge, Power: recollecting that the Things which
we perceive have this or that appellation applied to them because
they partake of this or that Idea; those things being _just_ which
participate in the idea of The Just, those being _beautiful_, which
contain the idea of The Beautiful." And many of the arguments by which
this doctrine was maintained are to be found in the Platonic dialogues.
Thus the opinion that true knowledge consists in sensation, which had
been asserted by Protagoras and others, is refuted in the _Theætetus_:
and, we may add, so victoriously refuted, that the arguments there
put forth have ever since exercised a strong influence upon the
speculative world. It may be remarked that in the minds of Plato and
of those who have since pursued the same paths of speculation, the
interest of such discussions as those we are now referring to, was by
no means limited to their bearing upon mere theory; but was closely
connected with those great questions of morals which have always a
practical import. Those who asserted that the only foundation of
knowledge was sensation, asserted also that the only foundation of
virtue was the desire of pleasure. And in Plato, the metaphysical
part of the disquisitions concerning knowledge in general, though
independent in its principles, always seems to be subordinate in its
purpose to the questions concerning the knowledge of our duty.

Since Plato thus looked upon the Ideas which were involved in each
department of knowledge as forming its only essential part, it was
natural that he should look upon the study of Ideas as the true mode
of pursuing knowledge. This he himself describes in the _Philebus_[3].
"The best way of arriving at truth is not very difficult to point out,
but most hard to pursue. All the arts which have ever been discovered,
were revealed in this manner. It is a gift of the gods to man, which,
as I conceive, they sent down by some Prometheus, as by Prometheus
they gave us the light of fire; and the ancients, more clear-sighted
than we, and less removed from the gods, handed down this traditionary
doctrine: that whatever is said to be, comes of One and of Many, and
comprehends in itself the Finite and the Infinite in coalition
(being One Kind, and consisting of Infinite Individuals). And this
being the state of things, we must, in each case, endeavour to seize
the One Idea (the idea of the Kind) as the chief point; for we shall
find that it is there. And when we have seized this one thing, we may
then consider how it comprehends in itself two, or three, or any other
number; and, again, examine each of these ramifications separately;
till at last we perceive, not only that One is at the same time One
and Many, but also _how many_. And when we have thus filled up the
interval between the Infinite and the One, we may consider that we
have done with each one. The gods then, as I have said, taught us by
tradition thus to contemplate, and to learn, and to teach one another.
But the philosophers of the present day seize upon the One, at hazard,
too soon or too late, and then immediately snatch at the Infinite; but
the intermediate steps escape them, in which resides the distinction
between a truly logical and a mere disputatious discussion."

It would seem that what the author here describes as the most perfect
form of exposition, is that which refers each object to its place in
a classification containing a complete series of subordinations, and
which gives a definition of each class. We have repeatedly remarked
that, in sciences of classification, each new definition which gives a
tenable and distinct separation of classes is an important advance in
our knowledge; but that such definitions are rather the last than the
first step in each advance. In the progress of real knowledge, these
definitions are always the results of a laborious study of individual
cases, and are never arrived at by a pure effort of thought, which is
what Plato appears to have imagined as the true mode of philosophizing.
And still less do the advances of other sciences consist in seizing
at once upon the highest generality, and filling in afterwards all
the intermediate steps between that and the special instances. On the
contrary, as we have seen, the ascents from particular to general are
all successive; and each step of this ascent requires time, and labour,
and a patient examination of actual facts and objects.

It would, of course, be absurd to blame Plato for having inadequate
views of the nature of progressive knowledge, at the time when
knowledge could hardly be said to have begun its progress. But we
already find in his speculations, as appears in the passages just
quoted from his writings, several points brought into view which will
require our continued attention as we proceed. In overlooking the
necessity of a gradual and successive advance from the less general to
the more general truths, Plato shared in a dimness of vision[4] which
prevailed among philosophers to the time of Francis Bacon. In thinking
too slightly of the study of actual nature, he manifested a bias from
which the human intellect freed itself in the vigorous struggles which
terminated the dark ages. In pointing out that all knowledge implies
a unity of what we observe as manifold, which unity is given by the
mind, Plato taught a lesson which has of late been too obscurely
acknowledged, the recoil by which men repaired their long neglect of
facts having carried them for a while so far as to think that facts
were the whole of our knowledge. And in analysing this principle of
Unity, by which we thus connect sensible things, into various Ideas,
such as Number, Magnitude, Position, Motion, he made a highly important
step, which it has been the business of philosophers in succeeding
times to complete and to follow out.

But the efficacy of Plato's speculations in their bearing upon physical
science, and upon theory in general, was much weakened by the confusion
of practical with theoretical knowledge, which arose from the ethical
propensities of the Socratic school. In the Platonic Dialogues, Art and
Science are constantly spoken of indiscriminately. The skill possessed
by the Painter, the Architect, the Shoemaker, is considered as a just
example of human science, no less than the knowledge which the geometer
or the astronomer possesses of the theoretical truths with which he
is conversant. Not only so; but traditionary and mythological tales,
mystical imaginations and fantastical etymologies, are mixed up, as
no less choice ingredients, with the most acute logical analyses, and
the most exact conduct of metaphysical controversies. There is no
distinction made between the knowledge possessed by the theoretical
psychologist and the physician, the philosophical teacher of morals
and the legislator or the administrator of law. This, indeed, is the
less to be wondered at, since even in our own time the same confusion
is very commonly made by persons not otherwise ignorant or uncultured.

On the other hand, we may remark finally, that Plato's admiration of
Ideas was not a barren imagination, even so far as regarded physical
science. For, as we have seen[5], he had a very important share in
the introduction of the theory of epicycles, having been the first to
propose to astronomers in a distinct form, the problem of which that
theory was the solution; namely, "to explain the celestial phenomena
by the combination of equable circular motions." This demand of an
ideal hypothesis which should exactly express the phenomena (as well
as they could then be observed), and from which, by the interposition
of suitable steps, all special cases might be deduced, falls in well
with those views respecting the proper mode of seeking knowledge
which we have quoted from the _Philebus_. And the Idea which could
thus represent and replace all the particular Facts, being not only
sought but found, we may readily suppose that the philosopher was, by
this event, strongly confirmed in his persuasion that such an Idea
was indeed what the inquirer ought to seek. In this conviction all
his genuine followers up to modern times have participated; and thus,
though they have avoided the error of those who hold that facts alone
are valuable as the elements of our knowledge, they have frequently run
into the opposite error of too much despising and neglecting facts, and
of thinking that the business of the inquirer after truth was only a
profound and constant contemplation of the conceptions of his own mind.
But of this hereafter.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: _Metaph._ xii. 4.]

[Footnote 2: Diog. Laert. _Vit. Plat._]

[Footnote 3: T. ii. p. 16, c, d. ed. Bekker, t. v. p. 437.]

[Footnote 4: See the remarks on this phrase in the next chapter.]

[Footnote 5: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. iii. c. ii.]




