CHAPTER XVI.

ADDITIONAL REMARKS ON FRANCIS BACON.


Francis Bacon and his works have recently been discussed and examined
by various writers in France and Germany as well as England[197]. Not
to mention smaller essays, M. Bouillet has published a valuable edition
of his philosophical works; Count Joseph de Maistre wrote a severe
critique of his philosophy, which has been published since the death of
the author; M. Charles Remusat has written a lucid and discriminating
Essay on the subject; and in England we have had a new edition of the
works published, with a careful and thoughtful examination of the
philosophy which they contain, written by one of the editors: a person
especially fitted for such an examination by an acute intellect, great
acquaintance with philosophical literature, and a wide knowledge of
modern science. Robert Leslie Ellis, the editor of whom I speak, died
during the publication of the edition, and before he had done full
justice to his powers; but he had already written various dissertations
on Bacon's philosophy, which accompany the different Treatises in the
new edition.

Mr. Ellis has given a more precise view than any of his predecessors
had done of the nature of Bacon's induction and of his philosophy of
discovery. Bacon's object was to discover the 'natures' or essences
of things, in order that he might reproduce these natures or essences
at will; he conceived that these natures were limited in number, and
manifested in various combinations in the bodies which exist in the
universe; so that by accumulating observations of them in a multitude
of cases, we may learn by induction in what they do and in what
they do not consist; the _Induction_ which is to be used for this
purpose consists in a great measure of _excluding_ the cases which
do not exhibit the 'nature' in question; and by such exclusion, duly
repeated, we have at last left in our hands the elements of which the
proposed nature consists. And the knowledge which is thus obtained may
be applied to reproduce the things so analysed. As exhibiting this
view clearly we may take a passage in the _Sylva Sylvarum_: "Gold has
these natures: greatness of weight, closeness of parts, fixation,
pliantness or softness, immunity from rust, colour or tincture of
yellow. Therefore the sure way, though most about, to make gold, is to
know the causes of the several natures before rehearsed, and the axioms
concerning the same. For if a man can make a metal, that hath all these
properties, let men dispute whether it be gold or no." He means that
however they dispute, it is gold for all practical purposes.

For such an Induction as this, Bacon claims the merit both of
being certain, and of being nearly independent of the ingenuity of
the inquirer. It is a method which enables all men to make exact
discoveries, as a pair of compasses enables all men to draw an exact
circle.

Now it is necessary for us, who are exploring the progress of the true
philosophy of discovery, to say plainly that this part of Bacon's
speculation is erroneous and valueless. No scientific discovery ever
has been made in this way. Men have not obtained truths concerning
the natural world by seeking for the natures of things, and by
extracting them from phenomena by rejecting the cases in which they
were not. On the contrary, they have begun by ascertaining the _laws
of the phenomena_; and have then gone on, not by a mechanical method
which levels all intellect, but by special efforts of the brightest
intellects to catch hold of the ideas by which these laws of phenomena
might be interpreted and expressed in more general terms. These two
steps, the finding the laws of phenomena, and finding the conceptions
by which those laws can be expressed, are really the course of
discovery, as the history of science exhibits it to us.

Bacon, therefore, according to the view now presented, was wrong both
as to his object and as to his method. He was wrong in taking for his
object the essences of things,--the causes of abstract properties:
for these man cannot, or can very rarely discover; and all Bacon's
ingenuity in enumerating and classifying these essences and abstract
properties has led, and could lead, to no result. The vast results
of modern science have been obtained, not by seeking and finding the
essences of things, but by exploring the laws of phenomena and the
causes of those laws.

And Bacon's method, as well as his object, is vitiated by a pervading
error:--the error of supposing that to be done by method which must
be done by mind;--that to be done by rule which must be done by a
flight beyond rule;--that to be mainly negative which is eminently
positive;--that to depend on other men which must depend on the
discoverer himself;--that to be mere prose which must have a dash of
poetry;--that to be a work of mere labour which must be also a work of
genius.

Mr. Ellis has seen very clearly and explained very candidly that this
method thus recommended by Bacon has not led to discovery. "It is," he
says, "neither to the technical part of his method nor to the details
of his view of the nature and progress of science, that his great fame
is justly owing. His merits are of another kind. They belong to the
spirit rather than to the positive precepts of his philosophy."

As the reader of the last chapter will see, this amounts to much the
same as the account which I had given of the positive results of
Bacon's method, and the real value of that portion of his philosophy
which he himself valued most. But still there remain, as I have also
noted, portions of Bacon's speculations which have a great and enduring
value, namely, his doctrine that Science is the Interpretation of
Nature, his distinction of this Interpretation of Nature from the
vicious and premature Anticipation of Nature which had generally
prevailed till then; and the recommendation of a graduated and
successive induction by which alone the highest and most general
truths were to be reached. These are points which he urges with great
clearness and with great earnestness; and these are important points in
the true philosophy of discovery.

I may add that Mr. Ellis agrees with me in noting the invention of
the conception by which the laws of phenomena are interpreted as
something additional to _Induction_, both in the common and in the
Baconian sense of the word. He says (General Preface, Art. 9), "In
all cases this process [scientific discovery] involves an element to
which nothing corresponds in the Tables of Comparence and Exclusion;
namely the application to the facts of a _principle_ of arrangement,
an _idea_, existing in the mind of the discoverer antecedently to the
act of induction." It may be said that this principle or idea is aimed
at in the Baconian analysis. "And this is in one sense true: but it
must be added, that this _analysis_, if it be thought right to call it
so, is of the essence of the discovery which results from it. To take
for granted that it has been already effected is simply a _petitio
principii_. In most cases the mere act of induction follows as a matter
of course as soon as the _appropriate idea_ has been introduced." And
as an example he takes Kepler's invention of the ellipse, as the idea
by which Mars's motions could be reduced to law; making the same use of
this example which we have repeatedly made of it.

Mr. Ellis may at first sight appear to express himself more favourably
than I have done, with regard to the value of Bacon's _Inquisitio in
Naturam Calidi_ in the Second Book of the _Novum Organon_. He says of
one part of it[198]: "Bacon here anticipates not merely the essential
character of the most recent theory of heat, but also the kind of
evidence by which it has been established.... The merit of having
perceived the true significance of the production of heat by friction
belongs of right to Bacon."

But notwithstanding this, Mr. Ellis's general judgment on this specimen
of Bacon's application of his own method does not differ essentially
from mine. He examines the _Inquisitio_ at some length, and finally
says: "If it were affirmed that Bacon, after having had a glimpse of
the truth suggested by some obvious phenomena, had then recourse, as he
himself expresses it, to certain 'differentiæ inanes' in order to save
the phenomena, I think it would be hard to dispute the truth of the
censure."


Another of the Editors of this edition (Mr. Spedding) fixes his
attention upon another of the features of the method of discovery
proposed by Bacon, and is disposed to think that the proposed method
has never yet had justice done it, because it has not been tried in the
way and on the scale that Bacon proposes[199]. Bacon recommended that
a great collection of facts should be at once made and accumulated,
regarding every branch of human knowledge; and conceived that, when
this had been done by common observers, philosophers might extract
scientific truths from this mass of facts by the application of a right
method. This separation of the offices of the observer and discoverer,
Mr. Spedding thinks is shown to be possible by such practical examples
as meteorological observations, made by ordinary observers, and
reduced to tables and laws by a central calculator; by hydrographical
observations made by ships provided with proper instructions, and
reduced to general laws by the man of science in his study; by
magnetical observations made by many persons in every part of the
world, and reduced into subservience to theory by mathematicians at
home.

And to this our reply will be, in the terms which the history of
all the Sciences has taught us, that such methods of procedure as
this do not belong to the _Epoch of Discovery_, but to the Period of
_verification_ and _application_ of the discovery which follows. When a
theory has been established in its general form, our knowledge of the
distribution of its phenomena in time and space can be much promoted
by ordinary observers scattered over the earth, and succeeding each
other in time, provided they are furnished with instruments and methods
of observation, duly constructed on the principles of science; but
such observers cannot in any degree supersede the discoverer who is
first to establish the theory, and to introduce into the facts a new
principle of order. When the laws of nature have been caught sight
of, much may be done, even by ordinary observers, in verifying and
exactly determining them; but when a real discovery is to be made,
this separation of the observer and the theorist is not possible. In
those cases, the questioning temper, the busy suggestive mind, is
needed at every step, to direct the operating hand or the open gaze.
No possible accumulation of facts about mixture and heat, collected in
the way of blind trial, could have led to the doctrines of chemistry,
or crystallography, or the atomic theory, or voltaic and chemical
and magnetic polarity, or physiology, or any other science. Indeed
not only is an existing theory requisite to supply the observer with
instruments and methods, but without theory he cannot even describe his
observations. He says that he mixes an acid and an alkali; but what
is an acid? What is an alkali? How does he know them? He classifies
crystals according to their forms: but till he has learnt what is
distinctive in the form of a crystal, he cannot distinguish a cube
from a square prism, even if he had a goniometer and could use it. And
the like impossibility hangs over all the other subjects. To report
facts for scientific purposes without some aid from theory, is not only
useless, but impossible.

When Mr. Spedding says, "I could wish that men of science would apply
themselves earnestly to the solution of this practical problem:
What measures are to be taken in order that the greatest variety of
judicious observations of nature all over the world may be carried on
in concert upon a common plan and brought to a common centre:"--he is
urging upon men of science to do what they have always done, so far
as they have had any power, and in proportion as the state of science
rendered such a procedure possible and profitable to science. In
Astronomy, it has been done from the times of the Greeks and even of
the Chaldeans, having been begun _as soon as_ the heavens were reduced
to law at all. In meteorology, it has been done extensively, though to
little purpose, because the weather has _not yet_ been reduced to rule.
Men of science have shown how barometers, thermometers, hygrometers,
and the like, may be constructed; and these may be now read by any one
as easily as a clock; but of ten thousand meteorological registers
thus kept by ordinary observers, what good has come to science?
Again: The laws of the tides have been in a great measure determined
by observations in all parts of the globe, _because_ theory pointed
out what was to be observed. In like manner the facts of terrestrial
magnetism were ascertained with tolerable completeness by extended
observations, _then_, and then only, when a most recondite and profound
branch of mathematics had pointed out what was to be observed, and most
ingenious instruments had been devised by men of science for observing.
And even with these, it requires an education to use the instruments.
But in many cases no education in the use of instruments devised by
others can supersede the necessity of a theoretical and suggestive
spirit in the inquirer himself. He must devise his own instruments
and his own methods, if he is to make any discovery. What chemist, or
inquirer about polarities, or about optical laws yet undiscovered, can
make any progress by using another man's experiments and observations?
He must invent at every step of his observation; and the observer and
theorist can no more be dissevered, than the body and soul of the
inquirer.

That persons of moderate philosophical powers may, when duly
educated, make observations which may be used by greater discoverers
than themselves, is true. We have examples of such a subordination
of scientific offices in astronomy, in geology, and in many other
departments. But still, as I have said, a very considerable degree of
scientific education is needed even for the subordinate labourers in
science; and the more considerable in proportion as science advances
further and further; since every advance implies a knowledge of what
has already been done, and requires a new precision or generality in
the new points of inquiry.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 197: _Œuvres Philosophiques de Bacon, &c._ par M. N.
Bouillet, 3 Tomes.

_Examen de la Philosophie de Bacon_ (_Œuvres Posthumes_ du Comte J. de
Maistre).

_Bacon, sa Vie, son Temps, sa Philosophie_, par Charles de Remusat.

_Histoire de la Vie et des Ouvrages de François Bacon_, par J. B. de
Vaugelles.

_Franz Baco von Verulam_, von Kuno Fischer.

_The Works of Francis Bacon_, collected and edited by James Spedding,
Robert Leslie Ellis, and Douglas Denon Heath.]

[Footnote 198: Note to Aph. xviii.]

[Footnote 199: Pref. to the _Parasceue_, Vol. i. p. 382.]




