CHAPTER XIII.

THE THEORETICAL REFORMERS OF SCIENCE.


We have already seen that Patricius, about the middle of the sixteenth
century, announced his purpose of founding anew the whole fabric
of philosophy; but that, in executing this plan, he ran into wide
and baseless hypotheses, suggested by _à priori_ conceptions rather
than by external observation; and that he was further misled by
fanciful analogies resembling those which the Platonic mystics loved
to contemplate. The same time, and the period which followed it,
produced several other essays which were of the same nature, with the
exception of their being free from the peculiar tendencies of the
Platonic school: and these insurrections against the authority of
the established dogmas, although they did not directly substitute a
better positive system in the place of that which they assailed, shook
the authority of the Aristotelian system, and led to its overthrow;
which took place as soon as these theoretical reformers were aided by
practical reformers.


1. _Bernardinus Telesius._--Italy, always, in modern times, fertile in
the beginnings of new systems, was the soil on which these innovators
arose. The earliest and most conspicuous of them is Bernardinus
Telesius, who was born in 1508, at Cosenza, in the kingdom of Naples.
His studies, carried on with great zeal and ability, first at Milan
and then at Rome, made him well acquainted with the knowledge of
his times; but his own reflections convinced him that the basis of
science, as then received, was altogether erroneous; and led him to
attempt a reform, with which view, in 1565, he published, at Rome,
his work[108], "_Bernardinus Telesius, of Cosenza, on the Nature of
Things, according to principles of his own_." In the preface of this
work he gives a short account[109] of the train of reflection by which
he was led to put himself in opposition to the Aristotelian philosophy.
This kind of autobiography occurs not unfrequently in the writings of
theoretical reformers; and shows how livelily they felt the novelty of
their undertaking. After the storm and sack of Rome in 1527, Telesius
retired to Padua, as a peaceful seat of the muses; and there studied
philosophy and mathematics, with great zeal, under the direction of
Jerome Amalthæus and Frederic Delphinus. In these studies he made great
progress; and the knowledge which he thus acquired threw a new light
upon his view of the Aristotelian philosophy. He undertook a closer
examination of the Physical Doctrines of Aristotle; and as the result
of this, he was astonished how it could have been possible that so
many excellent men, so many nations, and even almost the whole human
race, should, for so long a time, have allowed themselves to be carried
away by a blind reverence for a teacher, who had committed errors so
numerous and grave as he perceived to exist in "the philosopher." Along
with this view of the insufficiency of the Aristotelian philosophy,
arose, at an early period, the thought of erecting a better system in
its place. With this purpose he left Padua, when he had received the
degree of Doctor, and went to Rome, where he was encouraged in his
design by the approval and friendly exhortations of distinguished men
of letters, amongst whom were Ubaldino Bandinelli and Giovanni della
Casa. From Rome he went to his native place, when the incidents and
occupations of a married life for a while interrupted his philosophical
project. But after his wife was dead, and his eldest son grown to
manhood, he resumed with ardour the scheme of his youth; again studied
the works of Aristotle and other philosophers, and composed and
published the first two books of his treatise. The opening to this
work sufficiently exhibits the spirit in which it was conceived. Its
object is stated in the title to be to show, that "the construction
of the world, the magnitude and nature of the bodies contained in
it, are not to be investigated by reasoning, which was done by the
ancients, but are to be apprehended by the senses, and collected from
the things themselves." And the Proem is in the same strain. "They who
before us have inquired concerning the construction of this world and
of the things which it contains, seem indeed to have prosecuted their
examination with protracted vigils and great labour, but _never to have
looked at it_." And thus, he observes, they found nothing but error.
This he ascribes to their presumption. "For, as it were, attempting
to rival God in wisdom, and venturing to seek for the principles and
causes of the world by the light of their own reason, and thinking they
had found what they had only invented, they made an arbitrary world of
their own." "_We_ then," he adds, "not relying on ourselves, and of a
duller intellect than they, propose to ourselves to turn our regards to
the world itself and its parts."

The execution of the work, however, by no means corresponds to the
announcement. The doctrines of Aristotle are indeed attacked; and the
objections to these, and to other received opinions, form a large
part of the work. But these objections are supported by _à priori_
reasoning, and not by experiments. And thus, rejecting the Aristotelian
physics, he proposes a system at least equally baseless; although, no
doubt, grateful to the author from its sweeping and apparently simple
character. He assumes three principles, Heat, Cold, and Matter: Heat
is the principle of motion, Cold of immobility, and Matter is the
corporeal substratum, in which these incorporeal and active principles
produce their effects. It is easy to imagine that, by combining and
separating these abstractions in various ways, a sort of account of
many natural phenomena may be given; but it is impossible to ascribe
any real value to such a system. The merit of Telesius must be
considered to consist in his rejection of the Aristotelian errors,
in his perception of the necessity of a reform in the method of
philosophizing, and in his persuasion that this reform must be founded
on experiments rather than on reasoning. When he said[110], "We propose
to ourselves to turn our eyes to the world itself, and its parts, their
passions, actions, operations, and species," his view of the course to
be followed was right; but his purpose remained but ill fulfilled, by
the arbitrary edifice of abstract conceptions which his system exhibits.

Francis Bacon, who, about half a century later, treated the subject
of a reform of philosophy in a far more penetrating and masterly
manner, has given us his judgment of Telesius. In his view, he takes
Telesius as the restorer of the Atomic philosophy, which Democritus
and Parmenides taught among the ancients; and according to his
custom, he presents an image of this philosophy in an adaptation of
a portion of ancient mythology[111]. The Celestial Cupid, who with
Cœlus, was the parent of the Gods and of the Universe, is exhibited
as a representation of matter and its properties, according to the
Democritean philosophy. "Concerning Telesius," says Bacon, "we think
well, and acknowledge him as a lover of truth, a useful contributor to
science, an amender of some tenets, the first of recent men. But we
have to do with him as the restorer of the philosophy of Parmenides,
to whom much reverence is due." With regard to this philosophy,
he pronounces a judgment which very truly expresses the cause of
its rashness and emptiness. "It is," he says, "such a system[112]
as naturally proceeds from the intellect, abandoned to its own
impulse, and not rising from experience to theory continuously and
successively." Accordingly, he says that, "Telesius, although learned
in the Peripatetic philosophy (if that were anything), which indeed, he
has turned against the teachers of it, is hindered by his affirmations,
and is more successful in destroying than in building."

The work of Telesius excited no small notice, and was placed in the
_Index Expurgatorius_. It made many disciples, a consequence probably
due to its spirit of system-making, no less than to its promise of
reform, or its acuteness of argument; for till trial and reflection
have taught man modesty and moderation, he can never be content to
receive knowledge in the small successive instalments in which nature
gives it forth to him. It is the makers of large systems, arranged with
an _appearance_ of completeness and symmetry, who, principally, give
rise to Schools of philosophy.


2. (_Thomas Campanella_).--Accordingly, Telesius may be looked upon as
the founder of a School. His most distinguished successor was Thomas
Campanella, who was born in 1568, at Stilo, in Calabria. He showed
great talents at an early age, prosecuting his studies at Cosenza,
the birth-place of the great opponent of Aristotle and reformer of
philosophy. He, too, has given us an account[113] of the course of
thought by which he was led to become an innovator. "Being afraid
that not genuine truth, but falsehood in the place of truth, was the
tenant of the Peripatetic School, I examined all the Greek, Latin,
and Arabic commentators of Aristotle, and hesitated more and more, as
I sought to learn whether what they have said were also to be read
in the world itself, which I had been taught by learned men was the
living book of God. And as my doctors could not satisfy my scruples,
I resolved to read all the books of Plato, Pliny, Galen, the Stoics,
and the Democriteans, and especially those of Telesius; and to compare
them with that _first and original writing, the world_; that thus from
the primary autograph, I might learn if the copies contained anything
false." Campanella probably refers here to an expression of Plato,
who says, "the world is God's epistle to mankind." And this image, of
the natural world as an original manuscript, while human systems of
philosophy are but copies, and may be false ones, became a favourite
thought of the reformers, and appears repeatedly in their writings from
this time. "When I held my public disputation at Cosenza," Campanella
proceeds, "and still more, when I conversed privately with the brethren
of the monastery, I found little satisfaction in their answers; but
Telesius delighted me, on account of his freedom in philosophizing,
and because he rested upon the nature of things, and not upon the
assertions of men."

With these views and feelings, it is not wonderful that Campanella,
at the early age of twenty-two (1590,) published a work remarkable
for the bold promise of its title: "_Thomas Campanella's Philosophy
demonstrated to the senses, against those who have philosophized in an
arbitrary and dogmatical manner, not taking nature for their guide; in
which the errors of Aristotle and his followers are refuted from their
own assertions and the laws of nature: and all the imaginations feigned
in the place of nature by the Peripatetics are altogether rejected;
with a true defence of Bernardin Telesius of Cosenza, the greatest
of philosophers; confirmed by the opinions of the ancients, here
elucidated and defended, especially those of the Platonists_."

This work was written in answer to a book published against Telesius
by a Neapolitan professor named Marta; and it was the boast of the
young author that he had only employed eleven months in the composition
of his defence, while his adversary had been engaged eleven years
in preparing his attack. Campanella found a favourable reception in
the house of the Marchese Lavelli, and there employed himself in the
composition of an additional work, entitled _On the Sense of Things
and Magic_, and in other literary labours. These, however, are full
of the indications of an enthusiastic temper, inclined to mystical
devotion, and of opinions bearing the cast of pantheism. For instance,
the title of the book last quoted sets forth as demonstrated in the
course of the work, that "the world is the living and intelligent
statue of God; and that all its parts, and particles of parts, are
endowed some with a clearer, some with a more obscure sense, such
as suffices for the preservation of each and of the whole." Besides
these opinions, which could not fail to make him obnoxious to the
religious authorities, Campanella[114] engaged in schemes of political
revolution, which involved him in danger and calamity. He took part
in a conspiracy, of which the object was to cast off the tyranny of
Spain, and to make Calabria a republic. This design was discovered; and
Campanella, along with others, was thrown into prison and subjected to
torture. He was kept in confinement twenty-seven years; and at last
obtained his liberation by the interposition of Pope Urban VIII. He
was, however, still in danger from the Neapolitan Inquisition; and
escaped in disguise to Paris, where he received a pension from the
king, and lived in intercourse with the most eminent men of letters. He
died there in 1639.

Campanella was a contemporary of Francis Bacon, whom we must consider
as belonging to an epoch to which the Calabrian school of innovators
was only a prelude. I shall not therefore further follow the connexion
of writers of this order. Tobias Adami, a Saxon writer, an admirer
of Campanella's works, employed himself, about 1620, in adapting
them to the German public, and in recommending them strongly to
German philosophers. Descartes, and even Bacon, may be considered as
successors of Campanella; for they too were theoretical reformers; but
they enjoyed the advantage of the light which had, in the mean time,
been thrown upon the philosophy of science, by the great practical
advances of Kepler, Galileo, and others. To these practical reformers
we must soon turn our attention: but we may first notice one or two
additional circumstances belonging to our present subject.

Campanella remarks that both the Peripatetics and the Platonists
conducted the learner to knowledge by a long and circuitous path, which
he wished to shorten by setting out from the sense. Without speaking
of the methods which he proposed, we may notice one maxim[115] of
considerable value which he propounds, and to which we have already
been led. "We begin to reason from sensible objects, and definition
is the end and epilogue of science. It is not the beginning of our
knowing, but only of our teaching."


3. (_Andrew Cæsalpinus._)--The same maxim had already been announced
by Cæsalpinus, a contemporary of Telesius; (he was born at Arezzo in
1520, and died at Rome in 1603). Cæsalpinus is a great name in science,
though professedly an Aristotelian. It has been seen in the _History
of Science_[116], that he formed the first great epoch of the science
of botany by his systematic arrangement of plants, and that in this
task he had no successor for nearly a century. He also approached near
to the great discovery of the circulation of the blood[117]. He takes
a view of science which includes the remark that we have just quoted
from Campanella: "We reach perfect knowledge by three steps: Induction,
Division, Definition. By Induction, we collect likeness and agreement
from observation; by Division, we collect unlikeness and disagreement;
by Definition, we learn the proper substance of each object. Induction
makes universals from particulars, and offers to the mind all
intelligible matter; Division discovers the difference of universals,
and leads to species; Definition resolves species into their principles
and elements[118]." Without asserting this to be rigorously correct, it
is incomparably more true and philosophical than the opposite view,
which represents definition as the beginning of our knowledge; and
the establishment of such a doctrine is a material step in inductive
philosophy[119].


4. (_Giordano Bruno._)--Among the Italian innovators of this time
we must notice the unfortunate Giordano Bruno, who was born at Nola
about 1550 and burnt at Rome in 1600. He is, however, a reformer of a
different school from Campanella; for he derives his philosophy from
Ideas and not from Observation. He represents himself as the author of
a new doctrine, which he terms the _Nolan Philosophy_. He was a zealous
promulgator and defender of the Copernican system of the universe, as
we have noticed in the _History of Science_[120]. Campanella also wrote
in defence of that system.

It is worthy of remark that a thought which is often quoted from
Francis Bacon, occurs in Bruno's _Cena di Cenere_, published in
1584; I mean, the notion that the later times are more aged than
the earlier. In the course of the dialogue, the Pedant, who is one
of the interlocutors, says, "In antiquity is wisdom;" to which the
Philosophical Character replies, "If you knew what you were talking
about, you would see that your principle leads to the opposite result
of that which you wish to infer;--I mean, that _we_ are older, and have
lived longer, than our predecessors." He then proceeds to apply this,
by tracing the course of astronomy through the earlier astronomers up
to Copernicus.


5. (_Peter Ramus._)--I will notice one other reformer of this period,
who attacked the Aristotelian system on another side, on which it
was considered to be most impregnable. This was Peter Ramus,(born in
Picardy in 1515,) who ventured to denounce the _Logic_ of Aristotle as
unphilosophical and useless. After showing an extraordinary aptitude
for the acquirement of knowledge in his youth, when he proceeded to
the degree of Master of Arts, he astonished his examiners by choosing
for the subject of the requisite disputation the thesis[121], "that
what Aristotle has said is all wrong." This position, so startling in
1535, he defended for the whole day, without being defeated. This was,
however, only a formal academical exercise, which did not necessarily
imply any permanent conviction of the opinion thus expressed. But his
mind was really labouring to detect and remedy the errors which he
thus proclaimed. From him, as from the other reformers of this time,
we have an account of this mental struggle[122]. He says, in a work on
this subject, "I will candidly and simply explain how I was delivered
from the darkness of Aristotle. When, according to the laws of our
university, I had spent three years and a half in the Aristotelian
philosophy, and was now invested with the philosophical laurel as a
Master of Arts, I took an account of the time which I had consumed
in this study, and considered on what subjects I should employ this
logical art of Aristotle, which I had learnt with so much labour and
noise, I found it made me not more versed in history or antiquities,
more eloquent in discourse, more ready in verse, more wise in any
subject. Alas for me! how was I overpowered, how deeply did I groan,
how did I deplore my lot and my nature, how did I deem myself to be
by some unhappy and dismal fate and frame of mind abhorrent from the
Muses, when I found that I was one who, after all my pains, could
reap no benefit from that wisdom of which I heard so much, as being
contained in the Logic of Aristotle." He then relates that he was
led to the study of the Dialogues of Plato, and was delighted with
the kind of analysis of the subjects discussed which Socrates is
there represented as executing. "Well," he adds, "I began thus to
reflect within myself--(I should have thought it impious to say it to
another)--What, I pray you, prevents me from _socratizing_; and from
asking, without regard to Aristotle's authority, whether Aristotle's
Logic be true and correct? It may be that that philosopher leads
us wrong; and if so, no wonder that I cannot find in his books the
treasure which is not there. What if his dogmas be mere figments? Do
I not tease and torment myself in vain, trying to get a harvest from
a barren soil?" He convinced himself that the Aristotelian logic was
worthless: and constructed a new system of Logic, founded mainly on the
Platonic process of exhausting a subject by analytical classification
of its parts. Both works, his _Animadversions on Aristotle_, and his
_Logic_, appeared in 1543. The learned world was startled and shocked
to find a young man, on his first entrance into life, condemning
as faulty, fallacious, and useless, that part of Aristotle's works
which had always hitherto been held as a masterpiece of philosophical
acuteness, and as the Organon of scientific reasoning. And in truth, it
must be granted that Ramus does not appear to have understood the real
nature and object of Aristotle's Logic; while his own system could not
supply the place of the old one, and was not of much real value. This
dissent from the established doctrines was, however, not only condemned
but punished. The printing and selling of his books was forbidden
through France; and Ramus was stigmatized by a sentence[123] which
declared him rash, arrogant, impudent, and ignorant, and prohibited
from teaching logic and philosophy. He was, however, afterwards
restored to the office of professor: and though much attacked,
persisted in his plan of reforming, not only Logic but Physics and
Metaphysics. He made his position still more dangerous by adopting the
reformed religion; and during the unhappy civil wars of France, he was
deprived of his professorship, driven from Paris, and had his library
plundered. He endeavoured, but in vain, to engage a German professor,
Schegk, to undertake the reform of the Aristotelian Physics; a portion
of knowledge in which he felt himself not to be strong. Unhappily for
himself, he afterwards returned to Paris, where he perished in the
massacre of St. Bartholomew in 1572.

Ramus's main objection to the Aristotelian Logic is, that it is not
the image of the natural process of thought; an objection which shows
little philosophical insight; for the course by which we obtain
knowledge may well differ from the order in which our knowledge,
when obtained, is exhibited. We have already seen that Ramus's
contemporaries, Cæsalpinus and Campanella, had a wiser view; placing
definition as the last step in knowing, but the first in teaching.
But the effect which Ramus produced was by no means slight. He aided
powerfully in turning the minds of men to question the authority of
Aristotle on all points; and had many followers, especially among the
Protestants. Among the rest, Milton, our great poet, published "Artis
Logicæ plenior Institutio _ad Petri Rami methodum concinnata_;" but
this work, appearing in 1672, belongs to a succeeding period.


6. (_The Reformers in general_).--It is impossible not to be struck
with the series of misfortunes which assailed the reformers of
philosophy of the period we have had to review. Roger Bacon was
repeatedly condemned and imprisoned; and, not to speak of others who
suffered under the imputation of magical arts, Telesius is said[124] to
have been driven from Naples to his native city by calumny and envy;
Cæsalpinus was accused of atheism[125]; Campanella was imprisoned for
twenty-seven years and tortured; Giordano Bruno was burnt at Rome as
a heretic; Ramus was persecuted during his life, and finally murdered
by his personal enemy Jacques Charpentier, in a massacre of which the
plea was religion. It is true, that for the most part these misfortunes
were not principally due to the attempts at philosophical reform, but
were connected rather with politics or religion. But we cannot doubt
that the spirit which led men to assail the received philosophy, might
readily incline them to reject some tenets of the established religion;
since the boundary line of these subjects is difficult to draw. And as
we have seen, there was in most of the persons of whom we have spoken,
not only a well-founded persuasion of the defects of existing systems,
but an eager spirit of change, and a sanguine anticipation of some
wide and lofty philosophy, which was soon to elevate the minds and
conditions of men. The most unfortunate were, for the most part, the
least temperate and judicious reformers. Patricius, who, as we have
seen, declared himself against the Aristotelian philosophy, lived and
died at Rome in peace and honour[126].


7. (_Melancthon._)--It is not easy to point out with precision the
connexion between the efforts at a Reform in Philosophy, and the great
Reformation of Religion in the sixteenth century. The disposition to
assert (practically at least) a freedom of thinking, and to reject the
corruptions which tradition had introduced and authority maintained,
naturally extended its influence from one subject to another; and
especially in subjects so nearly connected as theology and philosophy.
The Protestants, however, did not reject the Aristotelian system;
they only reformed it, by going back to the original works of the
author, and by reducing it to a conformity with Scripture. In this
reform, Melancthon was the chief author, and wrote works on Logic,
Physics, Morals, and Metaphysics, which were used among Protestants.
On the subject of the origin of our knowledge, his views contained
a very philosophical improvement of the Aristotelian doctrines. He
recognized the importance of Ideas, as well as of Experience. "We could
not," he says[127], "proceed to reason at all, except there were by
nature innate in man certain fixed points, that is, principles of
science;--as Number, the recognition of Order and Proportion, logical,
geometrical, physical and moral Principles. Physical principles are
such as these,--everything which exists proceeds from a cause,--a body
cannot be in two places at once,--time is a continued series of things
or of motions,--and the like." It is not difficult to see that such
Principles partake of the nature of the Fundamental Ideas which we have
attempted to arrange and enumerate in a previous part of this work.

Before we proceed to the next chapter, which treats of the Practical
Reformers of Scientific Method, let us for an instant look at the
strong persuasion implied in the titles of the works of this period,
that the time of a philosophical revolution was at hand. Telesius
published _De Rerum Natura juxta propria principia_; Francis Helmont,
_Philosophia vulgaris refutata_; Patricius, _Nova de Universis
Philosophia_; Campanella, _Philosophia sensibus demonstrata, adversus
errores Aristotelis_; Bruno professed himself the author of a _Nolan
Philosophy_; and Ramus of a _New Logic_. The age announced itself
pregnant; and the eyes of all who took an interest in the intellectual
fortunes of the race, were looking eagerly for the expected offspring.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 108: Bernardini Telesii Consentini _De Rerum Natura juxta
propria Principia_.]

[Footnote 109: I take this account from Tenneman: this Proem was
omitted in subsequent editions of Telesius, and is not in the one which
I have consulted. Tenneman, _Gesch. d. Phil._ ix. 280.]

[Footnote 110: Proem.]

[Footnote 111: "De Principiis atque Originibus secundum fabulas
Cupidinis et Cœli: sive Parmenidis et Telesii et præcipuè Democriti
Philosophia tractata in Fabula de Cupidine."]

[Footnote 112: "Talia sunt qualia possunt esse ea quæ ab intellectu
sibi permisso, nec ab experimentis continenter et gradatim sublevato,
profecta videntur."]

[Footnote 113: Thom. Campanella _de Libris propriis_, as quoted in
Tenneman, ix. 291.]

[Footnote 114: _Economisti Italiani_, t. i. p. xxxiii.]

[Footnote 115: Tenneman, ix. 305.]

[Footnote 116: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xvi. c. iii. sect. 2.]

[Footnote 117: _Ibid._ b. xvii. c. ii. sect. 1.]

[Footnote 118: _Quæst. Peripat._ i. 1.]

[Footnote 119: Tenneman, ix. 108.]

[Footnote 120: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. v. c. iii. sect. 2.]

[Footnote 121: Tenneman, ix. 420. "Quæcunque ab Aristotele dicta essent
commenticia esse." Freigius, _Vita Petri Rami_, p. 10.]

[Footnote 122: Rami, _Animadv. Aristot._ i. iv.]

[Footnote 123: See _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. iv. c. iv. sect. 4.]

[Footnote 124: Tenneman, ix. 230.]

[Footnote 125: _Ibid._ 108.]

[Footnote 126: Tenneman, ix. 246.]

[Footnote 127: Melancthon, _De Anima_, p. 207, quoted in Tenneman, ix.
121.]




