CHAPTER XIX.

LOCKE AND HIS FRENCH FOLLOWERS.


1. In the constant opposition and struggle of the schools of
philosophy, which consider our Senses and our Ideas respectively,
as the principal sources of our knowledge, we have seen that at the
period of which we now treat, the tendency was to exalt the external
and disparage the internal element. The disposition to ascribe our
knowledge to observation alone, had already, in Bacon's time, led him
to dwell to a disproportionate degree upon that half of his subject;
and had tinged Newton's expressions, though it had not biassed his
practice. But this partiality soon assumed a more prominent shape,
becoming extreme in Locke, and extravagant in those who professed to
follow him.

Indeed Locke appears to owe his popularity and influence as a popular
writer mainly to his being one of the first to express, in a plain and
unhesitating manner, opinions which had for some time been ripening
in the minds of a large portion of the cultivated public. Hobbes had
already promulgated the main doctrines which Locke afterwards urged, on
the subject of the origin and nature of our knowledge: but in him these
doctrines were combined with offensive opinions on points of morals,
government, and religion, so that their access to general favour was
impeded: and it was to Locke that they were indebted for the extensive
influence which they soon after obtained. Locke owed this authority
mainly to the intellectual circumstances of the time. Although a writer
of great merit, he by no means possesses such metaphysical acuteness or
such philosophical largeness of view, or such a charm of writing, as
must necessarily give him the high place he has held in the literature
of Europe. But he came at a period when the reign of Ideas was
tottering to its fall. All the most active and ambitious spirits had
gone over to the new opinions, and were prepared to follow the fortunes
of the Philosophy of Experiment, then in the most prosperous and
brilliant condition, and full of still brighter promise. There were,
indeed, a few learned and thoughtful men who still remained faithful
to the empire of Ideas; partly, it may be, from a too fond attachment
to ancient systems; but partly, also, because they knew that there
were subjects of vast importance, in which experience did not form the
whole foundation of our knowledge. They knew, too, that many of the
plausible tenets of the new philosophy were revivals of fallacies which
had been discussed and refuted in ancient times. But the advocates of
mere experience came on with a vast store of weighty truth among their
artillery, and with the energy which the advance usually bestows. The
ideal system of philosophy could, for the present, make no effectual
resistance; Locke, by putting himself at the head of the assault,
became the hero of his day: and his name has been used as the watchword
of those who adhere to the philosophy of the senses up to our own times.


2. Locke himself did not assert the exclusive authority of the senses
in the extreme unmitigated manner in which some who call themselves
his disciples have done. But this is the common lot of the leaders
of revolutions, for they are usually bound by some ties of affection
and habit to the previous state of things, and would not destroy all
traces of that condition: while their followers attend, not to their
inconsistent wishes, but to the meaning of the revolution itself;
and carry out, to their genuine and complete results, the principles
which won the victory, and which have been brought out more sharp from
the conflict. Thus Locke himself does not assert that all our ideas
are derived from Sensation, but from Sensation _and Reflection_. But
it was easily seen that, in this assertion, two very heterogeneous
elements were conjoined: that while to pronounce Sensation the origin
of ideas, is a clear decided tenet, the acceptance or rejection of
which determines the general character of our philosophy; to make the
same declaration concerning Reflection, is in the highest degree vague
and ambiguous; since reflection may either be resolved into a mere
modification of sensation, as was done by one school, or may mean all
that the opposite school opposes to sensation, under the name of Ideas.
Hence the clear and strong impression which fastened upon men's minds,
and which does in fact represent all the systematic and consistent part
of Locke's philosophy, was, that in it all our ideas are represented as
derived from Sensation.


3. We need not spend much time in pointing out the inconsistencies into
which Locke fell; as all must fall into inconsistencies who recognize
no source of knowledge except the senses. Thus he maintains that our
Idea of Space is derived from the senses of sight and touch; our Idea
of Solidity from the touch alone. Our Notion of Substance is an unknown
support of unknown qualities, and is illustrated by the Indian fable
of the tortoise which supports the elephant, which supports the world.
Our Notion of Power or Cause is in like manner got from the senses.
And yet, though these ideas are thus mere fragments of our experience,
Locke does not hesitate to ascribe to them necessity and universality
when they occur in propositions. Thus he maintains the necessary truth
of geometrical properties: he asserts that the resistance arising from
solidity is absolutely insurmountable[225]; he conceives that nothing
short of Omnipotence can annihilate a particle of matter[226]; and he
has no misgivings in arguing upon the axiom that Every thing must have
a cause. He does not perceive that, upon his own account of the origin
of our knowledge, we can have no right to make any of these assertions.
If our knowledge of the truths which concern the external world were
wholly derived from experience, all that we could venture to say would
be,--that geometrical properties of figures are true _as far as we have
tried them_;--that we have seen _no example_ of a solid body being
reduced to occupy less space by pressure, or of a material substance
annihilated by natural means;--and that _wherever we have examined_,
we have found that every change has had a cause. Experience can never
entitle us to declare that what she has not seen is impossible; still
less, that things which she can not see are certain. Locke himself
intended to throw no doubt upon the certainty of either human or
divine knowledge; but his principles, when men discarded the temper in
which he applied them, and the checks to their misapplication which
he conceived that he had provided, easily led to a very comprehensive
skepticism. His doctrines tended to dislodge from their true bases the
most indisputable parts of knowledge; as, for example, pure and mixed
mathematics. It may well be supposed, therefore, that they shook the
foundations of many other parts of knowledge in the minds of common
thinkers.

It was not long before these consequences of the overthrow of
ideas showed themselves in the speculative world. I have already
in a previous work[227] mentioned Hume's skeptical inferences from
Locke's maxim, that we have no ideas except those which we acquire
by experience; and the doctrines set up in opposition to this by
the metaphysicians of Germany. I might trace the progress of the
sensational opinions in Britain till the reaction took place here
also: but they were so much more clearly and decidedly followed out in
France, that I shall pursue their history in that country.


4. _The French Followers of Locke, Condillac, &c._--Most of the
French writers who adopted Locke's leading doctrines, rejected the
"Reflection," which formed an anomalous part of his philosophy, and
declared that Sensation alone was the source of ideas. Among these
writers, Condillac was the most distinguished. He expressed the leading
tenet of their school in a clear and pointed manner by saying that "All
ideas are transformed sensations." We have already considered this
phrase[228], and need not here dwell upon it.

Opinions such as these tend to annihilate, as we have seen, one of the
two co-ordinate elements of our knowledge. Yet they were far from being
so prejudicial to the progress of science, or even of the philosophy
of science, as might have been anticipated. One reason of this was,
that they were practically corrected, especially among the cultivators
of Natural Philosophy, by the study of mathematics; for that study did
really supply all that was requisite on the ideal side of science, so
far as the ideas of space, time, and number, were concerned, and partly
also with regard to the idea of cause and some others. And the methods
of discovery, though the philosophy of them made no material advance,
were practically employed with so much activity, and in so many various
subjects, that a certain kind of prudence and skill in this employment
was very widely diffused.


5. _Importance of Language._--In one respect this school of
metaphysicians rendered a very valuable service to the philosophy of
science. They brought into prominent notice the great importance of
_words_ and _terms_ in the formation and progress of knowledge, and
pointed out that the office of language is not only to convey and
preserve our thoughts, but to perform the analysis in which reasoning
consists. They were led to this train of speculation, in a great
measure, by taking pure mathematical science as their standard example
of substantial knowledge. Condillac, rejecting, as we have said, almost
all those ideas on which universal and demonstrable truths must be
based, was still not at all disposed to question the reality of human
knowledge; but was, on the contrary, a zealous admirer of the evidence
and connexion which appear in those sciences which have the ideas of
space and number for their foundation, especially the latter. He looked
for the grounds of the certainty and reality of the knowledge which
these sciences contain; and found them, as he conceived, in the nature
of the _language_ which they employ. The _Signs_ which are used in
arithmetic and algebra enable us to keep steadily in view the identity
of the same quantity under all the forms which, by composition and
decomposition, it may be made to assume; and these Signs also not only
express the operations which are performed, but suggest the extension
of the operations according to analogy. Algebra, according to him,
is only a very perfect language; and language answers its purpose of
leading us to truth, by possessing the characteristics of algebra.
Words are the symbols of certain groups of impressions or facts; they
are so selected and applied as to exhibit the analogies which prevail
among these facts; and these analogies are the truths of which our
knowledge consists. "Every language is an analytical method; every
analytical method is a language[229];" these were the truths "alike new
and simple," as he held, which he conceived that he had demonstrated.
"The art of speaking, the art of writing, the art of reasoning, the
art of thinking, are only, at bottom, one and the same art[230]." Each
of these operations consists in a succession of analytical operations;
and words are the marks by which we are able to fix our minds upon the
steps of this analysis.


6. The analysis of our impressions and notions does in reality lead
to truth, not only in virtue of the identity of the whole with its
parts, as Condillac held, but also in virtue of certain Ideas which
govern the synthesis of our sensations, and which contain the elements
of universal truths, as we have all along endeavoured to show. But
although Condillac overlooked or rejected this doctrine, the importance
of words, as marking the successive steps of this synthesis and
analysis, is not less than he represented it to be. Every truth, once
established by induction from facts, when it is become familiar under
a brief and precise form of expression, becomes itself a fact; and is
capable of being employed, along with other facts of a like kind, as
the materials of fresh inductions. In this successive process, the
term, like the cord of a fagot, both binds together the facts which it
includes, and makes it possible to manage the assemblage as a single
thing. On occasion of most discoveries in science, the selection of a
technical term is an essential part of the proceeding. In the _History
of Science_, we have had numerous opportunities of remarking this; and
the List of technical terms given as an Index to that work, refers us,
by almost every word, to one such occasion. And these terms, which
thus have had so large a share in the formation of science, and which
constitute its language, do also offer the means of analyzing its
truths, each into its constituent truths; and these into facts more
special, till the original foundations of our most general propositions
are clearly exhibited. The relations of general and particular truths
are most evidently represented by the Inductive Tables given in
Book II. of the _Novum Organon Renovatum_. But each step in each of
these Tables has its proper form of expression, familiar among the
cultivators of science; and the analysis which our Tables display, is
commonly performed in men's minds, when it becomes necessary, by fixing
the attention successively upon a series of words, not upon the lines
of a Table. Language offers to the mind such a scale or ladder as the
Table offers to the eye; and since such Tables present to us, as we
have said, the Logic of Induction, that is, the formal conditions of
the soundness of our reasoning from facts, we may with propriety say
that a just analysis of the meaning of words is an essential portion of
Inductive Logic.

In saying this, we must not forget that a decomposition of general
truths into ideas, as well as into facts, belongs to our philosophy;
but the point we have here to remark, is the essential importance of
words to the latter of these processes. And this point had not ever
had its due weight assigned to it till the time of Condillac and other
followers of Locke, who pursued their speculations in the spirit I have
just described. The doctrine of the importance of terms is the most
considerable addition to the philosophy of science which has been made
since the time of Bacon[231].


7. _The French Encyclopedists._--The French _Encyclopédie_, published
in 1751, of which Diderot and Dalembert were the editors, may be
considered as representing the leading characters of European
philosophy during the greater part of the eighteenth century. The
writers in this work belong for the most part to the school of Locke
and Condillac; and we may make a few remarks upon them, in order to
bring into view one or two points in addition to what we have already
said of that school. The _Discours Préliminaire_, written by Dalembert,
is celebrated as containing a view of the origin of our knowledge, and
the connexion and classification of the sciences.

A tendency of the speculations of the Encyclopedists, as of the School
of Locke in general, is to reject all ideal principles of connexion
among facts, as something which experience, the only source of true
knowledge, does not give. Hence all certain knowledge consists only
in the recognition of the same thing under different aspects, or
different forms of expression. Axioms are not the result of an original
relation of ideas, but of the use, or it may be the abuse[232], of
words. In like manner, the propositions of Geometry are a series of
modifications,--of distortions, so to speak,--of one original truth;
much as if the proposition were stated in the successive forms of
expression presented by a language which was constantly growing more
and more artificial. Several of the sciences which rest upon physical
principles, that is, (says the writer,) truths of experience or simple
hypotheses, have only an experimental or hypothetical certainty.
Impenetrability added to the idea of extent is a mystery in addition:
the nature of motion is a riddle for philosophers: the metaphysical
principle of the laws of percussion is equally concealed from them. The
more profoundly they study the idea of matter and of the properties
which represent it, the more obscure this idea becomes; the more
completely does it escape them.


8. This is a very common style of reflection, even down to our own
times. I have endeavoured to show that concerning the Fundamental Ideas
of space, of force and resistance, of substance, external quality, and
the like, we know enough to make these Ideas the grounds of certain
and universal truths;--enough to supply us with axioms from which we
can demonstratively reason. If men wish for any other knowledge of
the nature of matter than that which ideas, and facts conformable to
ideas, give them, undoubtedly their desire will be frustrated, and
they will be left in a mysterious vacancy; for it does not appear
how such knowledge as they ask for could be knowledge at all. But in
reality, this complaint of our ignorance of the real nature of things
proceeds from the rejection of ideas, and the assumption of the senses
alone as the ground of knowledge. "Observation and calculation are
the only sources of truth:" this is the motto of the school of which
we now speak. And its import amounts to this:--that they reject all
ideas except the idea of number, and recognize the modifications which
parts undergo by addition and subtraction as the only modes in which
true propositions are generated. The laws of nature are assemblages of
facts: the truths of science are assertions of the identity of things
which are the same. "By the avowal of almost all philosophers," says
a writer of this school[233], "the most sublime truths, when once
simplified and reduced to their lowest terms, are converted into facts,
and thenceforth present to the mind only this proposition; the white is
white, the black is black."

These statements are true in what they positively assert, but they
involve error in the denial which by implication they convey. It
is true that observation and demonstration are the only sources of
scientific truth; but then, demonstration may be founded on other
grounds besides the elementary properties of number. It is true that
the theory of gravitation is but the assertion of a general fact; but
this is so, not because a sound theory does not involve ideas, but
because our apprehension of a fact does.


9. Another characteristic indication of the temper of the
Encyclopedists and of the age to which they belong, is the importance
by them assigned to those practical _Arts_ which minister to man's
comfort and convenience. Not only, in the body of the Encyclopedia, are
the Mechanical Arts placed side by side with the Sciences, and treated
at great length; but in the Preliminary Discourse, the preference
assigned to the liberal over the mechanical Arts is treated as a
prejudice[234], and the value of science is spoken of as measured
by its utility. "The discovery of the Mariner's Compass is not less
advantageous to the human race than the explanation of its properties
would be to physics.--Why should we not esteem those to whom we owe
the fusee and the escapement of watches as much as the inventors of
Algebra?" And in the classification of sciences which accompanies the
Discourse, the labours of artisans of all kinds have a place.

This classification of the various branches of science contained
in the Dissertation is often spoken of. It has for its basis the
classification proposed by Bacon, in which the parts of human knowledge
are arranged according to the faculties of the mind in which they
originate; and these faculties are taken, both by Bacon and by
Dalembert, as Memory, Reason, and Imagination. The insufficiency of
Bacon's arrangement as a scientific classification is so glaring, that
the adoption of it, with only superficial modifications, at the period
of the Encyclopedia, is a remarkable proof of the want of original
thought and real philosophy at the time of which we speak.


10. We need not trace further the opinion which derives all our
knowledge from the senses in its application to the philosophy of
Science. Its declared aim is to reduce all knowledge to the knowledge
of Facts; and it rejects all inquiries which involve the Idea of Cause,
and similar Ideas, describing them as "metaphysical," or in some other
damnatory way. It professes, indeed, to discard all Ideas; but, as we
have long ago seen, some Ideas or other are inevitably included even
in the simplest Facts. Accordingly the speculations of this school
are compelled to retain the relations of Position, Succession, Number
and Resemblance, which are rigorously ideal relations. The philosophy
of Sensation, in order to be consistent, ought to reject these Ideas
along with the rest, and to deny altogether the possibility of general
knowledge.

When the opinions of the Sensational School had gone to an extreme
length, a Reaction naturally began to take place in men's minds. Such
have been the alternations of opinion, from the earliest ages of human
speculation. Man may perhaps have existed in an original condition in
which he was only aware of the impressions of Sense; but his first
attempts to analyse his perceptions brought under his notice Ideas as
a separate element, essential to the existence of knowledge. Ideas
were thenceforth almost the sole subject of the study of philosophers;
of Plato and his disciples, professedly; of Aristotle, and still more
of the followers and commentators of Aristotle, practically. And this
continued till the time of Galileo, when the authority of the Senses
again began to be asserted; for it was shown by the great discoveries
which were then made, that the Senses had at least some share in
the promotion of knowledge. As discoveries more numerous and more
striking were supplied by Observation, the world gradually passed
over to the opinion that the share which had been ascribed to Ideas in
the formation of real knowledge was altogether a delusion, and that
Sensation alone was true. But when this was asserted as a general
doctrine, both its manifest falsity and its alarming consequences
roused men's minds, and made them recoil from the extreme point to
which they were approaching. Philosophy again oscillated back towards
Ideas; and over a great part of Europe, in the clearest and most
comprehensive minds, this regression from the dogmas of the Sensational
School is at present the prevailing movement. We shall conclude our
review by noticing a few indications of this state of things.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 225: _Essay_, b. xi. c. iv. sect. 3.]

[Footnote 226: _Ibid._ c. xiii. sect. 22.]

[Footnote 227: _History of Ideas_, b. iii. c. iii. Modern Opinions
respecting the Idea of Cause.]

[Footnote 228: _Ibid._ b. i. c. iv.]

[Footnote 229: _Langue des Calculs_, p. 1.]

[Footnote 230: _Grammaire_, p. xxxvi.]

[Footnote 231: Since the selection and construction of terms is thus
a matter of so much consequence in the formation of science, it is
proper that systematic rules, founded upon sound principles, should be
laid down for the performance of this operation. Some such rules are
accordingly suggested in b. iv. of the _Nov. Org. Ren._]

[Footnote 232: _Disc. Prélim._ p. viii.]

[Footnote 233: Helvetius _Sur l'Homme_, c. xxiii.]

[Footnote 234: P. xiii.]




