CHAPTER III.

ADDITIONAL REMARKS ON PLATO.


The leading points in Plato's writings which bear upon the philosophy
of discovery are these:

  1. The Doctrine of Ideas.
  2. The Doctrine of the One and the Many.
  3. The notion of the nature and aim of Science.
  4. The survey of existing Sciences.

1. The Doctrine of Ideas is an attempt to solve a problem which in all
ages forces itself upon the notice of thoughtful men; namely, How can
certain and permanent knowledge be possible for man, since all his
knowledge must be derived from transient and fluctuating sensations?
And the answer given by this doctrine is, that certain and permanent
knowledge is _not_ derived from _Sensations_, but from _Ideas_. There
are in the mind certain elements of knowledge which are not derived
from sensation, and are only imperfectly exemplified in sensible
objects; and when we reason concerning sensible things so as to obtain
real knowledge, we do so by considering such things as partaking of
the qualities of the Ideas concerning which there can be truth. The
sciences of Geometry and Arithmetic show that there _are_ truths which
man can know; and the Doctrine of Ideas explains how this is possible.

So far the Doctrine of Ideas answers its primary purpose, and is a
reply (by no means the least intelligible and satisfactory reply) to
a question still agitated among philosophers: What is the ground of
geometrical (and other necessary) truth?

But Plato seems, in many of his writings, to extend this doctrine much
further; and to assume, not only Ideas of Space and its properties,
from which geometrical truths are derived; but of Relations, as the
Relations of Like and Unlike, Greater and Less; and of mere material
objects, as Tables and Chairs. Now to assume Ideas of such things as
these solves no difficulty and is supported by no argument. In this
respect the Ideal theory is of no value in Science.

It is curious that we have a very acute refutation of the Ideal theory
in this sense, not only in Aristotle, the open opponent of Plato on
this subject, but in the Platonic writings themselves: namely, in the
Dialogue entitled _Parmenides_; which, on this and on other accounts, I
consider to be the work not of Plato, but of an opponent of Plato[6].


2. I have spoken, in the preceding chapter, of Plato's doctrine that
truth is to be obtained by discerning the One in the Many. This
expression is used, it would seem, in a somewhat large and fluctuating
way, to mean several things; as for instance, finding the one _kind_ in
many _individuals_ (for instance, the one idea of dog in many dogs);
or the one _law_ in many _phenomena_ (for instance, the eccentrics and
epicycles in many planets). In any interpretation, it is too loose and
indefinite a rule to be of much value in the formation of sciences,
though it has been recently again propounded as important in modern
times.


3. I have said, in the preceding chapter, that Plato, though he saw
that scientific truths of great generality might be obtained and
were to be arrived at by philosophers, overlooked the necessity of a
_gradual_ and _successive_ advance from the less general to the more
general; and I have described this as a 'dimness of vision.' I must now
acknowledge that this is not a very appropriate phrase; for not only
no acuteness of vision could have enabled Plato to see that gradual
generalization in science of which, as yet, no example had appeared;
but it was very fortunate for the progress of truth, at that time, that
Plato had imagined to himself the object of science to be general
and sublime truths which prove themselves to be true by the light of
their own generality and symmetry. It is worth while to illustrate this
notice of Plato by some references to his writings.

In the Sixth Book of the _Republic_, Plato treats of the then existing
sciences as the instruments of a philosophical education. Among the
most conspicuous of these is astronomy. He there ridicules the notion
that astronomy is a sublime science because it makes men look _upward_.
He asserts that the really sublime science is that which makes men look
at the _realities_, which are suggested by the appearances seen in the
heavens: namely, the spheres which revolve and carry the luminaries
in their revolutions. Now it was no doubt the determined search for
such "realities" as these which gave birth to the Greek _Astronomy_,
that first and critical step in the progress of science. Plato, by his
exhortations, if not by his suggestions, contributed effectually, as
I conceive, to this step in science. In the same manner he requires
a science of _Harmonics_ which shall be free from the defects and
inaccuracies which occur in actual instruments. This belief that the
universe was full of mathematical relations, and that these were the
true objects of scientific research, gave a vigour, largeness of mind,
and confidence to the Greek speculators which no more cautious view of
the problem of scientific discovery could have supplied. It was well
that this advanced guard in the army of discoverers was filled with
indomitable courage, boundless hopes, and creative minds.

But we must not forget that this disposition to what Bacon calls
_anticipation_ was full of danger as well as of hope. It led Plato
into error, as it led Kepler afterwards, and many others in all ages
of scientific activity. It led Plato into error, for instance, when it
led him to assert (in the _Timæus_) that the four elements, Earth, Air,
Fire and Water, have, for the forms of their particles respectively,
the Cube, the Icosahedron, the Pyramid, and the Octahedron; and again,
when it led him to despise the practical controversies of the musicians
of his time; which controversies were, in fact, the proof of the
truth of the mathematical theory of Harmonics. And in like manner it
led Kepler into error when it led him to believe that he had found the
reason of the number, size and motion of the planetary orbits in the
application of the five regular solids to the frame of the universe[7].

How far the caution in forming hypotheses which Bacon's writings urge
upon us is more severe than suits the present prospects of science,
we may hereafter consider; but it is plainly very conceivable that
a boldness in the invention and application of hypotheses which was
propitious to science in its infancy, may be one of the greatest
dangers of its more mature period: and further, that the happy effect
of such a temper depended entirely upon the candour, skill and labour
with which the hypotheses were compared with the observed phenomena.


4. Plato has given a survey of the sciences of his time as Francis
Bacon has of _his_. Indeed Plato has given two such surveys: one,
in the _Republic_, in reviewing, as I have said, the elements of a
philosophical education; the other in the _Timæus_, as the portions
of a theological view of the universe--such as has been called a
_Theodicæa_, a justification of God. In the former passage of Plato,
the sciences enumerated are Arithmetic, Plane Geometry, Solid Geometry,
Astronomy and Harmonics[8]. In the _Timæus_ we have a further notice
of many other subjects, in a way which is intended, I conceive, to
include such knowledge as Plato had then arrived at on the various
parts of the universe. The subjects there referred to are, as I have
elsewhere stated[9], these: light and heat, water, ice, gold, gems,
rust and other natural objects:--odours, taste, hearing, lights,
colour, and the powers of sense in general:--the parts and organs of
the body, as the bones, the marrow, the brain, flesh, muscles, tendons,
ligaments and nerves; the skin, the hair, the nails; the veins and
arteries; respiration; generation; and in short, every obvious point
of physiology. But the opinions thus delivered in the _Timæus_ on the
latter subject have little to do with the progress of real knowledge.
The doctrines, on the other hand, which depend upon geometrical and
arithmetical relations are portions or preludes of the sciences which
the fulness of time brought forth.


5. I may, as further bearing upon the Platonic notion of science,
notice Plato's view of the constitution of the human mind. According
to him the Ideas which are the constituents of science form an
Intelligible World, while the visible and tangible things which we
perceive by our senses form the Visible World. In the visible world we
have shadows and reflections of actual objects, and by these shadows
and reflections we may judge of the objects, even when we cannot do
so directly; as when men in a dark cavern judge of external objects
by the shadows which they cast into the cavern. In like manner in the
Intelligible World there are conceptions which are the usual objects of
human thought, and about which we reason; but these are only shadows
and reflections of the Ideas which are the real sources of truth.
And the Reasoning Faculty, the Discursive Reason, the _Logos_, which
thus deals with conceptions, is subordinate to the Intuitive Faculty,
the Intuitive Reason, the _Nous_, which apprehends Ideas[10]. This
recognition of a Faculty in man which contemplates the foundations--the
_Fundamental Ideas_--of science, and by apprehending such Ideas, makes
science possible, is consentaneous to the philosophy which I have
all along presented, as the view taught us by a careful study of the
history and nature of science. That new Fundamental Ideas are unfolded,
and the Intuitive Faculty developed and enlarged by the progress of
science and by an intimate acquaintance with its reasonings, Plato
appears to have discerned in some measure, though dimly. And this is
the less wonderful, inasmuch as this gradual and successive extension
of the field of Intuitive Truth, in proportion as we become familiar
with a larger amount of derived truth, is even now accepted by few,
though proved by the reasonings of the greatest scientific discoverers
in every age.

The leading defect in Plato's view of the nature of real science is his
not seeing fully the extent to which experience and observation are the
basis of all our knowledge of the universe. He considers the luminaries
which appear in the heavens to be not the true objects of astronomy,
but only some imperfect adumbration of them;--mere diagrams which may
assist us in the study of a higher truth, as beautiful diagrams might
illustrate the truths of geometry, but would not prove them. This
notion of an astronomy which is an astronomy of Theories and not of
Facts, is not tenable, for Theories _are_ Facts. Theories and Facts
are equally _real_; true Theories are Facts, and Facts are familiar
Theories. But when Plato says that astronomy is a series of problems
suggested by visible things, he uses expressions quite conformable
to the true philosophy of science; and the like is true of all other
sciences.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 6: This matter is further discussed in the Appendix, Essay A.]

[Footnote 7: These matters are further discussed in the Appendix, Essay
B.]

[Footnote 8: See Appendix, Essay B.]

[Footnote 9: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. ii. Additions to 3rd Ed.]

[Footnote 10: See these views further discussed in the Appendix, Essay
C.]




