CHAPTER XV.

FRANCIS BACON.


(I.) 1. _General Remarks._--It is a matter of some difficulty to speak
of the character and merits of this illustrious man, as regards his
place in that philosophical history with which we are here engaged.
If we were to content ourselves with estimating him according to the
office which, as we have just seen, he claims for himself[168], as
merely the harbinger and announcer of a sounder method of scientific
inquiry than that which was recognized before him, the task would
be comparatively easy. For we might select from his writings those
passages in which he has delivered opinions and pointed out processes,
then novel and strange, but since confirmed by the experience of
actual discoverers, and by the judgments of the wisest of succeeding
philosophers; and we might pass by, without disrespect, but without
notice, maxims and proposals which have not been found available for
use;--views so indistinct and vague, that we are even yet unable to
pronounce upon their justice;--and boundless anticipations, dictated
by the sanguine hopes of a noble and comprehensive intellect. But
if we thus reduce the philosophy of Bacon to that portion which the
subsequent progress of science has rigorously verified, we shall
have to pass over many of those declarations which have excited
most notice in his writings, and shall lose sight of many of those
striking thoughts which his admirers most love to dwell upon. For he
is usually spoken of, at least in this country, as a teacher who
not only commenced, but in a great measure completed, the Philosophy
of Induction. He is considered, not only as having asserted some
general principles, but laid down the special rules of scientific
investigation; as not only one of the Founders, but the supreme
Legislator of the modern Republic of Science; not only the Hercules who
slew the monsters that obstructed the earlier traveller, but the Solon
who established a constitution fitted for all future time.


2. Nor is it our purpose to deny that of such praise he deserves
a share which, considering the period at which he lived, is truly
astonishing. But it is necessary for us in this place to discriminate
and select that portion of his system which, bearing upon _physical_
science, has since been confirmed by the actual history of science.
Many of Bacon's most impressive and captivating passages contemplate
the extension of the new methods of discovering truth to intellectual,
to moral, to political, as well as to physical science. And how far,
and how, the advantages of the inductive method may be secured for
those important branches of speculation, it will at some future time
be a highly interesting task to examine. But our plan requires us at
present to omit the consideration of these; for our purpose is to learn
what the genuine course of the formation of science is, by tracing it
in those portions of human knowledge, which, by the confession of all,
are most exact, most certain, most complete. Hence we must here deny
ourselves the dignity and interest which float about all speculations
in which the great moral and political concerns of men are involved.
It cannot be doubted that the commanding position which Bacon occupies
in men's estimation arises from his proclaiming a reform in philosophy
of so comprehensive a nature;--a reform which was to infuse a new
spirit into every part of knowledge. Physical Science has tranquilly
and noiselessly adopted many of his suggestions; which were, indeed,
her own natural impulses, not borrowed from him; and she is too deeply
and satisfactorily absorbed in contemplating her results, to talk much
about the methods of obtaining them which she has thus instinctively
pursued. But the philosophy which deals with mind, with manners,
with morals, with polity, is conscious still of much obscurity and
perplexity; and would gladly borrow aid from a system in which aid
is so confidently promised. The aphorisms and phrases of the _Novum
Organon_ are far more frequently quoted by metaphysical, ethical, and
even theological writers, than they are by the authors of works on
physics.


3. Again, even as regards physics, Bacon's fame rests upon something
besides the novelty of the maxims which he promulgated. That a
revolution in the method of scientific research was going on, all
the greatest physical investigators of the sixteenth century were
fully aware, as we have shown in the last chapter. But their writings
conveyed this conviction to the public at large somewhat slowly. Men of
letters, men of the world, men of rank, did not become familiar with
the abstruse works in which these views were published; and above all,
they did not, by such occasional glimpses as they took of the state of
physical science, become aware of the magnitude and consequences of
this change. But Bacon's lofty eloquence, wide learning, comprehensive
views, bold pictures of the coming state of things, were fitted to
make men turn a far more general and earnest gaze upon the passing
change. When a man of his acquirements, of his talents, of his rank and
position, of his gravity and caution, poured forth the strongest and
loftiest expressions and images which his mind could supply, in order
to depict the "Great Instauration" which he announced;--in order to
contrast the weakness, the blindness, the ignorance, the wretchedness,
under which men had laboured while they followed the long beaten track,
with the light, the power, the privileges, which they were to find in
the paths to which he pointed;--it was impossible that readers of all
classes should not have their attention arrested, their minds stirred,
their hopes warmed; and should not listen with wonder and with pleasure
to the strains of prophetic eloquence in which so great a subject
was presented. And when it was found that the prophecy was verified;
when it appeared that an immense change in the methods of scientific
research really _had_ occurred;--that vast additions to man's knowledge
and power had been acquired, in modes like those which had been spoken
of;--that further advances might be constantly looked for;--and that a
progress, seemingly boundless, was going on in the direction in which
the seer had thus pointed;--it was natural that men should hail him as
the leader of the revolution; that they should identify him with the
event which he was the first to announce; that they should look upon
him as the author of that which he had, as they perceived, so soon and
so thoroughly comprehended.


4. For we must remark, that although (as we have seen) he was not the
only, nor the earliest writer, who declared that the time was come
for such a change, he not only proclaimed it more emphatically, but
understood it, in its general character, much more exactly, than any
of his contemporaries. Among the maxims, suggestions and anticipations
which he threw out, there were many of which the wisdom and the novelty
were alike striking to his immediate successors;--there are many
which even now, from time to time, we find fresh reason to admire,
for their acuteness and justice. Bacon stands far above the herd of
loose and visionary speculators who, before and about his time, spoke
of the establishment of new philosophies. If we must select some one
philosopher as the Hero of the revolution in scientific method, beyond
all doubt Francis Bacon must occupy the place of honour.

We shall, however, no longer dwell upon these general considerations,
but shall proceed to notice some of the more peculiar and
characteristic features of Bacon's philosophy; and especially those
views, which, occurring for the first time in his writings, have been
fully illustrated and confirmed by the subsequent progress of science,
and have become a portion of the permanent philosophy of our times.


(II.) 5. _A New Era announced._--The first great feature which
strikes us in Bacon's philosophical views is that which we have
already noticed;--his confident and emphatic announcement of a _New
Era_ in the progress of science, compared with which the advances of
former times were poor and trifling. This was with Bacon no loose and
shallow opinion, taken up on light grounds and involving only vague,
general notions. He had satisfied himself of the justice of such a
view by a laborious course of research and reflection. In 1605, at the
age of forty-four, he published his Treatise of the _Advancement of
Learning_, in which he takes a comprehensive and spirited survey of
the condition of all branches of knowledge which had been cultivated
up to that time. This work was composed with a view to that reform
of the existing philosophy which Bacon always had before his eyes;
and in the Latin edition of his works, forms the First Part of the
_Instauratio Magna_. In the Second Part of the Instauratio, the _Novum
Organon_, published in 1620, he more explicitly and confidently states
his expectations on this subject. He points out how slightly and
feebly the examination of nature had been pursued up to his time, and
with what scanty fruit. He notes the indications of this in the very
limited knowledge of the Greeks who had till then been the teachers
of Europe, in the complaints of authors concerning the subtilty and
obscurity of the secrets of nature, in the dissensions of sects, in
the absence of useful inventions resulting from theory, in the fixed
form which the sciences had retained for two thousand years. Nor, he
adds[169], is this wonderful; for how little of his thought and labour
has man bestowed upon science! Out of twenty-five centuries scarce six
have been favourable to the progress of knowledge. And even in those
favoured times, natural philosophy received the smallest share of man's
attention; while the portion so given was marred by controversy and
dogmatism; and even those who have bestowed a little thought upon
this philosophy, have never made it their main study, but have used it
as a passage or drawbridge to serve other objects. And thus, he says,
the great Mother of the Sciences is thrust down with indignity to the
offices of a handmaid; is made to minister to the labours of medicine
or mathematics, or to give the first preparatory tinge to the immature
minds of youth. For these and similar considerations of the errors of
past time, he draws hope for the future, employing the same argument
which Demosthenes uses to the Athenians: "That which is worst in the
events of the past, is the best as a ground of trust in the future.
For if you had done all that became you, and still had been in this
condition, your case might be desperate; but since your failure is the
result of your own mistakes, there is good hope that, correcting the
error of your course, you may reach a prosperity yet unknown to you."


(III.) 6. _A change of existing Method._--All Bacon's hope of
improvement indeed was placed in an entire _change of the Method_ by
which science was pursued; and the boldness, and at the same time (the
then existing state of science being considered), the definiteness of
his views of the change that was requisite, are truly remarkable.

That all knowledge must begin with observation, is one great principle
of Bacon's philosophy; but I hardly think it necessary to notice the
inculcation of this maxim as one of his main services to the cause of
sound knowledge, since it had, as we have seen, been fully insisted
upon by others before him, and was growing rapidly into general
acceptance without his aid. But if he was not the first to tell men
that they must collect their knowledge from observation, he had no
rival in his peculiar office of teaching them _how_ science must thus
be gathered from experience.

It appears to me that by far the most extraordinary parts of Bacon's
works are those in which, with extreme earnestness and clearness, he
insists upon a _graduated and successive induction_, as opposed to a
hasty transit from special facts to the highest generalizations. The
nineteenth Axiom of the First Book of the _Novum Organon_ contains a
view of the nature of true science most exact and profound, and, so
far as I am aware, at the time perfectly new. "There are two ways, and
can only be two, of seeking and finding truth. The one, from sense and
particulars, takes a flight to the most general axioms, and from those
principles and their truth, settled once for all, invents and judges of
intermediate axioms. The other method collects axioms from sense and
particulars, ascending _continuously and by degrees_, so that in the
end it arrives at the most general axioms; this latter way is the true
one, but hitherto untried."

It is to be remarked, that in this passage Bacon employs the term
_axioms_ to express any propositions collected from facts by induction,
and thus fitted to become the starting-point of deductive reasonings.
How far propositions so obtained may approach to the character of
axioms in the more rigorous sense of the term, we have already in some
measure examined; but that question does not here immediately concern
us. The truly remarkable circumstance is to find this recommendation
of a continuous advance from observation, by limited steps, through
successive gradations of generality, given at a time when speculative
men in general had only just begun to perceive that they must begin
their course from experience in some way or other. How exactly this
description represents the general structure of the soundest and
most comprehensive physical theories, all persons who have studied
the progress of science up to modern times can bear testimony; but
perhaps this structure of science cannot in any other way be made so
apparent as by those Tables of successive generalizations in which we
have exhibited the history and constitution of some of the principal
physical sciences, in the Chapter of a preceding work which treats of
the Logic of Induction. And the view which Bacon thus took of the true
progress of science was not only new, but, so far as I am aware, has
never been adequately illustrated up to the present day.


7. It is true, as I observed in the last chapter, that Galileo had been
led to see the necessity, not only of proceeding from experience in the
pursuit of knowledge, but of proceeding cautiously and gradually; and
he had exemplified this rule more than once, when, having made one step
in discovery, he held back his foot, for a time, from the next step,
however tempting. But Galileo had not reached this wide and commanding
view of the successive subordination of many steps, all leading up at
last to some wide and simple general truth. In catching sight of this
principle, and in ascribing to it its due importance, Bacon's sagacity,
so far as I am aware, wrought unassisted and unrivalled.


8. Nor is there any wavering or vagueness in Bacon's assertion of this
important truth. He repeats it over and over again; illustrates it by
a great number of the most lively metaphors and emphatic expressions.
Thus he speaks of the successive _floors_ (_tabulata_) of induction;
and speaks of each science as a _pyramid_[170] which has observation
and experience for its basis. No images can better exhibit the relation
of general and particular truths, as our own Inductive Tables may serve
to show.


(IV.) 9. _Comparison of the New and Old Method._ Again; not less
remarkable is his contrasting this true Method of Science (while it was
almost, as he says, yet untried) with the ancient and _vicious Method_,
which began, indeed, with facts of observation, but rushed at once
and with no gradations, to the most general principles. For this was
the course which had been actually followed by all those speculative
reformers who had talked so loudly of the necessity of beginning our
philosophy from experience. All these men, if they attempted to frame
physical doctrines at all, had caught up a few facts of observation,
and had erected a universal theory upon the suggestions which these
offered. This process of illicit generalization, or, as Bacon terms
it, Anticipation of Nature (_anticipatio naturæ_), in opposition to
the Interpretation of Nature, he depicts with singular acuteness, in
its character and causes. "These two ways," he says[171], "both begin
from sense and particulars; but their discrepancy is immense. The one
merely skims over experience and particulars in a cursory transit; the
other deals with them in a due and orderly manner. The one, at its very
outset, frames certain general abstract principles, but useless; the
other gradually rises to those principles which have a real existence
in nature."

"The former path," he adds[172], "that of illicit and hasty
generalization, is one which the intellect follows when abandoned to
its own impulse; and this it does from the requisitions of logic. For
the mind has a yearning which makes it dart forth to generalities, that
it may have something to rest in; and after a little dallying with
experience, becomes weary of it; and all these evils are augmented by
logic, which requires these generalities to make a show with in its
disputations."

"In a sober, patient, grave intellect," he further adds, "the mind, by
its own impulse, (and more especially if it be not impelled by the sway
of established opinions) attempts in some measure that other and true
way, of gradual generalization; but this it does with small profit;
for the intellect, except it be regulated and aided, is a faculty of
unequal operation, and altogether unapt to master the obscurity of
things."

The profound and searching wisdom of these remarks appears more
and more, as we apply them to the various attempts which men have
made to obtain knowledge; when they begin with the contemplation of
a few facts, and pursue their speculations, as upon most subjects
they have hitherto generally done; for almost all such attempts have
led immediately to some process of illicit generalization, which
introduces an interminable course of controversy. In the physical
sciences, however, we have the further inestimable advantage of seeing
the other side of the contrast exemplified: for many of them, as our
inductive Tables show us, have gone on according to the most rigorous
conditions of gradual and successive generalization; and in consequence
of this circumstance in their constitution, possess, in each part of
their structure, a solid truth, which is always ready to stand the
severest tests of reasoning and experiment.

We see how justly and clearly Bacon judged concerning the mode in which
facts are to be employed in the construction of science. This, indeed,
has ever been deemed his great merit: insomuch that many persons appear
to apprehend the main substance of his doctrine to reside in the maxim
that facts of observation, and such facts alone, are the essential
elements of all true science.


(V.) 10. _Ideas are necessary._--Yet we have endeavoured to establish
the doctrine that facts are but one of two ingredients of knowledge
both equally necessary;--that _Ideas_ are no less indispensable than
facts themselves; and that except these be duly unfolded and applied,
facts are collected in vain. Has Bacon then neglected this great
portion of his subject? Has he been led by some partiality of view, or
some peculiarity of circumstances, to leave this curious and essential
element of science in its pristine obscurity? Was he unaware of its
interest and importance?

We may reply that Bacon's philosophy, in its effect upon his readers
in general, does _not_ give due weight or due attention to the ideal
element of our knowledge. He is considered as peculiarly and eminently
the asserter of the value of experiment and observation. He is always
understood to belong to the experiential, as opposed to the ideal
school. He is held up in contrast to Plato and others who love to dwell
upon that part of knowledge which has its origin in the intellect of
man.


11. Nor can it be denied that Bacon has, in the finished part of his
_Novum Organon_, put prominently forwards the necessary dependence of
all our knowledge upon Experience, and said little of its dependence,
equally necessary, upon the Conceptions which the intellect itself
supplies. It will appear, however, on a close examination, that he
was by no means insensible or careless of this internal element of
all connected speculation. He held the balance, with no partial or
feeble hand, between phenomena and ideas. He urged the Colligation of
Facts, but he was not the less aware of the value of the Explication of
Conceptions.


12. This appears plainly from some remarkable Aphorisms in the _Novum
Organon_. Thus, in noticing the causes of the little progress then
made by science[173], he states this:--"In the current Notions, all is
unsound, whether they be logical or physical. _Substance_, _quality_,
_action_, _passion_, even _being_, are not good Conceptions; still less
are _heavy_, _light_, _dense_, _rare_, _moist_, _dry_, _generation_,
_corruption_, _attraction_, _repulsion_, _element_, _matter_, _form_,
and others of that kind; all are fantastical and ill-defined." And in
his attempt to exemplify his own system, he hesitates[174] in accepting
or rejecting the notions of _elementary_, _celestial_, _rare_, as
belonging to fire, since, as he says, they are vague and ill-defined
notions (_notiones vagæ nec bene terminatæ_). In that part of his work
which appears to be completed, there is not, so far as I have noticed,
any attempt to fix and define any notions thus complained of as loose
and obscure. But yet such an undertaking appears to have formed part
of his plan; and in the _Abecedarium Naturæ_[175], which consists of
the heads of various portions of his great scheme, marked by letters
of the alphabet, we find the titles of a series of dissertations "On
the Conditions of Being," which must have had for their object the
elucidation of divers Notions essential to science, and which would
have been contributions to the Explication of Conceptions, such as
we have attempted in a former part of this work. Thus some of the
subjects of these dissertations are;--Of Much and Little;--Of Durable
and Transitory;--Of Natural and Monstrous;--Of Natural and Artificial.
When the philosopher of induction came to discuss these, considered as
_conditions of existence_, he could not do otherwise than develope,
limit, methodize, and define the Ideas involved in these Notions,
so as to make them consistent with themselves, and a fit basis of
demonstrative reasoning. His task would have been of the same nature
as ours has been, in that part of this work which treats of the
Fundamental Ideas of the various classes of sciences.


13. Thus Bacon, in his speculative philosophy, took firmly hold of
both the handles of science; and if he had completed his scheme, would
probably have given due attention to Ideas, no less than to Facts, as
an element of our knowledge; while in his view of the general method
of ascending from facts to principles, he displayed a sagacity truly
wonderful. But we cannot be surprised, that in attempting to exemplify
the method which he recommended, he should have failed. For the method
could be exemplified only by some important discovery in physical
science; and great discoveries, even with the most perfect methods, do
not come at command. Moreover, although the general structure of his
scheme was correct, the precise import of some of its details could
hardly be understood, till the actual progress of science had made men
somewhat familiar with the kind of steps which it included.


(VI.) 14. _Bacon's Example._--Accordingly, Bacon's _Inquisition into
the Nature of Heat_, which is given in the Second Book of the _Novum
Organon_ as an example of the mode of interrogating Nature, cannot be
looked upon otherwise than as a complete failure. This will be evident
if we consider that, although the exact nature of heat is still an
obscure and controverted matter, the science of Heat now consists of
many important truths; and that to none of these truths is there any
approximation in Bacon's essay. From his process he arrives at this,
as the "forma or true definition" of heat;--"that it is an expansive,
restrained motion, modified in certain ways, and exerted in the
smaller particles of the body." But the steps by which the science of
Heat really advanced were (as may be seen in the history[176] of the
subject) these;--The discovery of a _measure_ of heat or temperature
(the thermometer); the establishment of the _laws_ of conduction
and radiation; of the _laws_ of specific heat, latent heat, and the
like. Such steps have led to Ampère's _hypothesis_[177], that heat
consists in the vibrations of an imponderable fluid; and to Laplace's
_hypothesis_, that temperature consists in the internal radiation of
such a fluid. These hypotheses cannot yet be said to be even probable;
but at least they are so modified as to include some of the preceding
laws which are firmly established; whereas Bacon's hypothetical motion
includes no laws of phenomena, explains no process, and is indeed
itself an example of illicit generalization.


15. One main ground of Bacon's ill fortune in this undertaking appears
to be, that he was not aware of an important maxim of inductive
science, that we must first obtain the _measure_ and ascertain the
_laws_ of phenomena, before we endeavour to discover their _causes_.
The whole history of thermotics up to the present time has been
occupied with the _former_ step, and the task is not yet completed:
it is no wonder, therefore, that Bacon failed entirely, when he so
prematurely attempted the _second_. His sagacity had taught him that
the progress of science must be gradual; but it had not led him to
judge adequately how gradual it must be, nor of what different kinds
of inquiries, taken in due order, it must needs consist, in order to
obtain success.

Another mistake, which could not fail to render it unlikely that Bacon
should really exemplify his precepts by any actual advance in science,
was, that he did not justly appreciate the sagacity, the inventive
genius, which all discovery requires. He conceived that he could
supersede the necessity of such peculiar endowments. "Our method of
discovery in science," he says[178], "is of such a nature, that there
is not much left to acuteness and strength of genius, but all degrees
of genius and intellect are brought nearly to the same level." And he
illustrates this by comparing his method to a pair of compasses, by
means of which a person with no manual skill may draw a perfect circle.
In the same spirit he speaks of proceeding by _due rejections_; and
appears to imagine that when we have obtained a collection of facts, if
we go on successively rejecting what is false, we shall at last find
that we have, left in our hands, that scientific truth which we seek.
I need not observe how far this view is removed from the real state of
the case. The necessity of a _conception_ which must be furnished by
the mind in order to bind together the facts, could hardly have escaped
the eye of Bacon, if he had cultivated more carefully the ideal side
of his own philosophy. And any attempts which he could have made to
construct such conceptions by mere rule and method, must have ended
in convincing him that nothing but a peculiar inventive talent could
supply that which was thus not contained in the facts, and yet was
needed for the discovery.


(VII.) 16. _His Failure._--Since Bacon, with all his acuteness, had not
divined circumstances so important in the formation of science, it is
not wonderful that his attempt to reduce this process to a _Technical
Form_ is of little value. In the first place, he says[179], we must
prepare a natural and experimental history, good and sufficient; in the
next place, the instances thus collected are to be arranged in Tables
in some orderly way; and then we must apply a legitimate and true
induction. And in his example[180], he first collects a great number
of cases in which heat appears under various circumstances, which he
calls "a Muster of Instances before the intellect," (_comparentia
instantiarum ad intellectum_,) or a _Table of the Presence_ of the
thing sought. He then adds a _Table of its Absence_ in proximate cases,
containing instances where heat does not appear; then a _Table of
Degrees_, in which it appears with greater or less intensity. He then
adds[181], that we must try to exclude several obvious suppositions,
which he does by reference to some of the instances he has collected;
and this step he calls the _Exclusive_, or the _Rejection of Natures_.
He then observes, (and justly,) that whereas truth emerges more easily
from error than from confusion, we may, after this preparation, _give
play to the intellect_, (fiat permissio intellectus,) and make an
attempt at induction, liable afterwards to be corrected; and by this
step, which he terms his _First Vindemiation_, or _Inchoate Induction_,
he is led to the proposition concerning heat, which we have stated
above.


17. In all the details of his example he is unfortunate. By proposing
to himself to examine at once into the _nature_ of heat, instead
of the laws of special classes of phenomena, he makes, as we have
said, a fundamental mistake; which is the less surprising since he
had before him so few examples of the right course in the previous
history of science. But further, his collection of instances is very
loosely brought together; for he includes in his list the _hot_ taste
of aromatic plants, the _caustic_ effects of acids, and many other
facts which cannot be ascribed to heat without a studious laxity in
the use of the word. And when he comes to that point where he permits
his intellect its range, the conception of _motion_ upon which it at
once fastens, appears to be selected with little choice or skill, the
suggestion being taken from flame[182], boiling liquids, a blown fire,
and some other cases. If from such examples we could imagine heat
to be motion, we ought at least to have some gradation to cases of
heat where no motion is visible, as in a red-hot iron. It would seem
that, after a large collection of instances had been looked at, the
intellect, even in its first attempts, ought not to have dwelt upon
such an hypothesis as this.


18. After these steps, Bacon speaks of several classes of instances
which, singling them out of the general and indiscriminate collection
of facts, he terms _Instances with Prerogative_: and these he points
out as peculiar aids and guides to the intellect in its task. These
Instances with Prerogative have generally been much dwelt upon by those
who have commented on the _Novum Organon_. Yet, in reality, such a
classification, as has been observed by one of the ablest writers of
the present day[183], is of little service in the task of induction.
For the instances are, for the most part, classed, not according to
the ideas which they involve, or to any obvious circumstance in the
facts of which they consist, but according to the extent or manner of
their influence upon the inquiry in which they are employed. Thus we
have Solitary Instances, Migrating Instances, Ostensive Instances,
Clandestine Instances, so termed according to the degree in which
they exhibit, or seem to exhibit, the property whose nature we would
examine. We have Guide-Post Instances, (_Instantiæ Crucis_,) Instances
of the Parted Road, of the Doorway, of the Lamp, according to the
guidance they supply to our advance. Such a classification is much of
the same nature as if, having to teach the art of building, we were to
describe tools with reference to the amount and place of the work which
they must do, instead of pointing out their construction and use:--as
if we were to inform the pupil that we must have tools for lifting a
stone up, tools for moving it sideways, tools for laying it square,
tools for cementing it firmly. Such an enumeration of ends would convey
little instruction as to the means. Moreover, many of Bacon's classes
of instances are vitiated by the assumption that the "form," that is,
the general law and cause of the property which is the subject of
investigation, is to be looked for directly in the instances; which, as
we have seen in his inquiry concerning heat, is a fundamental error.


19. Yet his phraseology in some cases, as in the _instantia crucis_,
serves well to mark the place which certain experiments hold in our
reasonings: and many of the special examples which he gives are full
of acuteness and sagacity. Thus he suggests swinging a pendulum in a
mine, in order to determine whether the attraction of the earth arises
from the attraction of its parts; and observing the tide at the same
moment in different parts of the world, in order to ascertain whether
the motion of the water is expansive or progressive; with other
ingenious proposals. These marks of genius may serve to counterbalance
the unfavourable judgment of Bacon's aptitude for physical science
which we are sometimes tempted to form, in consequence of his false
views on other points; as his rejection of the Copernican system, and
his undervaluing Gilbert's magnetical speculations. Most of these
errors arose from a too ambitious habit of intellect, which would not
be contented with any except very wide and general truths; and from an
indistinctness of mechanical, and perhaps, in general, of mathematical
ideas:--defects which Bacon's own philosophy was directed to remedy,
and which, in the progress of time, it has remedied in others.


(VIII.) 20. _His Idols._--Having thus freely given our judgment
concerning the most exact and definite portion of Bacon's precepts,
it cannot be necessary for us to discuss at any length the value
of those more vague and general _Warnings_ against prejudice and
partiality, against intellectual indolence and presumption, with which
his works abound. His advice and exhortations of this kind are always
expressed with energy and point, often clothed in the happiest forms
of imagery; and hence it has come to pass, that such passages are
perhaps more familiar to the general reader than any other part of
his writings. Nor are Bacon's counsels without their importance, when
we have to do with those subjects in which prejudice and partiality
exercise their peculiar sway. Questions of politics and morals,
of manners, taste, or history, cannot be subjected to a scheme of
rigorous induction; and though on such matters we venture to assert
general principles, these are commonly obtained with some degree of
insecurity, and depend upon special habits of thought, not upon mere
logical connexion. Here, therefore, the intellect may be perverted,
by mixing, with the pure reason, our gregarious affections, or our
individual propensities; the false suggestions involved in language,
or the imposing delusions of received theories. In these dim and
complex labyrinths of human thought, _the Idol of the Tribe_, or _of
the Den_, _of the Forum_, or _of the Theatre_, may occupy men's minds
with delusive shapes, and may obscure or pervert their vision of truth.
But in that Natural Philosophy with which we are here concerned, there
is little opportunity for such influences. As far as a physical theory
is completed through all the steps of a just induction, there is a
clear daylight diffused over it which leaves no lurking-place for
prejudice. Each part can be examined separately and repeatedly; and
the theory is not to be deemed perfect till it will bear the scrutiny
of all sound minds alike. Although, therefore, Bacon, by warning men
against the idols of fallacious images above spoken of, may have
guarded them from dangerous error, his precepts have little to do with
Natural Philosophy: and we cannot agree with him when he says[184],
that the doctrine concerning these idols bears the same relation to
the interpretation of nature as the doctrine concerning sophistical
paralogisms bears to common logic.


(IX.) 21. _His Aim, Utility._--There is one very prominent feature in
Bacon's speculations which we must not omit to notice; it is a leading
and constant object with him to apply his knowledge to _Use_. The
insight which he obtains into nature, he would employ in commanding
nature for the service of man. He wishes to have not only principles
but works. The phrase which best describes the aim of his philosophy is
his own[185], "Ascendendo ad _axiomata_, descendendo ad _opera_." This
disposition appears in the first aphorism of the _Novum Organon_, and
runs through the work. "Man, the _minister_ and interpreter of nature,
_does_ and understands, so far as he has, in fact or in thought,
observed the course of nature; and he cannot know or _do_ more than
this." It is not necessary for us to dwell much upon this turn of mind;
for the whole of our present inquiry goes upon the supposition that an
acquaintance with the laws of nature is worth our having for its own
sake. It may be universally true, that Knowledge is Power; but we have
to do with it not as Power, but as Knowledge. It is the formation of
Science, not of Art, with which we are here concerned. It may give a
peculiar interest to the history of science, to show how it constantly
tends to provide better and better for the wants and comforts of the
body; but _that_ is not the interest which engages us in our present
inquiry into the nature and course of philosophy. The consideration
of the means which promote man's material well-being often appears to
be invested with a kind of dignity, by the discovery of general laws
which it involves; and the satisfaction which rises in our minds at
the contemplation of such cases, men sometimes ascribe, with a false
ingenuity, to the love of mere bodily enjoyment. But it is never
difficult to see that this baser and coarser element is not the real
source of our admiration. Those who hold that it is the main business
of science to construct instruments for the uses of life, appear
sometimes to be willing to accept the consequence which follows from
such a doctrine, that the first shoemaker was a philosopher worthy of
the highest admiration[186]. But those who maintain such paradoxes,
often, by a happy inconsistency, make it their own aim, not to devise
some improved covering for the feet, but to delight the mind with acute
speculations, exhibited in all the graces of wit and fancy.

It has been said[187] that the key of the Baconian doctrine consists in
two words, Utility and Progress. With regard to the latter point, we
have already seen that the hope and prospect of a boundless progress in
human knowledge had sprung up in men's minds, even in the early times
of imperial Rome; and were most emphatically expressed by that very
Seneca who disdained to reckon the worth of knowledge by its value in
food and clothing. And when we say that Utility was the great business
of Bacon's philosophy, we forget one-half of his characteristic phrase:
"Ascendendo ad aximomata," no less than "descendendo ad opera," was,
he repeatedly declared, the scheme of his path. He constantly spoke,
we are told by his secretary[188], of two kinds of experiments,
_experimenta fructifera_, and _experimenta lucifera_.

Again; when we are told by modern writers that Bacon merely recommended
such induction as all men instinctively practise, we ought to recollect
his own earnest and incessant declarations to the contrary. The
induction hitherto practised is, he says, of no use for obtaining solid
science. There are two ways[189], "hæc via in usu est," "altera vera,
sed intentata." Men have constantly been employed in _anticipation_;
in illicit induction. The intellect left to itself rushes on in this
road[190]; the conclusions so obtained are persuasive[191]; far more
persuasive than inductions made with due caution[192]. But still this
method must be rejected if we would obtain true knowledge. We shall
then at length have ground of good hope for science when we proceed
in another manner[193]. We must rise, not by a leap, but by small
steps, by successive advances, by a gradation of ascents, trying our
facts, and clearing our notions at every interval. The scheme of true
philosophy, according to Bacon, is not obvious and simple, but long and
technical, requiring constant care and self-denial to follow it. And we
have seen that, in this opinion, his judgment is confirmed by the past
history and present condition of science.

Again; it is by no means a just view of Bacon's character to place
him in contrast to Plato. Plato's philosophy was the philosophy of
Ideas; but it was not left for Bacon to set up the philosophy of
Facts in opposition to that of Ideas. That had been done fully by the
speculative reformers of the sixteenth century. Bacon had the merit of
showing that Facts and Ideas must be combined; and not only so, but of
divining many of the special rules and forms of this combination, when
as yet there were no examples of them, with a sagacity hitherto quite
unparalleled.


(X.) 22. _His Perseverance._--With Bacon's unhappy political life we
have here nothing to do. But we cannot but notice with pleasure how
faithfully, how perseveringly, how energetically he discharged his
great philosophical office of a Reformer of Methods. He had conceived
the purpose of making this his object at an early period. When
meditating the continuation of his _Novum Organon_, and speaking of
his reasons for trusting that his work will reach some completeness
of effect, he says[194], "I am by two arguments thus persuaded.
First, I think thus from the zeal and constancy of my mind, which has
not waxed old in this design, nor, after so many years, grown cold
and indifferent; I remember that about forty years ago I composed
a juvenile work about these things, which with great contrivance
and a pompous title I called _temporis partum maximum_, or the most
considerable birth of time; Next, that on account of its usefulness,
it may hope the Divine blessing." In stating the grounds of hope for
future progress in the sciences, he says[195]: "Some hope may, we
conceive, be ministered to men by our own example: and this we say, not
for the sake of boasting, but because it is useful to be said. If any
despond, let them look at me, a man among all others of my age most
occupied with civil affairs, nor of very sound health, (which brings a
great loss of time;) also in this attempt the first explorer, following
the footsteps of no man, nor communicating on these subjects with any
mortal; yet, having steadily entered upon the true road and made my
mind submit to things themselves, one who has, in this undertaking,
made, (as we think,) some progress." He then proceeds to speak of what
may be done by the combined and more prosperous labours of others,
in that strain of noble hope and confidence, which rises again and
again, like a chorus, at intervals in every part of his writings. In
the _Advancement of Learning_ he had said, "I could not be true and
constant to the argument I handle, if I were not willing to go beyond
others, but yet not more willing than to have others go beyond me
again." In the Preface to the _Instauratio Magna_, he had placed among
his postulates those expressions which have more than once warmed the
breast of a philosophical reformer[196]. "Concerning ourselves we
speak not; but as touching the matter which we have in hand, this we
ask;--that men be of good hope, neither feign and imagine to themselves
this our Reform as something of infinite dimension and beyond the grasp
of mortal man, when in truth it is the end and true limit of infinite
error; and is by no means unmindful of the condition of mortality and
humanity, not confiding that such a thing can be carried to its perfect
close in the space of a single age, but assigning it as a task to a
succession of generations." In a later portion of the _Instauratio_ he
says: "We bear the strongest love to the _human republic_ our common
country; and we by no means abandon the hope that there will arise and
come forth some man among posterity, who will be able to receive and
digest all that is best in what we deliver; and whose care it will be
to cultivate and perfect such things. Therefore, by the blessing of the
Deity, to tend to this object, to open up the fountains, to discover
the useful, to gather guidance for the way, shall be our task; and from
this we shall never, while we remain in life, desist."


(XI.) 23. _His Piety._--We may add, that the spirit of piety as well as
of hope which is seen in this passage, appears to have been habitual
to Bacon at all periods of his life. We find in his works several
drafts of portions of his great scheme, and several of them begin with
a prayer. One of these entitled, in the edition of his works, "The
Student's Prayer," appears to me to belong probably to his early youth.
Another, entitled "The Writer's Prayer," is inserted at the end of
the Preface of the _Instauratio_, as it was finally published. I will
conclude my notice of this wonderful man by inserting here these two
prayers.

"To God the Father, God the Word, God the Spirit, we pour forth most
humble and hearty supplications; that he, remembering the calamities
of mankind, and the pilgrimage of this our life, in which we wear out
days few and evil, would please to open to us new refreshments out of
the fountains of his goodness for the alleviating of our miseries.
This also we humbly and earnestly beg, that human things may not
prejudice such as are divine; neither that, from the unlocking of the
gates of sense, and the kindling of a greater natural light, anything
of incredulity, or intellectual night, may arise in our minds towards
divine mysteries. But rather, that by our mind thoroughly cleansed and
purged from fancy and vanities, and yet subject and perfectly given up
to the Divine oracles, there may be given unto faith the things that
are faith's."

"Thou, O Father, who gavest the visible light as the first-born of
thy creatures, and didst pour into man the intellectual light as the
top and consummation of thy workmanship, be pleased to protect and
govern this work, which coming from thy goodness, returneth to thy
glory. Thou, after thou hadst reviewed the works which thy hands had
made, beheldest that everything was very good, and thou didst rest
with complacency in them. But man, reflecting on the works which he
had made, saw that all was vanity and vexation of spirit, and could by
no means acquiesce in them. Wherefore, if we labour in thy works with
the sweat of our brows, thou wilt make us partakers of thy vision and
thy Sabbath. We humbly beg that this mind may be steadfastly in us;
and that thou, by our hands, and also by the hands of others on whom
thou shalt bestow the same spirit, wilt please to convey a largess
of new alms to thy family of mankind. These things we commend to thy
everlasting love, by our Jesus, thy Christ, God with us. Amen."


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 168: And in other passages: thus, "Ego enim buccinator tantum
pugnam non ineo." _Nov. Org._ lib. iv. c. i.]

[Footnote 169: Lib. 1. Aphor. 78 _et seq._]

[Footnote 170: _Aug. Sc._ Lib. iii. c. 4. p. 194. So in other places,
as _Nov. Org._ i. Aph. 104. "De scientiis tum demum bene sperandum est
quando per scalam veram et per gradus continuos, et non intermissos aut
hiulcos a particularibus ascendetur ad axiomata minora, et deinde ad
media, alia aliis superiora, et postremo demum ad generalissima."]

[Footnote 171: _Nov. Org._ 1. Aph. 22.]

[Footnote 172: _Ib._ Aph. 20.]

[Footnote 173: 1 Ax. 15.]

[Footnote 174: _Nov. Org._ lib. ii. Aph. 19.]

[Footnote 175: _Inst. Mag._ par. iii. (vol. viii. p. 244).]

[Footnote 176: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. x. c. i.]

[Footnote 177: _Ib._ c. iv.]

[Footnote 178: _Nov. Org._ lib. i. Aph. 61.]

[Footnote 179: _Nov. Org._ lib. ii. Aph. 10.]

[Footnote 180: Aph. 11.]

[Footnote 181: Aph. 15, p. 105.]

[Footnote 182: Page 110.]

[Footnote 183: Herschel, _On the Study of Nat. Phil._ Art. 192.]

[Footnote 184: _Nov. Org._ lib. i. Aph. 40.]

[Footnote 185: _Nov. Org._ lib. i. Ax. 103.]

[Footnote 186: _Edinb. Rev._ No. cxxxii. p. 65.]

[Footnote 187: _Ib._]

[Footnote 188: Pref. to the _Nat. Hist._ i. 243.]

[Footnote 189: _Nov. Org._ lib. i. Aph. 19.]

[Footnote 190: _Ibid._ lib. i. Aph. 20.]

[Footnote 191: Aph. 27.]

[Footnote 192: _Ib._ 28.]

[Footnote 193: Aph. 104. So Aph. 105. "In constituendo axiomate forma
_inductionis_ alia quam adhuc in usu fuit excogitanda est," &c.]

[Footnote 194: _Ep. ad P. Fulgentium._ _Op._ x. 330.]

[Footnote 195: _Nov. Org._ i. Aph. 113.]

[Footnote 196: See the motto to Kant's _Kritik der Reinen Vernunft_.]




