CHAPTER VI.

THE LATER GREEKS.


Thus while Plato was disposed to seek the essence of our knowledge
in Ideas alone, Aristotle, slighting this source of truth, looked to
Experience as the beginning of Science; and he attempted to obtain, by
division and deduction, all that Experience did not immediately supply.
And thus, with these two great names, began that struggle of opposite
opinions which has ever since that time agitated the speculative
world, as men have urged the claims of Ideas or of Experience to our
respect, and as alternately each of these elements of knowledge has
been elevated above its due place, while the other has been unduly
depressed. We shall see the successive turns of this balanced struggle
in the remaining portions of this review.

But we may observe that practically the influence of Plato predominated
rather than that of Aristotle, in the remaining part of the history
of ancient philosophy. It was, indeed, an habitual subject of dispute
among men of letters, whether the sources of true knowledge are
to be found in the Senses or in the Mind; the Epicureans taking
one side of this alternative, and the Academics another, while the
Stoics in a certain manner included both elements in their view. But
none of these sects showed their persuasion that the materials of
knowledge were to be found in the domain of Sense, by seeking them
there. No one appears to have thought of following the example of
Aristotle, and gathering together a store of observed facts. We may
except, perhaps, assertions belonging to some provinces of Natural
History, which were collected by various writers: but in these, the
mixed character of the statements, the want of discrimination in
the estimate of evidence, the credulity and love of the marvellous
which the authors for the most part displayed, showed that instead
of improving upon the example of Aristotle, they were wandering
further and further from the path of real knowledge. And while they
thus collected, with so little judgment, such statements as offered
themselves, it hardly appears to have occurred to any one to enlarge
the stores of observation by the aid of experiment; and to learn
what the laws of nature were, by trying what were their results in
particular cases. They used no instruments for obtaining an insight
into the constitution of the universe, except logical distinctions
and discussions; and proceeded as if the phenomena familiar to their
predecessors must contain all that was needed as a basis for natural
philosophy. By thus contenting themselves with the facts which the
earlier philosophers had contemplated, they were led also to confine
themselves to the ideas which those philosophers had put forth. For
all the most remarkable alternatives of hypothesis, so far as they
could be constructed with a slight and common knowledge of phenomena,
had been promulgated by the acute and profound thinkers who gave the
first impulse to philosophy: and it was not given to man to add much
to the original inventions of _their_ minds till he had undergone
anew a long discipline of observation, and of thought employed upon
observation. Thus the later authors of the Greek Schools became little
better than commentators on the earlier; and the commonplaces with
which the different schools carried on their debates,--the constantly
recurring argument, with its known attendant answer,--the distinctions
drawn finer and finer and leading to nothing,--render the speculations
of those times a _scholastic_ philosophy, in the same sense in which
we employ the term when we speak of the labours of the middle ages. It
will be understood that I now refer to that which is here my subject,
the opinions concerning our knowledge of nature, and the methods in
use for the purpose of obtaining such knowledge. Whether the moral
speculations of the ancient world were of the same stationary kind,
going their round in a limited circle, like their metaphysics and
physics, must be considered on some other occasion. [33] Mr. Grote,
in his very interesting discussion of Socrates's teaching, notices
also[34] the teaching of Hippocrates, which he conceives to have in
one respect the same tendency as the philosophy of Socrates; namely,
to turn away from the vague aggregate of doctrines and guesses which
constituted the Physical Philosophy of that time, and to pursue instead
a special and more practical course of inquiry: Hippocrates selecting
Medicine and Socrates selecting Ethics. By this limitation of their
subject, they avoided some of the errors of their predecessors. For,
as Mr. Grote has also remarked, "the earlier speculators, Anaxagoras,
Empedocles, Democritus, the Pythagoreans, all had still present to
their minds the vast and undivided problems which have been transmitted
down from the old poets; bending their minds to the invention of some
system which would explain them all at once, or assist the imagination
in conceiving both how the Kosmos first began and how it continued to
move on." There could be no better remedy for this ambitious error of
the human mind than to have a definite subject of study, such as the
diseases and the health of the human body. Accordingly, we see that the
study of medicine did draw its cultivators away from this ancient but
unprofitable field. Hippocrates[35] condemns those who, as Empedocles,
set themselves to make out what man was from the beginning, how he
began first to exist, and in what manner he was constructed. This is,
he says, no part of medicine. In like manner he blames and refutes
those who make some simple element, Hot, or Cold, or Moist, or Dry, the
cause of diseases, and give medical precepts professing to be founded
on this hypothesis.

These passages are marked by the prudence which practical study
suggests to a calm and clear-sighted man. They can hardly be said to
have opened the way to a Science of Medicine; for in the sense in which
we here use the word _Science_, namely, a collection of general truths
inferred from facts by successive discoverers, we have even yet no
Science of Medicine. The question with regard to the number and nature
of the Elements of which bodies are composed began to be agitated, as
we have seen, at a very early period of Greek philosophy, and continued
long to be regarded as a chief point of physiological doctrine. In
Galen's work we have a treatise entitled, _On the Elements according
to Hippocrates_; and the writer explains[36] that though Hippocrates
has not written any work with the title _On the Elements_, yet that
he has in his _Treatise on the Nature of Man_ shown his opinion on
that subject. That the doctrine of the Four Elements, Hot, Cold,
Moist, Dry, subsisted long in the schools, we have evidence in Galen.
He tells us[37] that when he was a student of nineteen years old a
teacher urged this lore upon him, and regarded him as very contentious
and perverse, because he offered objections to it. His account of the
Dialogue between him and the teacher is curious. But in Hippocrates the
doctrine of these four elements is replaced, in a great measure, by the
doctrine of the Four Humours of which the human body is constituted;
namely, Blood, Phlegm, Yellow Bile and Black Bile. Galen dwells with
emphasis upon Hippocrates's proof that there must be more than one such
element[38].

"What," he asks, "is the method of finding the Elements of bodies?
There can, in my opinion, be no other than that which was introduced by
Hippocrates; namely, we must inquire whether there be only one element,
everywhere the same in kind, or whether there are more than one,
various and unlike each other. And if the Element be not one only, but
several, various and dissimilar, we must inquire in the second place,
how many elements there are, and what, and of what kind they are, and
how related in their association.

"Now that the First Element is not one only of which both our bodies
and those of all other creatures were produced, Hippocrates shows
from these considerations. And it is better first to put down his own
expressions and then to expound them. 'I assert that if man consisted
of one element only he could not fall sick; for there would be nothing
which could derange his health, if he were all of one Element.'"

The doctrine of One Element did not prevail much after the time of
Hippocrates: the doctrine of Four Elements continued, as I have said,
long to hold possession of the Schools, but does not appear as an
important part of the doctrine of Hippocrates. The doctrine of the Four
Humours (Blood, Phlegm, Yellow Bile and Black Bile) is more peculiarly
his, and long retained its place as a principle of physiological
Science.

But we are here not so much concerned with his discoveries in medicine
as with his views respecting the method of acquiring sound knowledge,
and in this respect, as has been said, he recommends by his practice
a prudent limitation of the field of inquiry, a rejection of wide,
ambitious, general assertions, and a practical study of his proper
field.

In ascribing these merits to Hippocrates's medical speculations as
to the ethical speculations of his contemporary Socrates, we assign
considerable philosophical value to Hippocrates, no less than to
Socrates. These merits were at that time the great virtues of physical
as well as of ethical philosophy. But, as Mr. Grote well observes, the
community of character which then subsisted between the physical and
ethical speculations prevailing at that time, ceased to obtain in later
times. Indeed, it ceased to exist just at that time, in consequence of
the establishment of scientific astronomy by the exertions of Plato
and his contemporaries. From that time the Common Sense (as we call it)
of a man like Socrates, though it might be a good guide in ethics, was
not a good guide in physics. I have shown elsewhere[39] how the Common
Sense of Socrates was worthless in matters of astronomy. From that time
one of the great intellectual lessons was, that in order to understand
the external world, we must indeed observe carefully, but we must also
guess boldly. Discovery here required an inventive mind like Plato's
to deal with and arrange new and varied facts. But in ethics all the
facts were old and familiar, and the generalizations of language by
which they were grouped as Virtues and Vices, and the like, were common
and well-known words. Here was no room for invention; and thus in the
ethical speculations of Socrates or of any other moral teacher, we are
not to look for any contributions to the Philosophy of Discovery.

Nor do I find anything on this subject among later Greek writers,
beyond the commendation of such intellectual virtues as Hippocrates and
Galen, and other medical writers, schooled by the practice of their
art, enjoined and praised. But before we quit the ancients I will point
out some peculiarities which may be noticed in the Roman disciples of
the Greek philosophy.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 33: The remainder of this chapter is new in the present
edition.]

[Footnote 34: _Hist. of Greece_, Part ii. chap. 68.]

[Footnote 35: _De Antiqua Medicina_, c. 20.]

[Footnote 36: Lib. i. c. 9.]

[Footnote 37: _De Elem._ i. 6.]

[Footnote 38: In former editions I have not done justice to this
passage.]

[Footnote 39: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ Addition to Introduction in Third
Edition.]




