CHAPTER X.

THE INNOVATORS OF THE MIDDLE AGES.


_Raymond Lully._

1. _General Remarks._--In the rise of Experimental Philosophy,
understanding the term in the way just now stated, two features have
already been alluded to: the disposition to cast off the prevalent
reverence for the opinions and methods of preceding teachers with an
eager expectation of some vast advantage to be derived from a change;
and the belief that this improvement must be sought by drawing our
knowledge from external observation rather than from mere intellectual
efforts;--_the Insurrection against Authority_, and _the Appeal to
Experience_. These two movements were closely connected; but they may
easily be distinguished, and in fact, persons were very prominent in
the former part of the task, who had no comprehension of the latter
principle, from which alone the change derives its value. There were
many Malcontents who had not the temper, talent or knowledge, which
fitted them to be Reformers.

The authority which was questioned, in the struggle of which we speak,
was that of the Scholastic System, the combination of Philosophy with
Theology; of which Aristotle, presented in the form and manner which
the Doctors of the Church had imposed upon him, is to be considered
the representative. When there was demanded of men a submission of
the mind, such as this system claimed, the natural love of freedom in
man's bosom, and the speculative tendencies of his intellect, rose in
rebellion, from time to time, against the ruling oppression. We find
in all periods of the scholastic ages examples of this disposition
of man to resist overstrained authority; the tendency being mostly,
however, combined with a want of solid thought, and showing itself
in extravagant pretensions and fantastical systems put forwards by
the insurgents. We have pointed out one such opponent[56] of the
established systems, even among the Arabian schoolmen, a more servile
race than ever the Europeans were. We may here notice more especially
an extraordinary character who appeared in the thirteenth century, and
who may be considered as belonging to the Prelude of the Reform in
Philosophy, although he had no share in the Reform itself.

2. _Raymond Lully._--Raymond Lully is perhaps traditionally best known
as an Alchemist, of which art he appears to have been a cultivator. But
this was only one of the many impulses of a spirit ardently thirsty
of knowledge and novelty. He had[57], in his youth, been a man of
pleasure, but was driven by a sudden shock of feeling to resolve on a
complete change of life. He plunged into solitude, endeavoured to still
the remorse of his conscience by prayer and penance, and soon had his
soul possessed by visions which he conceived were vouchsafed to him.
In the feeling of religious enthusiasm thus excited, he resolved to
devote his life to the diffusion of Christian truth among Heathens and
Mahomedans. For this purpose, at the age of thirty he betook himself
to the study of Grammar, and of the Arabic language. He breathed
earnest supplications for an illumination from above; and these were
answered by his receiving from heaven, as his admirers declare, his
_Ars Magna_ by which he was able without labour or effort to learn
and apply all knowledge. The real state of the case is, that he put
himself in opposition to the established systems, and propounded a New
Art, from which he promised the most wonderful results; but that his
Art really is merely a mode of combining ideal conceptions without any
reference to real sources of knowledge, or any possibility of real
advantage. In a Treatise addressed, in A.D. 1310, to King Philip of
France, entitled _Liber Lamentationis Duodecim Principiorum Philosophiæ
contra Averroistas_, Lully introduced Philosophy, accompanied by her
twelve Principles, (Matter, Form, Generation, &c.) uttering loud
complaints against the prevailing system of doctrine; and represents
her as presenting to the king a petition that she may be upheld and
restored by her favourite, the Author. His _Tabula Generalis ad omnes
Scientias applicabilis_ was begun the 15th September, 1292, in the
Harbour of Tunis, and finished in 1293, at Naples. In order to frame an
Art of thus tabulating all existing sciences, and indeed all possible
knowledge, he divides into various classes the conceptions with which
he has to deal. The first class contains nine _Absolute Conceptions_:
Goodness, Greatness, Duration, Power, Wisdom, Will, Virtue, Truth,
Majesty. The second class has nine _Relative Conceptions_: Difference,
Identity, Contrariety, Beginning, Middle, End, Majority, Equality,
Minority. The third class contains nine _Questions_: Whether? What?
Whence? Why? How great? How circumstanced? When? Where? and How?
The fourth class contains the nine _Most General Subjects_: God,
Angel, Heaven, Man, _Imaginativum_, _Sensitivum_, _Vegetativum_,
_Elementativum_, _Instrumentativum_. Then come nine _Prædicaments_,
nine _Moral Qualities_, and so on. These conceptions are arranged in
the compartments of certain concentric moveable circles, and give
various combinations by means of triangles and other figures, and thus
propositions are constructed.

It must be clear at once, that real knowledge, which is the union of
facts and ideas, can never result from this machinery for shifting
about, joining and disjoining, empty conceptions. This, and all similar
schemes, go upon the supposition that the logical combinations of
notions do of themselves compose knowledge; and that really existing
things may be arrived at by a successive system of derivation from
our most general ideas. It is imagined that by distributing the
nomenclature of abstract ideas according to the place which they can
hold in our propositions, and by combining them according to certain
conditions, we may obtain formulæ including all possible truths, and
thus fabricate a science in which all sciences are contained. We thus
obtain the means of talking and writing upon all subjects, without the
trouble of thinking: the revolutions of the emblematical figures are
substituted for the operations of the mind. Both exertion of thought,
and knowledge of facts, become superfluous. And this reflection, adds
an intelligent author[58], explains the enormous number of books which
Lully is said to have written; for he might have written those even
during his sleep, by the aid of a moving power which should keep his
machine in motion. Having once devised this invention for manufacturing
science, Lully varied it in a thousand ways, and followed it into
a variety of developments. Besides Synoptical Tables, he employs
Genealogical Trees, each of which he dignifies with the name of the
Tree of Science. The only requisite for the application of his System
was a certain agreement in the numbers of the classes into which
different subjects were distributed; and as this symmetry does not
really exist in the operations of our thoughts, some violence was done
to the natural distinction and subordination of conceptions, in order
to fit them for the use of the system.

Thus Lully, while he professed to teach an Art which was to shed new
light upon every part of science, was in fact employed in a pedantic
and trifling repetition of known truths or truisms; and while he
complained of the errors of existing methods, he proposed in their
place one which was far more empty, barren, and worthless, than the
customary processes of human thought. Yet his method is spoken of[59]
with some praise by Leibnitz, who indeed rather delighted in the
region of ideas and words, than in the world of realities. But Francis
Bacon speaks far otherwise and more justly on this subject[60]. "It is
not to be omitted that some men, swollen with emptiness rather than
knowledge, have laboured to produce a certain Method, not deserving
the name of a legitimate Method, since it is rather a method of
imposture: which yet is doubtless highly grateful to certain would-be
philosophers. This method scatters about certain little drops of
science in such a manner that a smatterer may make a perverse and
ostentatious use of them with a certain show of learning. Such was
the art of Lully, which consisted of nothing but a mass and heap of
the words of each science; with the intention that he who can readily
produce the words of any science shall be supposed to know the science
itself. Such collections are like a rag shop, where you find a patch of
everything, but nothing which is of any value."


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 56: Algazel. See _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. iv. c. i.]

[Footnote 57: Tenneman, viii. 830.]

[Footnote 58: Degerando, iv. 535.]

[Footnote 59: Leibnitz's expressions are, (_Op._ t. vi. p. 16): "Quand
j'étais jeune, je prenois quelque a l'_Art_ de Lulle, mais je crus y
entrevoir bien des défectuosités, dont j'ai dit quelque chose dans un
petit Essai d'écolier intitulé _De Arte Combinatoria_, publié en 1666,
et qui a été réimprimé après malgré moi. Mais comme je ne méprise
rien facilement, excepté les arts divinatoires que ne sont que des
tromperies toutes pures, j'ai trouvé quelque chose d'estimable encore
dans l'_Art_ de Lulle."]

[Footnote 60: _Works_, vii. 296.]




