CHAPTER XI.

THE INNOVATORS OF THE MIDDLE AGES--CONTINUED.


_Roger Bacon._

We now come to a philosopher of a very different character, who was
impelled to declare his dissent from the reigning philosophy by the
abundance of his knowledge, and by his clear apprehension of the mode
in which real knowledge had been acquired and must be increased.

Roger Bacon was born in 1214, near Ilchester, in Somersetshire, of
an old family. In his youth he was a student at Oxford, and made
extraordinary progress in all branches of learning. He then went to
the University of Paris, as was at that time the custom of learned
Englishmen, and there received the degree of Doctor of Theology. At
the persuasion of Robert Grostête, bishop of Lincoln, he entered the
brotherhood of Franciscans in Oxford, and gave himself up to study
with extraordinary fervour. He was termed by his brother monks _Doctor
Mirabilis_. We know from his own works, as well as from the traditions
concerning him, that he possessed an intimate acquaintance with all the
science of his time which could be acquired from books; and that he had
made many remarkable advances by means of his own experimental labours.
He was acquainted with Arabic, as well as with the other languages
common in his time. In the title of his works, we find the whole
range of science and philosophy, Mathematics and Mechanics, Optics,
Astronomy, Geography, Chronology, Chemistry, Magic, Music, Medicine,
Grammar, Logic, Metaphysics, Ethics, and Theology; and judging from
those which are published, these works are full of sound and exact
knowledge. He is, with good reason, supposed to have discovered, or to
have had some knowledge of, several of the most remarkable inventions
which were made generally known soon afterwards; as gunpowder, lenses,
burning specula, telescopes, clocks, the correction of the calendar,
and the explanation of the rainbow.

Thus possessing, in the acquirements and habits of his own mind,
abundant examples of the nature of knowledge and of the process of
invention, Roger Bacon felt also a deep interest in the growth and
progress of science, a spirit of inquiry respecting the causes which
produced or prevented its advance, and a fervent hope and trust in its
future destinies; and these feelings impelled him to speculate worthily
and wisely respecting a Reform of the Method of Philosophizing. The
manuscripts of his works have existed for nearly six hundred years in
many of the libraries of Europe, and especially in those of England;
and for a long period the very imperfect portions of them which were
generally known, left the character and attainments of the author
shrouded in a kind of mysterious obscurity. About a century ago,
however, his _Opus Majus_ was published[61] by Dr. S. Jebb, principally
from a manuscript in the Library of Trinity College, Dublin; and this
contained most or all of the separate works which were previously
known to the public, along with others still more peculiar and
characteristic. We are thus able to judge of Roger Bacon's knowledge
and of his views, and they are in every way well worthy our attention.

The _Opus Majus_ is addressed to Pope Clement the Fourth, whom Bacon
had known when he was legate in England as Cardinal-bishop of Sabina,
and who admired the talents of the monk, and pitied him for the
persecutions to which he was exposed. On his elevation to the papal
chair, this account of Bacon's labours and views was sent, at the
earnest request of the pontiff. Besides the _Opus Majus_, he wrote
two others, the _Opus Minus_ and _Opus Tertium_; which were also sent
to the pope, as the author says[62], "on account of the danger of
roads, and the possible loss of the work." These works still exist
unpublished, in the Cottonian and other libraries. The _Opus Majus_ is
a work equally wonderful with regard to its general scheme, and to the
special treatises with which the outlines of the plan are filled up.
The professed object of the work is to urge the necessity of a reform
in the mode of philosophizing, to set forth the reasons why knowledge
had not made a greater progress, to draw back attention to the sources
of knowledge which had been unwisely neglected, to discover other
sources which were yet almost untouched, and to animate men in the
undertaking, by a prospect of the vast advantages which it offered.
In the development of this plan, all the leading portions of science
are expounded in the most complete shape which they had at that time
assumed; and improvements of a very wide and striking kind are proposed
in some of the principal of these departments. Even if the work had had
no leading purpose, it would have been highly valuable as a treasure of
the most solid knowledge and soundest speculations of the time; even
if it had contained no such details, it would have been a work most
remarkable for its general views and scope. It may be considered as,
at the same time, the _Encyclopedia_ and the _Novum Organon_ of the
thirteenth century.

Since this work is thus so important in the history of Inductive
Philosophy I shall give, in a note, a view[63] of its divisions and
contents. But I must now endeavour to point out more especially the way
in which the various principles, which the reform of scientific method
involved, are here brought into view.

One of the first points to be noticed for this purpose, is the
resistance to authority; and at the stage of philosophical history
with which we here have to do, this means resistance to the authority
of Aristotle, as adopted and interpreted by the Doctors of the
Schools. Bacon's work[64] is divided into Six Parts; and of these
Parts, the First is, Of the four universal Causes of all Human
Ignorance. The causes thus enumerated[65] are:--the force of unworthy
authority;--traditionary habit;--the imperfection of the undisciplined
senses;--and the disposition to conceal our ignorance and to make an
ostentatious show of our knowledge. These influences involve every man,
occupy every condition. They prevent our obtaining the most useful and
large and fair doctrines of wisdom, the secret of all sciences and
arts. He then proceeds to argue, from the testimony of philosophers
themselves, that the authority of antiquity, and especially of
Aristotle, is not infallible. "We find[66] their books full of doubts,
obscurities, and perplexities. They scarce agree with each other in
one empty question or one worthless sophism, or one operation of
science, as one man agrees with another in the practical operations
of medicine, surgery, and the like arts of Secular men. Indeed," he
adds, "not only the philosophers, but the saints have fallen into
errors which they have afterwards retracted," and this he instances
in Augustin, Jerome, and others. He gives an admirable sketch[67] of
the progress of philosophy from the Ionic School to Aristotle; of whom
he speaks with great applause. "Yet," he adds[68], "those who came
after him corrected him in some things, and added many things to his
works, and shall go on adding to the end of the world." Aristotle, he
adds, is now called peculiarly[69] the Philosopher, "yet there was a
time when his philosophy was silent and unregarded, either on account
of the rarity of copies of his works, or their difficulty, or from
envy; till after the time of Mahomet, when Avicenna and Averroes, and
others, recalled this philosophy into the full light of exposition. And
although the Logic and some other works were translated by Boethius
from the Greek, yet the philosophy of Aristotle first received a quick
increase among the Latins at the time of Michael Scot; who, in the year
of our Lord 1230, appeared, bringing with him portions of the books of
Aristotle on Natural Philosophy and Mathematics. And yet a small part
only of the works of this author is translated, and a still smaller
part is in the hands of common students." He adds further[70] (in the
Third Part of the _Opus Majus_, which is a Dissertation on language),
that the translations which are current of these writings, are very
bad and imperfect. With these views, he is moved to express himself
somewhat impatiently[71] respecting these works: "If I had," he says,
"power over the works of Aristotle, I would have them all burnt; for
it is only a loss of time to study in them, and a cause of error, and
a multiplication of ignorance beyond expression." "The common herd of
students," he says, "with their heads, have no principle by which they
can be excited to any worthy employment; and hence they mope and make
asses of themselves over their bad translations, and lose their time,
and trouble, and money."

The remedies which he recommends for these evils, are, in the first
place, the study of that only perfect wisdom which is to be found in
the sacred Scripture[72], in the next place, the study of mathematics
and the use of experiment[73]. By the aid of these methods, Bacon
anticipates the most splendid progress for human knowledge. He takes up
the strain of hope and confidence which we have noticed as so peculiar
in the Roman writers; and quotes some of the passages of Seneca which
we adduced in illustration of this:--that the attempts in science were
at first rude and imperfect, and were afterwards improved;--that the
day will come, when what is still unknown shall be brought to light by
the progress of time and the labours of a longer period;--that one age
does not suffice for inquiries so wide and various;--that the people
of future times shall know many things unknown to us;--and that the
time shall arrive when posterity will wonder that we overlooked what
was so obvious. Bacon himself adds anticipations more peculiarly in
the spirit of his own time. "We have seen," he says, at the end of the
work, "how Aristotle, by the ways which wisdom teaches, could give to
Alexander the empire of the world. And this the Church ought to take
into consideration against the infidels and rebels, that there may be a
sparing of Christian blood, and especially on account of the troubles
that shall come to pass in the days of Antichrist; which by the grace
of God, it would be easy to obviate, if prelates and princes would
encourage study, and join in searching out the secrets of nature and
art."

It may not be improper to observe here that this belief in the
appointed progress of knowledge, is not combined with any overweening
belief in the unbounded and independent power of the human intellect.
On the contrary, one of the lessons which Bacon draws from the state
and prospects of knowledge, is the duty of faith and humility. "To
him," he says[74], "who denies the truth of the faith because he is
unable to understand it, I will propose in reply the course of nature,
and as we have seen it in examples." And after giving some instances,
he adds, "These, and the like, ought to move men and to excite them
to the reception of divine truths. For if, in the vilest objects of
creation, truths are found, before which the inward pride of man must
bow, and believe though it cannot understand, how much more should
man humble his mind before the glorious truths of God!" He had before
said[75]: "Man is incapable of perfect wisdom in this life; it is
hard for him to ascend towards perfection, easy to glide downwards
to falsehoods and vanities: let him then not boast of his wisdom, or
extol his knowledge. What he knows is little and worthless, in respect
of that which he believes without knowing; and still less, in respect
of that which he is ignorant of. He is mad who thinks highly of his
wisdom; he most mad, who exhibits it as something to be wondered at."
He adds, as another reason for humility, that he has proved by trial,
he could teach in one year, to a poor boy, the marrow of all that
the most diligent person could acquire in forty years' laborious and
expensive study.

To proceed somewhat more in detail with regard to Roger Bacon's views
of a Reform in Scientific Inquiry, we may observe that by making
Mathematics and Experiment the two great points of his recommendation,
he directed his improvement to the two essential parts of all
knowledge, Ideas and Facts, and thus took the course which the most
enlightened philosophy would have suggested. He did not urge the
prosecution of experiment, to the comparative neglect of the existing
mathematical sciences and conception; a fault which there is some
ground for ascribing to his great namesake and successor Francis
Bacon: still less did he content himself with a mere protest against
the authority of the schools, and a vague demand for change, which
was almost all that was done by those who put themselves forward as
reformers in the intermediate time. Roger Bacon holds his way steadily
between the two poles of human knowledge; which, as we have seen, it
is far from easy to do. "There are two modes of knowing," says he[76];
"by argument, and by experiment. Argument concludes a question; but
it does not make us feel certain, or acquiesce in the contemplation
of truth, except the truth be also found to be so by experience."
It is not easy to express more decidedly the clearly seen union of
exact conceptions with certain facts, which, as we have explained,
constitutes real knowledge.

One large division of the _Opus Majus_ is "On the Usefulness of
Mathematics," which is shown by a copious enumeration of existing
branches of knowledge, as Chronology, Geography, the Calendar and
(in a separate Part) Optics. There is a chapter[77], in which it is
proved by reason, that all science requires mathematics. And the
arguments which are used to establish this doctrine, show a most just
appreciation of the office of mathematics in science. They are such as
follows:--That other sciences use examples taken from mathematics as
the most evident:--That mathematical knowledge is, as it were, innate
in us, on which point he refers to the well-known dialogue of Plato,
as quoted by Cicero:--That this science, being the easiest, offers the
best introduction to the more difficult:--That in mathematics, things
as known to us are identical with things as known to nature:--That
we can here entirely avoid doubt and error, and obtain certainty and
truth:--That mathematics is prior to other sciences in nature, because
it takes cognizance of quantity, which is apprehended by intuition,
(_intuitu intellectus_). "Moreover," he adds[78], "there have been
found famous men, as Robert, bishop of Lincoln, and Brother Adam
Marshman (de Marisco), and many others, who by the power of mathematics
have been able to explain the causes of things; as may be seen in the
writings of these men, for instance, concerning the Rainbow and Comets,
and the generation of heat, and climates, and the celestial bodies."

But undoubtedly the most remarkable portion of the _Opus Majus_ is the
Sixth and last Part, which is entitled "De Scientia experimentali."
It is indeed an extraordinary circumstance to find a writer of the
thirteenth century, not only recognizing experiment as one source
of knowledge, but urging its claims as something far more important
than men had yet been aware of, exemplifying its value by striking
and just examples, and speaking of its authority with a dignity of
diction which sounds like a foremurmur of the Baconian sentences
uttered nearly four hundred years later. Yet this is the character of
what we here find[79]. "Experimental science, the sole mistress of
speculative sciences, has three great Prerogatives among other parts
of knowledge: First she tests by experiment the noblest conclusions of
all other sciences: Next she discovers respecting the notions which
other sciences deal with, magnificent truths to which these sciences of
themselves can by no means attain: her Third dignity is, that she by
her own power and without respect of other sciences, investigates the
secret of nature."

The examples which Bacon gives of these "Prerogatives" are very
curious, exhibiting, among some error and credulity, sound and clear
views. His leading example of the First Prerogative, is the Rainbow,
of which the cause, as given by Aristotle, is tested by reference to
experiment with a skill which is, even to us now, truly admirable.
The examples of the Second Prerogative are three:--_first_, the art
of making an artificial sphere which shall move with the heavens by
natural influences, which Bacon trusts may be done, though astronomy
herself cannot do it--"et tunc," he says, "thesaurum unius regis
valeret hoc instrumentum;"--_secondly_, the art of prolonging life,
which experiment may teach, though medicine has no means of securing
it except by regimen[80];--_thirdly_, the art of making gold finer
than fine gold, which goes beyond the power of alchemy. The Third
Prerogative of experimental science, arts independent of the received
sciences, is exemplified in many curious examples, many of them
whimsical traditions. Thus it is said that the character of a people
may be altered by altering the air[81]. Alexander, it seems, applied
to Aristotle to know whether he should exterminate certain nations
which he had discovered, as being irreclaimably barbarous; to which
the philosopher replied, "If you can alter their air, permit them to
live, if not, put them to death." In this part, we find the suggestion
that the fire-works made by children, of saltpetre, might lead to the
invention of a formidable military weapon.

It could not be expected that Roger Bacon, at a time when experimental
science hardly existed, could give any _precepts_ for the discovery
of truth by experiment. But nothing can be a better _example_ of the
method of such investigation, than his inquiry concerning the cause of
the Rainbow. Neither Aristotle, nor Avicenna, nor Seneca, he says, have
given us any clear knowledge of this matter, but experimental science
can do so. Let the experimenter (_experimentator_) consider the cases
in which he finds the same colours, as the hexagonal crystals from
Ireland and India; by looking into these he will see colours like those
of the rainbow. Many think that this arises from some special virtue of
these stones and their hexagonal figure; let therefore the experimenter
go on, and he will find the same in other transparent stones, in dark
ones as well as in light-coloured. He will find the same effect also
in other forms than the hexagon, if they be furrowed in the surface,
as the Irish crystals are. Let him consider too, that he sees the same
colours in the drops which are dashed from oars in the sunshine;--and
in the spray thrown by a millwheel;--and in the dew-drops which lie on
the grass in a meadow on a summer-morning;--and if a man takes water
in his mouth and projects it on one side into a sunbeam;--and if in an
oil-lamp hanging in the air, the rays fall in certain positions upon
the surface of the oil;--and in many other ways, are colours produced.
We have here a collection of instances, which are almost all examples
of the same kind as the phenomenon under consideration; and by the help
of a principle collected by induction from these facts, the colours of
the rainbow were afterwards really explained.

With regard to the form and other circumstances of the bow he is still
more precise. He bids us measure the height of the bow and of the sun,
to show that the center of the bow is exactly opposite to the sun.
He explains the circular form of the bow,--its being independent of
the form of the cloud, its moving when we move, its flying when we
follow,--by its consisting of the reflections from a vast number of
minute drops. He does not, indeed, trace the course of the rays through
the drop, or account for the precise magnitude which the bow assumes;
but he approaches to the verge of this part of the explanation; and
must be considered as having given a most happy example of experimental
inquiry into nature, at a time when such examples were exceedingly
scanty. In this respect, he was more fortunate than Francis Bacon, as
we shall hereafter see.

We know but little of the biography of Roger Bacon, but we have every
reason to believe that his influence upon his age was not great.
He was suspected of magic, and is said to have been put into close
confinement in consequence of this charge. In his work he speaks
of Astrology as a science well worth cultivating. "But," says he,
"Theologians and Decretists, not being learned in such matters and
seeing that evil as well as good may be done, neglect and abhor such
things, and reckon them among Magic Arts." We have already seen, that
at the very time when Bacon was thus raising his voice against the
habit of blindly following authority, and seeking for all science
in Aristotle, Thomas Aquinas was employed in fashioning Aristotle's
tenets into that fixed form in which they became the great impediment
to the progress of knowledge. It would seem, indeed, that something
of a struggle between the progressive and stationary powers of the
human mind was going on at this time. Bacon himself says[82], "Never
was there so great an appearance of wisdom, nor so much exercise of
study in so many Faculties, in so many regions, as for this last forty
years. Doctors are dispersed everywhere, in every castle, in every
burgh, and especially by the students of two Orders, (he means the
Franciscans and Dominicans, who were almost the only religious orders
that distinguished themselves by an application to study[83],) which
has not happened except for about forty years. And yet there was never
so much ignorance, so much error." And in the part of his work which
refers to Mathematics, he says of that study[84], that it is the door
and the key of the sciences; and that the neglect of it for thirty or
forty years has entirely ruined the studies of the Latins. According to
these statements, some change, disastrous to the fortunes of science,
must have taken place about 1230, soon after the foundation of the
Dominican and Franciscan Orders[85]. Nor can we doubt that the adoption
of the Aristotelian philosophy by these two Orders, in the form in
which the Angelical Doctor had systematized it, was one of the events
which most tended to defer, for three centuries, the reform which Roger
Bacon urged as a matter of crying necessity in his own time.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 61: _Fratris Rogeri Bacon, Ordinis Minorum_, Opus Majus, _ad
Clementem Quartum, Pontificem Romanum, ex MS. Codice Dubliniensi cum
aliis quibusdam collato, nunc primum edidit_ S. Jebb, M.D. Londini,
1733.]

[Footnote 62: _Opus Majus_, Præf.]

[Footnote 63: Contents of Roger Bacon's _Opus Majus_.

