CHAPTER XXXII.

ANALOGIES OF PHYSICAL AND RELIGIOUS PHILOSOPHY.


1. Any assertion of analogy between physical and religious philosophy
will very properly be looked upon with great jealousy as likely to
be forced and delusive; and it is only in its most general aspects
that a sound philosophy on the two subjects can offer any points of
resemblance. But in some of its general conditions the discovery of
truth in the one field of knowledge and in the other may offer certain
analogies, as well as differences, which it may be instructive to
notice; and to some such aspects of our philosophy I shall venture to
refer.

For the physical sciences--the sciences of observation and
speculation--the progress of our exact and scientific knowledge, as
I have repeatedly said, consists in reducing the objects and events
of the universe to a conformity with Ideas which we have in our own
minds:--the Ideas, for instance, of Space, Force, Substance, and the
like. In this sense, the intellectual progress of men consists in the
Idealization of Facts.

2. In moral subjects, on the other hand, where man has not merely to
observe and speculate, but also to act;--where he does not passively
leave the facts and events of the world such as they are, but tries
actively to alter them and to improve the existing state of things,
his progress consists in doing this. He makes a moral advance when he
succeeds in doing what he thus attempts:--when he really improves the
state of things with which he has to do by removing evil and producing
good:--when he makes the state of things, namely, the relations between
him and other persons, his acts and their acts, conform more and
more to Ideas which he has in his own mind:--namely, to the Ideas of
Justice, Benevolence, and the like. His moral progress thus consists in
the realization of Ideas.

And thus we are led to the Aphorism, as we may call it, that _Man's
Intellectual Progress consists in the Idealization of Facts, and his
Moral Progress consists in the Realization of Ideas_.


3. But further, though that progress of science which consists in
the idealization of facts may be carried through several stages, and
indeed, in the history of science, has been carried through many
stages, yet it is, and always must be, a progress exceedingly imperfect
and incomplete, when compared with the completeness to which its nature
points. Only a few sciences have made much progress; none are complete;
most have advanced only a step or two. In none have we reduced all the
Facts to Ideas. In all or almost all the unreduced Facts are far more
numerous and extensive than those which have been reduced. The general
mass of the facts of the universe are mere facts, unsubdued to the rule
of science. The Facts are not Idealized. The intellectual progress
is miserably scanty and imperfect, and would be so, even if it were
carried much further than it is carried. How can we hope that it will
ever approach to completeness?

4. And in like manner, the _moral_ progress of man is still more
miserably scanty and incomplete. In how small a degree has he in this
sense realized his Ideas! In how small a degree has he carried into
real effect, and embodied in the relations of society, in his own acts
and in those of others with whom he is concerned, the Ideas of Justice
and Benevolence and the like! How far from a complete realization of
such moral Ideas are the acts of the best men, and the relations of
the best forms of society! How far from perfection in these respects
is man! and how certain it is that he will always be very far from
perfection! Far below even such perfection as he can conceive, he will
always be in his acts and feelings. The moral progress of man, of each
man, and of each society, is, as I have said, miserably scanty and
incomplete; and when regarded as the realization of his moral Ideas,
its scantiness and incompleteness become still more manifest than
before.

Hence we are led to another Aphorism:--_that man's progress in the
realization of Moral Ideas, and his progress in the Scientific
idealization of Facts, are, and always will be, exceedingly scanty and
incomplete_.


5. But there is another aspect of Ideas, both physical and moral,
in which this scantiness and incompleteness vanish. In the Divine
Mind, all the physical Ideas are entertained with complete fulness
and luminousness; and it is because they are so entertained in the
Divine Mind, and it is because the universe is constituted and framed
upon them, that we find them verified in every part of the universe,
whenever we make our observation of facts and deduce their laws.

In like manner the Moral Ideas exist in the Divine Mind in complete
fulness and luminousness; and we are naturally led to believe and
expect that they must be exemplified in the moral universe, as
completely and universally as the physical laws are exemplified in the
physical universe. Is this so? or under what conditions can we conceive
this to be?

6. In answering this question, we must consider how far the moral,
still more even than the physical Ideas of the Divine Mind, are
elevated above our human Ideas; but yet not so far as to have no
resemblance to our corresponding human Ideas; for if this were so, we
could not reason about them at all.

In speaking of man's moral Ideas, Benevolence, Justice, and the like,
we speak of them as belonging to man's _Soul_, rather than to his
_Mind_, which we have commonly spoken of as the seat of his physical
Ideas. A distinction is thus often made between the intellectual and
the moral faculties of man; but on this distinction we here lay no
stress. We may speak of man's _Mind_ and _Soul_, meaning that part of
his being in which are all his Ideas, intellectual and moral.

And now let us consider the question which has just been asked:--how we
can conceive the Divine Benevolence and Justice to be completely and
universally realized in the moral world, as the Ideas of Space, Time,
&c. are in the physical world?


7. Our Ideas of Benevolence, Justice, and of other Virtues, may be
elevated above their original narrowness, and purified from their
original coarseness, by moral culture; as our Ideas of Force and
Matter, of Substance and Elements, and the like, may be made clear
and convincing by philosophical and scientific culture. This appears,
in some degree, in the history of moral terms, as the progress of
clearness and efficacy in the Idea of the material sciences appears in
the history of the terms belonging to such sciences. Thus among the
Romans, while they confined their kindly affections within their own
class, a stranger was universally an enemy; _peregrinus_ was synonymous
with _hostis_. But at a later period, they regarded all _men_ as having
a claim on their kindness; and he who felt and acted on this claim was
called _humane_. This meaning of the word _humanity_ shows the progress
(in their Ideas at least) of the virtue which the word _humanity_
designates.

8. And as man can thus rise to a point of view where he sees that man
is to be loved as man, so the humane and loving man inevitably assumes
that God loves all men; and thus assumes that there is, or may be, a
love of man in man's heart, which represents and resembles in kind,
however remote in degree, the love of God to man.

But as in man's love of man there are very widely different stages,
rising from the narrow love of a savage to his family or his tribe,
to the widest and warmest feelings of the most enlightened and loving
universal philanthropist;--so must we suppose that there are stages
immeasurably wider by which God's love of man is more comprehensive and
more tender than any love of man for man. The religious philosopher
will fully assent to the expressions of this conviction delivered by
pious men in all ages. "The eternal God is thy refuge, and beneath
thee are the everlasting arms." "When my father and my mother forsake
me the Lord taketh me up," is the expression of Divine Love, consistent
with philosophy as well as with revelation. But as the Divine Love is
more comprehensive and enduring than any human love, so is it in an
immeasurably greater degree, more enlightened. It is not a love that
seeks merely the pleasure and gratification of its object; _that_
even an enlightened human love does not do. It seeks the good of its
objects; and such a good as is the greatest good, to an Intelligence
which can embrace all cases, causes, and contingencies. To our limited
understanding, evil seems often to be inflicted, and the good of a
part seems inconsistent with the good of another part. Our attempts to
conceive a Supreme and complete Good provided for all the creatures
which exist in the universe, baffle and perplex us, even more than our
attempts to conceive infinite space, infinite time, and an infinite
chain of causation. But as the most careful attention which we can
give to the Ideas of Space, Time, and Causation convinces us that
these Ideas are perfectly clear and complete in the Divine Mind, and
that _our_ perplexity and confusion on these subjects arise only from
the vast distance between the Divine Mind and our human mind, so is
it reasonable to suppose the same to be the source of the confusion
which we experience when we attempt to determine what most conduces to
the good of our fellow-creatures; and when, urged by love to them, we
endeavour to promote this good. We can do little of what Infinite Love
would do, yet are we not thereby dispensed from seeking in some degree
to imitate the working of Divine Love. We can see but little of what
Infinite Intelligence sees, and this should be one source of confidence
and comfort, when we stumble upon perplexities produced by the seeming
mixture of good and evil in the world.

9. But when we ask the questions which have already been stated:
Whether this Infinite Divine Love is realized in the world, and if
so, How: I conceive that we are irresistibly impelled to reply to the
former question, that it is: and we then turn to the latter. We are
led to assume that there is in God an Infinite Love of man, a creature
in a certain degree of a Divine nature. We must, as a consequence of
this, assume that the Love of God to man, necessarily is, in the end,
and on the whole, completely and fully realized in the history of the
world. But what is the complete history of the world! Is it that which
consists in the lives of men such as we see them between their birth
and their death? If the minds or souls of men are alive after the death
of the body, that future life, as well as this present life, belongs to
the history of the world;--to that providential history, of which the
totality, as we have said, must be governed by Infinite Divine Love.
And in addition to all other reasons for believing that the minds and
souls of men do thus survive their present life, is this:--that we thus
can conceive, what otherwise it is difficult or impossible to conceive,
the operation of Infinite Love in the whole of the history of mankind.
If there be a Future State in which men's souls are still under the
authority and direction of the Divine Governor of the world, all that
is here wanting to complete the scheme of a perfect government of
Intelligent Love may thus be applied: all seeming and partial evil may
be absorbed and extinguished in an ultimate and universal good.


10. The Idea of Justice as belonging to God suggests to us some of the
same kind of reflexions as those which we have made respecting the
Divine Love. We believe God to be just: otherwise, as has been said,
He would not be God. And as we thus, from the nature of our minds and
souls, believe God to be just, we must, in this belief, understand
Justice according to the Idea which we have of Justice; that is, in
some measure, according to the Idea of Justice, as exemplified in
human actions and feelings. It would be absurd to combine the two
propositions, that we necessarily believe that God is just, and that by
_just_, we mean something entirely different from the common meaning of
the word.

But though the Divine Idea of Justice must necessarily, in some
measure, coincide with our Idea of Justice, we must believe in this,
as in other cases, that the Divine Idea is immeasurably more profound,
comprehensive, and clear, than the human Idea. Even the human Idea of
Justice is susceptible of many and large progressive steps, in the way
of clearness, consistency, and comprehensiveness. In the moral history
of man this Idea advances from the hard rigour of inflexible written
Law to the equitable estimation of the real circumstances of each case;
it advances also from the narrow Law of a single community to a larger
Law, which includes and solves the conflicts of all such Laws. Further,
the administration of human Law is always imperfect, often erroneous,
in consequence of man's imperfect knowledge of the facts of each case,
and still more, from his ignorance of the designs and feelings of the
actors. If the Judge could see into the heart of the person accused,
and could himself rise higher and higher in judicial wisdom, he might
exemplify the Idea of Justice in a far higher degree than has ever yet
been done.

11. But all such advance in the improvement of human Justice must
still be supposed to stop immeasurably short of the Divine Justice,
which must include a perfect knowledge of all men's actions, and all
men's hearts and thoughts; and a universal application of the wisest
and most comprehensive Laws. And the difference of the Divine and of
the human Idea of Justice may, like the differences of other Divine
and human Ideas, include the solution of all the perplexities in which
we find ourselves involved when we would trace the Idea to all its
consequences. The Divine Idea is immeasurably elevated above the human
Idea; in the Divine Idea all inconsistency, defect, and incompleteness
vanish, and Justice includes in its administration every man, without
any admixture of injustice. This is what we must conceive of the Divine
administration, since God is perfectly just.

12. But here, as before, we have another conclusion suggested to us. We
are, by the considerations just now spoken of, led to believe that, in
the Divine administration of the world is an administration of perfect
Justice;--that is, such is the Divine Administration in the end and on
the whole, taking into account the whole of the providential history of
the world. But the course of the world, taking into account only what
happens to man in this present life, is not, we may venture to say, a
complete and entire administration of justice. It often happens that
injustice is successful and triumphant, even in the end, so far as the
end is seen here. It happens that wrong is done, and is not remedied
or punished. It happens that blameless and virtuous men are subjected
to pain, grief, violence, and oppression, and are not protected,
extricated, or avenged. In the affairs of this world, the prevalence of
injustice and wrong-doing is so apparent, as to be a common subject of
complaint: and though the complaint may be exaggerated, and though a
calm and comprehensive view may often discern compensating and remedial
influences which are not visible at first sight, still we cannot regard
the lot of happiness or misery which falls to each man in this world
and this life as apportioned according to a scheme of perfect and
universal justice, such as in our thoughts we cannot but require the
Divine administration to be.

13. Here then we are again led to the same conviction by regarding the
Divine administration of the world as the realization of the Divine
Justice, to which we were before led by regarding it as the realization
of the Divine Love. Since the Idea is not fully or completely realized
in man's life in this present world, this present world cannot be the
whole of the Divine Administration. To complete the realization of the
Idea of Justice, as an element of the Divine Administration, there
must be a life of man after his life in this present world. If man's
mind and soul, the part of him which is susceptible of happiness and
misery, survive this present life, and be still subject to the Divine
Administration, the Idea of Divine Justice may still be completely
realized, notwithstanding all that here looks like injustice or
defective justice; and it belongs to the Idea of Justice to remedy
and compensate, not to prevent wrong. And thus by this supposition
of a Future State of man's existence, we are enabled to conceive
that, in the whole of the Divine Government of the universe, all
seeming injustice and wrong may be finally corrected and rectified,
in an ultimate and universal establishment of a reign of perfect
Righteousness.


14. Admitting the view thus presented, we may again discern a
remarkable analogy between what we have called our _physical_ Ideas
(those of Space, Time, Cause, Substance, and the like), and our _moral_
Ideas, (those of Benevolence, Justice, &c.). In both classes we must
suppose that our human Ideas represent, though very incompletely and at
an immeasurable distance, the Divine Ideas. Even our physical Ideas,
when pursued to their consequences, are involved in a perplexity
and confusion from which the Divine Ideas are free. Our Ideas of
Benevolence and Justice are still more full of imperfections and
inconsistency, when we would frame them into a complete scheme, and
yet from such imperfections and inconsistency we must suppose that
the Divine Benevolence and Justice are exempt. Our physical Ideas we
find in every case exactly exemplified and realized in the universe,
and we account for this by considering that they are the Divine Ideas,
on which the universe is constituted. Our moral Ideas, the Ideas of
Benevolence and Justice in particular, must also be realized in the
universe, as a scheme of Divine Government. But they are not realized
in the world as constituted of man living this present life. The Divine
Scheme of the world, therefore, extends beyond this present life of
man. If we could include in our survey the future life as well as the
present life of man, and the future course of the Divine Government, we
should have a scheme of the Moral Government of the universe, in which
the Ideas of Perfect Benevolence and Perfect Justice are as completely
and universally exemplified and realized, as the Ideas of Space, Time,
Cause, Substance, and the like, are in the physical universe.


15. There is one other remark bearing upon this analogy, which seems
to deserve our attention. As I have said in the last chapter, the
scheme of the world, as governed by our physical Ideas, seems to point
to a Beginning of the world, or at least of the present course of the
world: and if we suppose a Beginning, our thoughts naturally turn to
an End. But if our physical Ideas point to a Beginning and suggest an
End, do our Ideas of Divine Benevolence and Justice in any way lend
themselves to this suggestion?--Perhaps we might venture to say that in
some degree they do, even to the eye of a mere philosophical reason.
Perhaps our reason alone might suggest that there is a progression in
the human race, in various moral attributes--in art, in civilization,
and even in humanity and in justice, which implies a beginning. And
that at any rate there is nothing inconsistent with our Idea of the
Divine Government in the supposition that the history of this world has
a Beginning, a Middle and an End.

16. If therefore there should be conveyed to us by some channel
especially appropriated to the communication and development of moral
and religious Ideas, the knowledge that the world, as a scheme of
Divine Government, has _a Beginning_, _a Middle_, and _an End_, of
a Kind, or at least, invested with circumstances quite different
from any which our physical Ideas can disclose to us, there would
be, in such a belief, nothing at all inconsistent with the analogies
which our philosophy--the philosophy of our Ideas illustrated by the
whole progress of science--has impressed upon us. On the grounds of
this philosophy, we need find no difficulty in believing that as the
visible universe exhibits the operation of the Divine Ideas of Space,
Time, Cause, Substance, and the like, and discloses to us traces of
a Beginning of the present mode of operation, so the moral universe
exhibits to us the operation of the Divine Benevolence and Justice; and
that these Divine attributes wrought in a special and peculiar manner
in the Beginning; interposed in a peculiar and special manner in the
Middle; and will again act in a peculiar and special manner in the End
of the world. And thus the conditions of the physical universe, and the
Government of the Moral world, are both, though in different ways, a
part of the work which God is carrying on from the Beginning of things
to the End--_opus quod Deus operator a principio usque ad finem_.


17. We are led by such analogies as I have been adducing to believe
that the whole course of events in which the minds and souls of men
survive the present life, and are hereafter subjected to the Divine
government in such a way as to complete all that is here deficient in
the world's history, is a scheme of perfect Benevolence and Justice.
Now, can we discern in man's mind or soul itself any indication of a
destiny like this? Are there in us any powers and faculties which seem
as if they were destined to immortality? If there be, we have in such
faculties a strong confirmation of that belief in the future life of
man which has already been suggested to us as necessary to render the
Divine government conceivable.


18. According to our philosophy there are powers and faculties which
do thus seem fitted to endure, and not fitted to terminate and be
extinguished. The Ideas which we have in our minds--the physical
Ideas, as we have called them, according to which the universe is
constituted,--agree, as far as they go, with the Ideas of the Divine
Mind, seen in the constitution of the universe. But these Divine
Ideas are eternal and imperishable: we therefore naturally conclude
that the human mind which includes such elements, is also eternal and
imperishable. Since the mind can take hold of eternal truths, it must
be itself eternal. Since it is, to a certain extent, the image of God
in its faculties, it cannot ever cease to be the image of God. When it
has arrived at a stage in which it sees several aspects of the universe
in the same form in which they present themselves to the Divine Mind,
we cannot suppose that the Author of the human mind will allow it and
all its intellectual light to be extinguished.

19. And our conviction that this extinction of the human mind cannot
take place becomes stronger still, when we consider that the mind,
however imperfect and scanty its discernment of truth may be, is
still capable of a vast, and even of an unlimited progress in the
pursuit and apprehension of truth. The mind is capable of accepting
and appropriating, through the action of its own Ideas, every step in
science which has ever been made--every step which shall hereafter
be made. Can we suppose that this vast and boundless capacity exists
for a few years only, is unfolded only into a few of its simplest
consequences, and is then consigned to annihilation? Can we suppose
that the wonderful powers which carry man on, generation by generation,
from the contemplation of one great and striking truth to another, are
buried with each generation? May we not rather suppose that that mind,
which is capable of indefinite progression, is allowed to exist in an
infinite duration, during which such progression may take place?

20. I propose this argument as a ground of hope and satisfactory
reflexion to those who love to dwell on the natural arguments for the
Immortality of the Soul. I do not attempt to follow it into detail.
I know too well how little such a cause can gain by obstinate and
complicated argumentation, to attempt to urge the argument in that
manner: and probably different persons, among those who accept the
argument as valid, would give different answers to many questions of
detail, which naturally arise out of the acceptance of this argument.
I will not here attempt to solve, or even to propound these questions.
My main purpose in offering these views and this argument at all, is
to give some satisfaction to those who would think it a sad and blank
result of this long survey of the nature and progress of science in
which we have been so long engaged (through this series of works), that
it should in no way lead to a recognition of the Author of that world
about which our Science is, and to the high and consolatory hopes which
lift man beyond this world. No survey of the universe can be at all
satisfactory to thoughtful men, which has not a theological bearing;
nor can any view of man's powers and means of knowing be congenial to
such men, which does not recognize an infinite destination for the mind
which has an infinite capacity; an eternal being of the Faculty which
can take a steady hold of eternal being.


21. And as we may derive such a conviction from our physical Ideas, so
too may we no less from our moral Ideas. Our minds apprehend Space and
Time and Force and the like, as Ideas which are not dependent on the
body; and hence we believe that our minds shall not perish with our
bodies. And in the same manner our souls conceive pure Benevolence and
perfect Justice, which go beyond the conditions of this mortal life;
and hence we believe that our souls have to do with a life beyond this
mortal life.

It is more difficult to speak of man's indefinite moral progression
even than of his indefinite intellectual progression. Yet in every
path of moral speculation we have such a progression suggested to us.
We may begin, for instance, with the ordinary feelings and affections
of our daily nature:--Love, Hate, Scorn. But when we would elevate the
Soul in our imagination, we ascend above these ordinary affections, and
take the repulsive and hostile ones as fitted only to balance their own
influences. And thus the poet, speaking of a morally poetical nature,
describes it:

  The Poet in a golden clime was born,
    With golden stars above.
  He felt the hate _of_ hate, the scorn _of_ scorn,
    The love _of_ love.

But the loftier moralist can rise higher than this, and can, and will,
reject altogether Hate and Scorn from his view of man's better nature.
His description would rather be--

  The good man in a loving clime was born,
    With loving stars above.
  He felt sorrow for hate, pity for scorn,
    And love of love.

He would, in his conception of such a character, ascribe to it all
the virtues which result from the control and extinction of these
repulsive and hostile affections:--the virtues of magnanimity,
forgivingness, unselfishness, self-devotion, tenderness, sweetness. And
these we can conceive in a higher and higher degree, in proportion as
our own hearts become tender, forgiving, pure and unselfish. And though
in every human stage of such a moral proficiency, we must suppose
that there is still some struggle with the remaining vestiges of our
unkind, unjust, angry and selfish affections, we can see no limit to
the extent to which this struggle may be successful; no limit to the
degree in which these traces of the evil of our nature may be worn
out by an enduring practice and habit of our better nature. And when
we contemplate a human character which has, through a long course of
years, and through many trials and conflicts, made a large progress in
this career of melioration, and is still capable, if time be given,
of further progress towards moral perfection, is it not reasonable to
suppose that He who formed man capable of such progress, and who, as we
must needs believe, looks with approval on such progress where made,
will not allow the progress to stop when it has gone on to the end of
man's short earthly life? Is it not rather reasonable to suppose that
the pure and elevated and all-embracing affection, extinguishing all
vices and including all virtues, to which the good man thus tends,
shall continue to prevail in him as a permanent and ever-during
condition, in a life after this?

But can man raise himself to such a stage of moral progress, by his own
efforts? Such a progress is an approximation towards the perfection of
moral Ideas, and therefore an approximation towards the image of God,
in whom that perfection resides: is it not then reasonable to suppose
that man needs a Divine Influence to enable him to reach this kind of
moral completeness? And is it not also reasonable to suppose that,
as he needs such aid, in order that the Idea of his moral progress
may be realized, so he will receive such aid from the Divine Power
which realizes the Idea of Divine Love in the world; and to do so,
must realize it in those human souls which are most fitted for such a
purpose?

But these questions remind me how difficult, and indeed, how impossible
it is to follow such trains of reflexion by the light of philosophy
alone. To answer such questions, we need, not Religious Philosophy
only, but Religion: and as I do not here venture beyond the domain of
philosophy, I must, however abruptly, conclude.


THE END.




APPENDIX.


APPENDIX A.

OF THE PLATONIC THEORY OF IDEAS.

(_Cam. Phil. Soc._ Nov. 10, 1856.)


Though Plato has, in recent times, had many readers and admirers
among our English scholars, there has been an air of unreality and
inconsistency about the commendation which most of these professed
adherents have given to his doctrines. This appears to be no captious
criticism, for instance, when those who speak of him as immeasurably
superior in argument to his opponents, do not venture to produce
his arguments in a definite form as able to bear the tug of modern
controversy;--when they use his own Greek phrases as essential to the
exposition of his doctrines, and speak as if these phrases could not be
adequately rendered in English;--and when they assent to those among
the systems of philosophy of modern times which are the most clearly
opposed to the system of Plato. It seems not unreasonable to require,
on the contrary, that if Plato is to supply a philosophy for us, it
must be a philosophy which can be expressed in our own language;--that
his system, if we hold it to be well founded, shall compel us to deny
the opposite systems, modern as well as ancient;--and that, so far as
we hold Plato's doctrines to be satisfactorily established, we should
be able to produce the arguments for them, and to refute the arguments
against them. These seem reasonable requirements of the adherents of
_any_ philosophy, and therefore, of Plato's.

I regard it as a fortunate circumstance, that we have recently had
presented to us an exposition of Plato's philosophy which does conform
to those reasonable conditions; and we may discuss this exposition with
the less reserve, since its accomplished author, though belonging to
this generation, is no longer alive. I refer to the _Lectures_ on the
History of Ancient Philosophy, by the late Professor Butler of Dublin.
In these Lectures, we find an account of the Platonic Philosophy which
shows that the writer had considered it as, what it is, an attempt
to solve large problems, which in all ages force themselves upon the
notice of thoughtful men. In Lectures VIII. and X., of the Second
Series, especially, we have a statement of the Platonic Theory of
Ideas, which may be made a convenient starting point for such remarks
as I wish at present to make. I will transcribe this account; omitting,
as I do so, the expressions which Professor Butler uses, in order to
present the theory, not as a dogmatical assertion, but as a view, at
least not extravagant. For this purpose, he says, of the successive
portions of the theory, that one is "not too absurd to be maintained;"
that another is "not very extravagant either;" that a third is "surely
allowable;" that a fourth presents "no incredible account" of the
subject; that a fifth is "no preposterous notion in substance, and no
unwarrantable form of phrase." Divested of these modest formulæ, his
account is as follows: [Vol. II. p. 117.]

"Man's soul is made to contain not merely a consistent scheme of its
own notions, but a direct apprehension of _real and eternal laws beyond
it_. These real and eternal laws are things _intelligible_, and not
things sensible.

"These laws impressed upon creation by its Creator, and apprehended
by man, are something distinct equally from the Creator and from man,
and the whole mass of them may fairly be termed the World of Things
Intelligible.

"Further, there are qualities in the supreme and ultimate Cause of all,
which are manifested in His creation, and not merely manifested, but,
in a manner--after being brought out of his super-essential nature into
the stage of being [which is] below him, but next to him--are then by
the causative act of creation deposited in things, differencing them
one from the other, so that the things partake of them (μετέχουσι),
communicate with them (κοινωνοῦσι).

"The intelligence of man, excited to reflection by the impressions
of these objects thus (though themselves transitory) participant of
a divine quality, may rise to higher conceptions of the perfections
thus faintly exhibited; and inasmuch as these perfections are
unquestionably _real_ existences, and _known_ to be such in the very
act of contemplation,--this may be regarded as a direct intellectual
apperception of them,--a Union of the Reason with the Ideas in that
sphere of being which is common to both.

"Finally, the Reason, in proportion as it learns to contemplate the
Perfect and Eternal, _desires_ the enjoyment of such contemplations in
a more consummate degree, and cannot be fully satisfied, except in the
actual fruition of the Perfect itself.

"These suppositions, taken together, constitute the Theory of Ideas."

In remarking upon the theory thus presented, I shall abstain from any
discussion of the theological part of it, as a subject which would
probably be considered as unsuited to the meetings of this Society,
even in its most purely philosophical form. But I conceive that it will
not be inconvenient, if it be not wearisome, to discuss the Theory of
Ideas as an attempt to explain the existence of real knowledge; which
Prof. Butler very rightly considers as the necessary aim of this and
cognate systems of philosophy[321].

I conceive, then, that one of the primary objects of Plato's Theory
of Ideas is, to explain the existence of real knowledge, that is, of
demonstrated knowledge, such as the propositions of geometry offer
to us. In this view, the Theory of Ideas is one attempt to solve a
problem, much discussed in our times, What is the ground of geometrical
truth? I do not mean that this is the whole object of the Theory, or
the highest of its claims. As I have said, I omit its theological
bearings; and I am aware that there are passages in the Platonic
Dialogues, in which the Ideas which enter into the apprehension and
demonstration of geometrical truths are spoken of as subordinate to
Ideas which have a theological aspect. But I have no doubt that one
of the main motives to the construction of the Theory of Ideas was,
the desire of solving the Problem, "How is it possible that man should
apprehend necessary and eternal truths?" That the truths are necessary,
makes them eternal, for they do not depend on time; and that they are
eternal, gives them at once a theological bearing.

That Plato, in attempting to explain the nature and possibility of
real knowledge, had in his mind geometrical truths, as examples of
such knowledge is, I think, evident from the general purport of his
discourses on such subjects. The advance of Greek geometry into a
conspicuous position, at the time when the Heraclitean sect were
proving that nothing could be proved and nothing could be known,
naturally suggested mathematical truth as the refutation of the
skepticism of mere sensation. On the one side it was said, we can
know nothing except by our sensations; and that which we observe with
our senses is constantly changing; or at any rate, may change at any
moment. On the other hand it was said, we _do_ know geometrical truths,
and as truly as we know them, that they cannot change. Plato was quite
alive to the lesson, and to the importance of this kind of truths.
In the _Meno_ and in the _Phædo_ he refers to them, as illustrating
the nature of the human mind: in the _Republic_ and the _Timæus_ he
again speaks of truths which far transcend anything which the senses
can teach, or even adequately exemplify. The senses, he argues in the
_Theætetus_, cannot give us the knowledge which we have; the source
of it must therefore be in the mind itself; in the _Ideas_ which
it possesses. The impressions of sense are constantly varying, and
incapable of giving any certainty: but the Ideas on which real truth
depends are constant and invariable, and the certainty which arises
from these is firm and indestructible. Ideas are the permanent, perfect
objects, with which the mind deals when it contemplates necessary and
eternal truths. They belong to a region superior to the material world,
the world of sense. They are the objects which make up the furniture of
the Intelligible World; with which the Reason deals, as the Senses deal
each with its appropriate Sensation.

But, it will naturally be asked, what is the Relation of Ideas to the
Objects of Sense? Some connexion, or relation, it is plain, there
must be. The objects of sense can suggest, and can illustrate real
truths. Though these truths of geometry cannot be proved, cannot even
be exactly exemplified, by drawing diagrams, yet diagrams are of use
in helping ordinary minds to see the proof; and to all minds, may
represent and illustrate it. And though our conclusions with regard to
objects of sense may be insecure and imperfect, they have some show of
truth, and therefore some resemblance to truth. What does this arise
from? How is it explained, if there is no truth except concerning Ideas?

To this the Platonist replied, that the phenomena which present
themselves to the senses partake, in a certain manner, of Ideas, and
thus include so much of the nature of Ideas, that they include also
an element of Truth. The geometrical diagram of Triangles and Squares
which is drawn in the sand of the floor of the Gymnasium, partakes of
the nature of the true Ideal Triangles and Squares, so that it presents
an imitation and suggestion of the truths which are true of them. The
real triangles and squares are in the mind: they are, as we have said,
objects, not in the Visible, but in the Intelligible World. But the
Visible Triangles and Squares make us call to mind the Intelligible;
and thus the objects of sense suggest, and, in a way, exemplify the
eternal truths.

This I conceive to be the simplest and directest ground of two primary
parts of the Theory of Ideas;--The Eternal Ideas constituting an
Intelligible World; and the Participation in these Ideas ascribed to
the objects of the world of sense. And it is plain that so far, the
Theory meets what, I conceive, was its primary purpose; it answers the
questions, How can we have certain knowledge, though we cannot get it
from Sense? and, How can we have knowledge, at least apparent, though
imperfect, about the world of sense?

But is this the ground on which Plato himself rests the truth of his
Theory of Ideas? As I have said, I have no doubt that these were the
questions which suggested the Theory; and it is perpetually applied
in such a manner as to show that it was held by Plato in this sense.
But his applications of the Theory refer very often to another part
of it;--to the Ideas, not of Triangles and Squares, of space and its
affections; but to the Ideas of Relations--as the Relations of Like and
Unlike, Greater and Less; or to things quite different from the things
of which geometry treats, for instance, to Tables and Chairs, and other
matters, with regard to which no demonstration is possible, and no
general truth (still less necessary an eternal truth) capable of being
asserted.

I conceive that the Theory of Ideas, thus asserted and thus supported,
stands upon very much weaker ground than it does, when it is
asserted concerning the objects of thought about which necessary and
demonstrable truths are attainable. And in order to devise arguments
against _this_ part of the Theory, and to trace the contradictions to
which it leads, we have no occasion to task our own ingenuity. We find
it done to our hands, not only in Aristotle, the open opponent of the
Theory of Ideas, but in works which stand among the Platonic Dialogues
themselves. And I wish especially to point out some of the arguments
against the Ideal Theory, which are given in one of the most noted of
the Platonic Dialogues, the _Parmenides_.

The _Parmenides_ contains a narrative of a Dialogue held between
Parmenides and Zeno, the Eleatic Philosophers, on the one side, and
Socrates, along with several other persons, on the other. It may be
regarded as divided into two main portions; the first, in which the
Theory of Ideas is attacked by Parmenides, and defended by Socrates;
the second, in which Parmenides discusses, at length, the Eleatic
doctrine that _All things are One_. It is the former part, the
discussion of the Theory of Ideas, to which I especially wish to direct
attention at present: and in the first place, to that extension of
the Theory of Ideas, to things of which no general truth is possible;
such as I have mentioned, tables and chairs. Plato often speaks of
a Table, by way of example, as a thing of which there must be an
Idea, not taken from any special Table or assemblage of Tables; but
an Ideal Table, such that all Tables are Tables by participating in
the nature of this Idea. Now the question is, whether there is any
force, or indeed any sense, in this assumption; and this question is
discussed in the _Parmenides_. Socrates is there represented as very
confident in the existence of Ideas of the highest and largest kind,
the Just, the Fair, the Good, and the like. Parmenides asks him how
far he follows his theory. Is there, he asks, an Idea of Man, which is
distinct from us men? an Idea of Fire? of Water? "In truth," replies
Socrates, "I have often hesitated, Parmenides, about these, whether
we are to allow such Ideas." When Plato had proceeded to teach that
there is an Idea of a Table, of course he could not reject such Ideas
as Man, and Fire, and Water. Parmenides, proceeding in the same line,
pushes him further still. "Do you doubt," says he, "whether there
are Ideas of things apparently worthless and vile? Is there an Idea
of a Hair? of Mud? of Filth?" Socrates has not the courage to accept
such an extension of the theory. He says, "By no means. These are not
Ideas. These are nothing more than just what we see them. I have often
been perplexed what to think on this subject. But after standing to
this a while, I have fled the thought, for fear of falling into an
unfathomable abyss of absurdities." On this, Parmenides rebukes him for
his want of consistency. "Ah Socrates," he says, "you are yet young;
and philosophy has not yet taken possession of you as I think she will
one day do--when you will have learned to find nothing despicable in
any of these things. But now your youth inclines you to regard the
opinions of men." It is indeed plain, that if we are to assume an Idea
of a Chair or a Table, we can find no boundary line which will exclude
Ideas of everything for which we have a name, however worthless or
offensive. And this is an argument against the assumption of _such_
Ideas, which will convince most persons of the groundlessness of the
assumption:--the more so, as _for_ the assumption of such Ideas, it
does not appear that Plato offers any argument whatever; nor does
this assumption solve any problem, or remove any difficulty[322].
Parmenides, then, had reason to say that consistency required Socrates,
if he assumed any such Ideas, to assume all. And I conceive his reply
to be to this effect; and to be thus a _reductio ad absurdum_ of the
Theory of Ideas in this sense. According to the opinions of those
who see in the _Parmenides_ an exposition of Platonic doctrines, I
believe that Parmenides is conceived in this passage, to suggest to
Socrates what is necessary for the completion of the Theory of Ideas.
But upon either supposition, I wish especially to draw the attention
of my readers to the position of superiority in the Dialogue in which
Parmenides is here placed with regard to Socrates.

Parmenides then proceeds to propound to Socrates difficulties with
regard to the Ideal Theory, in another of its aspects;--namely, when it
assumes Ideas of Relations of things; and here also, I wish especially
to have it considered how far the answers of Socrates to these
objections are really satisfactory and conclusive.

"Tell me," says he (§ 10, Bekker), "You conceive that there are certain
Ideas, and that things partaking of these Ideas, are called by the
corresponding names;--an Idea of _Likeness_, things partaking of
which are called _Like_;--of _Greatness_, whence they are _Great_: of
_Beauty_, whence they are _Beautiful_?" Socrates assents, naturally:
this being the simple and universal statement of the Theory, in this
case. But then comes one of the real difficulties of the Theory. Since
the special things participate of the General Idea, has each got
the whole of the Idea, which is, of course, One; or has each a part
of the Idea? "For," says Parmenides, "can there be any other way of
participation than these two?" Socrates replies by a similitude: "The
Idea, though One, may be wholly in each object, as the Day, one and the
same, is wholly in each place." The physical illustration, Parmenides
damages by making it more physical still. "You are ingenious,
Socrates," he says, (§ 11) "in making the same thing be in many places
at the same time. If you had a number of persons wrapped up in a sail
or web, would you say that each of them had the whole of it? Is not the
case similar?" Socrates cannot deny that it is. "But in this case, each
person has only a part of the whole; and thus your Ideas are partible."
To this, Socrates is represented as assenting in the briefest possible
phrase; and thus, here again, as I conceive, Parmenides retains his
superiority over Socrates in the Dialogue.

There are many other arguments urged against the Ideal Theory by
Parmenides. The next is a consequence of this partibility of Ideas,
thus supposed to be proved, and is ingenious enough. It is this:

"If the Idea of Greatness be distributed among things that are Great,
so that each has a part of it, each separate thing will be Great in
virtue of a part of Greatness which is less than Greatness itself. Is
not this absurd?" Socrates submissively allows that it is.

And the same argument is applied in the case of the Idea of Equality.

"If each of several things have a part of the Idea of Equality, it
will be Equal to something, in virtue of something which is less than
Equality."

And in the same way with regard to the Idea of Smallness.

"If each thing be small by having a part of the Idea of Smallness,
Smallness itself will be greater than the small thing, since that is a
part of itself."

These ingenious results of the partibility of Ideas remind us of the
ingenuity shown in the Greek geometry, especially the Fifth Book of
Euclid. They are represented as not resisted by Socrates (§ 12): "In
what way, Socrates, can things participate in Ideas, if they cannot
do so either integrally or partibly?" "By my troth," says Socrates,
"it does not seem easy to tell." Parmenides, who completely takes the
conduct of the Dialogue, then turns to another part of the subject and
propounds other arguments. "What do you say to this?" he asks.

"There is an Ideal Greatness, and there are many things, separate from
it, and Great by virtue of it. But now if you look at Greatness and the
Great things together, since they are all Great, they must be Great in
virtue of some higher Idea of Greatness which includes both. And thus
you have a Second Idea of Greatness; and in like manner you will have a
third, and so on indefinitely."

This also, as an argument against the separate existence of Ideas,
Socrates is represented as unable to answer. He replies interrogatively:

"Why, Parmenides, is not each of these Ideas a Thought, which, by its
nature, cannot exist in anything except in the Mind? In that case your
consequences would not follow."

This is an answer which changes the course of the reasoning: but still,
not much to the advantage of the Ideal Theory. Parmenides is still
ready with very perplexing arguments. (§ 13.)

"The Ideas, then," he says, "are Thoughts. They must be Thoughts of
something. They are Thoughts of something, then, which exists in all
the special things; some one thing which the Thought perceives in all
the special things; and this one Thought thus involved in all, is the
_Idea_. But then, if the special things, as you say, participate in the
Idea, they participate in the Thought; and thus, all objects are made
up of Thoughts, and all things think; or else, there are thoughts in
things which do not think."

This argument drives Socrates from the position that Ideas are
Thoughts, and he moves to another, that they are Paradigms, Exemplars
of the qualities of things, to which the things themselves are like,
and their being thus like, is their participating in the Idea. But here
too, he has no better success. Parmenides argues thus:

"If the Object be like the Idea, the Idea must be like the Object.
And since the Object and the Idea are like, they must, according to
your doctrine, participate in the Idea of Likeness. And thus you have
one Idea participating in another Idea, and so on in infinitum."
Socrates is obliged to allow that this demolishes the notion of objects
partaking in their Ideas by likeness: and that he must seek some other
way. "You see then, O Socrates," says Parmenides, "what difficulties
follow, if any one asserts the independent existence of Ideas!"
Socrates allows that this is true. "And yet," says Parmenides, "you
do not half perceive the difficulties which follow from this doctrine
of Ideas." Socrates expresses a wish to know to what Parmenides
refers; and the aged sage replies by explaining that if Ideas exist
independently of us, we can never know anything about them: and that
even the Gods could not know anything about man. This argument, though
somewhat obscure, is evidently stated with perfect earnestness, and
Socrates is represented as giving his assent to it. "And yet," says
Parmenides (end of § 18), "if any one gives up entirely the doctrine of
Ideas, how is any reasoning possible?"

All the way through this discussion, Parmenides appears as vastly
superior to Socrates; as seeing completely the tendency of every line
of reasoning, while Socrates is driven blindly from one position to
another; and as kindly and graciously advising a young man respecting
the proper aims of his philosophical career; as well as clearly
pointing out the consequences of his assumptions. Nothing can be
more complete than the higher position assigned to Parmenides in the
Dialogue.

This has not been overlooked by the Editors and Commentators of Plato.
To take for example one of the latest; in Steinhart's Introduction to
Hieronymus Müller's translation of _Parmenides_ (Leipzig, 1852), p.
261, he says: "It strikes us, at first, as strange, that Plato here
seems to come forward as the assailant of his own doctrine of Ideas.
For the difficulties which he makes Parmenides propound against that
doctrine are by no means sophistical or superficial, but substantial
and to the point. Moreover there is among all these objections, which
are partly derived from the Megarics, scarce one which does not appear
again in the penetrating and comprehensive argumentations of Aristotle
against the Platonic Doctrine of Ideas."

Of course, both this writer and other commentators on Plato offer
something as a solution of this difficulty. But though these
explanations are subtle and ingenious, they appear to leave no
satisfactory or permanent impression on the mind. I must avow that, to
me, they appear insufficient and empty; and I cannot help believing
that the solution is of a more simple and direct kind. It may seem bold
to maintain an opinion different from that of so many eminent scholars;
but I think that the solution which I offer, will derive confirmation
from a consideration of the whole Dialogue; and therefore I shall
venture to propound it in a distinct and positive form. It is this:

I conceive that the _Parmenides_ is not a Platonic Dialogue at all;
but Antiplatonic, or more properly, _Eleatic_: written, not by Plato,
in order to explain and prove his Theory of Ideas, but by some one,
probably an admirer of Parmenides and Zeno, in order to show how strong
were his master's arguments against the Platonists and how weak their
objections to the Eleatic doctrine.

I conceive that this view throws an especial light on every part of the
Dialogue, as a brief survey of it will show. Parmenides and Zeno come
to Athens to the Panathenaic festival: Parmenides already an old man,
with a silver head, dignified and benevolent in his appearance, looking
five and sixty years old: Zeno about forty, tall and handsome. They are
the guests of Pythodorus, outside the Wall, in the Ceramicus; and there
they are visited by Socrates then young, and others who wish to hear
the written discourses of Zeno. These discourses are explanations of
the philosophy of Parmenides, which he had delivered in verse.

Socrates is represented as showing, from the first, a disposition to
criticize Zeno's dissertation very closely; and without any prelude or
preparation, he applies the Doctrine of Ideas to refute the Eleatic
Doctrine that All Things are One. (§ 3.) When he had heard to the
end, he begged to have the first Proposition of the First Book read
again. And then, "How is it, O Zeno, that you say, That if the Things
which exist are Many, and not One, they must be at the same time like
and unlike? Is this your argument? Or do I misunderstand you?" "No,"
says Zeno, "you understand quite rightly." Socrates then turns to
Parmenides, and says, somewhat rudely, as it seems, "Zeno is a great
friend of yours, Parmenides: he shows his friendship not only in
other ways, but also in what he writes. For he says the same things
which you say, though he pretends that he does not. You say, in your
poems, that All Things are One, and give striking proofs: he says that
existences are not many, and he gives many and good proofs. You seem
to soar above us, but you do not really differ." Zeno takes this sally
good-humouredly, and tells him that he pursues the scent with the
keenness of a Laconian hound. "But," says he (§ 6), "there really is
less of ostentation in my writing than you think. My Essay was merely
written as a defence of Parmenides long ago, when I was young; and is
not a piece of display composed now that I am older. And it was stolen
from me by some one; so that I had no choice about publishing it."

Here we have, as I conceive, Socrates already represented as placed
in a disadvantageous position, by his abruptness, rude allusions, and
readiness to put bad interpretations on what is done. For this, Zeno's
gentle pleasantry is a rebuke. Socrates, however, forthwith rushes into
the argument; arguing, as I have said, for his own Theory.

"Tell me," he says, "do you not think there is an Idea of Likeness, and
an Idea of Unlikeness? And that everything partakes of these Ideas? The
things which partake of Unlikeness are unlike. If all things partake of
both Ideas, they are both like and unlike; and where is the wonder? (§
7.) If you could show that Likeness itself was Unlikeness, it would be
a prodigy; but if things which partake of these opposites, have both
the opposite qualities, it appears to me, Zeno, to involve no absurdity.

"So if Oneness itself were to be shown to be Maniness" (I hope I may
use this word, rather than _multiplicity_) "I should be surprised; but
if any one say that _I_ am at the same time one and many, where is the
wonder? For I partake of maniness: my right side is different from my
left side, my upper from my under parts. But I also partake of Oneness,
for I am here One of us seven. So that both are true. And so if any one
say that stocks and stones, and the like, are both one and many,--not
saying that Oneness is Maniness, nor Maniness Oneness, he says nothing
wonderful: he says what all will allow. (§ 8.) If then, as I said
before, any one should take separately the Ideas or Essence of Things,
as Likeness and Unlikeness, Maniness and Oneness, Rest and Motion, and
the like, and then should show that these can mix and separate again,
I should be wonderfully surprised, O Zeno: for I reckon that I have
tolerably well made myself master of these subjects[323]. I should
be much more surprised if any one could show me this contradiction
involved in the Ideas themselves; in the object of the Reason, as well
as in Visible objects."

It may be remarked that Socrates delivers all this argumentation with
the repetitions which it involves, and the vehemence of its manner,
without waiting for a reply to any of his interrogations; instead
of making every step the result of a concession of his opponent, as
is the case in the Dialogues where he is represented as triumphant.
Every reader of Plato will recollect also that in those Dialogues,
the triumph of temper on the part of Socrates is represented as
still more remarkable than the triumph of argument. No vehemence or
rudeness on the part of his adversaries prevents his calmly following
his reasoning; and he parries coarseness by compliment. Now in this
Dialogue, it is remarkable that this kind of triumph is given to the
adversaries of Socrates. "When Socrates had thus delivered himself,"
says Pythodorus, the narrator of the conversation, "we thought that
Parmenides and Zeno would both be angry. But it was not so. They
bestowed entire attention upon him, and often looked at each other,
and smiled, as in admiration of Socrates. And when he had ended,
Parmenides said: 'O Socrates, what an admirable person you are, for the
earnestness with which you reason! Tell me then, Do you then believe
the doctrine to which you have been referring;--that there are certain
Ideas, existing independent of Things; and that there are, separate
from the Ideas, Things which partake of them? And do you think that
there is an Idea of Likeness besides the likeness which we have; and a
Oneness and a Maniness, and the like? And an Idea of the Right, and the
Good, and the Fair, and of other such qualities?'" Socrates says that
he does hold this; Parmenides then asks him, how far he carries this
doctrine of Ideas, and propounds to him the difficulties which I have
already stated; and when Socrates is unable to answer him, lets him off
in the kind but patronizing way which I have already described.

To me, comparing this with the intellectual and moral attitude of
Socrates in the most dramatic of the other Platonic Dialogues, it is
inconceivable, that this representation of Socrates should be Plato's.
It is just what Zeno would have written, if he had wished to bestow
upon his master Parmenides the calm dignity and irresistible argument
which Plato assigns to Socrates. And this character is kept up to the
end of the Dialogue. When Socrates (§ 19) has acknowledged that he is
at loss which way to turn for his philosophy, Parmenides undertakes,
though with kind words, to explain to him by what fundamental error in
the course of his speculative habits he has been misled. He says; "You
try to make a complete Theory of Ideas, before you have gone through
a proper intellectual discipline. The impulse which urges you to such
speculations is admirable--is divine. But you must exercise yourself in
reasoning which many think trifling, while you are yet young; if you
do not, the truth will elude your grasp." Socrates asks submissively
what is the course of such discipline: Parmenides replies, "The course
pointed out by Zeno, as you have heard." And then, gives him some
instructions in what manner he is to test any proposed Theory. Socrates
is frightened at the laboriousness and obscurity of the process. He
says, "You tell me, Parmenides, of an overwhelming course of study; and
I do not well comprehend it. Give me an example of such an examination
of a Theory." "It is too great a labour," says he, "for one so old
as I am." "Well then, you, Zeno," says Socrates, "will you not give
us such an example?" Zeno answers, smiling, that they had better get
it from Parmenides himself; and joins in the petition of Socrates to
him, that he will instruct them. All the company unite in the request.
Parmenides compares himself to an aged racehorse, brought to the course
after long disuse, and trembling at the risk; but finally consents.
And as an example of a Theory to be examined, takes his own Doctrine,
that All Things are One, carrying on the Dialogue thenceforth, not
with Socrates, but with Aristoteles (not the Stagirite, but afterwards
one of the Thirty), whom he chooses as a younger and more manageable
respondent.

The discussion of this Doctrine is of a very subtle kind, and it would
be difficult to make it intelligible to a modern reader. Nor is it
necessary for my purpose to attempt to do so. It is plain that the
discussion is intended seriously, as an example of true philosophy; and
each step of the process is represented as irresistible. The Respondent
has nothing to say but _Yes_; or _No_; _How so_? _Certainly_; _It does
appear_; _It does not appear_. The discussion is carried to a much
greater length than all the rest of the Dialogue; and the result of
the reasoning is summed up by Parmenides thus: "If One exist, it is
Nothing. Whether One exist or do not exist, both It and Other Things
both with regard to Themselves and to Each other, All and Everyway are
and are not, appear and appear not." And this also is fully assented
to; and so the Dialogue ends.

I shall not pretend to explain the Doctrines there examined that One
exists, or One does not exist, nor to trace their consequences. But
these were Formulæ, as familiar in the Eleatic school, as Ideas in the
Platonic; and were undoubtedly regarded by the Megaric contemporaries
of Plato as quite worthy of being discussed, after the Theory of Ideas
had been overthrown. This, accordingly, appears to be the purport of
the Dialogue; and it is pursued, as we see, without any bitterness
toward Socrates or his disciples; but with a persuasion that they were
poor philosophers, conceited talkers, and weak disputants.

The external circumstances of the Dialogue tend, I conceive, to confirm
this opinion, that it is not Plato's. The Dialogue begins, as the
_Republic_ begins, with the mention of a Cephalus, and two brothers,
Glaucon and Adimantus. But this Cephalus is not the old man of the
Piræus, of whom we have so charming a picture in the opening of the
_Republic_. He is from Clazomenæ, and tells us that his fellow-citizens
are great lovers of philosophy; a trait of their character which does
not appear elsewhere. Even the brothers Glaucon and Adimantus are not
the two brothers of Plato who conduct the Dialogue in the later books
of the _Republic_: so at least Ast argues, who holds the genuineness of
the Dialogue. This Glaucon and Adimantus are most wantonly introduced;
for the sole office they have, is to say that they have a half-brother
Antiphon, by a second marriage of their mother. No such half-brother of
Plato, and no such marriage of his mother, are noticed in other remains
of antiquity. Antiphon is represented as having been the friend of
Pythodorus, who was the host of Parmenides and Zeno, as we have seen.
And Antiphon, having often heard from Pythodorus the account of the
conversation of his guests with Socrates, retained it in his memory, or
in his tablets, so as to be able to give the full report of it which we
have in the Dialogue _Parmenides_[324]. To me, all this looks like a
clumsy imitation of the Introductions to the Platonic Dialogues.

I say nothing of the chronological difficulties which arise
from bringing Parmenides and Socrates together, though they are
considerable; for they have been explained more or less satisfactorily;
and certainly in the _Theætetus_, Socrates is represented as saying
that he when very young had seen Parmenides who was very old[325].
Athenæus, however[326], reckons this among Plato's fictions.
Schleiermacher gives up the identification and relation of the persons
mentioned in the Introduction as an unmanageable story.

I may add that I believe Cicero, who refers to so many of Plato's
Dialogues, nowhere refers to the _Parmenides_. Athenæus does refer to
it; and in doing so blames Plato for his coarse imputations on Zeno
and Parmenides. According to our view, these are hostile attempts to
ascribe rudeness to Socrates or to Plato. Stallbaum acknowledges that
Aristotle nowhere refers to this Dialogue.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 321: P. 116. "No amount of human knowledge can be adequate
which does not solve the phenomena of these absolute certainties."]

[Footnote 322: Prof. Butler, Lect. ix. Second Series, p. 136, appears
to think that Plato had sufficient grounds (of a theological kind) for
the assumption of such Ideas; but I see no trace of them.]

[Footnote 323: I am aware that this translation is different from the
common translation. It appears to me to be consistent with the habit
of the Greek language. It slightly leans in favour of my view; but I
do not conceive that the argument would be perceptibly weaker, if the
common interpretation were adopted.]

[Footnote 324: In the _First Alcibiades_, Pythodorus is mentioned as
having paid 100 minæ to Zeno for his instructions (119 A).]

[Footnote 325: P. 183 e.]

[Footnote 326: _Deip._ xi. c. 15, p. 105.]


APPENDIX B.

ON PLATO'S SURVEY OF THE SCIENCES.

(_Cam. Phil. Soc._ APRIL 23, 1855.)


A survey by Plato of the state of the Sciences, as existing in his
time, may be regarded as hardly less interesting than Francis Bacon's
Review of the condition of the Sciences of _his_ time, contained in the
_Advancement of Learning_. Such a survey we have, in the seventh book
of Plato's _Republic_; and it will be instructive to examine what the
Sciences then were, and what Plato aspired to have them become; aiding
ourselves by the light afforded by the subsequent history of Science.

In the first place, it is interesting to note, in the two writers,
Plato and Bacon, the same deep conviction that the large and profound
philosophy which they recommended, had not, in their judgment, been
pursued in an adequate and worthy manner, by those who had pursued it
at all. The reader of Bacon will recollect the passage in the _Novum
Organon_ (Lib. I. Aphorism 80) where he speaks with indignation of
the way in which philosophy had been degraded and perverted, by being
applied as a mere instrument of utility or of early education: "So that
the great mother of the Sciences is thrust down with indignity to the
offices of a handmaid;--is made to minister to the labours of medicine
or mathematics; or again, to give the first preparatory tinge to the
immature minds of youth[327]."

In the like spirit, Plato says (_Rep._ VI. § 11, Bekker's ed.):

"Observe how boldly and fearlessly I set about my explanation of my
assertion that philosophers ought to rule the world. For I begin by
saying, that the State must begin to treat the study of philosophy in a
way opposite to that now practised. Now, those who meddle at all with
this study are put upon it when they are children, between the lessons
which they receive in the farm-yard and in the shop[328]; and as soon
as they have been introduced to the hardest part of the subject, are
taken off from it, even those who get the most of philosophy. By the
hardest part, I mean, the discussion of principles--Dialectic[329].
And in their succeeding years, if they are willing to listen to a
few lectures of those who make philosophy their business, they think
they have done great things, as if it were something foreign to the
business of life. And as they advance towards old age, with a very
few exceptions, philosophy in them is extinguished: extinguished far
more completely than the Heraclitean sun, for theirs is not lighted
up again, as that is every morning:" alluding to the opinion which
was propounded, by way of carrying the doctrine of the _unfixity_ of
sensible objects to an extreme; that the Sun is extinguished every
night and lighted again in the morning. In opposition to this practice,
Plato holds that philosophy should be the especial employment of men's
minds when their bodily strength fails.

What Plato means by _Dialectic_, which he, in the next Book, calls the
highest part of philosophy, and which is, I think, what he here means
by the hardest part of philosophy, I may hereafter consider: but at
present I wish to pass in review the Sciences which he speaks of, as
leading the way to that highest study. These Sciences are Arithmetic,
Plane Geometry, Solid Geometry, Astronomy and Harmonics.

The view in which Plato here regards the Sciences is, as the
instruments of that culture of the philosophical spirit which is
to make the philosopher the fit and natural ruler of the perfect
State--the Platonic Polity. It is held that to answer this purpose, the
mind must be instructed in something more stable than the knowledge
supplied by the senses;--a knowledge of objects which are constantly
changing, and which therefore can be no real permanent Knowledge, but
only Opinion. The real and permanent Knowledge which we thus require is
to be found in certain sciences, which deal with _truths necessary and
universal_, as we should now describe them: and which therefore are,
in Plato's language, a knowledge of that which really _is_[330].

This is the object of the Sciences of which Plato speaks. And hence,
when he introduces Arithmetic, as the first of the Sciences which are
to be employed in this mental discipline, he adds (VII. § 8) that
it must be not mere common Arithmetic, but a science which leads to
speculative truths[331], seen by Intuition[332]; not an Arithmetic
which is studied for the sake of buying and selling, as among tradesmen
and shopkeepers, but for the sake of pure and real Science[333].

I shall not dwell upon the details with which he illustrates this view,
but proceed to the other Sciences which he mentions.

Geometry is then spoken of, as obviously the next Science in order;
and it is asserted that it really does answer the required condition
of drawing the mind from visible, mutable phenomena to a permanent
reality. Geometers indeed speak of their visible diagrams, as if their
problems were certain practical processes; to erect a perpendicular; to
construct a square: and the like. But this language, though necessary,
is really absurd. The figures are mere aids to their reasonings.
Their knowledge is really a knowledge not of visible objects, but of
permanent realities: and thus, Geometry is one of the helps by which
the mind may be drawn to Truth; by which the philosophical spirit may
be formed, which looks upwards instead of downwards.

Astronomy is suggested as the Science next in order, but Socrates, the
leader of the dialogue, remarks that there is an intermediate Science
first to be considered. Geometry treats of plane figures; Astronomy
treats of solids in motion, that is, of spheres in motion; for the
astronomy of Plato's time was mainly the doctrine of the sphere. But
before treating of solids in motion, we must have a science which
treats of solids simply. After taking space of two dimensions, we must
take space of three dimensions, length, breadth and depth, as in cubes
and the like[334]. But such a Science, it is remarked, has not yet
been discovered. Plato "notes as deficient" this branch of knowledge;
to use the expression employed by Bacon on the like occasions in his
Review. Plato goes on to say, that the cultivators of such a science
have not received due encouragement; and that though scorned and
starved by the public, and not recommended by any obvious utility, it
has still made great progress, in virtue of its own attractiveness.

In fact, researches in Solid Geometry had been pursued with great zeal
by Plato and his friends, and with remarkable success. The five Regular
Solids, the Tetrahedron or Pyramid, Cube, Octahedron, Dodecahedron
and Icosahedron, had been discovered; and the curious theorem, that
of Regular Solids there can be just so many, these and no others,
was known. The doctrine of these Solids was already applied in a
way, fanciful and arbitrary, no doubt, but ingenious and lively, to
the theory of the Universe. In the _Timæus_, the elements have these
forms assigned to them respectively. Earth has the Cube: Fire has the
Pyramid: Water has the Octahedron: Air has the Icosahedron: and the
Dodecahedron is the plan of the Universe itself. This application of
the doctrine of the Regular Solids shows that the knowledge of those
figures was already established; and that Plato had a right to speak
of Solid Geometry as a real and interesting Science. And that this
subject was so recondite and profound,--that these five Regular Solids
had so little application in the geometry which has a bearing on man's
ordinary thoughts and actions,--made it all the more natural for Plato
to suppose that these solids had a bearing on the constitution of the
Universe; and we shall find that such a belief in later times found a
ready acceptance in the minds of mathematicians who followed in the
Platonic line of speculation.

Plato next proceeds to consider Astronomy; and here we have an amusing
touch of philosophical drama. Glaucon, the hearer and pupil in the
Dialogue, is desirous of showing that he has profited by what his
instructor had said about the real uses of Science. He says Astronomy
is a very good branch of education. It is such a very useful science
for seamen and husbandmen and the like. Socrates says, with a smile,
as we may suppose: "You are very amusing with your zeal for utility.
I suppose you are afraid of being condemned by the good people of
Athens for diffusing Useless Knowledge." A little afterwards Glaucon
tries to do better, but still with no great success. He says, "You
blamed me for praising Astronomy awkwardly: but now I will follow your
lead. Astronomy is one of the sciences which you require, because it
makes men's minds look upwards, and study things above. Any one can
see that." "Well," says Socrates, "perhaps any one can see it except
me--I cannot see it." Glaucon is surprised, but Socrates goes on: "Your
notice of 'the study of things above' is certainly a very magnificent
one. You seem to think that if a man bends his head back and looks at
the ceiling he 'looks upwards' with his mind as well as his eyes. You
may be right and I may be wrong: but I have no notion of any science
which makes the _mind_ look upwards, except a science which is about
the permanent and the invisible. It makes no difference, as to that
matter, whether a man gapes and looks up or shuts his mouth and looks
down. If a man merely look up and stare at sensible objects, his mind
does not look upwards, even if he were to pursue his studies swimming
on his back in the sea."

The Astronomy, then, which merely looks at phenomena does not satisfy
Plato. He wants something more. What is it? as Glaucon very naturally
asks.

Plato then describes Astronomy as a real science (§ 11). "The
variegated adornments which appear in the sky, the visible luminaries,
we must judge to be the most beautiful and the most perfect things of
their kind: but since they are mere visible figures, we must suppose
them to be far inferior to the true objects; namely, those spheres
which, with their real proportions of quickness and slowness, their
real number, their real figures, revolve and carry luminaries in their
revolutions. These objects are to be apprehended by reason and mental
conception, not by vision." And he then goes on to say that the varied
figures which the skies present to the eye are to be used as _diagrams_
to assist the study of that higher truth; just as if any one were to
study geometry by means of beautiful diagrams constructed by Dædalus or
any other consummate artist.

Here then, Plato points to a kind of astronomical science which goes
beyond the mere arrangement of phenomena: an astronomy which, it
would seem, did not exist at the time when he wrote. It is natural
to inquire, whether we can determine more precisely what kind of
astronomical science he meant, and whether such science has been
brought into existence since his time.

He gives us some further features of the philosophical astronomy which
he requires. "As you do not expect to find in the most exquisite
geometrical diagrams the true evidence of quantities being equal, or
double, or in any other relation: so the true astronomer will not think
that the proportion of the day to the month, or the month to the year,
and the like, are real and immutable things. He will seek a deeper
truth than these. We must treat Astronomy, like Geometry, as a series
of problems suggested by visible things. We must apply the intelligent
portion of our mind to the subject."

Here we really come in view of a class of problems which astronomical
speculators at certain periods have proposed to themselves. What is the
real ground of the proportion of the day to the month, and of the month
to the year, I do not know that any writer of great name has tried to
determine: but to ask the reason of these proportions, namely, that of
the revolution of the earth on its axis, of the moon in its orbit, and
of the earth in its orbit, are questions just of the same kind as to
ask the reason of the proportion of the revolutions of the planets in
their orbits, and of the proportion of the orbits themselves. Now who
has attempted to assign such reasons?

Of course we shall answer, Kepler: not so much in the Laws of the
Planetary motions which bear his name, as in the Law which at an
earlier period he thought he had discovered, determining the proportion
of the distances of the several Planets from the Sun. And, curiously
enough, this solution of a problem which we may conceive Plato to have
had in his mind, Kepler gave by means of the Five Regular Solids which
Plato had brought into notice, and had employed in his theory of the
Universe given in the _Timæus_.

Kepler's speculations on the subject just mentioned were given to the
world in the _Mysterium Cosmographicum_ published in 1596. In his
Preface, he says "In the beginning of the year 1595 I brooded with
the whole energy of my mind on the subject of the Copernican system.
There were three things in particular of which I pertinaciously sought
the causes; why they are not other than they are: the number, the
size, and the motion of the orbits." We see how strongly he had his
mind impressed with the same thought which Plato had so confidently
uttered: that there must be some reason for those proportions in the
scheme of the Universe which appear casual and vague. He was confident
at this period that he had solved two of the three questions which
haunted him;--that he could account for the number and the size of the
planetary orbits. His account was given in this way.--"The orbit of
the Earth is a circle; round the sphere to which this circle belongs
describe a dodecahedron; the sphere including this will give the orbit
of Mars. Round Mars inscribe a tetrahedron; the circle including this
will be the orbit of Jupiter. Describe a cube round Jupiter's orbit;
the circle including this will be the orbit of Saturn. Now inscribe in
the Earth's orbit an icosahedron: the circle inscribed in it will be
the orbit of Venus. Inscribe an octahedron in the orbit of Venus; the
circle inscribed in it will be Mercury's orbit. This is the reason of
the number of the planets;" and also of the magnitudes of their orbits.

These proportions were only approximations; and the Rule thus asserted
has been shown to be unfounded, by the discovery of new Planets. This
Law of Kepler has been repudiated by succeeding Astronomers. So far,
then, the Astronomy which Plato requires as a part of true philosophy
has not been brought into being. But are we thence to conclude
that the demand for such a kind of Astronomy was a mere Platonic
imagination?--was a mistake which more recent and sounder views have
corrected? We can hardly venture to say that. For the questions which
Kepler thus asked, and which he answered by the assertion of this
erroneous Law, are questions of exactly the same kind as those which
he asked and answered by means of the true Laws which still fasten his
name upon one of the epochs of astronomical history. If he was wrong
in assigning reasons for the number and size of the planetary orbits,
he was right in assigning a reason for the proportion of the motions.
This he did in the _Harmonice Mundi_, published in 1619: where he
established that the squares of the periodic times of the different
Planets are as the cubes of their mean distances from the central Sun.
Of this discovery he speaks with a natural exultation, which succeeding
astronomers have thought well founded. He says: "What I prophesied
two and twenty years ago as soon as I had discovered the five solids
among the heavenly bodies; what I firmly believed before I had seen
the _Harmonics_ of Ptolemy; what I promised my friends in the title of
this book (_On the perfect Harmony of the celestial motions_), which
I named before I was sure of my discovery; what sixteen years ago I
regarded as a thing to be sought; that for which I joined Tycho Brahe,
for which I settled in Prague, for which I devoted the best part of my
life to astronomical contemplations; at length I have brought to light,
and have recognized its truth beyond my most sanguine expectations."
(_Harm. Mundi_, Lib. V.)

Thus the Platonic notion, of an Astronomy which deals with doctrines
of a more exact and determinate kind than the obvious relations of
phænomena, may be found to tend either to error or to truth. Such
aspirations point equally to the five regular solids which Kepler
imagined as determining the planetary orbits, and to the Laws of
Kepler in which Newton detected the effect of universal gravitation.
The realities which Plato looked for, as something incomparably more
real than the visible luminaries, are found, when we find geometrical
figures, epicycles and eccentrics, laws of motion and laws of force,
which explain the appearances. His Realities are Theories which account
for the Phenomena, Ideas which connect the Facts.

But, is Plato right in holding that such Realities as these are _more
real_ than the Phenomena, and constitute an Astronomy of a higher kind
than that of mere Appearances? To this we shall, of course, reply
that Theories and Facts have each their reality, but that these are
realities of different kinds. Kepler's Laws are as real as day and
night; the force of gravity tending to the Sun is as real as the Sun;
but not more so. True Theories and Facts are equally real, for true
Theories _are_ Facts, and Facts are familiar Theories. Astronomy is, as
Plato says, a series of Problems suggested by visible Things; and the
Thoughts in our own minds which bring the solutions of these Problems,
have a reality in the Things which suggest them.

But if we try, as Plato does, to separate and oppose to each other the
Astronomy of Appearances and the Astronomy of Theories, we attempt that
which is impossible. There are no Phenomena which do not exhibit some
Law; no Law can be conceived without Phenomena. The heavens offer a
series of Problems; but however many of these Problems we solve, there
remain still innumerable of them unsolved; and these unsolved Problems
have solutions, and are not different in kind from those of which the
extant solution is most complete.

Nor can we justly distinguish, with Plato, Astronomy into transient
appearances and permanent truths. The theories of Astronomy are
permanent, and are manifested in a series of changes: but the change is
perpetual just _because_ the theory is permanent. The perpetual change
_is_ the permanent theory. The perpetual changes in the positions
and movements of the planets, for instance, manifest the permanent
machinery: the machinery of cycles and epicycles, as Plato would
have said, and as Copernicus would have agreed; while Kepler, with a
profound admiration for both, would have asserted that the motions
might be represented by ellipses, more exactly, if not more truly. The
cycles and epicycles, or the ellipses, are as real as space and time,
_in_ which the motions take place. But we cannot justly say that space
and time and motion are more real than the bodies which move in space
and time, or than the appearances which these bodies present.

Thus Plato, with his tendency to exalt Ideas above Facts,--to find a
Reality which is more real than Phenomena,--to take hold of a permanent
Truth which is more true than truths of observation,--attempts what
is impossible. He tries to separate the poles of the Fundamental
Antithesis, which, however antithetical, are inseparable.

At the same time, we must recollect that this tendency to find a
Reality which is something beyond appearance, a permanence which is
involved in the changes, is the genuine spring of scientific discovery.
Such a tendency has been the cause of all the astronomical science
which we possess. It appeared in Plato himself, in Hipparchus, in
Ptolemy, in Copernicus, and most eminently in Kepler; and in him
perhaps in a manner more accordant with Plato's aspirations when he
found the five Regular Solids in the Universe, than when he found there
the Conic Sections which determine the form of the planetary orbits.
The pursuit of this tendency has been the source of the mighty and
successful labours of succeeding astronomers: and the anticipations of
Plato on this head were more true than he himself could have conceived.

When the above view of the nature of true astronomy has been proposed,
Glaucon says:

"That would be a task much more laborious than the astronomy now
cultivated." Socrates replies: "I believe so: and such tasks must be
undertaken, if our researches are to be good for anything."

After Astronomy, there comes under review another Science, which is
treated in the same manner. It is presented as one of the Sciences
which deal with real abstract truth; and which are therefore suited to
that development of the philosophic insight into the highest truth,
which is here Plato's main object. This Science is _Harmonics_, the
doctrine of the mathematical relations of musical sounds. Perhaps
it may be more difficult to explain to a general audience, Plato's
views on this than on the previous subjects: for though Harmonics is
still acknowledged as a Science including the mathematical truths to
which Plato here refers, these truths are less generally known than
those of geometry or astronomy. Pythagoras is reported to have been
the discoverer of the cardinal proposition in this Mathematics of
Music:--namely, that the musical notes which the ear recognizes as
having that definite and harmonious relation which we call an _octave_,
a _fifth_, a _fourth_, a _third_, have also, in some way or other, the
numerical relation of 2 to 1, 3 to 2, 4 to 3, 5 to 4. I say "some way
or other," because the statements of ancient writers on this subject
are physically inexact, but are right in the essential point, that
those simple numerical ratios are characteristic of the most marked
harmonic relations. The numerical ratios really represent the rate of
vibration of the air when those harmonics are produced. This perhaps
Plato did not know: but he knew or assumed that those numerical ratios
were cardinal truths in harmony: and he conceived that the exactness
of the ratios rested on grounds deeper and more intellectual than any
testimony which the ear could give. This is the main point in his mode
of applying the subject, which will be best understood by translating
(with some abridgement) what he says. Socrates proceeds:

(§ 11 near the end.) "Motion appears in many aspects. It would take a
very wise man to enumerate them all: but there are two obvious kinds.
One which appears in astronomy, (the revolutions of the heavenly
bodies,) and another which is the echo of that[335]. As the eyes are
made for Astronomy, so are the ears made for the motion which produces
Harmony[336]: and thus we have two sister sciences, as the Pythagoreans
teach, and we assent.

(§ 12.) "To avoid unnecessary labour, let us first learn what _they_
can tell us, and see whether anything is to be added to it; retaining
our own view on such subjects: namely this:--that those whose education
we are to superintend--real philosophers--are never to learn any
imperfect truths:--anything which does not tend to that point (exact
and permanent truth) to which all our knowledge ought to tend, as we
said concerning astronomy. Now those who cultivate music take a very
different course from this. You may see them taking immense pains in
measuring musical notes and intervals by the ear, as the astronomers
measure the heavenly motions by the eye.

"Yes, says Glaucon, they apply their ears close to the instrument, as
if they could catch the note by getting near to it, and talk of some
kind of recurrences[337]. Some say they can distinguish an interval,
and that this is the smallest possible interval, by which others are to
be measured; while others say that the two notes are identical: both
parties alike judging by the ear, not by the intellect.

"You mean, says Socrates, those fine musicians who torture their
notes, and screw their pegs, and pinch their strings, and speak of the
resulting sounds in grand terms of art. We will leave them, and address
our inquiries to our other teachers, the Pythagoreans."

The expressions about the small interval in Glaucon's speech appear to
me to refer to a curious question, which we know was discussed among
the Greek mathematicians. If we take a keyed instrument, and ascend
from a key note by two _octaves_ and a _third_, (say from _A__{1} to
_C__{3}) we arrive at the _same nominal note_, as if we ascend four
times by a _fifth_ (_A__{1} to _E__{1}, _E__{1} to _B__{2}, _B__{2}
to _F__{2}, _F__{2} to _C__{3}). Hence one party might call this the
_same_ note. But if the Octaves, Fifths, and Third be perfectly true
intervals, the notes arrived at in the two ways will not be really
the same. (In the one case, the note is ½ × ½ × ⅘; in the other
⅔ × ⅔ × ⅔ × ⅔; which are ⅕ and 16/81, or in the ratio of
81 to 80). This small interval by which the two notes really differ,
the Greeks called a _Comma_, and it was the smallest musical interval
which they recognized. Plato disdains to see anything important in this
controversy; though the controversy itself is really a curious proof
of his doctrine, that there is a mathematical truth in Harmony, higher
than instrumental exactness can reach. He goes on to say:

 "The musical teachers are defective in the same way as the
 astronomical. They do indeed seek numbers in the harmonic notes, which
 the ear perceives: but they do not ascend from them to the Problem,
 What are harmonic numbers and what are not, and what is the reason of
 each[338]?" "That", says Glaucon, "would be a sublime inquiry."

Have we in Harmonics, as in Astronomy, anything in the succeeding
History of the Science which illustrates the tendency of Plato's
thoughts, and the value of such a tendency?

It is plain that the tendency was of the same nature as that which
induced Kepler to call his work on Astronomy _Harmonice Mundi_; and
which led to many of the speculations of that work, in which harmonical
are mixed with geometrical doctrines. And if we are disposed to judge
severely of such speculations, as too fanciful for sound philosophy, we
may recollect that Newton himself seems to have been willing to find an
analogy between harmonic numbers and the different coloured spaces in
the spectrum.

But I will say frankly, that I do not believe there really exists any
harmonical relation in either of these cases. Nor can the problem
proposed by Plato be considered as having been solved since his
time, any further than the recurrence of vibrations, when their
ratios are so simple, may be easily conceived as affecting the ear
in a peculiar manner. The imperfection of musical scales, which the
_comma_ indicates, has not been removed; but we may say that, in the
case of this problem, as in the other ultimate Platonic problems,
the duplication of the cube and the quadrature of the circle, the
impossibility of a solution has been already established. The problem
of a perfect musical scale is impossible, because no power of 2 can
be equal to a power of 3; and if we further take the multiplier 5, of
course it also cannot bring about an exact equality. This impossibility
of a perfect scale being recognized, the practical problem is what is
the system of _temperament_ which will make the scale best suited for
musical purposes; and this problem has been very fully discussed by
modern writers.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 327: Accedit et illud quod naturalis philosophia in iis ipsis
viris, qui ei incubuerunt, vacantem et integrum hominem, præsertim
his recentioribus temporibus, vix nacta sit; nisi forte quis monachi
alicujus in cellula, aut nobilis in villula lucubrantis, exemplum
adduxerit; sed facta est demum naturalis philosophia instar transitus
cujusdam et pontisternii ad alia. Atque magna ista scientiarum mater
ad officia ancillæ detrusa est; quæ medicinæ aut mathematicis operibus
ministrat, et rursus quæ adolescentium immatura ingenia lavat et imbuat
velut tinctura quadam prima, ut aliam postea felicius et commodius
excipiant.]

[Footnote 328: μεταξὺ οἰκονομίας καὶ χρεματισμοῦ, between house-keeping
and money-getting.]

[Footnote 329: τὸ  περὶ τοὺς λόγους.]

[Footnote 330: The Sciences are to draw the mind from that which grows
and perishes to that which really is: μάθημα ψυχῆς ὁλκὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ
γιγνομένου ἐπι τὸ ὅν.]

[Footnote 331: ἐπὶ θέαν τῆς τῶν ἀριθμῶν φύσεως.]

[Footnote 332: τῇ νοηήσει αὐτῇ.]

[Footnote 333: He adds "and for the sake of war;" this point I have
passed by. Plato does not really ascribe much weight to this use of
Science, as we see in what he says of Geometry and Astronomy.]

[Footnote 334: ἀρθῶς ἕχει ἑξῆς μετὰ δευτέραν αὕξην τρίτην λαμβάνειν,
ἕστι δέ  που τοῦτο περὶ τὴν τῶν κύβων αύξην καὶ τὸ βάθους μέτεχον.]

[Footnote 335: ἀντίστροφον αὐτοῦ.]

[Footnote 336: πρὸς ἐναρμόνιον φορὰν ὦτα παγῆναι.]

[Footnote 337: πυκνώματα ἄ ττα.]

[Footnote 338: τίνες ξύμφωνοι ἀριθμοὶ, &c.]


APPENDIX BB.

ON PLATO'S NOTION OF DIALECTIC.

(_Cam. Phil. Soc._ MAY 7, 1855.)


The survey of the sciences, arithmetic, plane geometry, solid geometry,
astronomy and harmonics--which is contained in the seventh Book of
the Republic (§ 6-12), and which has been discussed in the preceding
paper, represents them as instruments in an education, of which the
end is something much higher--as steps in a progression which is to go
further. "Do you not know," says Socrates (§ 12), "that all this is
merely a prelude to the strain which we have to learn?" And what that
strain is, he forthwith proceeds to indicate. "That these sciences
do not suffice, you must be aware: for--those who are masters of
such sciences--do they seem to you to be good in dialectic? δεινοὶ
διαλεκτικοὶ εἷναι;"

"In truth, says Glaucon, they are not, with very few exceptions, so far
as I have fallen in with them."

"And yet, said I, if persons cannot give and receive a reason, they
cannot attain that knowledge which, as we have said, men ought to have."

Here it is evident that "to give and to receive a reason," is a
phrase employed as coinciding, in a general way at least, with being
"good in dialectic;" and accordingly, this is soon after asserted in
another form, the verb being now used instead of the adjective. "It is
dialectic discussion τὸ διαλέγεσθαι, which executes the strain which we
have been preparing." It is further said that it is a progress to clear
intellectual light, which corresponds to the progress of bodily vision
in proceeding from the darkened cave described in the beginning of the
Book to the light of day. This progress, it is added, of course you
call _Dialectic_ διαλεκτικήν.

Plato further says, that other sciences cannot properly be called
sciences. They begin from certain assumptions, and give us only the
consequences which follow from reasoning on such assumptions. But these
assumptions they cannot prove. To do so is not in the province of
each science. It belongs to a higher science: to the science of Real
Existences. You call the man Dialectical, who requires a reason of the
essence of each thing[339].

And as Dialectic gives an account of other real existences, so does
it of that most important reality, the true guide of Life and of
Philosophy, the Real Good. He who cannot follow this through all the
windings of the battle of Life, knows nothing to any purpose. And
thus Dialectic is the pinnacle, the top stone of the edifice of the
sciences[340].

Dialectic is here defined or described by Plato according to the
_subject_ with which it treats, and the _object_ with which it is to
be pursued: but in other parts of the Platonic Dialogues, Dialectic
appears rather to imply a certain _method_ of investigation;--to
describe the _form_ rather than the _matter_ of discussion; and it will
perhaps be worth while to compare these different accounts of Dialectic.

(_Phædrus._) One of the cardinal passages on this Point is in the
Phædrus, and may be briefly quoted. Phædrus, in the Dialogue which
bears his name, appears at first as an admirer of Lysias, a celebrated
writer of orations, the contemporary of Plato. In order to expose this
writer's style of composition as frigid and shallow, a specimen of it
is given, and Socrates not only criticises this, but delivers, as rival
compositions, two discourses on the same subject. Of these discourses,
given as the inspiration of the moment, the first is animated and
vigorous; the second goes still further, and clothes its meaning in a
gorgeous dress of poetical and mythical images. Phædrus acknowledges
that his favourite is outshone; and Socrates then proceeds to point
out that the real superiority of his own discourse consists in its
having a dialectical structure, beneath its outward aspect of imagery
and enthusiasm. He says: (§ 109, Bekker. It is to be remembered that
the subject of all the discourses was _Love_, under certain supposed
conditions.)

"The rest of the performance may be taken as play: but there were, in
what was thus thrown out by a random impulse, two features, of which,
if any one could reduce the effect to an art, it would be a very
agreeable and useful task.

"What are they? Phædrus asks.

"In the first place, Socrates replies, the taking a connected view of
the scattered elements of a subject, so as to bring them into one
Idea; and thus to give a definition of the subject, so as to make it
clear what we are speaking of; as was then done in regard to _Love_.
A definition was given of it, what it is: whether the definition was
good or bad, at any rate there was a definition. And hence, in what
followed, we were able to say what was clear and consistent with itself.

"And what, Phædrus asks, was the other feature?

"The dividing the subject into kinds or elements, according to the
nature of the thing itself:--not breaking its natural members, like a
bad carver who cannot hit the joint. So the two discourses which we
have delivered, took the irrational part of the mind, as their common
subject; and as the body has two different sides, the right and the
left, with the same names for its parts; so the two discourses took
the irrational portion of man; and the one took the left-hand portion,
and divided this again, and again subdivided it, till, among the
subdivisions, it found a left-handed kind of Love, of which nothing
but ill was to be said. While the discourse that followed out the
right-hand side of phrenzy, (the irrational portion of man's nature,)
was led to something which bore the name of _Love_ like the other,
but which is divine, and was praised as the source of the greatest
blessing."

"Now I," Socrates goes on to say, "am a great admirer of these
processes of division and comprehension, by which I endeavour to speak
and to think correctly. And if I can find any one who is able to see
clearly what is by nature reducible to one and manifested in many
elements, I follow his footsteps as a divine guide. Those who can do
this, I call--whether rightly or not, God knows--but I have hitherto
been in the habit of calling them _dialectical_ men."

It is of no consequence to our present purpose whether either of the
discourses of Socrates in the Phædrus, or the two together, as is here
assumed, do contain a just division and subdivision of that part of the
human soul which is distinguishable from Reason, and do thus exhibit,
in its true relations, the affection of Love. It is evident that
division and subdivision of this kind is here presented as, in Plato's
opinion, a most valuable method; and those who could successfully
practise this method are those whom he admires as dialectical men. This
is here his _Dialectic_.

(_Sophistes._) We are naturally led to ask whether this method of
dividing a subject as the best way of examining it, be in any other
part of the Platonic Dialogues more fully explained than it is in the
Phædrus; or whether any rules are given for this kind of Dialectic.

To this we may reply, that in the Dialogue entitled _The Sophist_, a
method of dividing a subject, in order to examine it, is explained
and exemplified with extraordinary copiousness and ingenuity. The
object proposed in that Dialogue is, to define what a Sophist is;
and with that view, the principal speaker, (who is represented as an
Eleatic stranger,) begins by first exemplifying what is his method of
framing a definition, and by applying it to define an _Angler_. The
course followed, though it now reads like a burlesque of philosophical
methods, appears to have been at that time a _bona fide_ attempt to be
philosophical and methodical. It proceeds thus:

"We have to inquire concerning _Angling_. Is it an Art? It is. Now
what kind of art? All art is an art of making or an art of getting:
(_Poietic_ or _Ktetic_.) It is Ktetic. Now the art of getting, is
the art of getting by exchange or by capture: (_Metabletic_ or
_Chirotic_.) Getting by capture is by contest or by chase: (_Agonistic_
or _Thereutic_.) Getting by chase is a chase of lifeless or of living
things: (the first has no name, the second is _Zootheric_.) The chase
of living things is the chase of land animals or of water animals:
(_Pezotheric_ or _Enygrotheric_.) Chase of water animals is of birds
or of fish: (_Ornithothereutic_ and _Halieutic_.) Chase of fish is by
inclosing or by striking them: (_Hercotheric_ or _Plectic_.) We strike
them by day with pointed instruments, or by night, using torches:
(hence the division _Ankistreutic_ and _Pyreutic_.) Of Ankistreutic,
one kind consists in spearing the fish downwards from above, the other
in twitching them upwards from below: (these two arts are _Triodontic_
and _Aspalieutic_.) And thus we have, what we sought, the notion and
the description of angling: namely that it is a Ktetic, Chirotic,
Thereutic, Zootheric, Enygrotheric, Halieutic, Plectic, Ankistreutic,
Aspalieutic Art."

Several other examples are given of this ingenious mode of definition,
but they are all introduced with reference to the definition of the
Sophist. And it will further illustrate this method to show how,
according to it, the Sophist is related to the Angler.

The Sophistical Art is an art of getting, by capture, living things,
namely men. It is thus a Ktetic, Chirotic, Thereutic art, and so far
agrees with that of the Angler. But here the two arts diverge, since
that of the Sophist is Pezotheric, that of the Angler Enygrotheric.
To determine the Sophist still more exactly, observe that the chase
of land animals is either of tame animals (including man) or of
wild animals: (_Hemerotheric_ and _Agriotheric_.) The chase of tame
animals is either by violence, (as kidnapping, tyranny, and war in
general,) or by persuasion, (as by the arts of speech;) that is, it
is _Biaiotheric_ or _Pithanurgic_. The art of persuasion is a private
or a public proceeding: (_Idiothereutic_ or _Demosiothereutic_.)
The art of private persuasion is accompanied with the giving of
presents, (as lovers do,) or with the receiving of pay: (thus it is
_Dorophoric_ or _Mistharneutic_.) To receive pay as the result of
persuasion, is the course, either of those who merely earn their bread
by supplying pleasure, namely flatterers, whose art is _Hedyntic_;
or of those who profess for pay to teach virtue. And who are they?
Plainly the Sophists. And thus _Sophistic_ is that kind of Ktetic,
Chirotic, Thereutic, Zootheric, Pezotheric, Hemerotheric, Pithanurgic,
Idiothereutic, Mistharneutic art, which professes to teach virtue, and
takes money on that account.

The same process is pursued along several other lines of inquiry: and
at the end of each of them the Sophist is detected, involved in a
number of somewhat obnoxious characteristics. This process of division
it will be observed, is at every step bifurcate, or as it is called,
_dichotomous_. Applied as it is in these examples, it is rather the
vehicle of satire than of philosophy. Yet, I have no doubt that this
bifurcate method was admired by some of the philosophers of Plato's
time, as a clever and effective philosophical invention. We may the
more readily believe this, inasmuch as one of the most acute persons
of our own time, who has come nearer than any other to the ancient
heads of sects in the submission with which his followers have accepted
his doctrines, has taken up this Dichotomous Method, and praised it
as the only philosophical mode of dividing a subject. I refer to Mr.
Jeremy Bentham's _Chrestomathia_ (published originally in 1816), in
which this exhaustive bifurcate method, as he calls it, was applied
to classify sciences and arts, with a view to a scheme of education.
How exactly the method, as recommended by him, agrees with the method
illustrated in the _Sophist_, an examination of any of his examples
will show. Thus to take Mineralogy as an example: according to Bentham,
Ontology is Cœnoscopic or Idioscopic: the Idioscopic is Somatoscopic
or Pneumatoscopic; the Somatoscopic is Pososcopic or Poioscopic:
Poioscopic is Physiurgoscopic or Anthropurgoscopic: Physiurgoscopic is
Uranoscopic or Epigeoscopic: Epigeoscopic is Abioscopic or Embioscopic.
And thus Mineralogy is the Science Idioscopic, Somatoscopic,
Poioscopic, Physiurgoscopic, Epigeoscopic, Abioscopic: inasmuch as
it is the science which regards bodies, with reference to their
qualities,--bodies, namely, the works of nature, terrestrial, lifeless.

I conceive that this bifurcate method is not really philosophical or
valuable: but that is not our business here. What we have to consider
is whether this is what Plato meant by the term _Dialectic_.

The general description of Dialectic in the _Sophistes_ agrees very
closely with that quoted from the _Phædrus_, that it is the separation
of a subject according to its natural divisions.

Thus, see in the Sophist the passage § 83: "To divide a subject
according to the kinds of things, so as neither to make the same
kind different nor different kinds identical, is the office of the
Dialectical Science." And this is illustrated by observing that it is
the office of the science of Grammar to determine what letters may be
combined and what may not; it is the office of the science of Music to
determine what sounds differing as acute and grave, may be combined,
and what may not: and in like manner it is the office of the science of
Dialectic to determine what _kinds_ may be combined in one subject and
what may not. And the proof is still further explained.

In many of the Platonic Dialogues, the Dialectic which Socrates is thus
represented as approving, appears to include the form of Dialogue,
as well as the subdivision of the subject into its various branches.
Socrates is presented as attaching so much importance to this form,
that in the Protagoras (§ 65) he rises to depart, because his opponent
will not conform to this practice. And generally in Plato, Dialectic is
opposed to Rhetoric, as a string of short questions and answers to a
continuous dissertation.

Xenophon also seems to imply (_Mem._ IV. 5, 11) that Socrates included
in his notion of Dialectic the form of Dialogue as well as the division
of the subject.

But that the method of close Dialogue was not called _Dialectic_ by
the author of the _Sophist_, we have good evidence in the work itself.
Among other notions which are analysed by the bifurcate division here
exhibited, is that of getting by contest (_Agonistic_, previously given
as a division of _Ktetic_). Now getting by contest may be by peaceful
trial of superiority, or by fight: (_Hamilletic_ or _Machelic_). The
fight may be of body against body, or of words against words: these
may be called _Biastic_ and _Amphisbetic_. The fight of words about
right and wrong, may be by long discourses opposed to each other, as
in judicial cases; or by short questions and answers: the former may
be called _Dicanic_, the latter _Antilogic_. Of these colloquies,
about right and wrong, some are natural and spontaneous, others
artificial and studied: the former need no special name; the latter are
commonly called _Eristic_. Of Eristic colloquies, some are a source
of expense to those who hold them, some of gain: that is, they are
_Chrematophthoric_ or _Chrematistic_: the former, the occupation of
those who talk for pleasure's and for company's sake, is _Adoleschic_,
wasteful garrulity; the latter, that of those who talk for the sake
of gain, is _Sophistic_. And thus Sophistic is an art Eristic, which
is part of Antilogic, which is part of Amphisbetic, which is part of
Agonistic, which is part of Chirotic, which is a part of Ktetic. (§ 23.)

We may notice here an indication that satire rather than exact reason
directs these analyses; in that Sophistic, which was before a part of
the _thereutic_ branch of _chirotic_ and _ktetic_, is here a part of
the other branch, _agonistic_.

But the remark which I especially wish to make here is, that the art of
discussing points of right and wrong by short questions and answers,
being here brought into view, is not called _Dialectic_, which we
might have expected; but _Antilogic_. It would seem therefore that the
Author of the Sophist did not understand by _Dialectic_ such a process
as Socrates describes in Xenophon; (_Mem._ IV. 5, 11, 12;) where he
says it was called _Dialectic_, because it was followed by persons
_dividing things into their kinds in conversation_: (κοινῇ βουλεύεσθαι
διαλέγοντας:)or such as the Socrates of Plato insisted upon in the
Protagoras and the Gorgias. Of the two elements which the Dialectical
Process of Socrates implied, Division of the subject and Dialogue, the
author of the _Sophistes_ does not claim the name of _Dialectic_ for
either, and seems to reject it for the second.

But without insisting upon the name, are we to suppose that the
Dichotomous Method of the _Sophistes_ Dialogue, (I may add of the
_Politicus_, for the method is the same in this Dialogue also,) is the
method of division of a subject according to its natural members, of
which Plato speaks in the _Phædrus_?

If the _Sophistes_ be the work of Plato, the answer is difficult either
way. If this method be Plato's _Dialectic_, how came he to omit to say
so there? how came he even to seem to deny it? But on the other hand,
if this dichotomous division be a different process from the division
called _Dialectic_ in the Phædrus, had Plato two methods of division of
a subject? and yet has he never spoken of them as two, or marked their
distinction?

This difficulty would be removed if we were to adopt the opinion, to
which others, on other grounds, have been led, that the Sophistes,
though of Plato's time, is not Plato's work. The grounds of this
opinion are,--that the doctrines of the Sophistes are not Platonic:
(the doctrine of Ideas is strongly impugned and weakly defended:)
Socrates is not the principal speaker, but an Eleatic stranger: and
there is, in the Dialogue, none of the dramatic character which we
generally have in Plato. The Dialogue seems to be the work of some
Eleatic opponent of Plato, rather than his.

(_Rep._ B. VII.) But we can have no doubt that the _Phædrus_ contains
Plato's real view of the nature of Dialectic, as to its form; let us
see how this agrees with the view of Dialectic, as to its matter and
object, given in the seventh Book of the _Republic_.

According to Plato, Real Existences are the objects of the exact
sciences (as number and figure, of Arithmetic and Geometry). The things
which are the objects of sense transitory phenomena, which have no
reality, because no permanence. Dialectic deals with Realities in a
more general manner. This doctrine is everywhere inculcated by Plato,
and particularly in this part of the _Republic_. He does not tell us
how we are to obtain a view of the higher realities, which are the
objects of Dialectic: only he here assumes that it will result from
the education which he enjoins. He says (§ 13) that the Dialectic
Process (ἡ διαλεκτικὴ μέθοδος) alone leads to true science: it makes
no assumptions, but goes to First Principles, that its doctrines may
be firmly grounded: and thus it purges the eye of the soul, which was
immersed in barbaric mud, and turns it upward; using for this purpose
the aid of the sciences which have been mentioned. But when Glaucon
inquires about the details of this Dialectic, Socrates says he will not
then answer the inquiry. We may venture to say, that it does not appear
that he had any answer ready.

Let us consider for a moment what is said about a philosophy rendering
a reason for the First Principles of each Science, which the Science
itself cannot do. That there is room for such a branch of philosophy
in some sciences, we easily see. Geometry, for instance, proceeds
from Axioms, Definitions and Postulates; but by the very nature of
these terms, does not prove these First Principles. These--the Axioms,
Definitions and Postulates,--are, I conceive, what Plato here calls the
_Hypotheses_ upon which Geometry proceeds, and for which it is not the
business of Geometry to render a reason. According to him, it is the
business of "Dialectic" to give a just account of these "Hypotheses."
What then is _Dialectic?_

(_Aristotle._) It is, I think, well worthy of remark, that Aristotle,
giving an account in many respects different from that of Plato, of
the nature of Dialectic, is still led in the same manner to consider
Dialectic as the branch of philosophy which renders a reason for First
Principles. In the _Topics_, we have a distinction drawn between
reasoning demonstrative, and reasoning dialectical: and the distinction
is this:--(_Top_. I. 1) that demonstration is by syllogisms from true
first principles, or from true deductions from such principles; and
that the Dialectical Syllogism is that which syllogizes from probable
propositions (ἠξ ἠνδόξων). And he adds that probable propositions are
those which are accepted by all, or by the greatest part, or by the
wise. In the next chapter, he speaks of the uses of Dialectic, which,
he says, are three, mental discipline, debates, and philosophical
science. And he adds (_Top_. I. 2, 6) that it is also useful with
reference to the First Principles in each Science: for from the
appropriate Principles of each science we cannot deduce anything
concerning First Principles, since these principles are the beginning
of reasoning. But from the probable principles in each province of
science we must reason concerning First Principles: and this is either
the peculiar office of Dialectic, or the office most appropriate to it;
for it is a process of investigation, and must lead to the Principles
of all methods.

That a demonstrative science, as such, does not explain the origin
of its own First Principles, is undoubtedly true. Geometry does not
undertake to give a reason for the Axioms, Definitions, and Postulates.
This has been attempted, both in ancient and in modern times, by the
Metaphysicians. But the Metaphysics employed on such subjects has not
commonly been called Dialectic. The term has certainly been usually
employed rather as describing a Method, than as determining the subject
of investigation. Of the Faculty which apprehends First Principles,
both according to Plato and to Aristotle, I will hereafter say a few
words.

The object of the dichotomous process pursued in the Sophistes, and
its result in each case, is a Definition. Definition also was one of
the main features of the inquiries pursued by Socrates, Induction
being the other; and indeed in many cases Induction was a series of
steps which ended in Definition. And Aristotle also taught a peculiar
method, the object and result of which was the construction of
Definitions:--namely his _Categories_. This method is one of division,
but very different from the divisions of the Sophistes. His method
begins by dividing the whole subject of possible inquiry into ten heads
or _Categories_--Substance, Quantity, Quality, Relation, Place, Time,
Position, Habit, Action, Passion. These again are subdivided: thus
Quality is Habit or Disposition, Power, Affection, Form. And we have
an example of the application of this method to the construction of a
Definition in the Ethics; where he determines Virtue to be a Habit with
certain additional limitations.

Thus the Induction of Socrates, the Dichotomy of the Eleatics, the
Categories of Aristotle, may all be considered as methods by which we
proceed to the construction of Definitions. If, by any method, Plato
could proceed to the construction of a Definition, or rather of an
Idea, of the Absolute Realities on which First Principles depend,
such a method would correspond with the notion of Dialectic in the
_Republic_. And if it was a method of division like the Eleatic or
Aristotelic, it would correspond with the notion of Dialectic in the
_Phædrus_.

That Plato's notion, however, cannot have been exactly either of these
is, I think, plain. The colloquial method of stimulating and testing
the progress of the student in Dialectic is implied, in the sequel
of this discussion of the effect of scientific study. And the method
of Dialogue, as the instrument of instruction, being thus supposed,
the continuation of the account in the _Republic_, implies that Plato
expected persons to be made dialectical by the study of the exact
sciences in a comprehensive spirit. After insisting on Geometry and
other sciences, he says (_Rep._ VII. § 16): "The synoptical man is
dialectical; and he who is not the one, is not the other."

But, we may ask, does a knowledge of sciences lead naturally to a
knowledge of Ideas, as absolute realities from which First Principles
flow? And supposing this to be true, as the Platonic Philosophy
supposes, is the Idea of the Good, as the source of moral truths, to
be thus attained to? That it is, is the teaching of Plato, here and
elsewhere; but have the speculations of subsequent philosophers in the
same direction given any confirmation of this lofty assumption?

In reply to this inquiry, I should venture to say, that this assumption
appears to be a remnant of the Socratic doctrine from which Plato
began his speculations, that Virtue is a kind of knowledge; and that
all attempts to verify the assumption have failed. What Plato added to
the Socratic notion was, that the inquiry after The Good, the Supreme
Good, was to be aided by the analogy or suggestions of those sciences
which deal with necessary and eternal truths; the supreme good being
of the nature of those necessary and eternal truths. This notion is a
striking one, as a suggestion, but it has always failed, I think, in
the attempts to work it out. Those who in modern times, as Cudworth
and Samuel Clarke, have supposed an analogy between the necessary
truths of Geometry and the truths of Morality, though they have used
the like expressions concerning the one and the other class of truths,
have failed to convey clear doctrines and steady convictions to their
readers; and have now, I believe, few or no followers.

The result of our investigation appears to be, that though Plato added
much to the matter by means of which the mind was to be improved and
disciplined in its research after Principles and Definitions, he did
not establish any form of Method according to which the inquiry
must be conducted, and by which it might be aided. The most definite
notion of Dialectic still remained the same with the original informal
view which Socrates had taken of it, as Xenophon tells us, (_Mem._
IV. 5, 11) when he says: "He said that Dialectic (τὸ διαλέγεσθαι)
was so called because it is an inquiry pursued by persons who take
counsel together, separating the subjects considered according to
their kinds (διαλέγοντας). He held accordingly that men should try
to be well prepared for such a process, and should pursue it with
diligence: by this means, he thought, they would become good men,
fitted for responsible offices of command, and truly dialectical"
(διαλέκτικωτάτους). And this is, I conceive, the answer to Mr. Grote's
interrogatory exclamation (Vol. VIII. p. 577): "Surely the Etymology
here given by Xenophon or Socrates of the word (διαλέγεσθαι) cannot
be considered as satisfactory." The two notions, of investigatory
Dialogue, and Distribution of notions according to their kinds, which
are thus asserted to be connected in etymology, were, among the
followers of Socrates, connected in fact; the dialectic dialogue was
supposed to involve of course the dialectic division of the subject.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 339: Η καὶ διαλεκτικὸν καλεῖς τὸν λόγον ἐκάστου λαμβάνοντα
τῆς οὐσίας; (§ 14).]

[Footnote 340: ὥσπερ θριγγὸς τοῖς μαθήμασιν ἡ διαλεκτικὴ ἦμιν ἐπάνω
κεῖσθαι. (§ 14).]


APPENDIX C.

OF THE INTELLECTUAL POWERS ACCORDING TO PLATO.

(_Cam. Phil. Soc._ NOV. 10, 1856.)


In the Seventh Book of Plato's _Republic_, we have certain sciences
described as the instruments of a philosophical and intellectual
education; and we have a certain other intellectual employment spoken
of, namely, Dialectic, as the means of carrying the mind beyond these
sciences, and of enabling it to see the sources of those truths which
the sciences assume as their first principles. These points have been
discussed in the two preceding papers. But this scheme of the highest
kind of philosophical education proceeds upon a certain view of the
nature and degrees of knowledge, and of the powers by which we know;
which view had been presented in a great measure in the Sixth Book;
this view I shall now attempt to illustrate.

To analyse the knowing powers of man is a task so difficult, that we
need not be surprised if there is much obscurity in this portion of
Plato's writings. But as a reason for examining what he has said, we
must recollect that if there be in it anything on this subject which
was true then, it is true still; and also, that if we know any truth on
that subject now, we shall find something corresponding to that truth
in the best speculations of sagacious ancient writers, like Plato.
It may therefore be worth while to discuss the Platonic doctrines on
this matter, and to inquire how they are to be expressed in modern
phraseology.

Plato's doctrine will perhaps be most clearly understood, if we begin
by considering the _diagram_ by which he illustrates the different
degrees of knowledge[341]. He sets out from the distinction of
_visible_ and _intelligible_ things. There are visible objects,
squares and triangles, for instance; but these are not the squares
and triangles about which the Geometer reasons. The exactness of
his reasoning does not depend on the exactness of his diagrams. He
reasons from certain mental squares and triangles, as he conceives and
understands them. "Thus there are visible and there are intelligible
things. There is a visible and an intelligible world[342]: and there
are two different regions about which our knowledge is concerned.
Now take a line divided into two unequal segments to represent these
two regions: and again, divide each segment in the same ratio. The
parts of each segment are to represent differences of clearness and
distinctness, and in the visible world these parts are _things_ and
_images_. By _images_ I mean shadows, and reflections in water, and in
polished bodies; and by _things_, I mean that of which these images
are the resemblances; as animals, plants, things made by man. This
difference corresponds to the difference of _Knowledge_ and mere
_Opinion_; and the _Opinable_ is to the _Knowable_ as the Image to the
Reality."

This analogy is assented to by Glaucon; and thus there is assumed a
ground for a further construction of the diagram.

"Now," he says, "we have to divide the segment which represents
Intelligible Things in the same way in which we have divided that which
represents Visible Things. The one part must represent the knowledge
which the mind gets by dealing as it were with images, and by reasoning
downwards _from_ Principles; the other that which it has by dealing
with the Ideas themselves, and going _to_ First Principles.

"The one part depends upon assumptions or hypotheses[343], the other is
unhypothetical or absolute truth.

"One kind of Intelligible Things, then, is Conceptions; for instance,
geometrical conceptions of figures, by means of which we reason
downwards, assuming certain First Principles.

"Now the other kind of Intelligible Things is this:--that which the
Reason includes in virtue of its power of reasoning, when it regards
the assumptions of the Sciences as, what they are, assumptions only;
and uses them as occasions and starting points, that from these it may
ascend to the _absolute_, (ἀνυπόθετον, unhypothetical,) which does
not depend upon assumption, but is the origin of scientific truth.
The Reason takes hold of this first principle of truth; and availing
itself of all the connections and relations of this principle, it
proceeds to the conclusion; using no sensible image in doing this, but
contemplating the Ideas alone; and with these Ideas the process begins,
goes on, and terminates."

This account of the matter will probably seem to require at least
further explanation; and that accordingly is acknowledged in the
Dialogue itself. Glaucon says:

"I apprehend your meaning in a certain degree, but not very clearly,
for the matter is somewhat abstruse. You wish to prove that the
knowledge which, by the Reason, we acquire, of Real Existence and
Intelligible Things, is of a higher degree of certainty than the
knowledge which belongs to what are commonly called Sciences. Such
sciences, you say, have certain assumptions for their bases; and these
assumptions are, by the students of such sciences, apprehended, not
by Sense (that is, the Bodily Senses), but by a Mental Operation,--by
Conception. But inasmuch as such students ascend no higher than the
assumptions, and do not go to the First Principles of Truth, they do
not seem to you to have true knowledge--intuitive insight--_Nous_--on
the subject of their reasonings, though the subjects are intelligible,
along with their principle. And you call this habit and practice of the
Geometers and others by the name _Conception_, not _Intuition_[344];
taking Conception to be something between Opinion on the one side, and
Intuitive Insight on the other."

"You have explained it well, said I. And now consider the four sections
(of the line) of which we have spoken, as corresponding to four
affections in the mind. Intuition, the highest; Conception, the next;
the third, Belief; and the fourth, Conjecture (from likenesses); and
arrange them in order, so that they may have more or less of certainty,
as their objects have more or less of truth[345].

"I understand, said he. I agree to what you say, and I arrange them as
you direct."

And so the Sixth Book ends: and the Seventh Book opens with the
celebrated image of the Cave, in which men are confined, and see all
external objects only by the shadows which they cast on the walls of
their prison. And this imperfect knowledge of things is to the true
vision of them, which is attained by those who ascend to the light of
day, as the ordinary knowledge of men is to the knowledge attainable by
those whose minds are purged and illuminated by a true philosophy.

Confining ourselves at present to the part of Plato's speculations
which we have mentioned, namely, the degrees of knowledge, and the
division of our knowing faculties, we may understand, and may in a
great degree accept, Plato's scheme. We have already (in the preceding
papers) seen that, by the knowledge of real things, he means, in the
first place, the knowledge of universal and necessary truths, such
as Geometry and the other exact sciences deal with. These _we_ call
sciences of Demonstration; and we are in the habit of contrasting the
knowledge which constitutes such sciences with the knowledge obtained
by the Senses, by Experience or mere Observation. This distinction of
Demonstrative and Empirical knowledge is a cardinal point in Plato's
scheme also; the former alone being allowed to deserve the name of
_Knowledge_, and the latter being only _Opinion_. The Objects with
which Demonstration deals may be termed _Conceptions_, and the objects
with which Observation or Sense has to do, however much speculation may
reduce them to mere Sensations, are commonly described as _Things_. Of
these Things, there may be Shadows or Images, as Plato says; and as we
may obtain a certain kind of knowledge, namely Opinion or Belief, by
seeing the Things themselves, we may obtain an inferior kind of Opinion
or Belief by seeing their Images, which kind of opinion we may for the
moment call _Conjecture_. Whether then we regard the distinctions of
knowledge itself or of the objects of it, we have three terms before us.

  If we consider the kinds of knowledge, they are
  Demonstration: Belief: Conjecture.
  If the objects of this knowledge, they are
  Conceptions: Things: Images.

But in each of these Series, the first term is evidently wanting: for
Demonstration supposes Principles to reason from. Conceptions suppose
some basis in the mind which gives them their evidence. What then is
the first term in each of these two Series?

The Principles of Demonstration must be seen by _Intuition_.

Conceptions derive their properties from certain powers or attributes
of the mind which we may term _Ideas_.

Therefore the two series are

  Intuition: Demonstration: Belief: Conjecture.
  Ideas: Conceptions: Things: Images.

Plato further teaches that the two former terms in each Series belong
to the Intelligible, the two latter to the Visible World: and he
supposes that the ratio of these two primary segments of the line is
the same as the ratio in which each segment is divided[346].

In using the term _Ideas_ to describe the mental sources from which
Conceptions derive their validity in demonstration, I am employing a
phraseology which I have already introduced in the _Philosophy of the
Inductive Sciences_. But independently altogether of this, I do not
see what other term could be employed to denote the mental objects,
attributes, or powers, whatever they be, from which Conceptions derive
their evidence, as Demonstrative Truths derive their evidence from
Intuitive Truths.

That the Scheme just presented is Plato's doctrine on this subject,
I do not conceive there can be any doubt. There is a little want of
precision in his phraseology, arising from his mixing together the two
series. In fact, his final series

  _Noësis_: _Dianoia_: _Pistis_: _Eikasia_;

is made by putting in the second place, instead of _Demonstration_,
which is the _process_ pursued, or _Science_, which is the _knowledge_
obtained, _Conception_, which is the _object_ with which the mind
deals. Such deviations from exact symmetry and correlation in speaking
of the faculties of the mind, are almost unavoidable in every language.
And there is yet another source of such inaccuracies of language; for
we have to speak, not only of the process of acquiring knowledge, and
of the objects with which the mind deals, but of the Faculties of the
mind which are thus employed. Thus _Intuition_ is the Process; _Ideas_
are the Object, in the first term of our series. The Faculty also we
may call _Intuition_; but the Greek offers a distinction. _Noësis_ is
the _Process_ of Intuition; but the _Faculty_ is _Nous_. If we wish to
preserve this distinction in English, what must we call the Faculty?
I conceive we must call it _the Intuitive Reason_, a term well known
to our older philosophical writers[347]. Again: taking the second
term of the series, _Demonstration_ is the process, _Science_, the
result; and _Conceptions_ are the objects with which the mind deals.
But what is the _Faculty_ thus employed? What is the Faculty employed
in Demonstration? The same philosophical writers of whom I spoke would
have answered at once, _the Discursive Reason_; and I do not know
that, even now, we can suggest any better term. The Faculty employed
in acquiring the two lower kinds of knowledge, the Faculty which deals
with Things and their Images is, of course, _Sense_, or _Sensation_.

The assertion of a Faculty of the mind by which it apprehends Truth,
which Faculty is higher than the Discursive Reason, as the Truth
apprehended by it is higher than mere Demonstrative Truth, agrees (as
it will at once occur to several of my readers) with the doctrine
taught and insisted upon by the late Samuel Taylor Coleridge. And so
far as he was the means of inculcating this doctrine, which, as we
see, is the doctrine of Plato, and I might add, of Aristotle, and of
many other philosophers, let him have due honour. But in his desire
to impress the doctrine upon men's minds, he combined it with several
other tenets, which will not bear examination. He held that the two
Faculties by which these two kinds of truth are apprehended, and which,
as I have said, our philosophical writers call _the Intuitive Reason_
and _the Discursive Reason_, may be called, and ought to be called,
respectively, _The Reason_ and _The Understanding_; and that the second
of these is of the nature of the _Instinct_ of animals, so as to be
something intermediate between Reason and Instinct. These opinions,
I may venture to say, are altogether erroneous. The Intuitive Reason
and the Discursive Reason are not, by any English writers, called the
Reason and the Understanding; and accordingly, Coleridge has had to
alter all the passages, namely, those taken from Leighton, Harrington,
and Bacon, from which his exposition proceeds. The Understanding is so
far from being especially the Discursive or Reasoning Faculty, that
it is, in universal usage, and by our best writers, _opposed_ to the
Discursive or Reasoning Faculty. Thus this is expressly declared by Sir
John Davis in his poem _On the Immortality of the Soul_. He says, of
the soul,

    When she _rates_ things, and moves from ground to ground,
        The name of _Reason_ (_Ratio_) she acquires from this:
    But when by reason she truth hath found,
        And standeth fixt, she _Understanding_ is.

Instead of the Reason being fixed, and the Understanding discursive,
as Mr. Coleridge says, the Reason is distinctively discursive; that
is, it obtains conclusions by running from one point to another. This
is what is meant by _Discursus_; or, taking the full term, _Discursus
Rationis_, _Discourse of Reason_. Understanding is fixed, that is, it
dwells upon one view of a subject, and not upon the steps by which that
view is obtained. The verb _to reason_, implies the substantive, _the
Reason_, though it is not coextensive with it: for as I have said,
there is the Intuitive Reason as well as the Discursive Reason. But it
is by the Faculty of Reason that we are capable of reasoning; though
undoubtedly the practice or the pretence of reasoning may be carried so
far as to seem at variance with reason in the more familiar sense of
the term; as is the case also in French. Moliere's Crisale says (in the
_Femmes Savantes_),

  Raisonner est l'emploi de toute ma maison,
  Et le raisonnement en bannit la Raison.

If Mr. Coleridge's assertion were true, that the Understanding is the
discursive and the Reason the fixed faculty, we should be justified in
saying that _The Understanding is the faculty by which we reason, and
the Reason is the faculty by which we understand_. But this is not so.

Nor is the Understanding of the nature of Instinct, nor does it
approach nearer than the Reason to the nature of Instinct, but the
contrary. The Instincts of animals bear a very obscure resemblance
to any of man's speculative Faculties; but so far as there is any
such resemblance, Instinct is an obscure image of Reason, not of
Understanding. Animals are said to act as if they reasoned, rather than
as if they understood. The verb _understand_ is especially applied to
man as distinguished from animals. Mr. Coleridge tells a tale from
Huber, of certain bees which, to prevent a piece of honey from falling,
balanced it by their weight, while they built a pillar to support it.
They did this by Instinct, not _understanding_ what they did; men,
doing the same, would have _understood_ what they were doing. Our
Translation of the Scriptures, in making it the special distinction of
man and animals, that _he has Understanding_ and they have not, speaks
quite consistently with good philosophy and good English.

Mr. Coleridge's object in his speculations is nearly the same as
Plato's; namely, to declare that there is a truth of a higher kind than
can be obtained by mere reasoning; and also to claim, as portions of
this higher truth, certain fundamental doctrines of Morality. Among
these, Mr. Coleridge places the Authority of Conscience, and Plato, the
Supreme Good. Mr. Coleridge also holds, as Plato held, that the Reason
of man, in its highest and most comprehensive form, is a portion of a
Supreme and Universal Reason; and leads to Truth, not in virtue of its
special attributes in each person, but by its own nature.

Many of the opinions which are combined with these doctrines, both
in Plato and in Coleridge, are such as we should, I think, find it
impossible to accept, upon a careful philosophical examination of them;
but on these I shall not here dwell.

I will only further observe, that if any one were to doubt whether the
term Νοῦς is rightly rendered _Intuitive Reason_, we may find proof
of the propriety of such a rendering in the remarkable discussion
concerning the Intellectual Virtues, which we have in the Sixth Book
of the Nicomachean Ethics. It can hardly be questioned that Aristotle
had in his mind, in writing that passage, the doctrines of Plato, as
expounded in the passage just examined, and similar passages. Aristotle
there says that there are five Intellectual Virtues, or Faculties
by which the Mind aims at Truth in asserting or denying:--namely,
_Art_, _Science_, _Prudence_, _Wisdom_, _Nous_. In this enumeration,
passing over Art, Prudence, and Wisdom, as virtues which are mainly
concerned from practical life, we have, in the region of speculative
Truth, a distinction propounded between _Science_ and _Nous_: and this
distinction is further explained (c. 6) by the remarks that Science
reasons with Principles; and that these Principles cannot be given
_by_ Science, because Science reasons _from_ them; nor by Art, nor
Prudence, for these are conversant with matters contingent, not with
matters demonstrable; nor can the First Principles of the Reasonings
of Science be given by Wisdom, for Wisdom herself has often to reason
from Principles. Therefore the First Principles of Demonstrative
Reasoning must be given by a peculiar Faculty, _Nous_. As we have
said, _Intuitive Reason_ is the most appropriate English term for this
Faculty.

The view thus given of that higher kind of Knowledge which Plato and
Aristotle place above ordinary Science, as being the Knowledge of and
Faculty of learning First Principles, will enable us to explain some
expressions which might otherwise be misunderstood. Socrates, in the
concluding part of this Sixth Book of the _Republic_, says, that this
kind of knowledge is "that of which the Reason (λόγος) takes hold,
_in virtue of its power of reasoning_[348]." Here we are plainly not
to understand that we arrive at First Principles _by reasoning_: for
the very opposite is true, and is here taught;--namely, that First
Principles are not what we reason _to_, but what we reason _from_.
The meaning of this passage plainly is, that First Principles are
those of which the Reason takes hold _in virtue of its power of
reasoning_;--they are the conditions which must exist in order to make
any reasoning possible:--they are the propositions which the Reason
must involve implicitly, in order that we may reason explicitly;--they
are the intuitive roots of the dialectical power.

In accordance with the views now explained, Plato's Diagram may be
thus further expanded. The term ιδέα is not used in this part of the
_Republic_; but, as is well known, occurs in its peculiar Platonic
sense in the Tenth Book.

 +---------+------------------------------------+-----------------------+
 |         |    Intelligible World. νοήτον.     | Visible World. ὁρατον.|
 +---------+-----------------+------------------+-----------------------+
 |_Object_ |     Ideas       |    Conceptions   |  Things   |   Images  |
 |         |     ἰδέαι       |      διάνοια     | ζῶα κ.τ.λ.|   εἰκἰνες |
 +---------+-----------------+------------------+-----------------------+
 |_Process_|   Intuition     |   Demonstration  |  Belief   | Conjecture|
 |         |    νἰησις       |     ἐπιστήμη     |  πίστις   |  είκασία  |
 +---------+-----------------+------------------+-----------------------+
 |_Faculty_|Intuitive Reason | Discursive Reason|        Sensation      |
 |         |      νοῦς       |       λόγος      |        αἴσθησις       |
 +---------+-----------------+------------------+-----------------------+


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 341: _Pol_. vi. § 19.]

[Footnote 342: He adds, "This _oraton_, this visible world, I will not
say has any connexion with _ouranon_, heaven, that I may not be accused
of playing upon words."]

[Footnote 343: It is plain that Plato, by _Hypotheses_, in this place,
means the usual foundations of Arithmetic and Geometry; namely,
Definitions and Postulates. He says that "the arithmeticians and
geometers take as hypotheses (hυποθεμενοι) odd and even, and the
three kinds of angles (right, acute, and obtuse); and figures, (as
a triangle, a square,) and the like." I say his "hypotheses" are
the Definitions and Postulates, not the Axioms: for the Axioms of
Arithmetic and Geometry belong to the Higher Faculty, which ascends
to First Principles. But this Faculty operates rather in using these
axioms than in enunciating them. It knows them implicitly rather than
expresses them explicitly.]

[Footnote 344: διάνοιαν άλλ' οὐ νοῦν.]

[Footnote 345: The Diagram, as here described, would be this:

  +---------------------------+---------------------------+
  |   _Intelligible World._   |      _Visible World._     |
  |-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
  | Intuition.  | Conception. |   Things.   |   Images.   |
  +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

Plato supposes the whole, and each of the two parts, to be divided in
the same ratio, in order that the _analogy_ of the division in each
case may be represented.]

[Footnote 346: The four segments might be as 4: 2: 2: 1; or as 9: 6: 6:
4; or generally, as _a_: _ar_: _ar_: _ar_^2.]

[Footnote 347:

           Hence the mind Reason receives
  Intuitive or Discursive.

  MILTON.]

[Footnote 348: τῇ τοῦ διαλέγεσθαι δυνόμει.]


APPENDIX D.

CRITICISM OF ARISTOTLE'S ACCOUNT OF INDUCTION.

(_Cam. Phil. Soc._ FEB. 11, 1850.)


The Cambridge Philosophical Society has willingly admitted among
its proceedings not only contributions to science, but also to the
philosophy of science; and it is to be presumed that this willingness
will not be less if the speculations concerning the philosophy of
science which are offered to the Society involve a reference to ancient
authors. Induction, the process by which general truths are collected
from particular examples, is one main point in such philosophy: and the
comparison of the views of Induction entertained by ancient and modern
writers has already attracted much notice. I do not intend now to go
into this subject at any length; but there is a cardinal passage on the
subject in Aristotle's _Analytics_, (_Analyt. Prior._ II. 25) which I
wish to explain and discuss. I will first translate it, making such
emendations as are requisite to render it intelligible and consistent,
of which I shall afterwards give an account.

I will number the sentences of this chapter of Aristotle in order that
I may afterwards be able to refer to them readily.

§ 1. "We must now proceed to observe that we have to examine not only
syllogisms according to the aforesaid _figures_,--syllogisms logical
and demonstrative,--but also rhetorical syllogisms,--and, speaking
generally, any kind of proof by which belief is influenced, following
any method.

§ 2. "All belief arises either from Syllogism or from Induction: [we
must now therefore treat of Induction.]

§ 3. "Induction, and the Inductive Syllogism, is when by means of one
extreme term we infer the other extreme term to be true of the middle
term.

§ 4. "Thus if _A_, _C_, be the extremes, and _B_ the mean, we have to
show, by means of _C_, that _A_ is true of _B_.

§ 5. "Thus let _A_ be _long-lived_; _B_, _that which has no
gall-bladder;_ and _C_, particular long-lived animals, as _elephant_,
_horse_, _mule_.

§ 6. "Then every _C_ is _A_, for all the animals above named are
long-lived.

§ 7. "Also every _C_ is _B_, for all those animals are destitute of
gall-bladder.

§ 8. "If then _B_ and _C_ are convertible, and the mean (_B_) does not
extend further than extreme (_C_), it necessarily follows that every
_B_ is _A_.

§ 9. "For it was shown before, that, if any two things be true of the
same, and if either of them be convertible with the extreme, the other
of the things predicated is true of the convertible (extreme).

§ 10. "But we must conceive that _C_ consists of a collection of all
the particular cases; for Induction is applied to all the cases.

§ 11. "But such a syllogism is an inference of a first truth and
immediate proposition.

§ 12. "For when there is a mean term, there is a demonstrative
syllogism through the mean; but when there is not a mean, there is
proof by Induction.

§ 13. "And in a certain way, Induction is contrary to Syllogism; for
Syllogism proves, by the middle term, that the extreme is true of the
third thing: but Induction proves, by means of the third thing, that
the extreme is true of the mean.

§ 14. "And Syllogism concluding by means of a middle term is prior
by nature and more usual to us; but the proof by Induction, is more
luminous."

I think that the chapter, thus interpreted, is quite coherent and
intelligible; although at first there seems to be some confusion, from
the author sometimes saying that Induction is a kind of Syllogism, and
at other times that it is not. The amount of the doctrine is this.

When we collect a general proposition by Induction from particular
cases, as for instance, that all animals destitute of gall-bladder
(_acholous_), are long-lived, (if this proposition were true, of which
hereafter,) we may express the process in the form of a Syllogism, if
we will agree to make a collection of particular cases our middle term,
and assume that the proposition in which the second extreme term occurs
is convertible. Thus the known propositions are

  Elephant, horse, mule, &c., are long-lived.
  Elephant, horse, mule, &c., are _acholous_.

But if we suppose that the latter proposition is convertible, we shall
have these propositions:

  Elephant, horse, mule, &c., are long-lived.
  All acholous animals are elephant, horse, mule, &c.,

from whence we infer, quite rigorously as to _form_,

  All acholous animals are long-lived.

This mode of putting the Inductive inference shows both the strong and
the weak point of the illustration of Induction by means of Syllogism.
The strong point is this, that we make the inference perfect as to
form, by including an indefinite collection of particular cases,
elephant, horse, mule, &c., in a single term, _C_. The Syllogism then is

  All _C_ are long-lived.
  All acholous animals are _C_.
  Therefore all acholous animals are long-lived.

The weak point of this illustration is, that, at least in some
instances, when the number of actual cases is necessarily indefinite,
the representation of them as a single thing involves an unauthorized
step. In order to give the reasoning which really passes in the mind,
we must say

  Elephant, horse, &c., are long-lived.
  All acholous animals are _as_ elephant, horse, &c.,
  Therefore all acholous animals are long-lived.

This "_as_" must be introduced in order that the "all _C_" of the first
proposition may be justified by the "_C_" of the second.

This step is, I say, necessarily unauthorized, where the number of
particular cases is indefinite; as in the instance before us, the
species of acholous animals. We do not know how many such species
there are, yet we wish to be able to assert that _all_ acholous
animals are long-lived. In the proof of such a proposition, put in a
syllogistic form, there must necessarily be a logical defect; and the
above discussion shows that this defect is the substitution of the
proposition, "All acholous animals are _as_ elephant, &c.," for the
converse of the experimentally proved proposition, "elephant, &c., are
acholous."

In instances in which the number of particular cases is limited, the
necessary existence of a logical flaw in the syllogistic translation
of the process is not so evident. But in truth, such a flaw exists in
all cases of Induction _proper_: (for Induction by _mere enumeration_
can hardly be called _Induction_). I will, however, consider for a
moment the instance of a celebrated proposition which has often been
taken as an example of Induction, and in which the number of particular
cases is, or at least is at present supposed to be, limited. Kepler's
laws, for instance the law that the planets describe ellipses, may
be regarded as examples of Induction. The law was inferred, we will
suppose, from an examination of the orbits of Mars, Earth, Venus. And
the syllogistic illustration which Aristotle gives, will, with the
necessary addition to it, stand thus,

  Mars, Earth, Venus describe ellipses.
  Mars, Earth, Venus are planets.

Assuming the convertibility of this last proposition, _and its
universality_, (which is the necessary addition in order to make
Aristotle's syllogism valid) we say

  All the planets are as Mars, Earth, Venus.

Whence it follows that all the planets describe ellipses.

If, instead of this assumed universality, the astronomer had made a
real enumeration, and had established the fact of each particular, he
would be able to say

 Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Earth, Venus, Mercury, describe ellipses.

 Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Earth, Venus, Mercury are all the planets.

And he would obviously be entitled to convert the second proposition,
and then to conclude that

  All the planets describe ellipses.

But then, if this were given as an illustration of Induction by means
of syllogism, we should have to remark, in the first place, that the
conclusion that "all the planets describe ellipses," adds nothing to
the major proposition, that "S., J., M., E., V., m., do so." It is
merely the same proposition expressed in other words, so long as S.,
J., M., E., V., m., are supposed to be all the planets. And in the
next place we have to make a remark which is more important; that the
minor, in such an example, must generally be either a very precarious
truth, or, as appears in this case, a transitory error. For that the
planets known at any time are _all_ the planets, must always be a
doubtful assertion, liable to be overthrown to-night by an astronomical
observation. And the assertion, as received in Kepler's time, has been
overthrown. For Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Earth, Venus, Mercury, are
not all the planets. Not only have several new ones been discovered
at intervals, as Uranus, Ceres, Juno, Pallas, Vesta, but we have new
ones discovered every day; and any conclusion depending upon this
premiss that _A_, _B_, _C_, _D_, _E_, _F_, _G_, _H_, to _Z_ are all the
planets, is likely to be falsified in a few years by the discovery of
_A´_, _B´_, _C´_, &c. If, therefore, this were the syllogistic analysis
of Induction, Kepler's discovery rested upon a false proposition;
and even if the analysis were now made conformable to our present
knowledge, that induction, analysed as above, would still involve a
proposition which to-morrow may show to be false. But yet no one, I
suppose, doubts that Kepler's discovery was really a discovery--the
establishment of a scientific truth on solid grounds; or, that it is
a scientific truth for us, notwithstanding that we are constantly
discovering new planets. Therefore the syllogistic analysis of it now
discussed (namely, that which introduces simple enumeration as a step)
is not the right analysis, and does not represent the grounds of the
Inductive Truth, that all the planets describe ellipses.

It may be said that all the planets discovered since Kepler's time
conform to his law, and thus confirm his discovery. This we grant:
but they only _confirm_ the discovery, they do not make it; they are
not its groundwork. It was a discovery before these new cases were
known; it was an inductive truth without them. Still, an objector might
urge, if any one of these new planets had contradicted the law, it
would have overturned the discovery. But this is too boldly said. A
discovery which is so precise, so complex (in the phenomena which it
explains), so supported by innumerable observations extending through
space and time, is not so easily overturned. If we find that Uranus,
or that Encke's comet, deviates from Kepler's and Newton's laws, we
do not infer that these laws must be false; we say that there must
be some disturbing cause in these cases. We seek, and we find these
disturbing causes: in the case of Uranus, a new planet; in the case
of Encke's comet, a resisting medium. Even in this case therefore,
though the number of particulars is limited, the Induction was not
made by a simple enumeration of all the particulars. It was made from
a few cases, and when the law was discerned to be true in these, it
was extended to all; the conversion and assumed universality of the
proposition that "these are planets," giving us the proposition which
we need for the syllogistic exhibition of Induction, "all the planets
are as these."

I venture to say further, that it is plain, that Aristotle did not
regard Induction as the result of simple enumeration. This is plain,
in the first place, from his example. Any proposition with regard to
a special class of animals, cannot be proved by simple enumeration:
for the number of particular cases, that is, of animal species in
the class, is indefinite at any period of zoological discovery, and
must be regarded as infinite. In the next place, Aristotle says (§
10 of the above extract), "We must conceive that _C_ consists of a
collection of all the particular cases; for induction is applied to
all the cases." We must _conceive_ (νοεῖν) that _C_ in the major,
consists of all the cases, in order that the conclusion may be true
of all the cases; but we cannot _observe_ all the cases. But the
evident proof that Aristotle does not contemplate in this chapter an
Induction by simple enumeration, is the contrast in which he places
Induction and Syllogism. For Induction by simple enumeration stands
in no contrast to Syllogism. The Syllogism of such Induction is quite
logical and conclusive. But Induction from a comparatively small
number of particular cases to a general law, does stand in opposition
to Syllogism. It gives us a truth,--a truth which, as Aristotle
says (§ 14), is more luminous than a truth proved syllogistically,
though Syllogism may be _more natural and usual_. It gives us (§ 11)
immediate propositions, obtained directly from observation, and not
by a chain of reasoning: "first truths," the principles from which
syllogistic reasonings may be deduced. The Syllogism proves by means of
a middle term (§ 13) that the extreme is true of a third thing: thus,
(_acholous_ being the middle term):

  Acholous animals are long-lived:
  All elephants are acholous animals:
  Therefore all elephants are long-lived.

But Induction proves by means of a third thing (namely, particular
cases) that the extreme is true of the mean; thus (_acholous_, still
being the middle term)

  Elephants are long-lived:
  Elephants are acholous animals:
  Therefore acholous animals are long-lived.

It may be objected, such reasoning as this is quite inconclusive:
and the answer is, that this is precisely what we, and as I believe,
Aristotle, are here pointing out. Induction _is_ inconclusive _as
reasoning_. It is not reasoning: it is another way of getting at
truth. As we have seen, no reasoning can prove such an inductive
truth as this, that all planets describe ellipses. It is _known_ from
observation, but it is not _demonstrated_. Nevertheless, no one doubts
its universal truth, (except, as aforesaid, when disturbing causes
intervene). And thence, Induction is, as Aristotle says, opposed to
syllogistic reasoning, and yet is a means of discovering truth: not
only so, but a means of discovering primary truths, immediately derived
from observation.

I have elsewhere taught that all Induction involves a _Conception_ of
the mind applied to facts. It may be asked whether this applies in
such a case as that given by Aristotle. And I reply, that Aristotle's
instance is a very instructive example of what I mean. The Conception
which is applied to the facts in order to make the induction possible
is the want of the gall-bladder;--and Aristotle supplies us with a
special term for this conception; _acholous_[349]. But, it may be
said, that the animals observed, the elephant, horse, mule, &c., are
acholous, is a mere fact of observation, not a Conception. I reply
that it is a _Selected_ Fact, a fact selected and compared in several
cases, which is what we mean by a _Conception_. That there is needed
for such selection and comparison a certain activity of the mind, is
evident; but this also may become more clear by dwelling a little
further on the subject. Suppose that Aristotle, having a desire to know
what class of animals are long-lived, had dissected for that purpose
many animals; elephants, horses, cows, sheep, goats, deer and the like.
How many resemblances, how many differences, must he have observed
in their anatomy! He was very likely long in fixing upon any one
resemblance which was common to all the long-lived. Probably he tried
several other characters, before he tried the presence and absence
of the gall-bladder:--perhaps, trying such characters, he found them
succeed for a few cases, and then fail in others, so that he had to
reject them as useless for his purpose. All the while, the absence of
the gall-bladder in the long-lived animals was a fact: but it was of
no use to him, because he had not selected it and drawn it forth from
the mass of other facts. He was looking for a mean term to connect his
first extreme, _long-lived_, with his second, the special cases. He
sought this middle term in the entrails of the many animals which he
used as extremes: it _was_ there, but he could not find it. The fact
existed, but it was of no use for the purpose of Induction, because
it did not become a special Conception in his mind. He considered the
animals in various points of view, it may be, as ruminant, as horned,
as hoofed, and the contrary; but not as _acholous_ and the contrary.
When he looked at animals in that point of view,--when he took up that
character as the ground of distinction, he forthwith imagined that he
found a separation of long-lived and short-lived animals. When that
Fact became a Conception, he obtained an inductive truth, or, at any
rate, an inductive proposition.

He obtained an inductive proposition by applying the Conception
_acholous_ to his observation of animals. This Conception divided
them into two classes; and these classes were, he fancied, long-lived
and short-lived respectively. That it was the Conception, and not
the Fact which enabled him to obtain his inductive proposition, is
further plain from this, that the supposed Fact is not a fact. Acholous
animals are not longer-lived than others. The presence or absence of
the gall-bladder is no character of longevity. It is true, that in one
familiar class of animals, the herbivorous kind, there is a sort of
first seeming of the truth of Aristotle's asserted rule: for the horse
and mule which have not the gall-bladder are longer-lived than the
cow, sheep, and goat, which have it. But if we pursue the investigation
further, the rule soon fails. The deer-tribe that want the gall-bladder
are not longer-lived than the other ruminating animals which have it.
And as a conspicuous evidence of the falsity of the rule, man and the
elephant are perhaps, for their size, the longest-lived animals, and
of these, man has, and the elephant has not, the organ in question.
The inductive proposition, then, is false; but what we have mainly
to consider is, where the fallacy enters, according to Aristotle's
analysis of Induction into Syllogism. For the two premisses are still
true; that elephants, &c., are long-lived; and that elephants, &c.,
are acholous. And it is plain that the fallacy comes in with that
conversion and generalization of the latter proposition, which we have
noted as necessary to Aristotle's illustration of Induction. When we
say "All acholous animals are as elephants, &c.," that is, as those
in their biological conditions, we say what is not true. Aristotle's
condition (§ 8) is not complied with, that the middle term shall not
extend beyond the extreme. For the character _acholous_ does extend
beyond the elephant and the animals biologically resembling it; it
extends to deer, &c., which are not like elephants and horses, in the
point in question. And thus, we see that the assumed conversion and
generalization of the minor proposition, is the seat of the fallacy of
false Inductions, as it is the seat of the peculiar logical character
of true Inductions.

As true Inductive Propositions cannot be logically demonstrated by
syllogistic rules, so they cannot be discovered by any rule. There
is no formula for the discovery of inductive truth. It is caught by
a peculiar sagacity, or power of divination, for which no precepts
can be given. But from what has been said, we see that this sagacity
shows itself in the discovery of propositions which are both _true_,
and _convertible_ in the sense above explained. Both these steps may
be difficult. The former is often very laborious: and when the labour
has been expended, and a true proposition obtained, it may turn out
useless, because the proposition is not convertible. It was a matter
of great labour to Kepler to prove (from calculation of observations)
that Mars moves elliptically. Before he proved this, he had tried
to prove many similar propositions:--that Mars moved according to
the "bisection of the eccentricity,"--according to the "vicarious
hypothesis,"--according to the "physical hypothesis,"--and the like;
but none of these was found to be exactly true. The proposition that
Mars moves elliptically was proved to be true. But still, there was
the question, Is it convertible? Do all the planets move as Mars
moves? This was proved, (suppose,) to be true, for the Earth and
Venus. But still the question remains, Do all the planets move as
Mars, Earth, Venus, do? The inductive generalizing impulse boldly
answers, Yes, to this question; though the rules of Syllogism do not
authorize the answer, and though there remain untried cases. The
inductive Philosopher tries the cases as fast as they occur, in order
to confirm his previous conviction; but if he had to wait for belief
and conviction till he had tried every case, he never could have belief
or conviction of such a proposition at all. He is prepared to modify or
add to his inductive truth according as new cases and new observations
instruct him; but he does not fear that new cases or new observations
will overturn an inductive proposition established by exact comparison
of many complex and various phenomena.

Aristotle's example offers somewhat similar reflections. He had to
establish a proposition concerning long-lived animals, which should
be true, and should be susceptible of generalized conversion. To
prove that the elephant, horse and mule are destitute of gall-bladder
required, at least, the labour of anatomizing those animals in the
seat of that organ. But this labour was not enough; for he would find
those animals to agree in many other things besides in being acholous.
He must have selected that character somewhat at a venture. And the
guess was wrong, as a little more labour would have shown him; if
for instance he had dissected deer: for they are acholous, and yet
short-lived. A trial of this kind would have shown him that the extreme
term, _acholous_, did extend beyond the mean, namely, animals such
as elephant, horse, mule; and therefore, that the conversion was not
allowable, and that the Induction was untenable. In truth, there is no
relation between bile and longevity[350], and this example given by
Aristotle of generalization from induction is an unfortunate one.

       *       *       *       *       *

In discussing this passage of Aristotle, I have made two alterations in
the text, one of which is necessary on account of the fact; the other
on account of the sense. In the received text, the particular examples
of long-lived animals given are _man_, horse, and mule (ἐφ' ᾧ δὲ Γ, τὸ
καθέκαστον μακρόβιον, οἷον ἄνθρωπος, καὶ ἵππος, καὶ ἡμίονος). And it is
afterwards said that all these are _acholous_: (ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ Β, τὸ μὴ
ἔχον χολὴν, παντὶ ὑπάρχει τῷ Γ). But man _has_ a gall-bladder: and the
fact was well known in Aristotle's time, for instance, to Hippocrates;
so that it is not likely that Aristotle would have made the mistake
which the text contains. But at any rate, it is a mistake; if not of
the transcriber, of Aristotle; and it is impossible to reason about the
passage, without correcting the mistake. The substitution of ἔλεφας
for ἄνθρωπος makes the reasoning coherent; but of course, any other
acholous long-lived animal would do so equally well.

The other emendation which I have made is in § 6. In the received text
§ 6 and 7 stand thus:

 6. Then every _C_ is _A_, for _every acholous animal is long-lived_

 (τῷ δὴ Γ ὅλω ὑπάρχει τὸ Α, πᾶν γὰρ τὸ ἄχολον μακρόβιον).

 7. Also every _C_ is _B_, for all _C_ is destitute of bile.

Whence it may be inferred, says Aristotle, under certain conditions,
that every _B_ is _A_ (τὸ Α τῷ Β ὑπάρχειν) that is, that _every
acholous animal is long-lived_. But this conclusion is, according
to the common reading, identical with the major premiss; so that
the passage is manifestly corrupt. I correct it by substituting for
ἄχολον, Γ; and thus reading πᾶν γὰρ τὸ Γ μακρόβιον "for every _C_ is
long-lived:" just as in the parallel sentence, 7, we have ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ
Β, τὸ μὴ ἔχον χολην, παντὶ ὑπάρχει τῷ Γ. In this way the reasoning
becomes quite clear. The corrupt substitution of ἄχολον for Γ may have
been made in various ways; which I need not suggest. As my business is
with the sense of the passage, and as it makes no sense without the
change, and very good sense with it, I cannot hesitate to make the
emendation. And these emendations being made, Aristotle's view of the
nature and force of Induction becomes, I think, perfectly clear and
very instructive.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADDITIONAL NOTE.

I take the liberty of adding to this Memoir the following remarks, for
which I am indebted to Mr. Edleston, Fellow of Trinity College.

Several of the earlier editions of Aristotle have γ instead of ἄχολον
in the passage referred to in the above paper: ex. gr.

(1) The edition printed at Basle, 1539 (after Erasmus): "τὸ γ."

(2) Basil (Erasmus) 1550. "τὸ γ."

(3) Burana's Latin version, Venet. 1552, has "omne enim _C_ longævum."

(4) Sylburg, Francf. 1587 "τὸ γ" is printed in brackets thus: "[τὸ γ]
τὸ ἄχολον."

(5) So also in Casaubon's edition, 1590.

(6) Casaub. 1605 "τὸ γ," (though the Latin version has "vacans bile;")
not "[τὸ γ] τὸ ἄχολον," as the edition of 1590.

(7) In the edition printed Aurel. Allobr. 1607, "[τὸ γ] τὸ ἄχολον," as
in (4) and (5).

(8) Du Val's editions, Paris, 1619, 1629, 1654 "τὸ γ," though in
Pacius's translation in the adjacent column we find "vacans bile."

(9) In the critical notes to Waitz's edition of the _Organon_ (Lips.
1844) it is stated that "post ἄχολον del. γ. _n_," implying apparently,
that in the MS. marked _n_, the letter γ, which had been originally
written after ἄχολον, had been erased.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following passages throw light upon the question whether ἄνθρωπος
ought or ought not to be retained in the passage discussed in the
Memoir.

(A) Aristot. _De Animalibus Histor._ II. 15, 9 (Bekk.), τῶν μὲν
ζωοτόκων καὶ τετραπόδων ἔλαφος οὐκ ἔχει [χολήν] οὐδὲ πρόξ, ἕτι δὲ
ἵππος, ὀρεύς, ὄνος, φώκη καὶ τῶν ὑῶν ἔνιοι.... Ἔχει δὲ καὶ ὁ ἐλέφας τὸ
ῆπαρ ἄχολον μέν, κ.τ.λ.

(B) Conf. Ib. I. 17, 10, 11. (In the beginning of Chap. 16, he says
that the external μορια of man are γνώριμα, "τὰ δ' ἐντὸς τοὐναντίον.
Ἄγνωστα γάρ ἐστι μάλιστα τὰ τῶν ἀνθρώπων, ὡστε δεῖ πρὸς τὰ τῶν ἄλλων μόρια
ζώων ἀνάγοντας σκοπεῖν," ...)

(C) Id _De Part. Animal._ IV. 2, 2. τὰ μὲν γὰρ ὅλως οὐκ ἕχει χολήν,
οἷον ἱππος και ὀρεύς καὶ ονος καὶ ἔλαφος καὶ πρόξ..... Ἐν δὲ τοῖς
γένεσι τοῖς αὐτοῖς τὰ μὲν ἔχειν φαίνεται, τὰ δ' οὐκ ἔχειν, οἷον ἐν
τῷ τῶν μυῶν. Τούτων δ' ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ ἄνθρωπος· ἔνιοι μὲν γὰρ φαίνονται
ἔχοντες χολὴν ἐπὶ του ἥπατος, ἔνιοι δ' οὐκ ἔχοντες. Διο καὶ γίνεται
ἀμφισβήτησις περὶ ὁλου τοῦ γένους· οἱ γὰρ ἐντυχόντες ὁποτερωσοῦν ἔχουσι
περὶ πάντων ὑπολαμβάνουσιν ὡς ἁπάντων ἐχόντων.....

(D) Ib. § 11. Διὸ καὶ χαριέστατα λέγουσι τῶν ῶρχαίων ὁι φάσκοντες
αἴτιον εῖναι τοῦ πλείω ζῆν χρόνον το μὴ ἔχειν χολήν, βλέψαντες ἐπὶ τὰ
μωνυχα και τὰς ελαφους· ταῦτα γὰρ ἄχολά τε καὶ ζῇ πολὺν χρόνον. Ἔτι
δὲ καὶ τὰ μὴ ἑωραμένα ὑπ' ἐκείνων ὁτι οὐκ ἔχει χολήν, οἷον δελφις καὶ
κάμηλος, καὶ ταῦτα τυγχάνει μακρόβια ὄντα. Εὔλογον γάρ, κ.τ.λ.

(E) The elephant and man are mentioned together as long-lived animals
(_De Long. et Brev. Vitæ_, IV. 2, and _De Generat. Animal._ IV. 10, 2.)

       *       *       *       *       *

The following is the import of these passages:

(_A_) "Of viviparous quadrupeds, the deer, roe, horse, mule, ass, seal,
and some of the swine have not the gall-bladder....

The elephant also has the liver without gall-bladder, &c."

(_B_) "The external parts of man are well known: the internal parts are
far from being so. The parts of man are in a great measure unknown; so
that we must judge concerning them by reference to the analogy of other
animals...."

(_C_) "Some animals are altogether destitute of gall-bladder, as the
horse, the mule, the ass, the deer, the roe.... But in some kinds it
appears that some have it, and some have it not, as the mice kind. And
among these is man; for some men appear to have a gall-bladder on the
liver, and some not to have one. And thus there is a doubt as to the
species in general; for those who have happened to examine examples of
either kind, hold that all the cases are of that kind."

(_D_) Those of the ancients speak most plausibly, who say that the
absence of the gall-bladder is the cause of long life; looking at
animals with uncloven hoof, and deer: for these are destitute of
gall-bladder, and live a long time. And further, those animals in which
the ancients had not the opportunity of ascertaining that they have not
the gall-bladder, as the dolphin, and the camel, are also long-lived
animals."

It appears, from these passages, that Aristotle was aware that some
persons had asserted man to have a gall-bladder, but that he also
conceived this not to be universally true. He may have inclined to
the opinion, that the opposite case was the more usual, and may have
written ἄνθρωπος in the passage which I have been discussing. Another
mistake of his is the reckoning deer among long-lived animals.

It appears probable, from the context of the passages (_C_) and (_D_),
that the conjecture of a connexion between absence of the gall-bladder
and length of life was suggested by some such notion as this:--that
the gall, from its bitterness, is the cause of irritation, mental and
bodily, and that irritation is adverse to longevity. The opinion is
ascribed to "the ancients," not claimed by Aristotle as his own.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 350: Mr. Owen, to whom I am indebted for the physiological
part of this criticism, tells me, "All mammalia have bile, the
carnivora in greater proportion than the herbivora: the gall-bladder
is a comparatively unimportant accessory to the biliary apparatus;
adjusting it to certain modifications of stomach and intestine: there
is no relation between natural longevity and bile. Neither has the
presence or absence of the gall-bladder any connexion with age. Man and
the elephant are perhaps for their size the longest lived animals, and
the latest at coming to maturity: one has the gall-bladder, and the
other not."]


APPENDIX E.

ON THE FUNDAMENTAL ANTITHESIS OF PHILOSOPHY.

(_Cam. Phil. Soc._ FEB. 5, 1844.)


1. All persons who have attended in any degree to the views generally
current of the nature of reasoning are familiar with the distinction
of _necessary_ truths and _truths of experience_; and few such
persons, or at least few students of mathematics, require to have this
distinction explained or enforced. All geometricians are satisfied that
the geometrical truths with which they are conversant are necessarily
true: they not only are true, but they must be true. The meaning of the
terms being understood, and the proof being gone through, the truth
of the proposition must be assented to. That parallelograms upon the
same base and between the same parallels are equal;--that angles in the
same segment are equal;--these are propositions which we learn to be
true by demonstrations deduced from definitions and axioms; and which,
when we have thus learnt them, we see could not be otherwise. On the
other hand, there are other truths which we learn from experience;
as for instance, that the stars revolve round the pole in one day;
and that the moon goes through her phases from full to full again in
thirty days. These truths we see to be true; but we know them only
by experience. Men never could have discovered them without looking
at the stars and the moon; and having so learnt them, still no one
will pretend to say that they are necessarily true. For aught we can
see, things might have been otherwise; and if we had been placed in
another part of the solar system, then, according to the opinions of
astronomers, experience would have presented them otherwise.

2. I take the astronomical truths of experience to contrast with the
geometrical necessary truths, as being both of a familiar definite
sort; we may easily find other examples of both kinds of truth. The
truths which regard numbers are necessary truths. It is a necessary
truth, that 27 and 38 are equal to 65; that half the sum of two
numbers added to half their difference is equal to the greater
number. On the other hand, that sugar will dissolve in water; that
plants cannot live without light; and in short, the whole body of our
knowledge in chemistry, physiology, and the other inductive sciences,
consists of truths of experience. If there be any science which offer
to us truths of an ambiguous kind, with regard to which we may for a
moment doubt whether they are necessary or experiential, we will defer
the consideration of them till we have marked the distinction of the
two kinds more clearly.

3. One mode in which we may express the difference of necessary truths
and truths of experience, is, that necessary truths are those _of
which we cannot distinctly conceive the contrary_. We can very readily
conceive the contrary of experiential truths. We can conceive the stars
moving about the pole or across the sky in any kind of curves with any
velocities; we can conceive the moon always appearing during the whole
month as a luminous disk, as she might do if her light were inherent
and not borrowed. But we cannot conceive one of the parallelograms on
the same base and between the same parallels larger than the other;
for we find that, if we attempt to do this, when we separate the
parallelograms into parts, we have to conceive one triangle larger
than another, both having all their parts equal; which we cannot
conceive at all, if we conceive the triangles distinctly. We make this
impossibility more clear by conceiving the triangles to be placed so
that two sides of the one coincide with two sides of the other; and it
is then seen, that in order to conceive the triangles unequal, we must
conceive the two bases which have the same extremities both ways, to
be different lines, though both straight lines. This it is impossible
to conceive: we assent to the impossibility as an axiom, when it is
expressed by saying, that two straight lines cannot inclose a space;
and thus we cannot distinctly conceive the contrary of the proposition
just mentioned respecting parallelograms.

4. But it is necessary, in applying this distinction, to bear in mind
the terms of it;--that we cannot _distinctly_ conceive the contrary
of a necessary truth. For in a certain loose, indistinct way, persons
conceive the contrary of necessary geometrical truths, when they
erroneously conceive false propositions to be true. Thus, Hobbes
erroneously held that he had discovered a means of geometrically
doubling the cube, as it is called, that is, finding two mean
proportionals between two given lines; a problem which cannot be solved
by plane geometry. Hobbes not only proposed a construction for this
purpose, but obstinately maintained that it was right, when it had
been proved to be wrong. But then, the discussion showed how indistinct
the geometrical conceptions of Hobbes were; for when his critics had
proved that one of the lines in his diagram would not meet the other
in the point which his reasoning supposed, but in another point near
to it; he maintained, in reply, that one of these points was large
enough to include the other, so that they might be considered as the
same point. Such a mode of conceiving the opposite of a geometrical
truth, forms no exception to the assertion, that this opposite cannot
be distinctly conceived.

5. In like manner, the indistinct conceptions of children and of rude
savages do not invalidate the distinction of necessary and experiential
truths. Children and savages make mistakes even with regard to numbers;
and might easily happen to assert that 27 and 38 are equal to 63 or
64. But such mistakes cannot make such arithmetical truths cease to be
necessary truths. When any person conceives these numbers and their
addition distinctly, by resolving them into parts, or in any other way,
he sees that their sum is necessarily 65. If, on the ground of the
possibility of children and savages conceiving something different, it
be held that this is not a necessary truth, it must be held on the same
ground, that it is not a necessary truth that 7 and 4 are equal to 11;
for children and savages might be found so unfamiliar with numbers as
not to reject the assertion that 7 and 4 are 10, or even that 4 and 3
are 6, or 8. But I suppose that no persons would on such grounds hold
that these arithmetical truths are truths known only by experience.

6. Necessary truths are established, as has already been said, by
demonstration, proceeding from definitions and axioms, according to
exact and rigorous inferences of reason. Truths of experience are
collected from what we see, also according to inferences of reason,
but proceeding in a less exact and rigorous mode of proof. The former
depend upon the relations of the ideas which we have in our minds:
the latter depend upon the appearances or phenomena, which present
themselves to our senses. Necessary truths are formed from our
thoughts, the elements of the world within us; experiential truths are
collected from things, the elements of the world without us. The truths
of experience, as they appear to us in the external world, we call
Facts; and when we are able to find among our ideas a train which will
conform themselves to the apparent facts, we call this a Theory.

7. This distinction and opposition, thus expressed in various forms;
as Necessary and Experiential Truth, Ideas and Senses, Thoughts and
Things, Theory and Fact, may be termed the _Fundamental Antithesis
of Philosophy_; for almost all the discussions of philosophers have
been employed in asserting or denying, explaining or obscuring this
antithesis. It may be expressed in many other ways; but is not
difficult, under all these different forms, to recognize the same
opposition: and the same remarks apply to it under its various forms,
with corresponding modifications. Thus, as we have already seen, the
antithesis agrees with that of Reasoning and Observation: again, it
is identical with the opposition of Reflection and Sensation: again,
sensation deals with Objects; facts involve Objects, and generally all
things without us are Objects:--Objects of sensation, of observation.
On the other hand, we ourselves who thus observe objects, and in whom
sensation is, may be called the Subjects of sensation and observation.
And this distinction of Subject and Object is one of the most general
ways of expressing the fundamental antithesis, although not yet perhaps
quite familiar in English. I shall not scruple however to speak of
the Subjective and Objective element of this antithesis, where the
expressions are convenient.

8. All these forms of antithesis, and the familiar references to them
which men make in all discussions, show the fundamental and necessary
character of the antithesis. We can have no knowledge without the
union, no philosophy without the separation, of the two elements. We
can have no knowledge, except we have both impressions on our senses
from the world without, and thoughts from our minds within:--except we
attend to things, and to our ideas;--except we are passive to receive
impressions, and active to compare, combine, and mould them. But on
the other hand, philosophy seeks to distinguish the impressions of our
senses from the thoughts of our minds;--to point out the difference of
ideas and things;--to separate the active from the passive faculties
of our being. The two elements, sensations and ideas, are both
requisite to the existence of our knowledge, as both matter and form
are requisite to the existence of a body. But philosophy considers the
matter and the form separately. The properties of the form are the
subject of geometry, the properties of the matter are the subject of
chemistry or mechanics.

9. But though philosophy considers these elements of knowledge
separately, they cannot really be separated, any more than can matter
and form. "We cannot exhibit matter without form, or form without
matter; and just as little can we exhibit sensations without ideas, or
ideas without sensations;--the passive or the active faculties of the
mind detached from each other.

In every act of my knowledge, there must be concerned the things
whereof I know, and thoughts of me who know: I must both passively
receive or have received impressions, and I must actively combine
them and reason on them. No apprehension of things is purely ideal:
no experience of external things is purely sensational. If they
be conceived as _things_, the mind must have been awakened to the
conviction of things by sensation: if they be _conceived_ as things,
the expressions of the senses must have been bound together by
conceptions. If we _think_ of any _thing_, we must recognize the
existence both of thoughts and of things. _The fundamental antithesis
of philosophy is an antithesis of inseparable elements._

10. Not only cannot these elements be separately exhibited, but they
cannot be separately conceived and described. The description of them
must always imply their relation; and the names by which they are
denoted will consequently always bear a relative significance. And thus
_the terms which denote the fundamental antithesis of philosophy cannot
be applied absolutely and exclusively in any case_. We may illustrate
this by a consideration of some of the common modes of expressing the
antithesis of which we speak. The terms Theory and Fact are often
emphatically used as opposed to each other: and they are rightly so
used. But yet it is impossible to say absolutely in any case, This is
a Fact and not a Theory; this is a Theory and not a Fact, meaning by
Theory, true Theory. Is it a fact or a theory that the stars appear
to revolve round the pole? Is it a fact or a theory that the earth is
a globe revolving round its axis? Is it a fact or a theory that the
earth revolves round the sun? Is it a fact or a theory that the sun
attracts the earth? Is it a fact or a theory that a loadstone attracts
a needle? In all these cases, some persons would answer one way and
some persons another. A person who has never watched the stars, and has
only seen them from time to time, considers their circular motion round
the pole as a theory, just as he considers the motion of the sun in the
ecliptic as a theory, or the apparent motion of the inferior planets
round the sun in the zodiac. A person who has compared the measures of
different parts of the earth, and who knows that these measures cannot
be conceived distinctly without supposing the earth a globe, considers
its globular form a fact, just as much as the square form of his
chamber. A person to whom the grounds of believing the earth to revolve
round its axis and round the sun, are as familiar as the grounds for
believing the movements of the mail-coaches in this country, conceives
the former events to be facts, just as steadily as the latter. And a
person who, believing the fact of the earth's annual motion, refers it
distinctly to its mechanical course, conceives the sun's attraction as
a fact, just as he conceives as a fact the action of the wind which
turns the sails of a mill. We see then, that in these cases we cannot
apply absolutely and exclusively either of the terms, Fact or Theory.
Theory and Fact are the elements which correspond to our Ideas and our
Senses. The Facts are facts so far as the Ideas have been combined with
the sensations and absorbed in them: the Theories are Theories so far
as the Ideas are kept distinct from the sensations, and so far as it is
considered as still a question whether they can be made to agree with
them. A true Theory is a fact, a Fact is a familiar theory.

In like manner, if we take the terms Reasoning and Observation; at
first sight they appear to be very distinct. Our observation of the
world without us, our reasonings in our own minds, appear to be clearly
separated and opposed. But yet we shall find that we cannot apply
these terms absolutely and exclusively. I see a book lying a few feet
from me: is this a matter of observation? At first, perhaps, we might
be inclined to say that it clearly is so. But yet, all of us, who
have paid any attention to the process of vision, and to the mode in
which we are enabled to judge of the distance of objects, and to judge
them to be distant objects at all, know that this judgment involves
inferences drawn from various sensations;--from the impressions on
our two eyes;--from our muscular sensations; and the like. These
inferences are of the nature of reasoning, as much as when we judge of
the distance of an object on the other side of a river by looking at
it from different points, and stepping the distance between them. Or
again: we observe the setting sun illuminate a gilded weathercock; but
this is as much a matter of reasoning as when we observe the phases of
the moon, and infer that she is illuminated by the sun. All observation
involves inferences, and inference is reasoning.

11. Even the simplest terms by which the antithesis is expressed cannot
be applied: ideas and sensations, thoughts and things, subject and
object, cannot in any case be applied absolutely and exclusively. Our
sensations require ideas to bind them together, namely, ideas of space,
time, number, and the like. If not so bound together, sensations do not
give us any apprehension of things or objects. All things, all objects,
must exist in space and in time--must be one or many. Now space, time,
number, are not sensations or things. They are something different
from, and opposed to sensations and things. We have termed them ideas.
It may be said they are _relations_ of things, or of sensations. But
granting this form of expression, still a _relation_ is not a thing
or a sensation; and therefore we must still have another and opposite
element, along with our sensations. And yet, though we have thus these
two elements in every act of perception, we cannot designate any
portion of the act as absolutely and exclusively belonging to one of
the elements. Perception involves sensation, along with ideas of time,
space, and the like; or, if any one prefers the expression, involves
sensations along with the apprehension of relations. Perception is
sensation, along with such ideas as make sensation into an apprehension
of things or objects.

12. And as perception of objects implies ideas, as observation implies
reasoning; so, on the other hand, ideas cannot exist where sensation
has not been: reasoning cannot go on when there has not been previous
observation. This is evident from the necessary order of development
of the human faculties. Sensation necessarily exists from the first
moments of our existence, and is constantly at work. Observation
begins before we can suppose the existence of any reasoning which is
not involved in observation. Hence, at whatever period we consider
our ideas, we must consider them as having been already engaged in
connecting our sensations, and as modified by this employment. By being
so employed, our ideas are unfolded and defined, and such development
and definition cannot be separated from the ideas themselves. We
cannot conceive space without boundaries or forms; now forms involve
sensations. We cannot conceive time without events which mark the
course of time; but events involve sensations. We cannot conceive
number without conceiving things which are numbered; and things imply
sensations. And the forms, things, events, which are thus implied in
our ideas, having been the objects of sensation constantly in every
part of our life, have modified, unfolded and fixed our ideas, to
an extent which we cannot estimate, but which we must suppose to be
essential to the processes which at present go on in our minds. We
cannot say that objects create ideas; for to perceive objects we must
already have ideas. But we may say, that objects and the constant
perception of objects have so far modified our ideas, that we cannot,
even in thought, separate our ideas from the perception of objects.

We cannot say of any ideas, as of the idea of space, or time, or
number, that they are absolutely and exclusively ideas. We cannot
conceive what space, or time, or number would be in our minds, if we
had never perceived any thing or things in space or time. We cannot
conceive ourselves in such a condition as never to have perceived any
thing or things in space or time. But, on the other hand, just as
little can we conceive ourselves becoming acquainted with space and
time or numbers as objects of sensation. We cannot reason without
having the operations of our minds affected by previous sensations; but
we cannot conceive reasoning to be merely a series of sensations. In
order to be used in reasoning, sensation must become observation; and,
as we have seen, observation already involves reasoning. In order to
be connected by our ideas, sensations must be things or objects, and
things or objects already include ideas. And thus, as we have said,
none of the terms by which the fundamental antithesis is expressed can
be absolutely and exclusively applied.

13. I now proceed to make one or two remarks suggested by the views
which have thus been presented. And first I remark, that since, as
we have just seen, none of the terms which express the fundamental
antithesis can be applied absolutely and exclusively, the absolute
application of the antithesis in any particular case can never be a
conclusive or immoveable principle. This remark is the more necessary
to be borne in mind, as the terms of this antithesis are often used
in a vehement and peremptory manner. Thus we are often told that such
a thing is a _Fact_ and not a Theory, with all the emphasis which, in
speaking or writing, tone or italics or capitals can give. "We see from
what has been said, that when this is urged, before we can estimate the
truth, or the value of the assertion, we must ask to whom is it a fact?
what habits of thought, what previous information, what ideas does
it imply, to conceive the fact as a fact? Does not the apprehension
of the fact imply assumptions which may with equal justice be called
theory, and which are perhaps false theory? in which case, the fact is
no fact. Did not the ancients assert it as a fact, that the earth stood
still, and the stars moved? and can any fact have stronger apparent
evidence to justify persons in asserting it emphatically than this
had? These remarks are by no means urged in order to show that no fact
can be certainly known to be true; but only to show that no fact can
be certainly shown to be a fact merely by calling it a fact, however
emphatically. There is by no means any ground of general skepticism
with regard to truth involved in the doctrine of the necessary
combination of two elements in all our knowledge. On the contrary,
ideas are requisite to the essence, and things to the reality of our
knowledge in every case. The proportions of geometry and arithmetic are
examples of knowledge respecting our ideas of space and number, with
regard to which there is no room for doubt. The doctrines of astronomy
are examples of truths not less certain respecting the external world.

14. I remark further, that since in every act of knowledge, observation
or perception, both the elements of the fundamental antithesis are
involved, and involved in a manner inseparable even in our conceptions,
it must always be possible to derive one of these elements from the
other, if we are satisfied to accept, as proof of such derivation,
that one always co-exists with and implies the other. Thus an
opponent may say, that our ideas of space, time, and number, are
derived from our sensations or perceptions, because we never were
in a condition in which we had the ideas of space and time, and had
not sensations or perceptions. But then, we may reply to this, that
we no sooner perceive objects than we perceive them as existing in
space and time, and therefore the ideas of space and time are not
derived from the perceptions. In the same manner, an opponent may
say, that all knowledge which is involved in our reasonings is the
result of experience; for instance, our knowledge of geometry. For
every geometrical principle is presented to us by experience as true;
beginning with the simplest, from which all others are derived by
processes of exact reasoning. But to this we reply, that experience
cannot be the origin of such knowledge; for though experience shows
that such principles are true, it cannot show that they _must be_ true,
which we also know. We never have seen, as a matter of observation,
two straight lines inclosing a space; but we venture to say further,
without the smallest hesitation, that we never shall see it; and if any
one were to tell us that, according to his experience, such a form was
often seen, we should only suppose that he did not know what he was
talking of. No number of acts of experience can add to the certainty
of our knowledge in this respect; which shows that our knowledge is
not made up of acts of experience. We cannot test such knowledge by
experience; for if we were to try to do so, we must first know that the
lines with which we make the trial _are_ straight; and we have no test
of straightness better than this, that two such lines cannot inclose a
space. Since then, experience can neither destroy, add to, nor test our
axiomatic knowledge, such knowledge cannot be derived from experience.
Since no one act of experience can affect our knowledge, no numbers of
acts of experience can make it.

15. To this a reply has been offered, that it is a characteristic
property of geometric forms that the ideas of them exactly resemble the
sensations; so that these ideas are as fit subjects of experimentation
as the realities themselves; and that by such experimentation we learn
the truth of the axioms of geometry. I might very reasonably ask those
who use this language to explain how a particular class of ideas can
be said to resemble sensations; how, if they do, we can know it to be
so; how we can prove this resemblance to belong to geometrical ideas
and sensations; and how it comes to be an especial characteristic of
those. But I will put the argument in another way. Experiment can only
show what is, not what must be. If experimentation on ideas shows what
must be, it is different from what is commonly called experience.

I may add, that not only the mere use of our senses cannot show that
the axioms of geometry _must be_ true, but that, without the light
of our ideas, it cannot even show that they _are_ true. If we had a
segment of a circle a mile long and an inch wide, we should have two
lines inclosing a space; but we could not, by seeing or touching any
part of either of them, discover that it was a bent line.

16. That mathematical truths are not derived from experience is perhaps
still more evident, if greater evidence be possible, in the case of
numbers. We assert that 7 and 8 are 15. We find it so, if we try with
counters, or in any other way. But we do not, on that account, say that
the knowledge is derived from experience. We refer to our conceptions
of seven, of eight, and of addition, and as soon as we possess these
conceptions distinctly, we see that the sum must be fifteen. We cannot
be said to make a trial, for we should not believe the apparent result
of the trial if it were different. If any one were to say that the
multiplication table is a table of the results of experience, we should
know that he could not be able to go along with us in our researches
into the foundations of human knowledge; nor, indeed, to pursue with
success any speculations on the subject.

17. Attempts have also been made to explain the origin of axiomatic
truths by referring them to the association of ideas. But this is
one of the cases in which the word _association_ has been applied so
widely and loosely, that no sense can be attached to it. Those who
have written with any degree of distinctness on the subject, have
truly taught, that the habitual association of the ideas leads us to
believe a connexion of the things: but they have never told us that
this association gave us the power of forming the ideas. Association
may determine belief, but it cannot determine the possibility of our
conceptions. The African king did not believe that water could become
solid, because he had never seen it in that state. But that accident
did not make it impossible to conceive it so, any more than it is
impossible for us to conceive frozen quicksilver, or melted diamond,
or liquefied air; which we may never have seen, but have no difficulty
in conceiving. If there were a tropical philosopher really incapable
of conceiving water solidified, he must have been brought into that
mental condition by abstruse speculations on the necessary relations of
solidity and fluidity, not by the association of ideas.

18. To return to the results of the nature of the Fundamental
Antithesis. As by assuming universal and indissoluble connexion of
ideas with perceptions, of knowledge with experience, as an evidence
of derivation, we may assert the former to be derived from the latter,
so might we, on the same ground, assert the latter to be derived from
the former. We see all forms in space; and we might hence assert all
forms to be mere modifications of our idea of space. We see all events
happen in time; and we might hence assert all events to be merely
limitations and boundary-marks of our idea of time. We conceive all
collections of things as two or three, or some other number: it might
hence be asserted that we have an original idea of number, which is
reflected in external things. In this case, as in the other, we are met
at once by the impossibility of this being a complete account of our
knowledge. Our ideas of space, of time, of number, however distinctly
reflected to us with limitations and modifications, must be reflected,
limited and modified by something different from themselves. We must
have visible or tangible forms to limit space, perceived events to mark
time, distinguishable objects to exemplify number. But still, in forms,
and events, and objects, we have a knowledge which they themselves
cannot give us. For we know, without attending to them, that whatever
they are, they will conform and must conform to the truths of geometry
and arithmetic. There is an ideal portion in all our knowledge of the
external world; and if we were resolved to reduce all our knowledge
to one of its two antithetical elements, we might say that all our
knowledge consists in the relation of our ideas. Wherever there is
necessary truth, there must be something more than sensation can
supply: and the necessary truths of geometry and arithmetic show us
that our knowledge of objects in space and time depends upon necessary
relations of ideas, whatever other element it may involve.

19. This remark may be carried much further than the domain of geometry
and arithmetic. Our knowledge of matter may at first sight appear
to be altogether derived from the senses. Yet we cannot derive from
the senses our knowledge of a truth which we accept as universally
certain;--namely, that we cannot by any process add to or diminish
the quantity of matter in the world. This truth neither is nor can be
derived from experience; for the experiments which we make to verify
it pre-suppose its truth. When the philosopher was asked what was
the weight of smoke, he bade the inquirer subtract the weight of
the ashes from the weight of the fuel. Every one who thinks clearly
of the changes which take place in matter, assents to the justice of
this reply: and this, not because any one had found by trial that such
was the weight of the smoke produced in combustion, but because the
weight lost was assumed to have gone into some other form of matter,
not to have been destroyed. When men began to use the balance in
chemical analysis, they did not prove by trial, but took for granted,
as self-evident, that the weight of the whole must be found in the
aggregate weight of the elements. Thus it is involved in the idea of
matter that its amount continues unchanged in all changes which take
place in its consistence. This is a necessary truth: and thus our
knowledge of matter, as collected from chemical experiments, is also
a modification of our idea of matter as the material of the world
incapable of addition or diminution.

20. A similar remark may be made with regard to the mechanical
properties of matter. Our knowledge of these is reduced, in our
reasonings, to principles which we call the laws of motion. These laws
of motion, as I have endeavoured to show[351], depend upon the idea
of Cause, and involve necessary truths, which are necessarily implied
in the idea of cause;--namely, that every change of motion must have
a cause--that the effect is measured by the cause;--that reaction
is equal and opposite to action. These principles are not derived
from experience. No one, I suppose, would derive from experience the
principle, that every event must have a cause. Every attempt to see
the traces of cause in the world assumes this principle. I do not say
that these principles are anterior to experience; for I have already,
I hope, shown, that neither of the two elements of our knowledge is,
or can be, anterior to the other. But the two elements are co-ordinate
in the development of the human mind; and the ideal element may be
said to be the origin of our knowledge with the more propriety of the
two, inasmuch as our knowledge is the relation of ideas. The other
element of knowledge, in which sensation is concerned, and which
embodies, limits, and defines the necessary truths which express the
relations of our ideas, may be properly termed experience; and I have,
in the discussion just quoted, endeavoured to show how the principles
concerning mechanical causation, which I have just stated, are, by
observation and experiment, limited and defined, so that they become
the laws of motion. And thus we see that such knowledge is derived
from ideas, in a sense quite as general and rigorous, to say the least,
as that in which it is derived from experience.

21. I will take another example of this; although it is one less
familiar, and the consideration of it perhaps a little more difficult
and obscure. The objects which we find in the world, for instance,
minerals and plants, are of different kinds; and according to their
kinds, they are called by various names, by means of which we know
what we mean when we speak of them. The discrimination of these kinds
of objects, according to their different forms and other properties,
is the business of chemistry and botany. And this business of
discrimination, and of consequent classification, has been carried on
from the first periods of the development of the human mind, by an
industrious and comprehensive series of observations and experiments;
the only way in which any portion of the task could have been effected.
But as the foundation of all this labour, and as a necessary assumption
during every part of its progress, there has been in men's minds
the principle, that objects are so distinguishable by resemblances
and differences, that they may be named, and known by their names.
This principle is involved in the idea of a Name; and without it no
progress could have been made. The principle may be briefly stated
thus:--Intelligible Names of kinds are possible. If we suppose this
not to be so, language can no longer exist, nor could the business
of human life go on. If instead of having certain definite kinds of
minerals, gold, iron, copper and the like, of which the external forms
and characters are constantly connected with the same properties and
qualities, there were no connexion between the appearance and the
properties of the object;--if what seemed externally iron might turn
out to resemble lead in its hardness; and what seemed to be gold during
many trials, might at the next trial be found to be like copper; not
only all the uses of these minerals would fail, but they would not be
distinguishable kinds of things, and the names would be unmeaning. And
if this entire uncertainty as to kind and properties prevailed for all
objects, the world would no longer be a world to which language was
applicable. To man, thus unable to distinguish objects into kinds, and
call them by names, all knowledge would be impossible, and all definite
apprehension of external objects would fade away into an inconceivable
confusion. In the very apprehension of objects as intelligibly sorted,
there is involved a principle which springs within us, contemporaneous,
in its efficacy, with our first intelligent perception of the kinds
of things of which the world consists. We assume, as a necessary
basis of our knowledge, that things are of definite kinds; and the aim
of chemistry, botany, and other sciences is to find marks of these
kinds; and along with these, to learn their definitely-distinguished
properties. Even here, therefore, where so large a portion of our
knowledge comes from experience and observation, we cannot proceed
without a necessary truth derived from our ideas, as our fundamental
principle of knowledge.

22. What the marks are, which distinguish the constant differences of
kinds of things (definite marks, selected from among many unessential
appearances), and what their definite properties are, when they
are so distinguished, are parts of our knowledge to be learnt from
observation, by various processes; for instance, among others, by
chemical analysis. We find the differences of bodies, as shown by such
analysis, to be of this nature:--that there are various elementary
bodies, which, combining in different definite proportions, form kinds
of bodies definitely different. But, in arriving at this conclusion,
we introduce a new idea, that of Elementary Composition, which is not
extracted from the phenomena, but supplied by the mind, and introduced
in order to make the phenomena intelligible. That this notion of
elementary composition is not supplied by the chemical phenomena of
combustion, mixture, &c. as merely an observed fact, we see from this;
that men had in ancient times performed many experiments in which
elementary composition was concerned, and had not seen the fact. It
never was truly seen till modern times; and when seen, it gave a new
aspect to the whole body of known facts. This idea of elementary
composition, then, is supplied by the mind, in order to make the
facts of chemical analysis and synthesis intelligible _as_ analysis
and synthesis. And this idea being so supplied, there enters into our
knowledge along with it a corresponding necessary principle;--That the
elementary composition of a body determines its kind and properties.
This is, I say, a principle assumed, as a consequence of the idea of
composition, not a result of experience; for when bodies have been
divided into their kinds, we take for granted that the analysis of a
single specimen may serve to determine the analysis of all bodies of
the same kind: and without this assumption, chemical knowledge with
regard to the kinds of bodies would not be possible. It has been said
that we take only one experiment to determine the composition of any
particular kind of body, because we have a thousand experiments to
determine that bodies of the same kind have the same composition. But
this is not so. Our belief in the principle that bodies of the same
kind have the same composition is not established by experiments,
but is assumed as a necessary consequence of the ideas of Kind and of
Composition. If, in our experiments, we found that bodies supposed
to be of the same kind had not the same composition, we should not
at all doubt of the principle just stated, but conclude at once that
the bodies were _not_ of the same kind;--that the marks by which the
kinds are distinguished had been wrongly stated. This is what has very
frequently happened in the course of the investigations of chemists and
mineralogists. And thus we have it, not as an experiential fact, but
as a necessary principle of chemical philosophy, that the Elementary
Composition of a body determines its Kind and Properties.

23. How bodies differ in their elementary composition, experiment must
teach us, as we have already said, that experiment has taught us. But
as we have also said, whatever be the nature of this difference, kinds
must be definite, in order that language may be possible: and hence,
whatever be the terms in which we are taught by experiment to express
the elementary composition of bodies, the result must be conformable
to this principle, That the differences of elementary composition
are definite. The law to which we are led by experiment is, that the
elements of bodies continue in definite proportions according to
weight. Experiments add other laws; as for instance, that of multiple
proportions in different kinds of bodies composed of the same elements;
but of these we do not here speak.

24. We are thus led to see that in our knowledge of mechanics,
chemistry, and the like, there are involved certain necessary
principles, derived from our ideas, and not from experience. But to
this it may be objected, that the parts of our knowledge in which these
principles are involved has, in historical fact, all been acquired by
experience. The laws of motion, the doctrine of definite proportions,
and the like, have all become known by experiment and observation; and
so far from being seen as necessary truths, have been discovered by
long-continued labours and trials, and through innumerable vicissitudes
of confusion, error, and imperfect truth. This is perfectly true: but
does not at all disprove what has been said. Perception of external
objects and experience, experiment and observation are needed,
not only, as we have said, to supply the objective element of all
knowledge--to embody, limit, define, and modify our ideas; but this
intercourse with objects is also requisite to unfold and fix our ideas
themselves. As we have already said, ideas and facts can never be
separated. Our ideas cannot be exercised and developed in any other
form than in their combination with facts, and therefore the trials,
corrections, controversies, by which the matter of our knowledge is
collected, is also the only way in which the form of it can be rightly
fashioned. Experience is requisite to the clearness and distinctness of
our ideas, not because they are derived from experience, but because
they can only be exercised upon experience. And this consideration
sufficiently explains how it is that experiment and observation have
been the means, and the only means, by which men have been led to a
knowledge of the laws of nature. In reality, however, the necessary
principles which flow from our ideas, and which are the basis of such
knowledge, have not only been inevitably assumed in the course of such
investigations, but have been often expressly promulgated in words
by clear-minded philosophers, long before their true interpretation
was assigned by experiment. This has happened with regard to such
principles as those above mentioned; That every event must have a
cause; That reaction is equal and opposite to action; That the quantity
of matter in the world cannot be increased or diminished: and there
would be no difficulty in finding similar enunciations of the other
principles above mentioned;--That the kinds of things have definite
differences, and that these differences depend upon their elementary
composition. In general, however, it may be allowed, that the necessary
principles which are involved in those laws of nature of which we have
a knowledge become then only clearly known, when the laws of nature are
discovered which thus involve the necessary ideal element.

25. But since this is allowed, it may be further asked, how we are to
distinguish between the necessary principle which is derived from our
ideas, and the law of nature which is learnt by experience. And to this
we reply, that the necessary principle may be known by the condition
which we have already mentioned as belonging to such principles: ...
that it is impossible distinctly to conceive the contrary. We cannot
conceive an event without a cause, except we abandon all distinct idea
of cause; we cannot distinctly conceive two straight lines inclosing
space; and if we seem to conceive this, it is only because we conceive
indistinctly. We cannot conceive 5 and 3 making 7 or 9; if a person
were to say that he could conceive this, we should know that he was a
person of immature or rude or bewildered ideas, whose conceptions had
no distinctness. And thus we may take it as the mark of a necessary
truth, that we cannot conceive the contrary distinctly.

26. If it be asked what is the test of distinct conception (since it
is upon the distinctness of conception that the matter depends), we
may consider what answer we should give to this question if it were
asked with regard to the truths of geometry. If we doubted whether
anyone had these distinct conceptions which enable him to see the
necessary nature of geometrical truth, we should inquire if he could
understand the axioms as axioms, and could follow, as demonstrative,
the reasonings which are founded upon them. If this were so, we should
be ready to pronounce that he had distinct ideas of space, in the sense
now supposed. And the same answer may be given in any other case. That
reasoner has distinct conceptions of mechanical causes who can see
the axioms of mechanics as axioms, and can follow the demonstrations
derived from them as demonstrations. If it be said that the science,
as presented to him, may be erroneously constructed; that the axioms
may not be axioms, and therefore the demonstrations may be futile, we
still reply, that the same might be said with regard to geometry: and
yet that the possibility of this does not lead us to doubt either of
the truth or of the necessary nature of the propositions contained
in Euclid's Elements. We may add further, that although, no doubt,
the authors of elementary books maybe persons of confused minds, who
present as axioms what are not axiomatic truths; yet that in general,
what is presented as an axiom by a thoughtful man, though it may
include some false interpretation or application of our ideas, will
also generally include some principle which really is necessarily true,
and which would still be involved in the axiom, if it were corrected
so as to be true instead of false. And thus we still say, that if in
any department of science a man can conceive distinctly at all, there
are principles the contrary of which he cannot distinctly conceive, and
which are therefore necessary truths.

27. But on this it may be asked, whether truth can thus depend upon
the particular state of mind of the person who contemplates it; and
whether that can be a necessary truth which is not so to all men. And
to this we again reply, by referring to geometry and arithmetic. It
is plain that truths may be necessary truths which are not so to all
men, when we include men of confused and perplexed intellects; for to
such men it is not a necessary truth that two straight lines cannot
inclose a space, or that 14 and 17 are 31. It need not be wondered
at, therefore, if to such men it does not appear a necessary truth
that reaction is equal and opposite to action, or that the quantity of
matter in the world cannot be increased or diminished. And this view of
knowledge and truth does not make it depend upon the state of mind of
the student, any more than geometrical knowledge and geometrical truth,
by the confession of all, depend upon that state. We know that a man
cannot have any knowledge of geometry without so much of attention to
the matter of the science, and so much of care in the management of
his own thoughts, as is requisite to keep his ideas distinct and clear.
But we do not, on that account, think of maintaining that geometrical
truth depends merely upon the state of the student's mind. We conceive
that he knows it because it is true, not that it is true because he
knows it. We are not surprised that attention and care and repeated
thought should be requisite to the clear apprehension of truth. For
such care and such repetition are requisite to the distinctness and
clearness of our ideas: and yet the relations of these ideas, and
their consequences, are not produced by the efforts of attention or
repetition which we exert. They are in themselves something which
we may discover, but cannot make or change. The idea of space, for
instance, which is the basis of geometry, cannot give rise to any
doubtful propositions. What is inconsistent with the idea of space
cannot be truly obtained from our ideas by any efforts of thought or
curiosity; if we blunder into any conclusion inconsistent with the idea
of space, our knowledge, so far as this goes, is no knowledge: any more
than our observation of the external world would be knowledge, if, from
haste or inattention, or imperfection of sense, we were to mistake the
object which we see before us.

28. But further: not only has truth this reality, which makes it
independent of our mistakes, that it must be what is really consistent
with our ideas; but also, a further reality, to which the term
is more obviously applicable, arising from the principle already
explained, that ideas and perceptions are inseparable. For since,
when we contemplate our ideas, they have been frequently embodied and
exemplified in objects, and thus have been fixed and modified; and
since this compound aspect is that under which we constantly have
them before us, and free from which they cannot be exhibited; our
attempts to make our ideas clear and distinct will constantly lead us
to contemplate them as they are manifested in those external forms
in which they are involved. Thus in studying geometrical truth, we
shall be led to contemplate it as exhibited in visible and tangible
figures;--not as if these could be sources of truth, but as enabling
us more readily to compare the aspects which our ideas, applied to the
world of objects, may assume. And thus we have an additional indication
of the reality of geometrical truth, in the necessary possibility of
its being capable of being exhibited in a visible or tangible form. And
yet even this test by no means supersedes the necessity of distinct
ideas, in order to a knowledge of geometrical truth. For in the case
of the duplication of the cube by Hobbes, mentioned above, the diagram
which he drew made two points appear to coincide, which did not
really, and by the nature of our idea of space, coincide; and thus
confirmed him in his error.

_Thus the inseparable nature of the Fundamental Antithesis of Ideas and
Things gives reality to our knowledge, and makes objective reality a
corrective of our subjective imperfections in the pursuit of knowledge.
But this objective exhibition of knowledge can by no means supersede a
complete development of the subjective condition, namely, distinctness
of ideas. And that there is a subjective condition, by no means makes
knowledge altogether subjective, and thus deprives it of reality;
because, as we have said, the subjective and the objective elements are
inseparably bound together in the fundamental antithesis._

29. It would be easy to apply these remarks to other cases, for
instance, to the case of the principle we have just mentioned, that
the differences of elementary composition of different kinds of bodies
must be definite. We have stated that this principle is necessarily
true;--that the contrary proposition cannot be distinctly conceived.
But by whom? Evidently, according to the preceding reasoning, by a
person who distinctly conceives Kinds, as marked by intelligible
names, and Composition, as determining the kinds of bodies. Persons
new to chemical and classificatory science may not possess these ideas
distinctly; or rather, cannot possess them distinctly; and therefore
cannot apprehend the impossibility of conceiving the opposite of
the above principle; just as the schoolboy cannot apprehend the
impossibility of the numbers in his multiplication table being other
than they are. But this inaptitude to conceive, in either case, does
not alter the necessary character of the truth: although, in one case,
the truth is obvious to all except schoolboys and the like, and the
other is probably not clear to any except those who have attentively
studied the philosophy of elementary compositions. At the same time,
this difference of apprehension of the truth in different persons does
not make the truth doubtful or dependent upon personal qualifications;
for in proportion as persons attain to distinct ideas, they will see
the truth; and cannot, with such ideas, see anything as truth which
is not truth. When the relations of elements in a compound become as
familiar to a person as the relations of factors in a multiplication
table, he will then see what are the necessary axioms of chemistry, as
he now sees the necessary axioms of arithmetic.

30. There is also one other remark which I will here make. In the
progress of science, both the elements of our knowledge are constantly
expanded and augmented. By the exercise of observation and experiment,
we have a perpetual accumulation of facts, the materials of knowledge,
the objective element. By thought and discussion, we have a perpetual
development of man's ideas going on: theories are framed, the materials
of knowledge are shaped into form; the subjective element is evolved;
and by the necessary coincidence of the objective and subjective
elements, the matter and the form, the theory and the facts, each of
these processes furthers and corrects the other: each element moulds
and unfolds the other. Now it follows, from this constant development
of the ideal portion of our knowledge, that we shall constantly be
brought in view of new Necessary Principles, the expression of the
conditions belonging to the Ideas which enter into our expanding
knowledge. These principles, at first dimly seen and hesitatingly
asserted, at last become clearly and plainly self-evident. Such is the
case with the principles which are the basis of the laws of motion.
Such may soon be the case with the principles which are the basis
of the philosophy of chemistry. Such may hereafter be the case with
the principles which are to be the basis of the philosophy of the
connected and related polarities of chemistry, electricity, galvanism,
magnetism. That knowledge is possible in these cases, we know; that
our knowledge may be reduced to principles, gradually more simple,
we also know; that we have reached the last stage of simplicity of
our principles, few cultivators of the subject will be disposed to
maintain; and that the additional steps which lead towards very simple
and general principles will also lead to principles which recommend
themselves by a kind of axiomatic character, those who judge from the
analogy of the past history of science will hardly doubt. That the
principles thus axiomatic in their form, do also express some relation
of our ideas, of which experiment and observation have given a true
and real interpretation, is the doctrine which I have here attempted
to establish and illustrate in the most clear and undoubted of the
existing sciences; and the evidence of this doctrine in those cases
seems to be unexceptionable, and to leave no room to doubt that such is
the universal type of the progress of science. Such a doctrine, as we
have now seen, is closely connected with the views here presented of
the nature of the Fundamental Antithesis of Philosophy, which I have
endeavoured to illustrate.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 351: _Hist. Sc. Ind._ b. iii.]


APPENDIX F.

REMARKS ON A REVIEW OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE INDUCTIVE SCIENCES.


  _Trinity Lodge, April 11th, 1844._

  MY DEAR HERSCHEL,

Being about to send you a copy of a paper on a philosophical question
just printed in the Transactions of our Cambridge Society, I am tempted
to add, as a private communication, a few Remarks on another aspect of
the same question. These Remarks I think I may properly address to you.
They will refer to an Article in the _Quarterly Review_ for June, 1841,
respecting my _History_ and _Philosophy_ of the Inductive Sciences; and
without assigning any other reason, I may say that the interest I know
you to take in speculations on such subjects makes me confident that
you will give a reasonable attention to what I may have to say on the
subject of that Article. With the Reviewal itself, I am so far from
having any quarrel, that when it appeared I received it as affording
all that I hoped from Public Criticism. The degree and the kind of
admiration bestowed upon my works by a writer so familiar with science,
so comprehensive in his views, and so equitable in his decisions, as
the Reviewer manifestly was, I accepted as giving my work a stamp of
acknowledged value which few other hands could have bestowed.

You may perhaps recollect, however, that the Reviewer dissented
altogether from some of the general views which I had maintained,
and especially from a general view which is also, in the main, that
presented in the accompanying Memoir, namely, that, besides Facts,
Ideas are an indispensable source of our knowledge; that Ideas are
the ground of necessary truth; that the Idea of Space, in particular,
is the ground of the necessary truths of geometry. This question,
and especially as limited to the last form, will be the subject of
my Remarks in the first place; and I wish to consider the Reviewer's
objections with the respect which their subtlety and depth of thought
well deserve.

The Reviewer makes objections to the account which I have given of
the source whence geometrical truth derives its characters of being
necessary and universal; but he is not one of those metaphysicians
who deny those characters to the truths of geometry. He allows in the
most ample manner that the truths of geometry _are_ necessary. The
question between us therefore is from what this character is derived.
The Reviewer prefers, indeed, to have it considered that the question
is not concerning the necessity, but, as he says, the universality of
these truths; or rather, the nature and grounds of our conviction of
their universality. He might have said, with equal justice, the nature
and grounds of our conviction of their necessity. For his objection to
the term _necessity_ in this case--"that all the propositions about
realities are necessarily true, since every reality must be consistent
with itself," (p. 206)--does not apply to our conviction of necessity,
since we may not be able to see what are the properties of real things;
and therefore may have no conviction of their necessity. It may be a
necessary property of salt to be soluble, but we see no such necessity;
and therefore the assertion of such a property is not one of the
necessary truths with which we are here concerned. But to turn back to
the necessary or universal truths of geometry, and the ground of those
attributes: The main difference between the Author and the Reviewer is
brought into view, when the Reviewer discusses the general argument
which I had used, in order to show that truths which we see to be
necessary and universal cannot be derived from experience. The argument
is this,--

"Experience must always consist of a limited number of observations;
and however numerous these may be, they can show nothing with regard
to the infinite number of cases in which the experiment has not been
made.... Truths can only be known to be general, not universal, if
they depend upon experience alone. Experience cannot bestow that
universality which she herself cannot have; nor that necessity of which
she has no comprehension." (_Phil._ _i._ pp. 60, 61.)

Here is that which must be considered as the cardinal argument on this
subject. It is therefore important to attend to the answer which the
Reviewer makes to it. He says,--

"We conceive that a full answer to this argument is afforded by the
nature of the inductive propensity,--by the irresistible impulse of
the mind to generalize _ad infinitum_, when nothing in the nature of
limitation or opposition offers itself to the imagination; and by our
involuntary application of the law of continuity to fill up, by the
same ideal substance of truth, every interval which uncontradicted
experience may have left blank in our inductive conclusion." (p. 207.)

Now here we have two rival explanations of the same thing,--the
conviction of the universality of geometrical truths. The one
explanation is, that this universality is imposed upon such truths by
their involving a certain element, derived from the universal mode of
activity of the mind when apprehending such truths, which element I
have termed an Idea. The other explanation is, that this universality
arises from the _inductive propensity_--from the _irresistible impulse
to generalize ad infinitum_--from the _involuntary application of the
law of continuity_--from the _filling up all intervals with the same
ideal substance of truth_.

With regard to these two explanations, I may observe, that so far as
they are thus stated they do not necessarily differ. They both agree
in expressing this; that the ground of the universality of geometrical
truths is a certain law of the mind's activity, which determines its
procedure when it is concerned in apprehending the external world.
One explanation says, that we impress upon the external world the
relations of our ideas, and thus believe more than we see,--the
other says, that we have an irresistible impulse to introduce into
our conviction a relation between what we do observe and what we do
not, namely, to generalize _ad infinitum_ from what we do see. One
explanation says, that we perceive all external objects as included
in absolute ideal space,--the other, that we fill up the intervals of
the objects which we perceive with the same ideal substance of truth.
Both sets of expressions may perhaps be admissible; and if admitted,
may be understood as expressing the same opinions, or opinions which
have much in common. The Author's expressions have the advantage, which
ought to belong to them, as the expressions employed in a systematic
work, of being fixed expressions, technical phrases, intentionally
selected, uniformly and steadily employed whenever the occasion recurs.
The Reviewer's expressions are more lively and figurative, and such
as well become an occasional composition; but hardly such as could
be systematically applied to the subject in a regular treatise. We
could not, as a standard and technical phrase, talk of filling up
the intervals of observation with the same ideal substance of truth;
and the inevitable impulse to generalize would hardly sufficiently
express that we generalize according to a certain idea, namely, the
idea of space. Perhaps that which is suggested to us as the common
import of the two sets of expressions may be conveyed by some other
phrase, in a manner free from the objections which lie against both the
Author's and the Critic's terms. Perhaps the mental idea governing
our experience, and the irresistible impulse to generalize our
observation, may both be superseded by our speaking of a law of the
mind's _activity_, which is really implied in both. There operates, in
observing the external world, a law of the mind's activity, by which it
connects its observations; and this law of the mind's activity may be
spoken of either as the idea of space, or as the irresistible impulse
to generalize the relations of space which it observes. And this
expression--_the laws of the mind's activity_--thus opposed to that
merely passive function by which the mind receives the impressions of
sense, may be applied to other ideas as well as to the idea of space,
and to the impulse to generalize in other truths as well as those of
geometry.

So far, it would seem, that the Author and the Critic may be brought
into much nearer agreement than at first seemed likely, with regard
to the grounds of the necessity and universality in our knowledge.
But even if we adopt this conciliatory suggestion, and speak of the
necessity and universality of certain truths as arising from the laws
of the mind's activity, we cannot, without producing great confusion,
allow ourselves to say, as the Critic says, that these truths are thus
derived from _experience_, or from _observation_. It will, I say, be
found fatal to all philosophical precision of thought and language,
to say that the fundamental truths of geometry, the axioms, with the
conviction of their necessary truth, are derived from experience. Let
us take any axiomatic truth of geometry, and ask ourselves if this is
not so.

It is, for example, an axiom in geometry that if a straight line cut
one of two parallel straight lines, it must cut the other also. Is this
truth derived or derivable from observation of actual parallel lines,
and a line cutting them, exhibited to our senses? Let those who say
that we do acquire this truth by observation, imagine to themselves
the mode in which the observation must be made. We have before us two
parallel straight lines, and we see that a straight line which cuts
the one cuts the other also. We see this again in another case, it
may be the angles and the distances being different, and in a third,
and in a fourth; and so on; and generalizing, we are irresistibly
led to believe the assertion to be universally true. But can any one
really imagine this to be the mode in which we arrive at this truth?
"We see," says this explanation, "two parallel straight lines, cut by
a third." But how do we know that the observed lines are parallel?
If we apply any test of parallelism, we must assume some property of
parallels, and thus involve some axiom on the subject, which we have no
more right to assume than the one now under consideration. We should
thus destroy our explanation as an account of the mode of arriving
at independent geometrical axioms. But probably those who would give
such an explanation would not do this. They would not suppose that in
observing this property of parallels we try by measurement whether the
lines are parallel. They would say, I conceive, that we suppose lines
to be parallel, and that then we see that the straight line which cuts
the one must cut the other. That when we make this supposition, we are
persuaded of the truth of the conclusion, is certain. But what I have
to remark is, that this being so, the conclusion is the result, not of
observation, but of the hypothesis. The geometrical truth here spoken
of, after this admission, no longer flows from experience, but from
supposition. It is not that we _ascertain_ the lines to be parallel,
and then _find_ that they have this property: but we _suppose_ the
lines to be parallel, and _therefore_ they have this property. This is
not a truth of experience.

This, it may be said, is so evident that it cannot have been overlooked
by a very acute reasoner, such as you describe your Critic to be.
What, it may be asked, is the answer which he gives to so palpable an
objection as this? How does he understand his assertion that we learn
the truth of geometrical axioms from experience (p. 208), so as to make
it tenable on his own principles? What account does he give of the
origin of such axioms which makes them in any sense to be derived from
experience?

In justice to the Reviewer's fairness (which is unimpeachable
throughout his argumentation) it must be stated that he does give an
account in which he professes to show how this is done. And the main
step of his explanation consists in introducing the conception of
_direction_, and _unity of direction_. He says (p. 208), "The _unity of
direction_, or that we cannot march from a given point by more than one
path _direct to the same object_, is a matter of practical experience,
long before it can by possibility become matter of abstract thought."
We might ask here, as in the former case, how this can be a matter of
experience, except we have some independent test of directness? and we
might demand to know what this test is. Or do we not rather, here as
in the other case, _suppose_ the directness of the path; and is not
the singleness of the direct path a consequence, not of its observed
form, but of its hypothetical directness; and thus by no means a
result of experience? But we may put our remark upon this deduction
of the geometrical axiom in another form. We generalize, it is said,
the observations which we have made ever since we were born. But this
term "generalize" is far too vague to pass for an explanation, without
being itself explained. We are impelled to believe that to be true in
general which we see to be true in particular. But how do we see any
truth? How do we pick out any proposition with respect to a diagram
which we see before us? We see in particular, and state in general,
some truth respecting straight lines, or parallel lines, or concerning
direction. But where do we find the conception of straightness, or
parallelism, or direction? These conceptions are not upon the surface
of things. The child does not, from his birth, see straightness
and parallelism so as to know that he sees them. How then does his
experience bear upon a proposition in which these conceptions are
involved? It is said that it is a matter of experience long before it
is a matter of abstract thought. But how can there be any experience
by which we learn these properties of a straight line, till our
thoughts are at least so abstract as to conceive what straightness is?
If it be said that this conception grows with our experience, and is
gradually unfolded with our unfolding materials of knowledge, so as
to give import and significance to them: I need make no objection to
such a statement, except this--that this power of unfolding out of the
mind conceptions which give meaning to our experience, is something
in addition to the mere employment of our senses upon the external
world. It is what I have called the ideal part of our knowledge. It
implies, not only an impulse to generalize from experience, but also
an impulse to form conceptions by which generalization is possible. It
requires, not only that nothing should oppose the tendency, but that
the direction in which the tendency is to operate should be determined
by the laws of the mind's activity; by an internal, not by an external
agency.

One main ground on which the Reviewer is disposed to quarrel with and
reject several of the expressions used in the _Philosophy_;--such as
that space is an idea, a form of our perception, and the like,--is
this; that such expressions appear to deprive the external world of its
reality; to make it, or at least most of its properties, a creation of
the observing mind. He quotes the following argument which is urged in
the _Philosophy_, in order to prove that space is not a notion obtained
from experience: "Experience gives us information concerning things
without us, but our apprehending them as without us takes for granted
their existence in space. Experience acquaints us with the form,
position, magnitude, &c. of particular objects, but that they _have_
form, position, magnitude, pre-supposes that they are in space." From
this statement he altogether dissents. No, says he, "the reason why we
apprehend things as without us is that they _are_ without us. We take
for granted that they exist in space, because they _do_ so exist, and
because such their existence is a matter of direct perception, which
can neither be explained in words nor contravened in imagination:
because, in short, space is a _reality_, and not a mere matter of
convention or imagination."

Now, if by calling space an idea, we suggest any doubt of its reality
and of the reality of the external world, we certainly run the risk
of misleading our readers; for the external world is real if anything
be real: the bodies which exist in space are things, if things are
anywhere to be found. That bodies do exist in space, and that _that_ is
the reason why we apprehend them as existing in space, I readily grant.
But I conceive that the term Idea ought not to suggest any such doubt
of the reality of the knowledge in which it is involved. Ideas are
always, in our knowledge, conjoined with facts. Our real knowledge is
knowledge, because it involves ideas, real, because it involves facts.
We apprehend things as existing in space because they do so exist: and
our idea of space enables us so to observe them, and so to conceive
them.

But we want, further, a reason why, apprehending them as they are, we
also apprehend, that in certain relations they could not be otherwise
(that two straight linear objects could not inclose a space, for
instance). This circumstance is no way accounted for by saying that we
apprehend them as they are; and is, I presume to say, inexplicable,
except by supposing that it arises from some property of the observing
mind:--an Idea, as I have termed it,--an irresistible Impulse to
generalize, as the Reviewer expresses it. Or, as I have suggested, we
may adopt a third phrase, a Law of the mind's activity: and in order
that no question may remain, whether we ascribe reality to the objects
and relations which we observe, we may describe it as "a Law of the
mind's activity in apprehending what is." And thus the real existence
of the object, and the ideal element which our apprehension of it
introduces, would both be clearly asserted.

I am ready to use expressions which recognize the reality of space
and other external things more emphatically than those expressions
which I have employed in the _Philosophy_, if expressions can be
found which, while they do this, enable us to explain the possibility
of knowledge, and to analyze the structure of truth. It is, indeed,
extremely difficult to find, in speaking of this subject, expressions
which are satisfactory. The reality of the objects which we perceive
is a profound, apparently an insoluble problem[352]. We cannot but
suppose that existence is something different from our knowledge of
existence:--that which exists, does not exist merely in our knowing
that it does:--truth is truth whether we know it or not. Yet how can we
conceive truth, otherwise than as something known? How can we conceive
things as existing, without conceiving them as objects of perception?
Ideas and Things are constantly opposed, yet necessarily co-existent.
How they are thus opposite and yet identical, is the ultimate problem
of all philosophy. The successive phases of philosophy have consisted
in separating and again uniting these two opposite elements; in
dwelling sometimes upon the one and sometimes upon the other, as the
principal or original or only element; and then in discovering that
such an account of the state of the case was insufficient. Knowledge
requires ideas. Reality requires things. Ideas and things co-exist.
Truth _is_, and is known. But the complete explanation of these points
appears to be beyond our reach. At least it is not necessary for the
purposes of our philosophy. The separation of ideas and sensations
in order to discover the conditions of knowledge is our main task.
How ideas and sensations are united so as to form things, does not so
immediately concern us.

I have stated that we may, without giving up any material portion
of the Philosophy of Science to which I have been led, express the
conclusions in other phraseology; and that instead of saying that all
our knowledge involves certain Fundamental Ideas, the sources from
which all universal truth is derived, we may say that there are certain
Laws of Mental Activity according to which alone all the real relations
of things are apprehended. If this alteration in the phraseology will
make the doctrines more generally intelligible or acceptable, there is
no reason why it should not be adopted. But I may remark, that a main
purpose of the _Philosophy_ was not merely to prove that there _are_
such Fundamental Ideas or Laws of mental activity, but to enumerate
those of them which are involved in the existing sciences; and to state
the fundamental truths to which the fundamental ideas lead. This was
the task which was attempted; and if this have been executed with any
tolerable success, it may perhaps be received as a contribution to the
philosophy of science, of which the value is not small, in whatever
terms it be expressed. And this enumeration of fundamental ideas, and
of truths derived from them, must have something to correspond to it,
in any other mode of expressing that view of the nature of knowledge
which we are led to adopt. If instead of _Fundamental Ideas_, we speak
of Impulses of generalization, or of _Laws of mental activity_, we
must still distinguish such Impulses, or such Laws, according to the
distinctions of ideas to which the survey of science led us. We shall
thus have a series of groups of Laws, or of classes of generalizing
Impulses, corresponding to the series of Fundamental Ideas already
given. If we employ the language of the Reviewer, we shall have one
generalizing Impulse which suggests relations of Space; another which
directs us to properties of Numbers; another which deals with Time;
another with Cause: another which groups objects according to Likeness;
another which suggests a purpose as a necessary relation among
them; to which may be added, even while we confine ourselves to the
physical sciences, several others, as may be seen in the _Philosophy_.
Now when the fundamental conditions and elements of truth are thus
arranged into groups, it is not a matter of so much consequence to
decide whether each group shall be said to be bound together by an
idea or by an impulse of generalization; as it is to see that, if
this happen in virtue of ideas, here are so many distinct ideas which
enter into the structure of science, and give universality to its
matter; and again, if this happen in virtue of an irresistible impulse
of generalization in each case, we have so many different kinds of
impulses of generalization. The main purpose in the _Philosophy_ was to
analyze scientific truth into its conditions and elements; and I did
not content myself with saying that those elements are Sensations and
Ideas; the Ideas being that element which makes universal knowledge
conceivable and possible. I went further: I enumerated the Ideas
which thus enter into science. I showed that in the sciences which
I passed in review, the most acute and profound inquirers had taken
for granted that certain truths in each science are of universal and
necessary validity, and I endeavoured to select the idea in which this
universality and necessity resided, and to separate it from all other
ideas involved in other sciences. If therefore it be thought better
to say that those principles in each science upon which, as upon the
axioms in geometry, the universality and necessity of scientific truth
depends, are arrived at, not by ideas, but by an irresistible impulse
of generalization, those who employ such phraseology, if they make a
classification of such impulses corresponding to my classification of
ideas, will still adopt the greater part of my philosophy, altering
only the phraseology. Or if, as I suggested, instead of "Fundamental
Ideas," we use the phrase "Laws of Mental Activity," then our primary
intellectual Code--the Constitution of our minds, as it may be
termed--will consist of a Body of Laws of which the Titles correspond
with the Fundamental Ideas of the _Philosophy_.

My object was, from the writings of the most sagacious and profound
philosophers who have laboured on each science, to extract such a
code, such a constitution. If I have in any degree succeeded in this,
the result must have a reality and a value independently of all forms
of expression. Still I do not think that any language can ever serve
for such legislation, in which the two elements of truth are not
distinguished. Even if we adopt the phraseology which I have just
employed, we shall have to recollect that Law and Fact must be kept
distinct, and that the Constitution has its Principles as well as its
History.

But I will not longer detain you by seeking other modes of expressing
the Fundamental Antithesis to which the accompanying Memoir refers.
The Remarks which I here send you were written three years ago, on the
appearance of the Review which I have quoted. If I succeed in obtaining
for them a few minutes' attention from you and a few other friends, I
shall be glad that they have been preserved.

  I am, my dear Herschel,
  always truly yours,
  W. WHEWELL.

P.S. I have abstained from sending you a large portion of my Remarks
as originally written. I had gone on to show that, in my _Philosophy_,
I had not only enumerated and analyzed a great number of different
Fundamental Ideas which belong to the different existing sciences,
but that I had also shown in what manner these ideas enter into their
respective sciences; namely, by the statement or use of Axioms, which
involve the ideas, and which form the basis of each science when
systematically exhibited. A number of these Axioms belonging to most
of the physical sciences, are stated in the _Philosophy_. I might have
added also that I have attempted to classify the historical steps
by which such Axioms are brought into view and applied. But it is
not necessary to dwell upon these points, in order to illustrate the
difference and the agreement between the Reviewer and me.

  _Sir John F. W. Herschel, Bart. &c._


APPENDIX G.

ON THE TRANSFORMATION OF HYPOTHESES IN THE HISTORY OF SCIENCE.

(_Cam. Phil. Soc._ MAY 19, 1851.)


1. The history of science suggests the reflection that it is very
difficult for the same person at the same time to do justice to two
conflicting theories. Take for example the Cartesian hypothesis of
vortices and the Newtonian doctrine of universal gravitation. The
adherents of the earlier opinion resisted the evidence of the Newtonian
theory with a degree of obstinacy and captiousness which now appears
to us quite marvellous: while on the other hand, since the complete
triumph of the Newtonians, _they_ have been unwilling to allow any
merit at all to the doctrine of vortices. It cannot but seem strange,
to a calm observer of such changes, that in a matter which depends
upon mathematical proofs, the whole body of the mathematical world
should pass over, as in this and similar cases they seem to have done,
from an opinion confidently held, to its opposite. No doubt this must
be, in part, ascribed to the lasting effects of education and early
prejudice. The old opinion passes away with the old generation: the new
theory grows to its full vigour when its congenital disciples grow to
be masters. John Bernoulli continues a Cartesian to the last; Daniel,
his son, is a Newtonian from the first. Newton's doctrines are adopted
at once in England, for they are the solution of a problem at which his
contemporaries have been labouring for years. They find no adherents
in France, where Descartes is supposed to have already explained
the constitution of the world; and Fontenelle, the secretary of the
Academy of Sciences at Paris, dies a Cartesian seventy years after
the publication of Newton's _Principia_. This is, no doubt, a part
of the explanation of the pertinacity with which opinions are held,
both before and after a scientific revolution: but this is not the
whole, nor perhaps the most instructive aspect of the subject. There
is another feature in the change, which explains, in some degree, how
it is possible that, in subjects, mainly at least mathematical, and
therefore claiming demonstrative evidence, mathematicians should hold
different and even opposite opinions. And the object of the present
paper is to point out this feature in the successions of theories, and
to illustrate it by some prominent examples drawn from the history of
science.

2. The feature to which I refer is this; that when a prevalent
theory is found to be untenable, and consequently, is succeeded by a
different, or even by an opposite one, the change is not made suddenly,
or completed at once, at least in the minds of the most tenacious
adherents of the earlier doctrine; but is effected by a transformation,
or series of transformations, of the earlier hypothesis, by means of
which it is gradually brought nearer and nearer to the second; and
thus, the defenders of the ancient doctrine are able to go on as if
still asserting their first opinions, and to continue to press their
points of advantage, if they have any, against the new theory. They
borrow, or imitate, and in some way accommodate to their original
hypothesis, the new explanations which the new theory gives, of the
observed facts; and thus they maintain a sort of verbal consistency;
till the original hypothesis becomes inextricably confused, or breaks
down under the weight of the auxiliary hypotheses thus fastened upon
it, in order to make it consistent with the facts.

This often-occurring course of events might be illustrated from the
history of the astronomical theory of epicycles and eccentrics, as
is well known. But my present purpose is to give one or two brief
illustrations of a somewhat similar tendency from other parts of
scientific history; and in the first place, from that part which has
already been referred to, the battle of the Cartesian and Newtonian
systems.

3. The part of the Cartesian system of vortices which is most
familiarly known to general readers is the explanation of the motions
of the planets by supposing them carried round the sun by a kind
of whirlpool of fluid matter in which they are immersed: and the
explanation of the motions of the satellites round their primaries by
similar subordinate whirlpools, turning round the primary, and carried,
along with it, by the primary vortex. But it should be borne in mind
that a part of the Cartesian hypothesis which was considered quite as
important as the cosmical explanation, was the explanation which it
was held to afford of terrestrial gravity. Terrestrial gravity was
asserted to arise from the motion of the vortex of subtle matter which
revolved round the earth's axis and filled the surrounding space. It
was maintained that by the rotation of such a vortex, the particles
of the subtle matter would exert a centrifugal force, and by virtue of
that force, tend to recede from the center: and it was held that all
bodies which were near the earth, and therefore immersed in the vortex,
would be pressed towards the center by the effort of the subtle matter
to recede from the center[353].

These two assumed effects of the Cartesian vortices--to carry bodies
in their stream, as straws are carried round by a whirlpool, and to
press bodies to the center by the centrifugal effort of the whirling
matter--must be considered separately, because they were modified
separately, as the progress of discussion drove the Cartesians from
point to point. The former effect indeed, the _dragging_ force
of the vortex, as we may call it, would not bear working out on
mechanical principles at all; for as soon as the law of motion was
acknowledged (which Descartes himself was one of the loudest in
proclaiming), that a body in motion keeps all the motion which it has,
and receives in addition all that is impressed upon it; as soon, in
short, as philosophers rejected the notion of an inertness in matter
which constantly retards its movements,--it was plain that a planet
perpetually dragged onwards in its orbit by a fluid moving quicker than
itself, must be perpetually accelerated; and therefore could not follow
those constantly-recurring cycles of quicker and slower motion which
the planets exhibit to us.

The Cartesian mathematicians, then, left untouched the calculation of
the progressive motion of the planets; and, clinging to the assumption
that a vortex would produce a tendency of bodies to the center, made
various successive efforts to construct their vortices in such a manner
that the centripetal forces produced by them should coincide with those
which the phenomena required, and therefore of course, in the end, with
those which the Newtonian theory asserted.

In truth, the Cartesian vortex was a bad piece of machinery for
producing a central force: from the first, objections were made to the
sufficiency of its mechanism, and most of these objections were very
unsatisfactorily answered, even granting the additional machinery which
its defenders demanded. One formidable objection was soon started,
and continued to the last to be the torment of the Cartesians. If
terrestrial gravity, it was urged, arise from the centrifugal force of
a vortex which revolves about the earth's axis, terrestrial gravity
ought to act in planes perpendicular to the earth's axis, instead
of tending to the earth's center. This objection was taken by James
Bernoulli[354], and by Huyghens[355] not long after the publication of
Descartes's _Principia_. Huyghens (who adopted the theory of vortices
with modifications of his own) supposes that there are particles of the
fluid matter which move about the earth in every possible direction,
within the spherical space which includes terrestrial objects; and
that the greater part of these motions being in spherical surfaces
concentric with the earth, produces a tendency towards the earth's
center.

This was a procedure tolerably arbitrary, but it was the best which
could be done. Saurin, a little later[356], gave nearly the same
solution of this difficulty. The solution, identifying a vortex of some
kind with a central force, made the hypothesis of vortices applicable
wherever central forces existed; but then, in return, it deprived the
image of a vortex of all that clearness and simplicity which had been
its first great recommendation.

But still there remained difficulties not less formidable. According
to this explanation of gravity, since the tendency of bodies to the
earth's center arose from the superior centrifugal force of the
whirling matter which pushed them inward as water pushes a light body
upward, bodies ought to tend more strongly to the center in proportion
as they are less dense. The rarest bodies should be the heaviest;
contrary to what we find.

Descartes's original solution of this difficulty has a certain degree
of ingenuity. According to him (_Princip._ IV. 23) a terrestrial body
consists of particles of the _third element_, and the more it has
of such particles, the more it excludes the parts of the _celestial
matter_, from the revolution of which matter gravity arises; and
therefore the denser is the terrestrial body, and the heavier it will
be.

But though this might satisfy him, it could not satisfy the
mathematicians who followed him, and tried to reduce his system to
calculation on mechanical principles. For how could they do this,
if the celestial matter, by the operation of which the phenomena
of force and motion were produced, was so entirely different from
ordinary matter, which alone had supplied men with experimental
illustrations of mechanical principles? In order that the celestial
matter, by its whirling, might produce the gravity of heavy bodies,
it was mechanically necessary that it must be very dense; and _dense_
in the ordinary sense of the term; for it was by regarding density in
the ordinary sense of the term that the mechanical necessity had been
established.

The Cartesians tried to escape this result (Huyghens, _Pesanteur_, p.
161, and John Bernoulli, _Nouvelles Pensées_, Art. 31) by saying that
there were two meanings of _density_ and _rarity_; that some fluids
might be rare by having their particles far asunder, others, by having
their particles very small though in contact. But it is difficult to
think that they could, as persons well acquainted with mechanical
principles, satisfy themselves with this distinction; for they could
hardly fail to see that the mechanical effect of any portion of fluid
depends upon the total mass moved, not on the size of its particles.

Attempts made to exemplify the vortices experimentally only showed more
clearly the force of this difficulty. Huyghens had found that certain
bodies immersed in a whirling fluid tended to the center of the vortex.
But when Saulmon[357] a little later made similar experiments, he had
the mortification of finding that the heaviest bodies had the greatest
tendency to recede from the axis of the vortex. "The result is," as
the Secretary of the Academy (Fontenelle) says, "exactly the opposite
of what we could have wished, for the [Cartesian] system of gravity:
but we are not to despair; sometimes in such researches disappointment
leads to ultimate success."

But, passing by this difficulty, and assuming that in some way or
other a centripetal force arises from the centrifugal force of the
vortex, the Cartesian mathematicians were naturally led to calculate
the circumstances of the vortex on mechanical principles; especially
Huyghens, who had successfully studied the subject of centrifugal
force. Accordingly, in his little treatise on the _Cause of
Gravitation_ (p. 143), he calculates the velocity of the fluid matter
of the vortex, and finds that, at a point in the equator, it is 17
times the velocity of the earth's rotation.

It may naturally be asked, how it comes to pass that a stream of fluid,
dense enough to produce the gravity of bodies by its centrifugal force,
moving with a velocity 17 times that of the earth (and therefore
moving round the earth in 85 minutes), does not sweep all terrestrial
objects before it. But to this Huyghens had already replied (p. 137),
that there are particles of the fluid moving _in all directions_, and
therefore that they neutralize each other's action, so far as lateral
motion is concerned.

And thus, as early as this treatise of Huyghens, that is, in three
years from the publication of Newton's _Principia_, a vortex is made
to mean nothing more than some machinery or other for producing a
central force. And this is so much the case, that Huyghens commends
(p. 165), as confirming his own calculation of the velocity of his
vortex, Newton's proof that at the Moon's orbit the centripetal force
is equal to the centrifugal; and that thus, this force is less than the
centripetal force at the earth's surface in the inverse proportion of
the squares of the distances.

John Bernoulli, in the same manner, but with far less clearness
and less candour, has treated the hypothesis of vortices as being
principally a hypothetical cause of central force. He had repeated
occasions given him of propounding his inventions for propping up the
Cartesian doctrine, by the subjects proposed for prizes by the Paris
Academy of Sciences; in which competition Cartesian speculations were
favourably received. Thus the subject of the Prize Essays for 1730
was, the explanation of the Elliptical Form of the planetary orbits
and of the Motion of their Aphelia, and the prize was assigned to
John Bernoulli, who gave the explanation on Cartesian principles. He
explains the elliptical figure, not as Descartes himself had done,
by supposing the vortex which carries the planet round the sun to be
itself squeezed into an elliptical form by the pressure of contiguous
vortices; but he supposes the planet, while it is carried round by the
vortex, to have a limited oscillatory motion to and from the center,
produced by its being originally, not at the distance at which it would
float in equilibrium in the vortex, but above or below that point. On
this supposition, the planet would oscillate to and from the center,
Bernoulli says, like the mercury when deranged in a barometer: and
it is evident that such an oscillation, combined with a motion round
the center, might produce an oval curve, either with a fixed or with
a moveable aphelion. All this however merely amounts to a possibility
that the oval _may_ be an ellipse, not to a proof that it will be so;
nor does Bernoulli advance further.

It was necessary that the vortices should be adjusted in such a manner
as to account for Kepler's laws; and this was to be done by making
the velocity of each stratum of the vortex depend in a suitable
manner on its radius. The Abbé de Molières attempted this on the
supposition of elliptical vortices, but could not reconcile Kepler's
first two laws, of equal elliptical areas in equal times, with his
third law, that the squares of the periodic times are as the cubes
of the mean distances[358]. Bernoulli, with his circular vortices,
could accommodate the velocities at different distances so that they
should explain Kepler's laws. He pretended to prove that Newton's
investigations respecting vortices (in the ninth Section of the Second
Book of the _Principia_) were mechanically erroneous; and in truth,
it must be allowed that, besides several arbitrary assumptions, there
are some errors of reasoning in them. But for the most part, the more
enlightened Cartesians were content to accept Newton's account of the
motions and forces of the solar system as part of their scheme; and to
say only that the hypothesis of vortices explained the origin of the
Newtonian forces; and that thus theirs was a philosophy of a higher
kind. Thus it is asserted (_Mém. Acad._ 1734), that M. de Molières
retains the beautiful theory of Newton entire, only he renders it
in a sort less Newtonian, by disentangling it from attraction, and
transferring it from a vacuum into a plenum. This plenum, though
not its native region, frees it from the need of attraction, which
is all the better for it. These points were the main charms of the
Cartesian doctrine in the eyes of its followers;--the getting rid of
attractions, which were represented as a revival of the Aristotelian
"occult qualities," "substantial forms," or whatever else was the
most disparaging way of describing the bad philosophy of the dark
ages[359];--and the providing some material intermedium, by means of
which a body may affect another at a distance; and thus avoid the
reproach urged against the Newtonians, that they made a body act where
it was not. And we are the less called upon to deny that this last
feature in the Newtonian theory was a difficulty, inasmuch as Newton
himself was never unwilling to allow that gravity might be merely an
effect produced by some ulterior cause.

With such admissions on the two sides, it is plain that the Newtonian
and Cartesian systems would coincide, if the hypothesis of vortices
could be modified in such a way as to produce the force of gravitation.
All attempts to do this, however, failed: and even John Bernoulli,
the most obstinate of the mathematical champions of the vortices,
was obliged to give them up. In his Prize Essay for 1734, (on the
Inclinations of the Planetary Orbits[360],) he says (Art. VIII.), "The
gravitation of the Planets towards the center of the Sun and the weight
of bodies towards the center of the earth has not, for its cause,
either the attraction of M. Newton, or the centrifugal force of the
matter of the vortex according to M. Descartes;" and he then goes on to
assert that these forces are produced by a perpetual torrent of matter
tending to the center on all sides, and carrying all bodies with it.
Such a hypothesis is very difficult to refute. It has been taken up in
more modern times by Le Sage[361], with some modifications; and may be
made to account for the principal facts of the universal gravitation
of matter. The great difficulty in the way of such a hypothesis is,
the overwhelming thought of the whole universe filled with torrents
of an invisible but material and tangible substance, rushing in every
direction in infinitely prolonged straight lines and with immense
velocity. Whence can such matter come, and whither can it go? Where
can be its perpetual and infinitely distant fountain, and where the
ocean into which it pours itself when its infinite course is ended?
A revolving whirlpool is easily conceived and easily supplied; but
the central torrent of Bernoulli, the infinite streams of particles
of Le Sage, are an explanation far more inconceivable than the thing
explained.

But however the hypothesis of vortices, or some hypothesis substituted
for it, was adjusted to explain the facts of attraction to a
center, this was really nearly all that was meant by a vortex or a
"tourbillon," when the system was applied. Thus in the case of the last
act of homage to the Cartesian theory which the French Academy rendered
in the distribution of its prizes, the designation of a Cartesian
Essay in 1741 (along with three Newtonian ones) as worthy of a prize
for an explanation of the Tides; the difference of high and low water
was not explained, as Descartes has explained it, by the pressure, on
the ocean, of the terrestrial vortex, forced into a strait where it
passes under the Moon; but the waters were supposed to rise towards the
Moon, the terrestrial vortex being disturbed and broken by the Moon,
and therefore less effective in forcing them down. And in giving an
account of a Tourmaline from Ceylon (Acad. Sc. 1717), when it has been
ascertained that it attracts and repels substances, the writer adds, as
a matter of course, "It would seem that it has a vortex." As another
example, the elasticity of a body was ascribed to vortices between its
particles: and in general, as I have said, a vortex implied what we now
imply by speaking of a central force.

4. In the same manner vortices were ascribed to the Magnet, in order
to account for its attractions and repulsions. But we may note a
circumstance which gave a special turn to the hypothesis of vortices as
applied to this subject, and which may serve as a further illustration
of the manner in which a transition may be made from one to the other
of two rival hypotheses.

If iron filings be brought near a magnet, in such a manner as to be
at liberty to assume the position which its polar action assigns to
them; (for instance, by strewing them upon a sheet of paper while
the two poles of the magnet are close below the paper;) they will
arrange themselves in certain curves, each proceeding from the N. to
the S. pole of the magnet, like the meridians in a map of the globe.
It is easily shown, on the supposition of magnetic attraction and
repulsion, that these _magnetic curves_, as they are termed, are each
a curve whose tangent at every point is the direction of a small line
or particle, as determined by the attraction and repulsion of the two
poles. But if we suppose a _magnetic vortex_ constantly to flow out
of one pole and into the other, in streams which follow such curves,
it is evident that such a vortex, being supposed to exercise material
pressure and impulse, would arrange the iron filings in corresponding
streams, and would thus produce the phenomenon which I have described.
And the hypothesis of _central torrents_ of Bernoulli or Le Sage which
I have referred to, would, in its application to magnets, really become
this hypothesis of a magnetic vortex, if we further suppose that the
matter of the torrents which proceed to one pole and from the other,
mingles its streams, so as at each point to produce a stream in the
resulting direction. Of course we shall have to suppose two sets of
magnetic torrents;--a boreal torrent, proceeding to the north pole,
and from the south pole of a magnet; and an austral torrent proceeding
to the south and from the north pole:--and with these suppositions,
we make a transition from the hypothesis of attraction and repulsion,
to the Cartesian hypothesis of vortices, or at least, torrents, which
determine bodies to their magnetic positions by impulse.

Of course it is to be expected that, in this as in the other case,
when we follow the hypothesis of impulse into detail, it will need to
be loaded with so many subsidiary hypotheses, in order to accommodate
it to the phenomena, that it will no longer seem tenable. But the
plausibility of the hypothesis in its first application cannot be
denied:--for, it may be observed, the two _opposite_ streams would
counteract each other so as to produce no local _motion_, only
_direction_. And this case may put us on our guard against other
suggestions of forces acting in curve lines, which may at first sight
appear to be discerned in magnetic and electric phenomena. Probably
such curve lines will all be found to be only resulting lines, arising
from the direct action and combination of elementary attraction and
repulsion.

5. There is another case in which it would not be difficult to devise
a mode of transition from one to the other of two rival theories;
namely, in the case of the emission theory and the undulation theory
of Light. Indeed several steps of such a transition have already
appeared in the history of optical speculation; and the conclusive
objection to the emission theory of light, as to the Cartesian theory
of vortices, is, that no amount of additional hypotheses will reconcile
it to the phenomena. Its defenders had to go on adding one piece of
machinery after another, as new classes of facts came into view, till
it became more complex and unmechanical than the theory of epicycles
and eccentrics at its worst period. Otherwise, as I have said, there
was nothing to prevent the emission theory from migrating into the
undulatory theory, and as the theory of vortices did into the theory
of attraction. For the emissionists allow that rays may _interfere_;
and that these interferences may be modified by alternate _fits_ in the
rays; now these fits are already a kind of _undulation_. Then again the
phenomena of polarized light show that the fits or undulations must
have a _transverse_ character: and there is no reason why emitted rays
should not be subject to _fits_ of _transverse_ modification as well
as to any other fits. In short, we may add to the emitted rays of the
one theory, all the properties which belong to the undulations of the
other, and thus account for all the phenomena on the emission theory;
with this limitation only, that the emission will have no share in the
explanation, and the undulations will have the whole. If, instead of
conceiving the universe full of a _stationary_ ether, we suppose it
to be full of etherial particles moving in every direction; and if we
suppose, in the one case and in the other, this ether to be susceptible
of undulations proceeding from every luminous point; the results of the
two hypotheses will be the same; and all we shall have to say is, that
the supposition of the emissive motion of the particles is superfluous
and useless.

6. This view of the manner in which rival theories pass into one
another appears to be so unfamiliar to those who have only slightly
attended to the history of science, that I have thought it might be
worth while to illustrate it by a few examples.

It might be said, for instance, by such persons[362], "Either the
planets are not moved by vortices, or they do not move by the law by
which heavy bodies fall. It is impossible that both opinions can be
true." But it appears, by what has been said above, that the Cartesians
did hold both opinions to be true; and one with just as much reason as
the other, on their assumptions. It might be said in the same manner,
"Either it is false that the planets are made to describe their orbits
by the above quasi-Cartesian theory of Bernoulli, or it is false that
they obey the Newtonian theory of gravitation." But this would be
said quite erroneously; for if the hypothesis of Bernoulli be true,
it is so because it agrees in its result with the theory of Newton.
It is not only possible that both opinions may be true, but it is
certain that if the first be so, the second is. It might be said again,
"Either the planets describe their orbits by an inherent virtue, or
according to the Newton theory." But this again would be erroneous,
for the Newtonian doctrine decided nothing as to whether the force of
gravitation was inherent or not. Cotes held that it was, though Newton
strongly protested against being supposed to hold such an opinion.
The word _inherent_ is no part of the physical theory, and will be
asserted or denied according to our metaphysical views of the essential
attributes of matter and force.

Of course, the possibility of two rival hypotheses being true, one
of which takes the explanation a step higher than the other, is
not affected by the impossibility of two contradictory assertions
of the _same order_ of generality being both true. If there be a
new-discovered comet, and if one astronomer asserts that it will return
once in _every_ twenty years, and another, that it will return once in
every thirty years, both cannot be right. But if an astronomer says
that though its interval was in the last instance 30 years, it will
only be 20 years to the next return, in consequence of perturbation and
resistance, he may be perfectly right.

And thus, when different and rival explanations of the same phenomena
are held, till one of them, though long defended by ingenious men, is
at last driven out of the field by the pressure of facts, the defeated
hypothesis is transformed before it is extinguished. Before it has
disappeared, it has been modified so as to have all palpable falsities
squeezed out of it, and subsidiary provisions added, in order to
reconcile it with the phenomena. It has, in short, been penetrated,
infiltrated, and metamorphosed by the surrounding medium of truth,
before the merely arbitrary and erroneous residuum has been finally
ejected out of the body of permanent and certain knowledge.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 352: These remarks were written in 1841. The accompanying
Memoir contains a further discussion of this problem.]


APPENDIX H.

ON HEGEL'S CRITICISM OF NEWTON'S PRINCIPIA.

(_Cam. Phil. Soc._ MAY 21, 1849.)


The Newtonian doctrine of universal gravitation, as the cause of
the motions which take place in the solar system, is so entirely
established in our minds, and the fallacy of all the ordinary arguments
against it is so clearly understood among us, that it would undoubtedly
be deemed a waste of time to argue such questions in this place, so far
as physical truth is concerned. But since in other parts of Europe,
there are teachers of philosophy whose reputation and influence are
very great, and who are sometimes referred to among our own countrymen
as the authors of new and valuable views of truth, and who yet reject
the Newtonian opinions, and deny the validity of the proofs commonly
given of them, it may be worth while to attend for a few minutes to the
declarations of such teachers, as a feature in the present condition
of European philosophy. I the more readily assume that the Cambridge
Philosophical Society will not think a communication on such a subject
devoid of interest, in consequence of the favourable reception which it
has given to philosophical speculations still more abstract, which I
have on previous occasions offered to it. I will therefore proceed to
make some remarks on the opinions concerning the Newtonian doctrine of
gravitation, delivered by the celebrated Hegel, of Berlin, than whom no
philosopher in modern, and perhaps hardly any even in ancient times,
has had his teaching received with more reverential submission by his
disciples, or been followed by a more numerous and zealous band of
scholars bent upon diffusing and applying his principles.

The passages to which I shall principally refer are taken from one of
his works which is called the _Encyclopædia_ (Encyklopädie), of which
the First Part is _the Science of Logic_, the Second, the _Philosophy
of Nature_, the Third, the _Philosophy of Spirit_. The Second Part,
with which I am here concerned, has for an _aliter_ title, _Lectures
on Natural Philosophy_ (Vorlesungen über Natur-philosophie), and would
through its whole extent offer abundant material for criticism, by
referring it to principles with which we are here familiar: but I
shall for the present confine myself to that part which refers to the
subject which I have mentioned, the Newtonian Doctrine of Gravitation,
§ 269, 270, of the work. Nor shall I, with regard to this part, think
it necessary to give a continuous and complete criticism of all the
passages bearing upon the subject; but only such specimens, and such
remarks thereon, as may suffice to show in a general manner the value
and the character of Hegel's declarations on such questions. I do not
pretend to offer here any opinion upon the value and character of
Hegel's philosophy in general: but I think it not unlikely that some
impression on that head may be suggested by the examination, here
offered, of some points in which we can have no doubt where the truth
lies; and I am not at all persuaded that a like examination of many
other parts of the Hegelian _Encyclopædia_, would not confirm the
impression which we shall receive from the parts now to be considered.

Hegel both criticises the Newtonian doctrines, or what he states as
such; and also, not denying the truth of the laws of phenomena which he
refers to, for instance Kepler's laws, offers his own proof of these
laws. I shall make a few brief remarks on each of these portions of the
pages before me. And I would beg it to be understood that where I may
happen to put my remarks in a short, and what may seem a peremptory
form, I do so for the sake of saving time; knowing that among us, upon
subjects so familiar, a few words will suffice. For the same reason, I
shall take passages from Hegel, not in the order in which they occur,
but in the order in which they best illustrate what I have to say. I
shall do Hegel no injustice by this mode of proceeding: for I will
annex a faithful translation, so far as I can make one, of the whole of
the passages referred to, with the context.

No one will be surprised that a German, or indeed any lover of science,
should speak with admiration of the discovery of Kepler's laws, as a
great event in the history of Astronomy, and a glorious distinction to
the discoverer. But to say that the glory of the discovery of the proof
of these laws has been unjustly transferred from Kepler to Newton, is
quite another matter. This is what Hegel says (_a_)[363]. And we have
to consider the reasons which he assigns for saying so.

He says (_b_) that "it is allowed by mathematicians that the Newtonian
Formula maybe derived from the Keplerian laws," and hence he seems to
infer that the Newtonian law is not an additional truth. That is, he
does not allow that the discovery of the cause which produces a certain
phenomenal law is anything additional to the discovery of the law
itself.

"The Newtonian formula may be derived from the Keplerian law." It was
professedly so derived; but derived by introducing the Idea of _Force_,
which Idea and its consequences were not introduced and developed till
after Kepler's time.

"The Newtonian formula may be derived from the Keplerian law." And the
Keplerian law may be derived, and was derived, from the observations of
the Greek astronomers and their successors; but was not the less a new
and great discovery on that account.

But let us see what he says further of this derivation of the Newtonian
"formula" from the Keplerian Law. It is evident that by calling it a
_formula_, he means to imply, what he also asserts, that it is no new
law, but only a new form (and a bad one) of a previously known truth.

How is the Newtonian "formula," that is, the law of the inverse squares
of the central force, derived from the Keplerian law of the cubes of
the distances proportional to the squares of the times? This, says
Hegel, is the "immediate derivation." (_c_).--By Kepler's law, _A_
being the distance and _T_ the periodic time, _A_^3/_T_^2 is constant.
But Newton _calls_ _A_/_T_^2 universal gravitation; whence it easily
follows that gravitation is inversely as _A_^2.

This is Hegel's way of representing Newton's proof. Reading it, any one
who had never read the _Principia_ might suppose that Newton _defined_
gravitation to be _A_/_T_^2. We, who have read the _Principia_, know
that Newton _proves_ that in circles, the _central force_ (not the
_universal gravitation_) is as _A_/_T_^2: that he proves this, by
setting out from the idea of force, as that which deflects a body from
the tangent, and makes it describe a curved line: and that in this way,
he passes from Kepler's laws of mere motion to his own law of Force.

But Hegel does not see any value in this. Such a mode of treating the
subject he says (_i_) "offers to us a tangled web, formed of the Lines
of the mere geometrical construction, to which a physical meaning of
independent forces is given." That a _measure_ of forces is _found_ in
such lines as the sagitta of the arc described in a given time, (not
such a _meaning_ arbitrarily _given_ to them,) is certainly true, and
is very distinctly proved in Newton, and in all our elementary books.

But, says Hegel, as further showing the artificial nature of the
Newtonian formulæ, (_h_) "Analysis has long been able to derive the
Newtonian expression and the laws therewith connected out of the Form
of the Keplerian Laws;" an assertion, to verify which he refers to
Francœur's _Mécanique_. This is apparently in order to show that the
"lines" of the Newtonian construction are superfluous. We know very
well that analysis does not always refer to visible representations of
such lines: but we know too, (and Francœur would testify to this also,)
that the analytical proofs contain equivalents to the Newtonian lines.
We, in this place, are too familiar with the substitution of analytical
for geometrical proofs, to be led to suppose that such a substitution
affects the substance of the truth proved. The conversion of Newton's
geometrical proofs of his discoveries into analytical processes by
succeeding writers, has not made them cease to be discoveries: and
accordingly, those who have taken the most prominent share in such a
conversion, have been the most ardent admirers of Newton's genius and
good fortune.

So much for Newton's comparison of the Forces in different circular
orbits, and for Hegel's power of understanding and criticising it. Now
let us look at the motion in different parts of the same elliptical
orbit, as a further illustration of the value of Hegel's criticism. In
an elliptical orbit the velocity alternately increases and diminishes.
This follows necessarily from Kepler's law of the equal description
of the areas, and so Newton explains it. Hegel, however, treats of
this acceleration and retardation as a separate fact, and talks of
another explanation of it, founded upon Centripetal and Centrifugal
Force (_o_). Where he finds this explanation, I know not; certainly
not in Newton, who in the second and third section of the _Principia_
explains the variation of the velocity in a quite different manner, as
I have said; and nowhere, I think, employs centrifugal force in his
explanations. However, the notion of centrifugal as acting along with
centripetal force is introduced in some treatises, and may undoubtedly
be used with perfect truth and propriety. How far Hegel can judge
when it is so used, we may see from what he says of the confusion
produced by such an explanation, which is, he says, a maximum. In the
first place, he speaks of the motion being _uniformly_ accelerated and
retarded in an elliptical orbit, which, in any exact use of the word
_uniformly_, it is not. But passing by this, he proceeds to criticise
an explanation, not of the variable velocity of the body in its orbit,
but of the alternate access and recess of the body to and from the
center. Let us overlook this confusion also, and see what is the value
of his criticism on the explanation. He says (_p_), "according to
this explanation, in the motion of a planet from the aphelion to the
perihelion, the centrifugal is less than the centripetal force; and
in the perihelion itself the centripetal force is supposed suddenly
to become greater than the centrifugal;" and so, of course, the body
re-ascends to the aphelion.

Now I will not say that this explanation has never been given in a book
professing to be scientific; but I have never seen it given; and it
never can have been given but by a very ignorant and foolish person.
It goes upon the utterly unmechanical supposition that the approach
of a body to the center at any moment depends solely upon the excess
of the centripetal over the centrifugal force; and reversely. But the
most elementary knowledge of mechanics shows us that when a body is
moving _obliquely_ to the distance from the center, it approaches to
or recedes from the center in virtue of this obliquity, even if no
force at all act. And the total approach to the center is the approach
due to this cause, _plus_ the approach due to the centripetal force,
_minus_ the recess due to the centrifugal force. At the aphelion, the
centripetal is greater than the centrifugal force; and _hence_ the
motion becomes oblique; and _then_, the body approaches to the center
on _both_ accounts, and approaches on account of the obliquity of the
path even when the centrifugal has become greater than the centripetal
force, which it becomes before the body reaches the perihelion. This
reasoning is so elementary, that when a person who cannot see this,
writes on the subject with an air of authority, I do not see what can
be done but to point out the oversight and leave it.

But there is, says Hegel (_q_), another way of explaining the motion
by means of centripetal and centrifugal forces. The two forces are
supposed to increase and decrease gradually, according to different
laws. In this case, there must be a point where they are equal, and in
equilibrio; and this being the case, they will always continue equal,
for there will be no reason for their going out of equilibrium.

This, which is put as _another_ mode of explanation, is, in fact, the
same mode; for, as I have already said, the centrifugal force, which is
less than the centripetal at the aphelion, becomes the greater of the
two before the perihelion; and there is an intermediate position, at
which the two forces are equal. But at this point, is there no reason
why, being equal, the forces should become unequal? Reason abundant:
for the body, being there, moves in a line oblique to the distance, and
so changes its distance; and the centripetal and centrifugal force,
depending upon the distance by different laws, they forthwith become
unequal.

But these modes of explanation, by means of the centripetal and
centrifugal forces and their relation, are not necessary to Newton's
doctrine, and are nowhere used by Newton; and undoubtedly much
confusion has been produced in other minds, as well as Hegel's,
by speaking of the centrifugal force, which is a mere intrinsic
geometrical result of a body's curvilinear motion round a center, in
conjunction with centripetal force, which is an extrinsic force, acting
upon the body and urging it to the center. Neither Newton, nor any
intelligent Newtonian, ever spoke of the centripetal and centrifugal
force as two distinct forces both extrinsic to the motion, which Hegel
accuses them of doing. (_n_)

I have spoken of the third and second of Kepler's laws; of Newton's
explanations of them, and of Hegel's criticism. Let us now, in the same
manner, consider the first law, that the planets move in ellipses.
Newton's proof that this was the result of a central force varying
inversely as the square of the distance, was the solution of a problem
at which his contemporaries had laboured in vain, and is commonly
looked upon as an important step. "But," says Hegel, (_d_) "the proof
gives a conic section generally, whereas the main point which ought
to be proved is, that the path of the body is an ellipse only, not a
circle or any other conic section." Certainly if Newton _had_ proved
that a planet cannot move in a circle, (which Hegel says he ought to
have done), his system would have perplexed astronomers, since there
are planets which move in orbits hardly distinguishable from circles,
and the variation of the extremity from planet to planet shows that
there is nothing to prevent the excentricity vanishing and the orbit
becoming a circle.

"But," says Hegel again, (_e_) "the conditions which make the path to
be an ellipse rather than any other conic section, are empirical and
extraneous;--the supposed casual strength of the impulsion originally
received." Certainly the circumstances which determine the amount
of excentricity of a planet's orbit are derived from experience, or
rather, observation. It is not a part of Newton's system to determine
_à priori_ what the excentricity of a planet's orbit must be. A system
that professes to do this will undoubtedly be one very different
from his. And as our knowledge of the excentricity is derived from
observation, it is, in that sense, empirical and casual. The strength
of the original impulsion is a hypothetical and impartial way of
expressing this result of observation. And as we see no reason why the
excentricity should be of any certain magnitude, we see none why the
fraction which expresses the excentricity should not become as large
as unity, that is, why the orbit should not become a parabola; and
accordingly, some of the bodies which revolve about the same appear to
move in orbits of this form: so little is the motion in an ellipse, as
Hegel says, (_f_) "the only thing to be proved."

But Hegel himself has offered proof of Kepler's laws, to which,
considering his objections to Newton's proofs, we cannot help turning
with some curiosity.

And first, let us look at the proof of the Proposition which we have
been considering, that the path of a planet is necessarily an ellipse.
I will translate Hegel's language as well as I can; but without
answering for the correctness of my translation, since it does not
appear to me to conform to the first condition of translation, of
being intelligible. The translation however, such as it is, may help
us to form some opinion of the validity and value of Hegel's proofs as
compared with Newton's. (_r_)

"For absolutely uniform motion, the circle is the only path.... The
circle is the line returning into itself in which all the radii are
equal; there is, for it, only one determining quantity, the radius.

"But in free motion, the determination according to space and to
time come into view with differences. There must be a difference in
the spatial aspect in itself, and therefore the form requires two
determining quantities. Hence the form of the path returning into
itself is an ellipse."

Now even if we could regard this as reasoning, the conclusion does
not in the smallest degree follow. A curve returning into itself and
determined by two quantities, may have innumerable forms besides the
ellipse; for instance, any _oval_ form whatever, besides that of the
conic section.

But why must the curve be a curve returning into itself? Hegel has
professed to prove this previously (_m_) from "the determination of
particularity and individuality of the bodies in general, so that
they have partly a center in themselves, and partly at the same time
their center in another." Without seeking to find any precise meaning
in this, we may ask whether it proves the impossibility of the orbits
with moveable apses, (which do not return into themselves,) such as the
planets (affected by perturbations) really do describe, and such as
we know that bodies must describe in all cases, except when the force
varies exactly as the square of the distance? It appears to do so:
and it proves this impossibility of known facts at least as much as it
proves anything.

Let us now look at Hegel's proof of Kepler's second law, that the
elliptical sectors swept by the radius vector are proportional to the
time. It is this: (_s_).

"In the circle, the arc or angle which is included by the two radii is
independent of them. But in the motion [of a planet] as determined by
the conception, the distance from the center and the arc run over in a
certain time must be compounded in one determination, and must make out
a whole. This whole is the sector, a space of two dimensions. And hence
the arc is essentially a Function of the radius vector; and the former
(the arc) being unequal, brings with it the inequality of the radii."

As was said in the former case, if we could regard this as reasoning,
it would not prove the conclusion, but only, that the arc is _some
function or other_ of the radii.

Hegel indeed offers (_t_) a reason why there must be an arc involved.
This arises, he says, from "the determinateness [of the nature of
motion], at one while as time in the root, at another while as space in
the square. But here the quadratic character of the space is, by the
returning of the line of motion into itself, limited to a sector."

Probably my readers have had a sufficient specimen of Hegel's mode of
dealing with these matters. I will however add his proof of Kepler's
third law, that the cubes of the distances are as the squares of the
times.

Hegel's proof in this case (_u_) has a reference to a previous doctrine
concerning falling bodies, in which time and space have, he says, a
relation to each other as root and square. Falling bodies however
are the case of only _half-free_ motion, and the determination is
incomplete.

"But in the case of absolute motion, the domain of _free_ masses, the
determination attains its totality. The time as the root is a mere
empirical magnitude: but as a component of the developed Totality,
it is a Totality in itself: it produces itself, and therein has a
reference to itself. And in this process, Time, being itself the
dimensionless element, only comes to a formal identity with itself and
reaches the square: Space, on the other hand, as a positive external
relation, comes to the full dimensions of the conception of space,
that is, the cube. The Realization of the two conceptions (space and
time) preserves their original difference. This is the third Keplerian
law, the relation of the Cubes of the distances to the squares of the
times."

"And this," he adds, (_v_) with remarkable complacency, "represents
simply and immediately _the reason of the thing_:--while on the
contrary, the Newtonian Formula, by means of which the Law is changed
into a Law for the Force of Gravity, shows the distortion and inversion
of _Reflexion_, which stops half-way."

I am not able to assign any precise meaning to the _Reflexion_, which
is here used as a term of condemnation, applicable especially to the
Newtonian doctrine. It is repeatedly applied in the same manner by
Hegel. Thus he says, (_g_) "that what Kepler expresses in a simple and
sublime manner in the form of Laws of the Celestial Motions, Newton has
metamorphosed into the _Reflexion-Form_ of the Force of Gravitation."

Though Hegel thus denies Newton all merit with regard to the
explanation of Kepler's laws by means of the gravitation of the
planets to the sun, he allows that to the Keplerian Laws Newton added
the Principle of Perturbations (_k_). This Principle he accepts to a
certain extent, transforming the expression of it after his peculiar
fashion. "It lies," he says, (_l_) "in this: that matter in general
assigns a center for itself: the collective bodies of the system
recognise a reference to their sun, and all the individual bodies,
according to the relative positions into which they are brought by
their motions, form a momentary relation of their gravity towards each
other."

This must appear to us a very loose and insufficient way of stating the
Principle of Perturbations, but loose as it is, it recognises that the
Perturbations depend upon the gravity of the planets one to another,
and to the sun. And if the Perturbations depend upon these forces,
one can hardly suppose that any one who allows this will deny that
the primary undisturbed motions depend upon these forces, and must be
explained by means of them; yet this is what Hegel denies.

It is evident, on looking at Hegel's mode of reasoning on such
subjects, that his views approach towards those of Aristotle and the
Aristotelians; according to which motions were divided into _natural_
and _unnatural_;--the _celestial motions_ were circular and uniform in
their nature;--and the like. Perhaps it may be worth while to show how
completely Hegel adheres to these ancient views, by an extract from
the additions to the Articles on Celestial Motions, made in the last
edition of the _Encyclopædia_. He says (_w_),

"The motion of the heavenly bodies is not a being pulled this way
and that, as is imagined (by the Newtonians). _They go along, as the
ancients said, like blessed gods._ The celestial conformity is not
such a one as has the principle of rest or motion external to itself.
It is not right to say because a stone is inert, and the whole earth
consists of stones, and the other heavenly bodies are of the same
nature as the earth, therefore the heavenly bodies are inert. This
conclusion makes the properties of the whole the same as those of the
part. Impulse, Pressure, Resistance, Friction, Pulling, and the like,
are valid only for other than celestial matter."

There can be no doubt that this is a very different doctrine from that
of Newton.

I will only add to these specimens of Hegel's physics, a specimen of
the logic by which he refutes the Newtonian argument which has just
been adduced; namely, that the celestial bodies are matter, and that
matter, as we see in terrestrial matter, is inert. He says (_x_),

"Doubtless both are matter, as a good thought and a bad thought are
both thoughts; but the bad one is not therefore good, because it is a
thought."


APPENDIX TO THE MEMOIR ON HEGEL'S CRITICISM OF NEWTON'S PRINCIPIA.

HEGEL. _Encyclopædia_ (2nd Ed. 1827), Part XI. p. 250.

C. _Absolute Mechanics._

§ 269.

Gravitation is the true and determinate conception of material
Corporeity, which (Conception) is realized to the Idea (zur Idee).
_General_ Corporeity is separable essentially into _particular_
Bodies, and connects itself with the Element of _Individuality_ or
subjectivity, as apparent (phenomenal) presence in the _Motion_, which
by this means is immediately a system of _several Bodies_.

Universal gravitation must, as to itself, be recognised as a profound
thought, although it was principally as apprehended in the sphere
of Reflexion that it eminently attracted notice and confidence on
account of the quantitative determinations therewith connected, and
was supposed to find its confirmation in _Experiments_ (Erfahrung)
pursued from the Solar System down to the phenomena of Capillary
Tubes.--But Gravitation contradicts immediately the Law of Inertia,
for in virtue of it (Gravitation) matter tends _out of itself_ to the
other (matter).--In the _Conception of Weight_, there are, as has been
shown, involved the two elements--Self-existence, and Continuity,
which takes away self-existence. These elements of the Conception,
however, experience a fate, as particular forces, corresponding to
Attractive and Repulsive Force, and are thereby apprehended in nearer
determination, as _Centripetal_ and _Centrifugal Force_, which (Forces)
like weight, _act upon Bodies_, independent of each other, and are
supposed to come in contact accidentally in a third thing, Body. By
this means, what there is of profound in the thought of universal
weight is again reduced to nothing; and Conception and Reason cannot
make their way into the doctrine of absolute motion, so long as the
so highly-prized discoveries of Forces are dominant there. In the
conclusion which contains the _Idea_ of Weight, namely, [contains
this Idea] as the Conception which, in the case of motion, enters
into external Reality through the particularity of the Bodies, and
at the same time into this [Reality] and into their Ideality and
self-regarding Reflexion, (Reflexion-in-sich), the rational identity
and inseparability of the elements is involved, which at other times
are represented as independent. Motion itself, as such, has only its
meaning and existence in a system of _several_ bodies, and those,
such as stand in relation to each other according to different
determinations.

§ 270.

As to what concerns bodies in which the conception of gravity
(weight) is realized free by itself, we say that they have for the
determinations of their different nature the elements (momente) of
their conception. One [conception of this kind] is the _universal_
center of the abstract reference [of a body] to itself. Opposite
to this [conception] stands the immediate, extrinsic, centerless
_Individuality_, appearing as _Corporeity_ similarly independent. Those
[Bodies] however which are particular, which stand in the determination
of extrinsic, and at the same time of intrinsic relation, are centers
for themselves, and [also] have a reference to the first as to their
essential unity.

    The Planetary Bodies, as the immediately concrete, are in their
    existence the most complete. Men are accustomed to take the Sun
    as the most excellent, inasmuch as the understanding prefers the
    abstract to the concrete, and in like manner the fixed stars are
    esteemed higher than the Bodies of the Solar System. Centerless
    Corporeity, as belonging to externality, naturally separates itself
    into the opposition of the lunar and the cometary Body. The laws
    of absolutely free motion, as is well known, were discovered by
    Kepler;--a discovery of immortal fame. Kepler has proved these
    laws in this sense, that for the empirical data he found their
(_a_) general expression. Since then, (_a_) it has become a common way
    of speaking to say that Newton first found out the proof of these
    Laws. It has rarely happened that fame has been more unjustly
    transferred from the first discoverer to another person. On this
    subject I make the following remarks.

    1. That it is allowed by Mathematicians that the Newtonian
(_b_) Formulæ may be derived from the Keplerian Laws. The
    completely immediate derivation is this: In the third Keplerian
(_c_) Law, _A_^3/_T_^2 is the constant quantity. This being put
    as _A.A_^2/_T_^2 and calling, with Newton, _A_/_T_^2 universal
    Gravitation, his expression of the effect of gravity in the
    reciprocal ratio of the square of the distances is obvious.

(_d_) 2. That the Newtonian proof of the Proposition that a body
    subjected to the Law of Gravitation moves about the central body
    in an _Ellipse_, gives a _Conic Section_ generally, while the
    main Proposition which ought to be proved is that the fall of
    such a Body is _not_ a _Circle or any other Conic Section_, but
    an _Ellipse only_. Moreover, there are objections which may be
    made against this proof in itself (_Princ. Math._ I. 1. Sect. II.
(_e_) Prop. 1); and although it is the foundation of the Newtonian
    Theory, analysis has no longer any need of it. The conditions which
    in the sequel make the path of the Body to a determinate Conic
    Section, are referred to an _empirical_ circumstance, namely, a
    particular position of the Body at a determined moment of time, and
(_f_) the _casual_ strength of an _impulsion_ which it is supposed
    to have received originally; so that the circumstance which makes
    the Curve be an Ellipse, which alone ought to be the thing proved,
    is extraneous to the Formula.

    3. That the Newtonian Law of the so-called Force of Gravitation is
    in like manner only proved from experience by Induction.

(_g_) The sum of the difference is this, that what Kepler
    expressed in a simple and sublime manner in the Form of _Laws_
    _of the Celestial Motions_, Newton has metamorphosed into the
    _Reflection-Form_ of the _Force of Gravitation_. If the Newtonian
    Form has not only its convenience but its necessity in reference
(_h_) to the analytical method, this is only a difference of the
    mathematical formulæ; Analysis has long been able to derive the
    Newtonian expression, and the Propositions therewith connected,
    out of the Form of the Keplerian Laws; (on this subject I refer
(_i_) to the elegant exposition in _Francœur's Traité Elém. de
    Mécanique_, Liv. II. Ch. xi. n. 4.)--The old method of so-called
    proof is conspicuous as offering to us a tangled web, formed of
    the _Lines_ of the mere geometrical construction, to which a
    physical meaning of _independent Forces_ is given; and of empty
    Reflexion-determinations of the already mentioned _Accelerating
    Force_ and _Vis Inertiæ_, and especially of the relation of
    the so-called gravitation itself to the centripetal force and
    centrifugal force, and so on.

    The remarks which are here made would undoubtedly have need of
    a further explication to show how well founded they are: in a
    Compendium, propositions of this kind which do not agree with
    that which is assumed, can only have the shape of assertions.
    Indeed, since they contradict such high authorities, they must
    appear as something worse, as presumptuous assertions. I will not,
    on this subject, support myself by saying, by the bye, that an
    interest in these subjects has occupied me for 25 years; but it
    is more precisely to the purpose to remark, that the distinctions
    and determinations which Mathematical Analysis introduces,
    and the course which it must take according to its method, is
    altogether different from that which a physical reality must
    have. The Presuppositions, the Course, and the Results, which
    the Analysis necessarily has and gives, remain quite extraneous
    to the considerations which determine the physical value and the
    signification of those determinations and of that course. To this
    it is that attention should be directed. We have to do with a
    consciousness relative to the deluging of physical Mechanics with
    an _inconceivable_ (unsäglichen) _Metaphysic_, which--contrary to
    experience and conception--has those mathematical determinations
    alone for its source.

    It is recognized that what Newton--besides the foundation of the
    analytical treatment, the development of which, by the bye, has
    of itself rendered superfluous, or indeed rejected much which
    belonged to Newton's essential Principles and glory--has added
    to the Keplerian Laws is the Principle of _Perturbations_,--a
    Principle whose importance we may here accept thus far (hier in
(_k_) sofern anzuführen ist); namely, so far as it rests upon the
    Proposition that the so-called attraction is an operation of all
(_l_) the individual parts of bodies, as being material. It lies
    in this, that matter in general assigns a center for itself (sich
    das centrum setzt), and the figure of the body is an element in the
    determination of its place; that collective bodies of the system
    recognize a reference to their Sun (sich ihre Sonne setzen), but
    also the individual bodies themselves, according to the relative
    position with regard to each other into which they come by their
    general motion, form a momentary relation of their gravity
    (schwere) _towards each other_, and are related to each other not
    only in abstract spatial relations, but at the same time assign to
    themselves a joint center, which however is again resolved [into
    the general center] in the universal system.

(_m_) As to what concerns the features of the path, to show how
    the fundamental determinations of Free Motion are connected _with
    the Conception_, cannot here be undertaken in a satisfactory and
    detailed manner, and must therefore be left to its fate. The proof
    from reason of the quantitative determinations of free motion can
    only rest upon the _determinations_ of _Conceptions_ of space and
    time, the elements whose relation (intrinsic not extrinsic) motion
    is.

    That, _in the first place_, the motion in general is a motion
    _returning into itself_, is founded on the determination of
    particularity and individuality of the bodies in general (§ 269),
    so that partly they have a center in themselves, and partly at the
    same time their center in another. These are the determinations of
    Conceptions which form the basis of the false representatives of
(_n_) Centripetal Force and Centrifugal Force, as if each of these
    were self-existing, extraneous to the other, and independent of
    it; and as if they only came in contact in their operations and
    consequently _externally_. They are, as has already been mentioned,
    the Lines which must be drawn for the mathematical determinations,
    transformed into physical realities.

    Further, this motion is _uniformly accelerated_, (and--as returning
    into itself--in turn uniformly retarded). In motion as _free_,
    Time and Space enter as _different_ things which are to make
(_o_) themselves effective in the determination of the motion
    (§ 266, note). In the so-called _Explanation_ of the uniformly
    accelerated and retarded motion, by means of the alternate
    decrease and increase of the magnitude of the Centripetal Force
    and Centrifugal Force, the _confusion_ which the assumption of
(_p_) such independent Forces produces is at its greatest height.
    According to this explanation, in the motion of a Planet from the
    Aphelion to the Perihelion, the centrifugal is _less_ than the
    centripetal force, and on the contrary, in the Perihelion itself,
    the centrifugal force is supposed to become greater than the
    centripetal. For the motion from the Perihelion to the Aphelion,
    this representation makes the forces pass into the opposite
    relation in the same manner. It is apparent that such a sudden
    conversion of the preponderance which a force has obtained over
    another, into an inferiority to the other, cannot be anything taken
    out of the nature of Forces. On the contrary it must be concluded,
    that a preponderance which one Force has obtained over another
    must not only be preserved, but must go onwards to the complete
    annihilation of the other Force, and the motion must either, by
    the Preponderance of the Centripetal Force, proceed till it ends
    in rest, that is, in the Collision of the Planet with the Central
(_q_) Body, or till by the Preponderance of the Centrifugal Force
    it ends in a straight line. But now, if in place of the suddenness
    of the conversion, we suppose a gradual increase of the Force in
    question, then, since rather the other Force ought to be assumed as
    increasing, we lose the opposition which is assumed for the sake
    of the explanation; and if the increase of the one is assumed to
    be different from that of the other, (which is the case in some
    representations,) then there is found at the mean distance between
    the apsides a point in which the Forces are _in equilibrio_. And
    the transition of the Forces out of Equilibrium is a thing just as
    little without any sufficient reason as the aforesaid suddenness
    of inversion. And in the whole of this kind of explanation, we see
    that the mode of remedying a bad mode of dealing with a subject
    leads to newer and greater confusion.--A similar confusion makes
    its appearance in the explanation of the phænomenon that the
    pendulum oscillates more slowly at the equator. This phænomenon is
    ascribed to the Centrifugal Force, which it is asserted must then
    be greater; but it is easy to see that we may just as well ascribe
    it to the augmented gravity, inasmuch as that holds the pendulum
    more strongly to the perpendicular line of rest.


    § 240.

(_r_) And now first, as to what concerns the _Form of the Path_,
    the _Circle_ only can be conceived as the path of an _absolutely
    uniform_ motion. _Conceivable_, as people express it, no doubt it
    is, that an increasing and diminishing motion should take place in
    a circle. But this conceivableness or possibility means only an
    abstract capability of being represented, which leaves out of sight
    that Determinate Thing on which the question turns.

    The Circle is the line returning into itself in which all the radii
    are _equal_, that is, it is completely determined by means of the
    radius. There is only _one_ Determination, and that is the _whole_
    Determination.

    But in free motion, in which the Determinations according to
    space and according to time come into view with Differences, in a
    qualitative relation to each other, this Relation appears in the
    spatial aspect as a _Difference_ thereof in itself, which therefore
    requires two Determinations. Hereby the Form of the path returning
    into itself is essentially an _Ellipse_.

(_s_) The abstract Determinations which produces the circle
    appears also in this way, that the arc or angle which is included
    by two Radii is independent of them, a magnitude with regard to
    them completely empirical. But since in the motion as determined
    by the Conception, the distance from the center, and the arc
    which is run over in a certain time, must be comprehended in one
    determinateness, [_and_] make out a whole, this is the sector, a
    space-determination of two dimensions: in this way, the arc is
    essentially a Function of the Radius Vector; and the former (the
    arc) being unequal, brings with it the inequality of the Radii.
    That the determination with regard to the space by means of the
(_t_) time appears as a Determination of two Dimensions,--as a
    Superficies-Determination,--agrees with what was said before (§
    266) respecting Falling Bodies, with regard to the exposition of
    the same Determinateness, at one while as Time in the root, at
    another while as Space in the Square. Here, however, the Quadratic
    character of the space is, by the returning of the Line of motion
    into itself, limited to a Sector. These are, as may be seen, the
    general principles on which the Keplerian Law, that in equal times
    equal sectors are cut off, rests.

    This Law becomes, as is clear, only the relation of the arc to
    the Radius Vector, and the Time enters there as the abstract
    Unity, in which the different Sectors are compared, because as
    Unity it is the Determining Element. But the further relation is
    that of the Time, not as Unity, but as a Quantity in general,--as
    the time of Revolution--to the magnitude of the Path, or, what is
    the same thing, the distance from the center. As Root and Square,
    we saw that Time and Space had a relation to each other, in the
    case of Falling Bodies, the case of half-free motion--because
    that [_motion_] is determined on one side by the conception, on
(_u_) the other by external [_conditions_]. But in the case of
    absolute motion--the domain of _free_ masses--the determination
    attains its Totality. The Time as the Root is a mere empirical
    magnitude; but as a component (moment) of the developed Totality,
    it is a Totality in itself,--it produces itself, and therein has
    a reference to itself; as the Dimensionless Element in itself, it
    only comes to a formal identity with itself, the Square; Space,
    on the other hand, as the positive Distribution (aussereinander)
    [_comes_] to the Dimension of the Conception, _the_ CUBE. Their
(_v_) Realization preserves their original difference. This is the
    third Keplerian Law, the relation of the _Cubes_ of the _Distances_
    to the _Squares_ of the _Times_;--a Law which is so great on this
    account, that it represents so simply and immediately _Reason
    as belonging to the thing_: while on the contrary the Newtonian
    Formula, by means of which the Law is changed into a Law for the
    Force of Gravity, shows the Distortion, Perversion and Inversion of
    _Reflexion_ which stops half-way.

    Additions to new Edition. § 269.

    The center has no sense without the circumference, nor the
    circumference without the center. This makes all physical
    hypotheses vanish which sometimes proceed from the center,
    sometimes from the particular bodies, and sometimes assign this,
    sometimes that, as the original [cause of motion] ... It is silly
    (läppisch) to suppose that the centrifugal force, as a tendency to
    fly off in a Tangent, has been produced by a lateral projection, a
    projectile force, an impulse which they have retained ever since
    they set out on their journey (von Haus aus). Such casualty of the
    motion produced by external causes belongs to inert matter; as when
    a stone fastened to a thread which is thrown transversely tries to
    fly from the thread. We are not to talk in this way of Forces. If
    we will speak of Force, there is one Force, whose elements do not
(_w_) draw bodies to different sides as if they were two Forces.
    The motion of the heavenly bodies is not a being pulled this way or
    that, such as is thus imagined; it is free motion: they go along,
    as the ancients said, as blessed Gods (sie gehen als selige Götter
    einher). The celestial corporeity is not such a one as has the
    principle of rest or motion external to itself. Because stone is
    inert, and all the earth consists of stones, and the other heavenly
    bodies are of the same nature,--is a conclusion which makes the
    properties of the whole the same as those of the part. Impulse,
    Pressure, Resistance, Friction, Pulling, and the like, are valid
(_x_) only for an existence of matter other than the celestial.
    Doubtless that which is common to the two is matter, as a good
    thought and a bad thought are both thoughts; but the bad one is not
    therefore good, because it is a thought.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 353: Cartes. _Princip._ iv. 23.]

[Footnote 354: Jac. Bernoulli, _Nouvelles Pensées sur le Système de M.
Descartes_, op. t. i. p. 239 (1686).]

[Footnote 355: _De la Cause de la Pesanteur_ (1689), p. 135.]

[Footnote 356: _Journal des Savans_, 1703. Mém. Acad. Par. 1709.

Bulfinger, in 1726 (Acad. Petrop.), conceived that by making a sphere
revolve at the same time about two axes at right angles to each other,
every particle would describe a great circle; but this is not so.]

[Footnote 357: Acad. Par. 1714, _Hist._ p. 106.]

[Footnote 358: Acad. Par. 1733.]

[Footnote 359: Acad. Sc. 1709. If we abandon the clear principles of
mechanics, the writer says, "toute la lumière que nous pouvons avoir
est éteinte, et nous voilà replongés de nouveau dans les anciennes
ténèbres du Peripatetisme, dont le Ciel nous veuille preserver!"

It was also objected to the Newtonian system, that it did not account
for the remarkable facts, that all the motions of the primary planets,
all the motions of the satellites, and all the motions of rotation,
including that of the sun, are in the same direction, and nearly in
the same plane; facts which have been urged by Laplace as so strongly
recommending the Nebular Hypothesis; and that hypothesis is, in truth,
a hypothesis of vortices respecting the _origin_ of the system of the
world.]

[Footnote 360: _Nouvelle Physique Céleste_, Op. t. iii. p. 163.

The deviation of the orbits of the planets from the plane of the
sun's equator was of course a difficulty in the system which supposed
that they were carried round by the vortices which the sun's rotation
caused, or at least rendered evident. Bernoulli's explanation consists
in supposing the planets to have a sort of _leeway_ (_dérive des
vaisseaux_) in the stream of the vortex.]

[Footnote 361: See _Hist. Sc. Ideas_, b. iii. c. ix. Art. 7.]

[Footnote 362: See Mill's _Logic_, vol. i. p. 311, 2nd ed.]

[Footnote 363: These letters refer to passages in the Translation
annexed to this Memoir.]


APPENDIX K.

DEMONSTRATION THAT ALL MATTER IS HEAVY.

(_Cam. Phil. Soc._ FEB. 22, 1841.)


The discussion of the nature of the grounds and proofs of the most
general propositions which the physical sciences include, belongs
rather to Metaphysics than to that course of experimental and
mathematical investigation by which the sciences are formed. But such
discussions seem by no means unfitted to occupy the attention of the
cultivators of physical science. The ideal, as well as the experimental
side of our knowledge must be carefully studied and scrutinized,
in order that its true import may be seen; and this province of
human speculation has been perhaps of late unjustly depreciated and
neglected by men of science. Yet it can be prosecuted in the most
advantageous manner by them only: for no one can speculate securely
and rightly respecting the nature and proofs of the truths of science
without a steady possession of some large and solid portions of such
truths. A man must be a mathematician, a mechanical philosopher, a
natural historian, in order that he may philosophize well concerning
mathematics, and mechanics, and natural history; and the mere
metaphysician who without such preparation and fitness sets himself
to determine the grounds of mathematical or mechanical truths, or the
principles of classification, will be liable to be led into error at
every step. He must speculate by means of general terms, which he
will not be able to use as instruments of discovering and conveying
philosophical truth, because he cannot, in his own mind, habitually and
familiarly, embody their import in special examples.

Acting upon such views, I have already laid before the Philosophical
Society of Cambridge essays on such subjects as I here refer to;
especially a memoir "On the Nature of the Truth of the Laws of Motion,"
which was printed by the Society in its Transactions. This memoir
appears to have excited in other places, notice of such a kind as to
show that the minds of many speculative persons are ready for and
inclined towards the discussion of such questions. I am therefore the
more willing to bring under consideration another subject of a kind
closely related to the one just mentioned.

The general questions which all such discussions suggest, are (in
the existing phase of English philosophy) whether certain proposed
scientific truths, (as the laws of motion,) be _necessary_ truths;
and if they are necessary, (which I have attempted to show that in a
certain sense they are,) _on what ground_ their necessity rests. These
questions may be discussed in a general form, as I have elsewhere
attempted to show. But it may be instructive also to follow the general
arguments into the form which they assume in special cases; and to
exhibit, in a distinct shape, the incongruities into which the opposite
false doctrine leads us, when applied to particular examples. This
accordingly is what I propose to do in the present memoir, with regard
to the proposition stated at the head of this paper, namely, that _all
matter is heavy_.

At first sight it may appear a doctrine altogether untenable to assert
that this proposition is a necessary truth: for, it may be urged, we
have no difficulty in conceiving matter which is not heavy; so that
matter without weight is a conception not inconsistent with itself;
which it must be if the reverse were a necessary truth. It may be
added, that the possibility of conceiving matter without weight
was shown in the controversy which ended in the downfall of the
phlogiston theory of chemical composition; for some of the reasoners
on this subject asserted phlogiston to be a body with positive levity
instead of gravity, which hypothesis, however false, shows that such
a supposition is possible. Again, it may be said that _weight_ and
_inertia_ are two separate properties of matter: that mathematicians
measure the quantity of matter by the inertia, and that we learn
by experiment only that the weight is proportional to the inertia;
Newton's experiments with pendulums of different materials having been
made with this very object.

I proceed to reply to these arguments. And first, as to the possibility
of conceiving matter without weight, and the argument thence
deduced, that the universal gravity of matter is not a necessary
truth, I remark, that it is indeed just, to say that we cannot even
distinctly conceive the contrary of a necessary truth to be true;
but that this impossibility can be asserted only of those perfectly
distinct conceptions which result from a complete development of
the fundamental idea and its consequences. Till we reach this stage
of development, the obscurity and indistinctness may prevent our
perceiving absolute contradictions, though they exist. We have abundant
store of examples of this, even in geometry and arithmetic; where the
truths are universally allowed to be necessary, and where the relations
which are impossible, are also inconceivable, that is, not conceivable
distinctly. Such relations, though not distinctly conceivable, still
often appear conceivable and possible, owing to the indistinctness
of our ideas. Who, at the first outset of his geometrical studies,
sees any impossibility in supposing the side and the diagonal of a
square to have a common measure? Yet they can be rigorously proved to
be incommensurable, and therefore the attempt distinctly to conceive
a common measure of them must fail. The attempts at the geometrical
duplication of the cube, and the supposed solutions, (as that of
Hobbes,) have involved absolute contradictions; yet this has not
prevented their being long and obstinately entertained by men, even of
minds acute and clear in other respects. And the same might be shewn to
be the case in arithmetic. It is plain, therefore, that we cannot, from
the supposed possibility of conceiving matter without weight, infer
that the contrary may not be a necessary truth.

Our power of judging, from the compatibility or incompatibility of our
conceptions, whether certain propositions respecting the relations of
ideas are true or not, must depend entirely, as I have said, upon the
degree of development which such ideas have undergone in our minds.
Some of the relations of our conceptions on any subject are evident
upon the first steady contemplation of the fundamental idea by a sound
mind: these are the _axioms_ of the subject. Other propositions may be
deduced from the axioms by strict logical reasoning. These propositions
are no less _necessary_ than the axioms, though to common minds their
_evidence_ is very different. Yet as we become familiar with the steps
by which these ulterior truths are deduced from the axioms, _their_
truth also becomes evident, and the contrary becomes inconceivable.
When a person has familiarized himself with the first twenty-six
propositions of Euclid, and not till then, it becomes evident to him,
that parallelograms on the same base and between the same parallels
are equal; and he cannot even conceive the contrary. When he has a
little further cultivated his geometrical powers, the equality of the
square on the hypothenuse of a right-angled triangle to the squares on
the sides, becomes also evident; the steps by which it is demonstrated
being so familiar to the mind as to be apprehended without a conscious
act. And thus, the contrary of a necessary truth cannot be distinctly
conceived; but the incapacity of forming such a conception is a
condition which depends upon cultivation, being intimately connected
with the power of rapidly and clearly perceiving the connection of the
necessary truth under consideration with the elementary principles on
which it depends. And thus, again, it may be that there is an absolute
impossibility of conceiving matter without weight; but then, this
impossibility may not be apparent, till we have traced our fundamental
conceptions of matter into some of their consequences.

The question then occurs, whether we can, by any steps of reasoning,
point out an inconsistency in the conception of matter without weight.
This I conceive we may do, and this I shall attempt to show.

The general mode of stating the argument is this:--the quantity of
matter is measured by those sensible properties of matter which undergo
quantitative addition, subtraction and division, as the matter is
added, subtracted and divided. The quantity of matter cannot be known
in any other way. But this mode of measuring the quantity of matter,
in order to be true at all, must be universally true. If it were only
partially true, the limits within which it is to be applied would be
arbitrary; and therefore the whole procedure would be arbitrary, and,
as a method of obtaining philosophical truth, altogether futile.

We may unfold this argument further. Let the contrary be supposed, of
that which we assert to be true: namely, let it be supposed that while
all other kinds of matter are heavy (and of course heavy in proportion
to the quantity of matter), there is one kind of matter which is
absolutely destitute of weight; as, for instance, phlogiston, or any
other element. Then where this _weightless_ element (as we may term
it) is mixed with _weighty_ elements, we shall have a compound, in
which the weight is no longer proportional to the quantity of matter.
If, for example, 2 measures of heavy matter unite with one measure
of phlogiston, the weight is as 2, and the quantity of matter as 3.
In all such cases, therefore, the weight ceases to be the measure of
the quantity of matter. And as the proportion of the weighty and the
weightless matter may vary in innumerable degrees in such compounds,
the weight affords no criterion at all of the quantity of matter
in them. And the smallest admixture of the weightless element is
sufficient to prevent the weight from being taken as the measure of the
quantity of matter.

But on this hypothesis, how are we to distinguish such compounds from
bodies consisting purely of heavy matter? How are we to satisfy
ourselves that there is not, in every body, some admixture, small or
great, of the weightless element? If we call this element _phlogiston_,
how shall we know that the bodies with which we have to do are, any of
them, absolutely free from phlogiston?

We cannot refer to the weight for any such assurance; for by
supposition the presence and absence of phlogiston makes no difference
in the weight. Nor can any other properties secure us at least from
a very small admixture; for to assert that a mixture of 1 in 100 or
1 in 10 of phlogiston would always manifest itself in the properties
of the body, must be an arbitrary procedure, till we have proved this
assertion by experiment: and we cannot do this till we have learnt
some mode of measuring the quantities of matter in bodies and parts of
bodies; which is exactly what we question the possibility of, in the
present hypothesis.

Thus, if we assume the existence of an element, _phlogiston_, devoid of
weight, we cannot be sure that every body does not contain some portion
of this element; while we see that if there be an admixture of such
an element, the weight is no longer any criterion of the quantity of
matter. And thus we have proved, that if there be any kind of matter
which is not heavy, the weight can no longer avail us, _in any case or
to any extent_, as a measure of the quantity of matter.

I may remark, that the same conclusion is easily extended to the case
in which phlogiston is supposed to have absolute levity; for in that
case, a certain mixture of phlogiston and of heavy matter would have
no weight, and might be substituted for phlogiston in the preceding
reasoning.

I may remark, also, that the same conclusion would follow by the same
reasoning, if any kind of matter, instead of being void of weight, were
heavy, indeed, but not _so_ heavy, in proportion to its quantity of
matter, as other kinds.

On all these hypotheses there would be no possibility of measuring
quantity of matter by weight at all, in any case, or to any extent.

But it may be urged, that we have not yet reduced the hypothesis of
matter without weight to a contradiction; for that mathematicians
measure quantity of matter, not by weight, but by the other property,
of which we have spoken, inertia.

To this I reply, that, practically speaking, quantity of matter is
always measured by weight, both by mechanicians and chemists: and as
we have proved that this procedure is utterly insecure in all cases,
on the hypothesis of weightless matter, the practice rests upon a
conviction that the hypothesis is false. And yet the practice is
universal. Every experimenter measures quantity of matter by the
balance. No one has ever thought of measuring quantity of matter by
its inertia practically: no one has constructed a measure of quantity
of matter in which the matter produces its indications of quantity by
its motion. When we have to take into account the inertia of a body,
we inquire what its weight is, and assume this as the measure of the
inertia; but we never take the contrary course, and ascertain the
inertia first in order to determine by that means the weight.

But it may be asked, Is it not then true, and an important scientific
truth, that the _quantity of matter_ is measured by the _inertia_?
Is it not true, and proved by experiment, that the _weight_ is
_proportional_ to the _inertia_? If this be not the result of Newton's
experiments mentioned above, what, it may be demanded, do they prove?

To these questions I reply: It is true that quantity of matter is
measured by the inertia, for it is true that inertia is as the quantity
of matter. This truth is indeed one of the laws of motion. That weight
is proportional to inertia is proved by experiment, as far as the laws
of motion are so proved: and Newton's experiments prove one of the laws
of motion, so far as any experiments can prove them, or are needed to
prove them.

That inertia is proportional to weight, is a law equivalent to that
law which asserts, that when pressure produces motion in a given body,
the velocity produced in a given time is as the pressure. For if the
velocity be as the pressure, when the body is given, the velocity will
be constant if the inertia also be as the pressure. For the inertia is
understood to be that property of bodies to which, _ceteris paribus_,
the velocity impressed is _inversely_ proportional. One body has
twice as much inertia as another, if, when the same force acts upon
it for the same time, it acquires but half the velocity. This is the
fundamental conception of _inertia_.

In Newton's pendulum experiments, the pressure producing motion was
a certain resolved part of the weight, and was proportional to the
weight. It appeared by the experiments, that whatever were the material
of which the pendulum was formed, the rate of oscillation was the same;
that is, the velocity acquired was the same. Hence the inertia of the
different bodies must have been in each case as the weight: and thus
this assertion is true of all different kinds of bodies.

Thus it appears that the assertion, that inertia is universally
proportional to weight, is equivalent to the law of motion, that the
velocity is as the pressure. The conception of inertia (of which,
as we have said, the fundamental conception is, that the velocity
impressed is inversely proportional to the inertia,) connects the two
propositions so as to make them identical.

Hence our argument with regard to the universal gravity of matter
brings us to the above law of motion, and is proved by Newton's
experiments in the same sense in which that law of motion is so proved.

Perhaps some persons might conceive that the identity of weight
and inertia is obvious at once; for both are merely resistance
to motion;--inertia, resistance to all motion (or change of
motion)--weight, resistance to motion upwards.

But there is a difference in these two kinds of resistance to motion.
Inertia is instantaneous, weight is continuous resistance. Any
momentary impulse which acts upon a free body overcomes its inertia,
for it changes its motion; and this change once effected, the inertia
opposes any return to the former condition, as well as any additional
change. The inertia is thus overcome by a momentary force. But the
weight can only be overcome by a continuous force like itself. If an
impulse act in opposition to the weight, it may for a moment neutralize
or overcome the weight; but if it be not continued, the weight resumes
its effect, and restores the condition which existed before the impulse
acted.

But weight not only produces rest, when it is resisted, but motion,
when it is not resisted. Weight is measured by the reaction which would
balance it; but when unbalanced, it produces motion, and the velocity
of this motion increases constantly. Now what determines the velocity
thus produced in a given time, or its rate of increase? What determines
it to have one magnitude rather than another? To this we must evidently
reply, _the inertia_. When weight produces motion, the inertia is the
reaction which makes the motion determinate. The accumulated motion
produced by the action of unbalanced weight is as determinate a
condition as the equilibrium produced by balanced weight. In both cases
the condition of the body acted on is determined by the opposition of
the action and reaction.

Hence inertia is the reaction which opposes the weight, when
unbalanced. But by the conception of action and reaction, (as mutually
determining and determined,) they are measured by each other: and hence
the inertia is necessarily proportional to the weight.

But when we have reached this conclusion, the original objection may be
again urged against it. It may be said, that there must be some fallacy
in this reasoning, for it proves a state of things to be necessary when
we can so easily conceive a contrary state of things. Is it denied,
the opponent may ask, that we can readily imagine a state of things in
which bodies have no weight? Is not the uniform tendency of all bodies
in the same direction not only not necessary, but not even true? For
they do in reality tend, not with equal forces in parallel lines, but
to a center with unequal forces, according to their position: and we
can conceive these differences of intensity and direction in the force
to be greater than they really are; and can with equal ease suppose the
force to disappear altogether.

To this I reply, that certainly we may conceive the weight of bodies
to vary in intensity and direction, and by an additional effort of
imagination, may conceive the weight to vanish: but that in all these
suppositions, even in the extreme one, we must suppose the rule to be
universal. If _any_ bodies have weight, _all_ bodies must have weight.
If the direction of weight be different in different points, this
direction must still vary according to the _law of continuity_; and the
same is true of the intensity of the weight. For if this were not so,
the rest and motion, the velocity and direction, the permanence and
change of bodies, as to their mechanical condition, would be arbitrary
and incoherent: they would not be subject to mechanical ideas; that
is, not to ideas at all: and hence these conditions of objects would
in fact be inconceivable. In order that the universe may be possible,
that is, may fall under the conditions of intelligible conceptions, we
must be able to conceive a body at rest. But the rest of bodies (except
in the absolute negation of all force) implies the equilibrium of
opposite forces. And one of these opposite forces must be a _general_
force, as weight, in order that the universe may be governed by general
conditions. And this general force, by the conception of force, may
produce motion, as well as equilibrium; and this motion again must
be determined, and determined by general conditions; which cannot
be, except the communication of motion be regulated by an inertia
proportional to the weight.

But it will be asked, Is it then pretended that Newton's experiment,
by which it was intended to prove inertia proportional to weight,
does really prove nothing but what may be demonstrated _à priori_?
Could we know, without experiment, that all bodies,--gold, iron, wood,
cork,--have inertia proportional to their weight? And to this we reply,
that experiment holds the same place in the establishment of this, as
of the other fundamental doctrines of mechanics. Intercourse with the
external world is requisite for developing our ideas; measurement of
phenomena is needed to fix our conceptions and to render them precise:
but the result of our experimental studies is, that we reach a
position in which our convictions do not rest upon experiment. We learn
by observation truths of which we afterwards see the necessity. This is
the case with the laws of motion, as I have repeatedly endeavoured to
show. The same will appear to be the case with the proposition, that
bodies of different kinds have their inertia proportional to their
weight.

For bodies _of the same kind_ have their inertia proportional to their
weight, both quantities being proportional to the quantity of matter.
And if we compress the same quantity of matter into half the space,
neither the weight nor the inertia is altered, because these depend
on the quantity of matter alone. But in this way we obtain a body
of _twice the density_; and in the same manner we obtain a body of
any other density. Therefore whatever be the density, the inertia is
proportional to the quantity of matter. But the mechanical relations
of bodies cannot depend upon any difference of _kind_, _except_ a
difference of density. For if we suppose any fundamental difference of
mechanical nature in the particles or component elements of bodies, we
are led to the same conclusion, of arbitrary, and therefore impossible,
results, which we deduced from this supposition with regard to weight.
Therefore all bodies of different density, and hence, all bodies
whatever, must have their inertia proportional to their weight.

Hence we see, that the propositions, that all bodies are heavy, and
that inertia is proportional to weight, necessarily follow from those
fundamental ideas which we unavoidably employ in all attempts to
reason concerning the mechanical relations of bodies. This conclusion
may perhaps appear the more startling to many, because they have
been accustomed to expect that fundamental ideas and their relations
should be self-evident at our first contemplation of them. This,
however, is far from being the case, as I have already shown. It is
not the _first_, but the most complete and developed condition of our
conceptions which enables us to see what are axiomatic truths in each
province of human speculation. Our fundamental ideas are necessary
conditions of knowledge, universal forms of intuition, inherent types
of mental development; they may even be termed, if any one chooses,
results of connate intellectual tendencies; but we cannot term them
_innate_ ideas, without calling up a large array of false opinions. For
innate ideas were considered as capable of composition, but by no means
of simplification: as most perfect in their original condition; as to
be found, if any where, in the most uneducated and most uncultivated
minds; as the same in all ages, nations, and stages of intellectual
culture; as capable of being referred to at once, and made the basis
of our reasonings, without any special acuteness or effort: in all
which circumstances the Fundamental Ideas of which we have spoken, are
opposed to Innate Ideas so understood.

I shall not, however, here prosecute this subject. I will only remark,
that Fundamental Ideas, as we view them, are not only not innate, in
any usual or useful sense, but they are not necessarily _ultimate_
elements of our knowledge. They are the results of our analysis so far
as we have yet prosecuted it; but they may themselves subsequently
be analysed. It may hereafter appear, that what we have treated as
different Fundamental Ideas have, in fact, a connexion, at some point
below the structure which we erect upon them. For instance, we treat of
the mechanical ideas of force, matter, and the like, as distinct from
the idea of substance. Yet the principle of measuring the quantity of
matter by its weight, which we have deduced from mechanical ideas, is
applied to determine the substances which enter into the composition
of bodies. The idea of substance supplies the axiom, that the whole
quantity of matter of a compound body is equal to the sum of the
quantities of matter of its elements. The mechanical ideas of force
and matter lead us to infer that the quantity both of the whole and
its parts must be measured by their weights. _Substance_ may, for some
purposes, be described as that to which properties belong; _matter_
in like manner may be described as that which resists force. The
former involves the Idea of permanent Being; the latter, the Idea of
Causation. There may be some elevated point of view from which these
ideas may be seen to run together. But even if this be so, it will by
no means affect the validity of reasonings founded upon these notions,
when duly determined and developed. If we once adopt a view of the
nature of knowledge which makes necessary truth possible at all, we
need be little embarrassed by finding how closely connected different
necessary truths are; and how often, in exploring towards their roots,
different branches appear to spring from the same stem.


END OF THE APPENDIX.




  Cambridge:
  PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A.
  AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.




WORKS BY

WILLIAM WHEWELL, D.D. F.R.S.

MASTER OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.


 HISTORY OF THE INDUCTIVE SCIENCES. Third and Cheaper Edition. Three
 Volumes, Small Octavo, 24_s._

 HISTORY OF SCIENTIFIC IDEAS, being the First Part of a Third Edition
 of the "Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences," with Additions. Two
 Volumes, 14_s._

 NOVUM ORGANON RENOVATUM; being the Second Part of a Third Edition of
 the "Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences." With large Additions. 7_s._

 INDICATIONS OF THE CREATOR: Theological Extracts from the "History and
 the Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences." Second Edition. 5_s._ 6_d._

 ELEMENTS OF MORALITY, INCLUDING POLITY. Third Edition, with a
 Supplement. Two Volumes, 15_s._

 LECTURES ON SYSTEMATIC MORALITY. 7_s._ 6_d._

 LECTURES ON THE HISTORY OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY IN ENGLAND. 8_s._

 OF A LIBERAL EDUCATION IN GENERAL, and with Particular Reference to
 the Studies of the University of Cambridge. Parts I. and II., in One
 Volume, 7_s._ 6_d._ Part III., sewed, 2_s._

 ON THE PRINCIPLES OF ENGLISH UNIVERSITY EDUCATION. Second Edition.
 5_s._

 COLLEGE CHAPEL SERMONS. 10_s._ 6_d._

 NOTES ON GERMAN CHURCHES. Third Edition. 12_s._

 THE MECHANICAL EUCLID. Fifth Edition. 5_s._

 THE MECHANICS OF ENGINEERING. 9_s._

 THE DOCTRINE OF LIMITS. Octavo, 9_s._

 CONIC SECTIONS. 2_s._ 6_d._


EDITED BY DR. WHEWELL.

 BUTLER'S THREE SERMONS ON HUMAN NATURE, and a Dissertation on Virtue;
 with a Preface and Syllabus. Third Edition. 3_s._ 6_d._

 BUTLER'S SIX SERMONS ON MORAL SUBJECTS. With Preface and Syllabus.
 3_s._ 6_d._


  LONDON: JOHN W. PARKER AND SON, WEST STRAND.




New Books and New Editions,

_Published by John W. Parker and Son, West Strand._


 History of England, from the Fall of Wolsey to the Death of Elizabeth.
 Fifth and Sixth Volumes, containing the Reigns of Edward the Sixth and
 Mary. By J. ANTHONY FROUDE. _In the Press._

 A Second Edition of the First Four Volumes, containing the Reign of
 Henry VIII. 2_l._ 14_s._

 History of England, during the Reign of George the Third. By W.
 MASSEY, M.P. Vols. I. and II. 12_s._ each. The Third Volume _in the
 Press_.

 History of Civilization in England. By HENRY THOMAS BUCKLE. The First
 Volume. Octavo. Second Edition. 21_s._

 Friends in Council. Second Series. The Second Edition. Two Volumes.
 14_s._

 Friends in Council. First Series. New Edition. Two Volumes. 9_s._

 On Liberty. BY JOHN STUART MILL. The Second Edition. 7_s._ 6_d._

 The Recreations of a Country Parson; Essays Parochial, Architectural,
 Æsthetical, Moral, Social, and Domestic. Being a Selection from the
 Contributions of A. K. H. B. to "Fraser's Magazine." 9_s._

 Major Hodson's Twelve Years of a Soldier's Life in India. Edited
 by his Brother, the Rev. GEORGE H. HODSON, M.A. Fellow of Trinity
 College, Cambridge. Third Edition, with Additions, and a Portrait,
 10_s._ 6_d._

 The Saint's Tragedy. By CHARLES KINGSLEY, Chaplain in Ordinary to the
 Queen. The Third Edition. Foolscap Octavo. 5_s._

 On the Classification and Geographical Distribution of Mammalia:
 On the Gorilla, On the Extinction and Transmutation of Species. By
 RICHARD OWEN, F.R.S. Octavo. 5_s._

 The Odes of Horace. Translated into English Verse, with a Life and
 Notes. By THEODORE MARTIN. 7_s._ 6_d._

 Arundines Cami. Edited by the Rev. HENRY DRURY, M.A. Canon of
 Salisbury, Chaplain to the House of Commons. The Fifth and Cheaper
 Edition.

 The New Cratylus. By J. W. DONALDSON, D.D. Classical Examiner in
 the University of London. The Third Edition, Revised throughout and
 considerably Enlarged. 20_s._

 Night Lessons from Scripture. Compiled by the Author of 'Amy Herbert.'
 Demy, Red Edges. 3_s._

 Paley's Evidences of Christianity. With Annotations by the Archbishop
 of Dublin. Octavo. 9_s._

 Paley's Moral Philosophy. With Annotations by the Archbishop of
 Dublin. Octavo. 7_s._

 The Good News of God. Sermons by CHARLES KINGSLEY, Chaplain in
 Ordinary to the Queen. The Second Edition. 6_s._

 Sermons on the Atonement and other Subjects, preached before the
 University of Cambridge. By E. HAROLD BROWNE, M.A. Norrisian Professor
 of Divinity in the University; Canon of Exeter. Octavo. 5_s._

 An Exposition of the Thirty-nine Articles, Historical and Doctrinal.
 By Professor HAROLD BROWNE. Fourth Edition. Octavo, 16_s._

 Critical and Grammatical Commentary on St. Paul's Epistle to the
 Ephesians. By CHARLES J. ELLICOTT, B.D. Professor of Divinity, King's
 College, London. The Second Edition, Enlarged. 8_s._ 6_d._

Lately Published:

  I. Galatians. Second Edition, Enlarged. 8_s._ 6_d._
  II. Pastoral Epistles. Second Edition. _In the Press._
  III. Philippians, Colossians, and Philemon. 10_s._ 6_d._
  IV. Thessalonians. 7_s._ 6_d._

 Peloponnesus: Notes of Study and Travel. By W. G. CLARK, M.A. Fellow
 and Tutor of Trinity College, Cambridge. 10_s._ 6_d._

 Revolutions in English History. By ROBERT VAUGHAN, D.D. The First
 Volume, Revolutions of Race. 15_s._

 History of the Literature of Ancient Greece. From the Manuscripts of
 the late Professor K. O. Müller. The first half of the Translation by
 the Right Hon. Sir GEORGE CORNEWALL LEWIS, Bart. M.P. The remainder
 of the Translation, and the Completion of the Work, by JOHN WILLIAM
 DONALDSON, D.D. Three Volumes, Octavo. 36_s._ The new portion
 separately, Two Volumes, 20_s._

 Soldiers and their Science. By Captain BRABAZON, R.A. 7_s._

 Essays written in the Intervals of Business. The Seventh Edition.
 2_s._ 6_d._

 Companions of My Solitude. The Fifth Edition. 3_s._ 6_d._


 On the Study of Words. By RICHARD CHENEVIX TRENCH, D.D. Dean of
 Westminster. The Ninth Edition, Revised and Enlarged. 4_s._

 A Select Glossary of English Words used formerly in Senses different
 from their Present. By RICHARD CHENEVIX TRENCH, D.D. Dean of
 Westminster. The Second Edition, Revised and Improved. 4_s._

 Intellectual Education, and its Influence on the Character and
 Happiness of Women. By EMILY SHIRREFF. Octavo. 10_s._

 The Cloister Life of the Emperor Charles the Fifth. By WILLIAM
 STIRLING, M.P. The Third Edition. 8_s._

 Man and His Dwelling Place. An Essay towards the Interpretation of
 Nature. 9_s._

 Dissertations and Discussions, Political, Philosophical and
 Historical. By JOHN STUART MILL. Two Volumes. Octavo. 24_s._

 Of the Plurality of Worlds. An Essay. The Fifth Edition. 6_s._

 Bacon's Essays. With Annotations by the Archbishop of Dublin. The
 Fourth Edition. 10_s._ 6_d._

 Extracts from Jean Paul Richter. Translated by Lady CHATTERTON. 3_s._
 6_d._

 Shipwrecks of the Royal Navy. By W. O. S. GILLY. With Preface by the
 Rev. Dr. Gilly. The Third Edition. 5_s._

 The Kingdom and People of Siam; with a Narrative of the Mission
 to that Country. By Sir JOHN BOWRING, F.R.S. Two Volumes, with
 Illustrations and Map. 32_s._

 The Spanish Conquest in America, and its Relation to the History of
 Slavery, and to the Government of Colonies. By ARTHUR HELPS. Octavo.
 Volumes I. II. 28_s._ Volume III. 16_s._

 Notes on Hospitals. By FLORENCE NIGHTINGALE. The Second Edition. 5_s._

 The Mediterranean; A Memoir Historical, Geographical, and Nautical. By
 Admiral W. H. SMYTH, D.C.L., F.R.S. Octavo. 15_s._

 Lectures on Astronomy. By HENRY MOSELEY, M.A., F.R.S. Canon of
 Bristol. The Fourth Edition. 3_s._ 6_d._

 Elements of Chemistry. By WILLIAM ALLEN MILLER, M.D., F.R.S. Professor
 of Chemistry, King's College, London. Complete in Three Parts, with
 numerous Illustrations. £2. 6_s._ 6_d._

 Manual of Human Microscopic Anatomy. By ALBERT KÖLLIKER. With 289
 Illustrations. Octavo.

 Lectures on the Principles and Practice of Physic. By THOMAS WATSON, M
 D. Physician Extraordinary to the Queen. Fourth Edition, revised. Two
 Volumes. Octavo. 34_s._

 Anatomy, Descriptive and Surgical. By HENRY GRAY, F.R.S. Lecturer
 on Anatomy at St. George's Hospital. With 363 large Woodcuts, from
 Original Drawings. Royal Octavo, 782 pages. 28_s._

 Practical Geodesy: Chain Surveying, Surveying Instruments, Levelling,
 Trigonometry, and Mining; Maritime, Estate, Parochial, and Railroad
 Surveying. By BUTLER WILLIAMS, C.E. The Third Edition, revised.
 Octavo. 8_s._ 6_d._


 Manual of Geographical Science. Part the Second, Descriptive
 Geography, containing

 Ancient Geography, by the Rev. W. L. BEVAN, M.A. Vicar of Hay, Brecon.

 Maritime Discovery and Modern Geography, by the Rev. C. G. NICOLAY,
 F.R.G.S.

With Copious Index. Octavo. 15_s._

The First Part, Octavo, 10_s._ 6_d._ contains:

  Mathematical Geography, by M. O'BRIEN, M.A.
  Physical Geography, by D. T. ANSTED, M.A., F.R.S.
  Chartography, by J. JACKSON, F.R.S.
  Geographical Terminology, by Rev. C. G. NICOLAY.

 The Institutes of Justinian; with English Introduction, Translation,
 and Notes. By THOMAS C. SANDARS, M.A. late Fellow of Oriel College,
 Oxford. The Second Edition, revised. Octavo. 15_s._

 Principles of Political Economy. By JOHN STUART MILL. Fourth Edition.
 Two Volumes. Octavo. 30_s._

 The Senses and the Intellect. The Emotions and the Will: completing
 a Systematic Exposition of the Human Mind. By ALEXANDER BAIN, M.A.,
 Examiner in Logic and Moral Philosophy in the University of London.
 Octavo. 15_s._ each.

 Babrii Fabulæ Æsopeæ, e Codice Manuscripto Partem Secundam nunc primum
 edidit GEORGIUS CORNEWALL LEWIS, A.M., Ædis Christi, in Universitate
 Oxoniensi, Alumnus Honorarius. 3_s._ 6_d._

 Babrii Fabulæ Æsopeæ, cum Fabularum deperditarum Fragmentis, recensuit
 et breviter illustravit GEORGIUS CORNEWALL LEWIS, M.A. 5_s._ 6_d._


 The Choephoræ of Æschylus; with Notes. By JOHN CONINGTON, M.A.
 Professor of Latin, Oxford. 6_s._

 Notes upon Thucydides. By JOHN G. SHEPPARD, M.A. Head Master of
 Kidderminster School, and LEWIS EVANS, M.A. Head Master of Sandbach
 School. Books I. and II. 8_s._

 The Ethics of Aristotle. By Sir ALEXANDER GRANT, Bart., M.A. The First
 Volume, the Essays, 8_s._ 6_d._ The Second Volume, Books I.--VI., with
 Notes, 12_s._

 The Politics of Aristotle; with Introduction, Essays, Notes, and
 Index. By R. CONGREVE, M.A. 16_s._

 Platonis Philebus; with Introduction, and Notes, Critical and
 Explanatory. By CHARLES BADHAM, D.D., Head Master of Birmingham and
 Edgbaston Proprietary School. 5_s._

 Phædrus, Lysis, and Protagoras of Plato, literally translated. By J.
 WRIGHT, M.A. 4_s._ 6_d._

 The Greek Testament; with Notes, Grammatical and Exegetical. By W.
 WEBSTER, M.A., of King's College, London; and W. F. WILKINSON, M.A.,
 Vicar of St. Werburgh, Derby. Volume I., containing the Four Gospels
 and the Acts of the Apostles, 20_s._

 Synonyms of the New Testament. By R. CHENEVIX TRENCH, D.D. Dean of
 Westminster. Fourth Edition. 5_s._

 Select Private Orations of Demosthenes; with English Notes. By C. T.
 PENROSE, M.A. 4_s._


 The Frogs of Aristophanes; with English Notes. By Rev. H. P.
 COOKESLEY, M.A. 7_s._

 Aristophanes. Edited, with Notes and Index, by H. A. HOLDEN, M.A.,
 Head Master of Ipswich School. 15_s._

 ⁂ The Plays separately, 1_s._ each; Notulæ Criticæ and Onomasticon.
 4_s._

Greek Verses of Shrewsbury School; with Account of the Iambic Metre,
and Exercises in Greek Tragic Senarii. Edited by Dr. KENNEDY, Head
Master. 8_s._

Antigone of Sophocles, in Greek and English; with Notes. By Dr.
DONALDSON. 9_s._

Agamemnon of Æschylus, in Greek and English; with Notes. By J.
CONINGTON, M.A. 7_s._ 6_d._

Æschylus translated into English Verse; with Notes, Life of Æschylus,
and Discourse on Greek Tragedy. By J. S. BLACKIE, Professor of Greek,
Edinburgh. Two Volumes, 46_s._

The Alcestis of Euripides; with Notes. By J. H. MONK, D.D., Bishop of
Gloucester and Bristol. 4_s._ 6_d._

Pindar; with Notes. By Dr. DONALDSON. 16_s._

Homeric Ballads. The Text, with Translation in Verse, and Notes. By Dr.
MAGINN. 6_s._

Müller's Dissertations on the Eumenides of Æschylus. Second Edition.
6_s._ 6_d._

C. Cornelii Taciti Opera ad Codices Antiquissimos commentario critico
edidit FRANCISCUS RITTER, Professor Bonnensis. Four Volumes, Octavo.
28_s._

Propertius; with English Notes. By F. A. PALEY, Editor of "Æschylus."
Octavo. 10_s._ 6_d._

Plautus: Aulularia; with Notes. By J. HILDYARD, B.D. 7_s._ 6_d._

Plautus: Menæchmei; with Notes. By J. HILDYARD, B.D. 7_s._ 6_d._

Longer Exercises in Latin Prose Composition; with a Commentary and
Remarks on the best mode of forming a correct Latin Style. By Dr.
DONALDSON. 6_s._ 6_d._

Elements of Logic. By RICHARD WHATELY, Archbishop of Dublin. Crown 8vo.
4_s._ 6_d._ Octavo. 10_s._ 6_d._

Elements of Rhetoric. By ARCHBISHOP WHATELY. Crown 8vo. 4_s._ 6_d._
Octavo. 10_s._ 6_d._

System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive. By JOHN STUART MILL.
Fourth Edition. Two Volumes, Octavo. 25_s._

An Historical and Explanatory Treatise on the Book of Common Prayer. By
W. G. HUMPHRY, B.D., late Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. Second
Edition, enlarged. 7_s._ 6_d._

Churchman's Guide: A Copious Index of Sermons and other Works, by
eminent Church of England Divines; digested and arranged according to
their subjects. By J. FORSTER, M.A. Octavo. 7_s._

On Public Reading: Garrick's Mode of Reading the Liturgy; with Notes,
and a Discourse on Public Reading. By R. CULL, Tutor in Elocution.
5_s._ 6_d._

The Churchman's Theological Dictionary. By ROBERT EDEN, M.A., Chaplain
to the Bishop of Norwich. Demy 12mo. 5_s._


  LONDON: JOHN W. PARKER AND SON, WEST STRAND.

Annotated Edition of the English Poets,

WITH INTRODUCTIONS, NOTES, AND MEMOIRS,

Historical, Biographical and Critical,

BY ROBERT BELL.

IN VOLUMES, 2s. 6d. EACH, BOUND IN CLOTH.


 ANCIENT POEMS, BALLADS, AND SONGS OF THE PEASANTRY. 2_s._ 6_d._

 GREENE AND MARLOWE. 2_s._ 6_d._

 EARLY BALLADS ILLUSTRATIVE OF HISTORY, TRADITIONS, AND CUSTOMS. 2_s._
 6_d._

 BEN JONSON. 2_s._ 6_d._

 CHAUCER. Eight Volumes, 20_s._

 BUTLER. Three Volumes, 7_s._ 6_d._

 THOMSON. Two Volumes, 5_s._

 DRYDEN. Three Volumes, 7_s._ 6_d._

 SHAKSPEARE. 2_s._ 6_d._

 COWPER. Three Volumes. 7_s._ 6_d._

 SURREY, MINOR CONTEMPORANEOUS POETS, AND BUCKHURST. 2_s._ 6_d._

 SONGS FROM THE DRAMATISTS; from the first regular Comedy to the close
 of the 18th Century. 2_s._ 6_d._

 WYATT. 2_s._ 6_d._

 OLDHAM. 2_s._ 6_d._

 WALLER. 2_s._ 6_d._


  LONDON: JOHN W. PARKER AND SON, WEST STRAND.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Other
variations in spelling, punctuation and hyphenation remain unchanged.

In the Table of Contents Chap. XV. item 3. is not listed.

In the Table of Contents Chap. XXVIII.  item 5.
Italics are represented thus _italics_.

The identification of the appendices skips I and J.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of On the Philosophy of Discovery,
Chapters Historical and Critica, by William Whewell

