CHAPTER XXII.

MR. MILL'S LOGIC[264].


The _History of the Inductive Sciences_ was published in 1837, and
the _Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences_ in 1840. In 1843 Mr. Mill
published his _System of Logic_, in which he states that without the
aid derived from the facts and ideas in my volumes, the corresponding
portion of his own would most probably not have been written, and
quotes parts of what I have said with commendation. He also, however,
dissents from me on several important and fundamental points, and
argues against what I have said thereon. I conceive that it may tend
to bring into a clearer light the doctrines which I have tried to
establish, and the truth of them, if I discuss some of the differences
between us, which I shall proceed to do[265].

Mr. Mill's work has had, for a work of its abstruse character, a
circulation so extensive, and admirers so numerous and so fervent, that
it needs no commendation of mine. But if my main concern at present
had not been with the points in which Mr. Mill _differs_ from me, I
should have had great pleasure in pointing out passages, of which there
are many, in which Mr. Mill appears to me to have been very happy in
promoting or in expressing philosophical truth.

There is one portion of his work indeed which tends to give it an
interest of a wider kind than belongs to that merely scientific truth
to which I purposely and resolutely confined my speculations in the
works to which I have referred. Mr. Mill has introduced into his work
a direct and extensive consideration of the modes of dealing with
moral and political as well as physical questions; and I have no doubt
that this part of his book has, for many of his readers, a more lively
interest than any other. Such a comprehensive scheme seems to give to
doctrines respecting science a value and a purpose which they cannot
have, so long as they are restricted to mere material sciences. I still
retain the opinion, however, upon which I formerly acted, that the
philosophy of science is to be extracted from the portions of science
which are universally allowed to be most certainly established, and
that those are the physical sciences. I am very far from saying, or
thinking, that there is no such thing as Moral and Political Science,
or that no method can be suggested for its promotion; but I think that
by attempting at present to include the Moral Sciences in the same
formulæ with the Physical, we open far more controversies than we
close; and that in the moral as in the physical sciences, the first
step towards showing how truth is to be discovered, is to study some
portion of it which is assented to so as to be beyond controversy.


1. _What is Induction?_--1. Confining myself, then, to the material
sciences, I shall proceed to offer my remarks on Induction with
especial reference to Mr. Mill's work. And in order that we may, as
I have said, proceed as intelligibly as possible, let us begin by
considering what we mean by _Induction_, as a mode of obtaining truth;
and let us note whether there is any difference between Mr. Mill and me
on this subject.

"For the purposes of the present inquiry," Mr. Mill says (i. 347[266]),
"Induction may be defined the operation of discovering and forming
general propositions:" meaning, as appears by the context, the
discovery of them from particular facts. He elsewhere (i. 370) terms
it "generalization from experience:" and again he speaks of it with
greater precision as the inference of a more general proposition from
less general ones.

2. Now to these definitions and descriptions I assent as far as they
go; though, as I shall have to remark, they appear to me to leave
unnoticed a feature which is very important, and which occurs in all
cases of Induction, so far as we are concerned with it. Science, then,
consists of general propositions, inferred from particular facts, or
from less general propositions, by Induction; and it is our object to
discern the nature and laws of _Induction_ in this sense. That the
propositions are general, or are more general than the facts from which
they are inferred, is an indispensable part of the notion of Induction,
and is essential to any discussion of the process, as the mode of
arriving at Science, that is, at a body of general truths.

3. I am obliged therefore to dissent from Mr. Mill when he includes, in
his notion of Induction, the process by which we arrive _at individual
facts_ from other facts _of the same order of particularity_.

Such inference is, at any rate, not Induction _alone_; if it be
Induction at all, it is Induction applied to an example.

For instance, it is a general law, obtained by Induction from
particular facts, that a body falling vertically downwards from rest,
describes spaces proportional to the squares of the times. But that a
particular body will fall through 16 feet in one second and 64 feet in
two seconds, is not an induction simply, it is a result obtained by
applying the inductive law to a particular case.

But further, such a process is often not induction _at all_. That a
ball striking another ball directly will communicate to it as much
momentum as the striking ball itself loses, is a law established
by induction: but if, from habit or practical skill, I make one
billiard-ball strike another, so as to produce the velocity which
I wish, without knowing or thinking of the general law, the term
_Induction_ cannot then be rightly applied. If I _know the law_ and
act upon it, I have in my mind both the general induction and its
particular application. But if I act by the ordinary billiard-player's
skill, without thinking of momentum or law, there is no Induction in
the case.

4. This distinction becomes of importance, in reference to Mr. Mill's
doctrine, because he has extended his use of the term _Induction_, not
only to the cases in which the general induction is consciously applied
to a particular instance; but to the cases in which the particular
instance is dealt with by means of experience, in that rude sense in
which _experience_ can be asserted of brutes; and in which, of course,
we can in no way imagine that the law is possessed or understood, as a
general proposition. He has thus, as I conceive, overlooked the broad
and essential difference between speculative knowledge and practical
action; and has introduced cases which are quite foreign to the idea
of science, alongside with cases from which we may hope to obtain some
views of the nature of science and the processes by which it must be
formed.

5. Thus (ii. 232) he says, "This inference of one particular fact from
another is a case of induction. It is of this sort of induction that
brutes are capable." And to the same purpose he had previously said (i.
251), "He [the burnt child who shuns the fire] is not generalizing:
he is inferring a particular from particulars. In the same way also,
brutes reason ... not only the burnt child, but the burnt dog, dreads
the fire."

6. This confusion, (for such it seems to me,) of knowledge with
practical tendencies, is expressed more in detail in other places. Thus
he says (i. 118), "I cannot dig the ground unless I have an idea of the
ground and of a spade, and of all the other things I am operating upon."

7. This appears to me to be a use of words which can only tend to
confuse our idea of knowledge by obliterating all that is distinctive
in _human_ knowledge. It seems to me quite false to say that I cannot
dig the ground, unless I have an idea of the ground and of my spade.
Are we to say that we cannot _walk_ the ground, unless we have an idea
of the ground, and of our feet, and of our shoes, and of the muscles of
our legs? Are we to say that a mole cannot dig the ground, unless he
has an idea of the ground and of the snout and paws with which he digs
it? Are we to say that a pholas cannot perforate a rock, unless he have
an idea of the rock, and of the acid with which he corrodes it?

8. This appears to me, as I have said, to be a line of speculation
which can lead to nothing but confusion. The knowledge concerning which
I wish to inquire is _human_ knowledge. And in order that I may have
any chance of success in the inquiry, I find it necessary to single
out that kind of knowledge which is especially and distinctively
human. Hence, I pass by, in this part of my investigation, all the
_knowledge_, if it is to be so called, which man has in no other way
than brutes have it;--all that merely shows itself in action. For
though action may be modified by habit, and habit by experience, in
animals as well as in men, such experience, so long as it retains
that merely practical form, is no part of the materials of science.
Knowledge in a _general_ form, is alone knowledge for that purpose;
and to _that_, therefore, I must confine my attention; at least till
I have made some progress in ascertaining its nature and laws, and am
thus prepared to compare such knowledge,--_human knowledge_ properly so
called,--with mere animal tendencies to action; or even with practical
skill which does not include, as for the most part practical skill does
not include, speculative knowledge.

9. And thus, I accept Mr. Mill's definition of Induction only in its
first and largest form; and reject, as useless and mischievous for our
purposes, his extension of the term to the practical influence which
experience of one fact exercises upon a creature dealing with similar
facts. Such influence cannot be resolved into _ideas_ and _induction_,
without, as I conceive, making all our subsequent investigation vague
and heterogeneous, indefinite and inconclusive. If we must speak of
animals as _learning_ from experience, we may at least abstain from
applying to them terms which imply that they learn, in the same way
in which men learn astronomy from the stars, and chemistry from the
effects of mixture and heat. And the same may be said of the language
which is to be used concerning what _men_ learn, when their _learning_
merely shows itself in action, and does not exist as a general thought.
_Induction_ must not be applied to such cases. _Induction_ must be
confined to cases where we have in our minds general propositions, in
order that the sciences, which are our most instructive examples of the
process we have to consider, may be, in any definite and proper sense,
_Inductive_ Sciences.

10. Perhaps some persons may be inclined to say that this difference
of opinion, as to the extent of meaning which is to be given to the
term _Induction_, is a question merely of words; a matter of definition
only. This is a mode in which men in our time often seem inclined to
dispose of philosophical questions; thus evading the task of forming
an opinion upon such questions, while they retain the air of looking
at the subject from a more comprehensive point of view. But as I have
elsewhere said, such questions of definition are never questions
of definition merely. A proposition is always implied along with
the definition; and the truth of the proposition depends upon the
settlement of the definition. This is the case in the present instance.
We are speaking of _Induction_, and we mean that kind of Induction
by which the sciences now existing among men have been constructed.
On this account it is, that we cannot include, in the meaning of the
term, mere practical tendencies or practical habits; for science is not
constructed of these. No accumulation of these would make up any of the
acknowledged sciences. The elements of such sciences are something of a
kind different from practical habits. The elements of such sciences are
principles which we _know_; truths which can be contemplated as being
_true_. Practical habits, practical skill, instincts and the like,
appear in action, and in action only. Such endowments or acquirements
show themselves when the occasion for action arrives, and then, show
themselves in the act; without being put, or being capable of being
put, in the form of truths contemplated by the intellect. But the
elements and materials of Science are necessary truths contemplated by
the intellect. It is by consisting of such elements and such materials,
that Science _is_ Science. Hence a use of the term _Induction_ which
requires us to obliterate this distinction, must make it impossible for
us to arrive at any consistent and intelligible view of the nature of
Science, and of the mental process by which Sciences come into being.
We must, for the purpose which Mr. Mill and I have in common, retain
his larger and more philosophical definition of Induction,--that it is
the inference of a more general proposition from less general ones.

11. Perhaps, again, some persons may say, that practical skill and
practical experience _lead_ to science, and may therefore be included
in the term _Induction_, which describes the formation of science. But
to this we reply, that these things lead to science as occasions only,
and do not form part of science; and that science begins then only
when we look at the facts in a general point of view. This distinction
is essential to the philosophy of science. The rope-dancer may, by
his performances, suggest, to himself or to others, properties of
the center of gravity; but this is so, because man has a tendency to
speculate and to think of general truths, as well as a tendency to
dance on a rope on special occasions, and to acquire skill in such
dancing by practice. The rope-dancer does not dance by Induction,
any more than the dancing dog does. To apply the terms Science and
Induction to such cases, carries us into the regions of metaphor;
as when we call birds of passage "wise meteorologists," or the bee
"a natural chemist, who turns the flower-dust into honey." This is
very well in poetry: but for our purposes we must avoid recognizing
these cases as really belonging to the sciences of meteorology and
chemistry,--as really cases of Induction. Induction for us is general
propositions, _contemplated as such_, derived from particulars.

Science may result _from_ experience and observation _by_ Induction;
but Induction is not therefore the same thing as experience and
observation. Induction is experience or observation _consciously_
looked at in a _general_ form. This consciousness and generality are
necessary parts of that knowledge which is science. And accordingly,
on the other hand, science cannot result from mere Instinct, as
distinguished from Reason; because Instinct by its nature is not
conscious and general, but operates blindly and unconsciously in
particular cases, the actor not seeing or thinking of the rule which he
obeys.

12. A little further on I shall endeavour to show that not only a
general _thought_, but a general _word_ or phrase is a requisite
element in Induction. This doctrine, of course, still more decidedly
excludes the case of animals, and of mere practical knowledge in man.
A burnt child dreads the fire; but reason must be unfolded, before the
child learns to understand the words "fire will hurt you." The burnt
dog never thus learns to understand words. And this difference points
to an entirely different state of thought in the two cases: or rather,
to a difference between a state of rational thought on the one hand,
and of mere practical instinct on the other.

13. Besides this difference of speculative thought and practical
instinct which thus are, as appears to me, confounded in Mr. Mill's
philosophy, in such a way as tends to destroy all coherent views of
human knowledge, there is another set of cases to which Mr. Mill
applies the term _Induction_, and to which it appears to me to be
altogether inapplicable. He employs it to describe the mode in which
superstitious men, in ignorant ages, were led to the opinion that
striking natural events presaged or accompanied calamities. Thus he
says (i. 389), "The opinion so long prevalent that a comet or any
other unusual appearance in the heavenly regions was the precursor of
calamities to mankind, or at least to those who witnessed it; the
belief in the oracles of Delphi and Dodona; the reliance on astrology,
or on the weather-prophecies in almanacs; were doubtless inductions
supposed to be grounded on experience;" and he speaks of these
insufficient inductions being extinguished by the stronger inductions
subsequently obtained by scientific inquiry. And in like manner,
he says in another place (i. 367), "Let us now compare different
predictions: the first, that eclipses will occur whenever one planet
or satellite is so situated as to cast its shadow upon another: the
second, that they will occur whenever some great calamity is impending
over mankind."

14. Now I cannot see how anything but confusion can arise from
applying the term _Induction_ to superstitious fancies like those
here mentioned. They are not imperfect truths, but entire falsehoods.
Of that, Mr. Mill and I are agreed: how then can they exemplify the
progress towards truth? They were not collected from the facts by
seeking a law of their occurrence; but were suggested by an imagination
of the anger of superior powers shown by such deviations from the
ordinary course of nature. If we are to speak of _inductions_ to any
purpose, they must be such inductions as represent the facts, in some
degree at least. It is not meant, I presume, that these opinions are in
any degree true: to what purpose then are they adduced? If I were to
hold that my dreams predict or conform to the motions of the stars or
of the clouds, would this be an induction? It would be so, as much one
as those here so denominated: yet what but confusion could arise from
classing it among scientific truths? Mr. Mill himself has explained
(ii. 389) the way in which such delusions as the prophecies of
almanac-makers, and the like, obtain credence; namely, by the greater
effect which the positive instances produce on ordinary minds in
comparison with the negative, when the rule has once taken possession
of their thoughts. And this being, as he says, the recognized
explanation of such cases, why should we not leave them to their due
place, and not confound and perplex the whole of our investigation by
elevating them to the rank of "inductions"? The very condemnation of
such opinions is that they are not at all inductive. When we have made
any progress in our investigation of the nature of science, to attempt
to drive us back to the wearisome discussion of such elementary points
as these, is to make progress hopeless.


II. _Induction or Description?_--15. In the cases hitherto noticed, Mr.
Mill extends the term _Induction_, as I think, too widely, and applies
it to cases to which it is not rightly applicable. I have now to notice
a case of an opposite kind, in which he does not apply it where I do,
and condemns me for using it in such a case. I had spoken of Kepler's
discovery of the Law, that the planets move round the sun in ellipses,
as an example of Induction. The separate facts of any planet (Mars, for
instance,) being in certain places at certain times, are all included
in the general proposition which Kepler discovered, that Mars describes
an ellipse of a certain form and position. This appears to me a very
simple but a very distinct example of the operation of discovering
general propositions; general, that is, with reference to particular
facts; which operation Mr. Mill, as well as myself, says is Induction.
But Mr. Mill denies this operation in this case to be Induction at
all (i. 357). I should not have been prepared for this denial by the
previous parts of Mr. Mill's book, for he had said just before (i.
350), "such facts as the magnitudes of the bodies of the solar system,
their distances from each other, the figure of the earth and its
rotation ... are proved indirectly, by the aid of inductions founded
on other facts which we can more easily reach." If the figure of the
earth and its rotation are proved by Induction, it seems very strange,
and is to me quite incomprehensible, how the figure of the earth's
orbit and its revolution (and of course, of the figure of Mars's orbit
and his revolution in like manner,) are not also proved by Induction.
No, says Mr. Mill, Kepler, in putting together a number of places of
the planet into one figure, only performed an act of _description_.
"This descriptive operation," he adds (i. 359), "Mr. Whewell, by an
aptly chosen expression, has termed Colligation of Facts." He goes on
to commend my observations concerning this process, but says that,
according to the old and received meaning of the term, it is not
Induction at all.

16. Now I have already shown that Mr. Mill himself, a few pages
earlier, had applied the term _Induction_ to cases undistinguishable
from this in any essential circumstance. And even in this case, he
allows that Kepler did really perform an act of Induction (i. 358),
"namely, in concluding that, because the observed places of Mars were
correctly represented by points in an imaginary ellipse, therefore Mars
would continue to revolve in that same ellipse; and even in concluding
that the position of the planet during the time which had intervened
between the two observations must have coincided with the intermediate
points of the curve." Of course, in Kepler's Induction, of which I
speak, I include all this; all this is included in speaking of the
_orbit_ of Mars: a continuous line, a periodical motion, are implied
in the term _orbit_. I am unable to see what would remain of Kepler's
discovery, if we take from it these conditions. It would not only not
be an induction, but it would not be a description, for it would not
recognize that Mars moved in an orbit. Are particular positions to be
conceived as points in a curve, without thinking of the intermediate
positions as belonging to the same curve? If so, there is no law at
all, and the facts are not bound together by any intelligible tie.

In another place (ii. 209) Mr. Mill returns to his distinction of
Description and Induction; but without throwing any additional light
upon it, so far as I can see.

17. The only meaning which I can discover in this attempted distinction
of Description and Induction is, that when particular facts are bound
together by their relation in _space_, Mr. Mill calls the discovery
of the connexion _Description_, but when they are connected by other
general relations, as time, cause and the like, Mr. Mill terms the
discovery of the connexion _Induction_. And this way of making a
distinction, would fall in with the doctrine of other parts of Mr.
Mill's book, in which he ascribes very peculiar attributes to space
and its relations, in comparison with other Ideas, (as I should call
them). But I cannot see any ground for this distinction, of connexion
according to space and other connexions of facts.

To stand upon such a distinction, appears to me to be the way to miss
the general laws of the formation of science. For example: The ancients
discovered that the planets revolved in recurring periods, and thus
connected the observations of their motions according to the Idea of
_Time_. Kepler discovered that they revolved in ellipses, and thus
connected the observations according to the Idea of _Space_. Newton
discovered that they revolved in virtue of the Sun's attraction, and
thus connected the motions according to the Idea of _Force_. The first
and third of these discoveries are recognized on all hands as processes
of Induction. Why is the second to be called by a different name? or
what but confusion and perplexity can arise from refusing to class it
with the other two? It is, you say, Description. But such Description
is a kind of Induction, and must be spoken of as Induction, if we are
to speak of Induction as the process by which Science is formed: for
the three steps are all, the second in the same sense as the first
and third, in co-ordination with them, steps in the formation of
astronomical science.

18. But, says Mr. Mill (i. 363), "it is a fact surely that the planet
does describe an ellipse, and a fact which we could see if we had
adequate visual organs and a suitable position." To this I should
reply: "Let it be so; and it is a fact, surely, that the planet does
move periodically: it is a fact, surely, that the planet is attracted
by the sun. Still, therefore, the asserted distinction fails to find a
ground." Perhaps Mr. Mill would remind us that the elliptical form of
the orbit is a fact which we could see if we had adequate visual organs
and a suitable position: but that force is a thing which we cannot
see. But this distinction also will not bear handling. Can we not see
a tree blown down by a storm, or a rock blown up by gunpowder? Do we
not here see force:--see it, that is, by its effects, the only way in
which we need to see it in the case of a planet, for the purposes of
our argument? Are not such operations of force, Facts which may be the
objects of sense? and is not the operation of the sun's Force a Fact
of the same kind, just as much as the elliptical form of orbit which
results from the action? If the latter be "surely a Fact," the former
is a Fact no less surely.

19. In truth, as I have repeatedly had occasion to remark, all attempts
to frame an argument by the exclusive or emphatic appropriation of
the term _Fact_ to particular cases, are necessarily illusory and
inconclusive. There is no definite and stable distinction between Facts
and Theories; Facts and Laws; Facts and Inductions. Inductions, Laws,
Theories, which are true, _are_ Facts. Facts involve Inductions. It is
a fact that the moon is attracted by the earth, just as much as it is a
Fact that an apple falls from a tree. That the former fact is collected
by a more distinct and conscious Induction, does not make it the less
a Fact. That the orbit of Mars is a Fact--a true Description of the
path--does not make it the less a case of Induction.

20. There is another argument which Mr. Mill employs in order to
show that there is a difference between mere colligation which is
description, and induction in the more proper sense of the term. He
notices with commendation a remark which I had made (i. 364), that
at different stages of the progress of science the facts had been
successfully connected by means of very different conceptions, while
yet the later conceptions have not contradicted, but included, so far
as they were true, the earlier: thus the ancient Greek representation
of the motions of the planets by means of epicycles and eccentrics,
was to a certain degree of accuracy true, and is not negatived, though
superseded, by the modern representation of the planets as describing
ellipses round the sun. And he then reasons that this, which is thus
true of Descriptions, cannot be true of Inductions. He says (i. 367),
"Different descriptions therefore may be all true: but surely not
different explanations." He then notices the various explanations of
the motions of the planets--the ancient doctrine that they are moved
by an inherent virtue; the Cartesian doctrine that they are moved by
impulse and by vortices; the Newtonian doctrine that they are governed
by a central force; and he adds, "Can it be said of these, as was said
of the different descriptions, that they are all true as far as they
go? Is it not true that one only can be true in any degree, and that
the other two must be altogether false?"

21. And to this questioning, the history of science compels me to reply
very distinctly and positively, in the way which Mr. Mill appears to
think extravagant and absurd. I am obliged to say, Undoubtedly, all
these explanations _may_ be true and consistent with each other, and
would be so if each had been followed out so as to show in what manner
it could be made consistent with the facts. And this was, in reality,
in a great measure done[267]. The doctrine that the heavenly bodies
were moved by vortices was successively modified, so that it came to
coincide in its results with the doctrine of an inverse-quadratic
centripetal force, as I have remarked in the _History_[268]. When this
point was reached, the vortex was merely a machinery, well or ill
devised, for producing such a centripetal force, and therefore did not
contradict the doctrine of a centripetal force. Newton himself does
not appear to have been averse to explaining gravity by impulse. So
little is it true that if the one theory be true the other must be
false. The attempt to explain gravity by the impulse of streams of
particles flowing through the universe in all directions, which I have
mentioned in the _Philosophy_[269] so far from being inconsistent
with the Newtonian theory, that it is founded entirely upon it. And
even with regard to the doctrine, that the heavenly bodies move by
an inherent virtue; if this doctrine had been maintained in any such
way that it was brought to agree with the facts, the inherent virtue
must have had its laws determined; and then, it would have been found
that the virtue had a reference to the central body; and so, the
"inherent virtue" must have coincided in its effect with the Newtonian
force; and then, the two explanations would agree, except so far as
the word "inherent" was concerned. And if such a part of an earlier
theory as this word _inherent_ indicates, is found to be untenable,
it is of course rejected in the transition to later and more exact
theories, in Inductions of this kind, as well as in what Mr. Mill calls
Descriptions. There is therefore still no validity discoverable in the
distinction which Mr. Mill attempts to draw between "descriptions" like
Kepler's law of elliptical orbits, and other examples of induction.

22. When Mr. Mill goes on to compare what he calls different
predictions--the first, the true explanation of eclipses by the shadows
which the planets and satellites cast upon one another, and the
other, the belief that they will occur whenever some great calamity
is impending over mankind, I must reply, as I have stated already,
(Art. 17), that to class such superstitions as the last with cases of
Induction, appears to me to confound all use of words, and to prevent,
as far as it goes, all profitable exercise of thought. What possible
advantage can result from comparing (as if they were alike) the
relation of two descriptions of a phenomenon, each to a certain extent
true, and therefore both consistent, with the relation of a scientific
truth to a false and baseless superstition?

23. But I may make another remark on this example, so strangely
introduced. If, under the influence of fear and superstition, men
may make such mistakes with regard to laws of nature, as to imagine
that eclipses portend calamities, are they quite secure from mistakes
in _description_? Do not the very persons who tell us how eclipses
predict disasters, also describe to us fiery swords seen in the air,
and armies fighting in the sky? So that even in this extreme case,
at the very limit of the rational exercise of human powers, there is
nothing to distinguish Description from Induction.

I shall now leave the reader to judge whether this feature in the
history of science,--that several views which appear at first quite
different are yet all true,--which Mr. Mill calls a curious and
interesting remark of mine, and which he allows to be "strikingly true"
of the Inductions which he calls _Descriptions_, (i. 364) is, as he
says, "unequivocally false" of other Inductions. And I shall confide
in having general assent with me, when I continue to speak of Kepler's
_Induction_ of the elliptical orbits.

I now proceed to another remark.


III. _In Discovery a new Conception is introduced._--

24. There is a difference between Mr. Mill and me in our view of the
essential elements of this Induction of Kepler, which affects all other
cases of Induction, and which is, I think, the most extensive and
important of the differences between us. I must therefore venture to
dwell upon it a little in detail.

I conceive that Kepler, in discovering the law of Mars's motion,
and in asserting that the planet moved in an ellipse, did this;--he
bound together particular observations of separate places of Mars
by the notion, or, as I have called it, the _conception_, of an
_ellipse_, which was supplied by his own mind. Other persons, and he
too, before he made this discovery, had present to their minds the
facts of such separate successive positions of the planet; but could
not bind them together rightly, because they did not apply to them
this conception of an _ellipse_. To supply this conception, required
a special preparation, and a special activity in the mind of the
discoverer. He, and others before him, tried other ways of connecting
the special facts, none of which fully succeeded. To discover such
a connexion, the mind must be conversant with certain relations of
space, and with certain kinds of figures. To discover the right figure
was a matter requiring research, invention, resource. To hit upon
the right conception is a difficult step; and when this step is once
made, the facts assume a different aspect from what they had before:
that done, they are seen in a new point of view; and the catching
this point of view, is a special mental operation, requiring special
endowments and habits of thought. Before this, the facts are seen as
detached, separate, lawless; afterwards, they are seen as connected,
simple, regular; as parts of one general fact, and thereby possessing
innumerable new relations before unseen. Kepler, then, I say, bound
together the facts by superinducing upon them the _conception_ of an
_ellipse_; and this was an essential element in his Induction.

25. And there is the same essential element in all Inductive
discoveries. In all cases, facts, before detached and lawless, are
bound together by a new thought. They are reduced to law, by being
seen in a new point of view. To catch this new point of view, is an
act of the mind, springing from its previous preparation and habits.
The facts, in other discoveries, are brought together according to
other relations, or, as I have called them, _Ideas_;--the Ideas of
Time, of Force, of Number, of Resemblance, of Elementary Composition,
of Polarity, and the like. But in all cases, the mind performs the
operation by an apprehension of some such relations; by singling out
the one true relation; by combining the apprehension of the true
relation with the facts; by applying to them the Conception of such a
relation.

26. In previous writings, I have not only stated this view generally,
but I have followed it into detail, exemplifying it in the greater part
of the History of the principal Inductive Sciences in succession. I
have pointed out what are the Conceptions which have been introduced in
every prominent discovery in those sciences; and have noted to which of
the above Ideas, or of the like Ideas, each belongs. The performance
of this task is the office of the greater part of my _Philosophy
of the Inductive Sciences_. For that work is, in reality, no less
historical than the _History_ which preceded it. The _History of the
Inductive Sciences_ is the history of the discoveries, mainly so far
as concerns the _Facts_ which were brought together to form sciences.
The _Philosophy_ is, in the first ten Books, the history of the _Ideas_
and _Conceptions_, by means of which the facts were connected, so as
to give rise to scientific truths. It would be easy for me to give a
long list of the Ideas and Conceptions thus brought into view, but
I may refer any reader who wishes to see such a list, to the Tables
of Contents of the _History_, and of the first ten Books of the
_Philosophy_.

27. That these Ideas and Conceptions are really distinct elements of
the scientific truths thus obtained, I conceive to be proved beyond
doubt, not only by considering that the discoveries never were made,
nor could be made, till the right Conception was obtained, and by
seeing how difficult it often was to obtain this element; but also, by
seeing that the Idea and the Conception itself, as distinct from the
Facts, was, in almost every science, the subject of long and obstinate
controversies;--controversies which turned upon the possible relations
of Ideas, much more than upon the actual relations of Facts. The first
ten Books of the _Philosophy_ to which I have referred, contain the
history of a great number of these controversies. These controversies
make up a large portion of the history of each science; a portion quite
as important as the study of the facts; and a portion, at every stage
of the science, quite as essential to the progress of truth. Men, in
seeking and obtaining scientific knowledge, have always shown that they
found the formation of right conceptions in their own minds to be an
essential part of the process.

28. Moreover, the presence of a Conception of the mind as a special
element of the inductive process, and as the tie by which the
particular facts are bound together, is further indicated, by there
being some special new _term_ or _phrase_ introduced in every
induction; or at least some term or phrase thenceforth steadily
applied to the facts, which had not been applied to them before; as
when Kepler asserted that Mars moved round the sun in an _elliptical
orbit_, or when Newton asserted that the planets _gravitate_ towards
the sun; these new terms, _elliptical orbit_, and _gravitate_, mark
the new conceptions on which the inductions depend. I have in the
_Philosophy_[270] further illustrated this application of "technical
terms," that is, fixed and settled terms, in every inductive discovery;
and have spoken of their use in enabling men to proceed from each such
discovery to other discoveries more general. But I notice these terms
here, for the purpose of showing the existence of a conception in the
discoverer's mind, corresponding to the term thus introduced; which
conception, the term is intended to convey to the minds of those to
whom the discovery is communicated.

29. But this element of discovery,--right conceptions supplied by
the mind in order to bind the facts together,--Mr. Mill denies to be
an element at all. He says, of Kepler's discovery of the elliptical
orbit (i. 363), "It superadded nothing to the particular facts
which it served to bind together;" yet he adds, "except indeed the
knowledge that a resemblance existed between the planetary orbit
and other ellipses;" that is, except the knowledge that it _was_ an
ellipse;--precisely the circumstance in which the discovery consisted.
Kepler, he says, "asserted as a fact that the planet moved in an
ellipse. But this fact, which Kepler did not add to, but found in the
motion of the planet ... was the very fact, the separate parts of
which had been separately observed; it was the sum of the different
observations."

30. That the fact of the elliptical motion was not merely the _sum_ of
the different observations, is plain from this, that other persons, and
Kepler himself before his discovery, did not find it by adding together
the observations. The fact of the elliptical orbit was not the sum of
the observations _merely_; it was the sum of the observations, _seen
under a new point of view_, which point of view Kepler's mind supplied.
Kepler found it in the facts, because it was there, no doubt, for one
reason; but also, for another, because he had, in his mind, those
relations of thought which enabled him to find it. We may illustrate
this by a familiar analogy. We too find the law in Kepler's book; but
if we did not understand Latin, we should not find it there. We must
learn Latin in order to find the law in the book. In like manner, a
discoverer must know the language of science, as well as look at the
book of nature, in order to find scientific truth. All the discussions
and controversies respecting Ideas and Conceptions of which I have
spoken, may be looked upon as discussions and controversies respecting
the grammar of the language in which nature speaks to the scientific
mind. Man is the _Interpreter_ of Nature; not the Spectator merely,
but the Interpreter. The study of the language, as well as the mere
sight of the characters, is requisite in order that we may read the
inscriptions which are written on the face of the world. And this
study of the language of nature, that is, of the necessary coherencies
and derivations of the relations of phenomena, is to be pursued by
examining Ideas, as well as mere phenomena;--by tracing the formation
of Conceptions, as well as the accumulation of Facts. And this is what
I have tried to do in the books already referred to.

31. Mr. Mill has not noticed, in any considerable degree, what I have
said of the formation of the Conceptions which enter into the various
sciences; but he has, in general terms, denied that the Conception is
anything different from the facts themselves. "If," he says (i. 301),
"the facts are rightly classed under the conceptions, it is because
there is in the facts themselves, something of which the conception
is a copy." But it is a copy which cannot be made by a person without
peculiar endowments; just as a person cannot copy an ill-written
inscription, so as to make it convey sense, unless he understand the
language. "Conceptions," Mr. Mill says (ii. 217), "do not develope
themselves from within, but are impressed from without." But what comes
from without is not enough: they must have both origins, or they cannot
make knowledge. "The conception," he says again (ii. 221), "is not
furnished _by_ the mind till it has been furnished _to_ the mind." But
it is furnished to the mind by its own activity, operating according to
its own laws. No doubt, the conception may be formed, and in cases of
discovery, must be formed, by the suggestion and excitement which the
facts themselves produce; and must be so moulded as to agree with the
facts. But this does not make it superfluous to examine, out of what
_materials_ such conceptions are formed, and _how_ they are capable of
being moulded so as to express laws of nature; especially, when we see
how large a share this part of discovery--the examination how our ideas
can be modified so as to agree with nature,--holds, in the history of
science.

32. I have already (Art. 28) given, as evidence that the conception
enters as an element in every induction, the constant introduction
in such cases, of a new fixed term or phrase. Mr. Mill (ii. 282)
notices this introduction of a new phrase in such cases as important,
though he does not appear willing to allow that it is necessary. Yet
the necessity of the conception at least, appears to result from the
considerations which he puts forward. "What darkness," he says, "would
have been spread over geometrical demonstration, if wherever the word
_circle_ is used, the definition of a circle was inserted instead of
it." "If we want to make a particular combination of ideas permanent
in the mind, there is nothing which clenches it like a name specially
devoted to express it." In my view, the new conception is the _nail_
which connects the previous notions, and the name, as Mr. Mill says,
_clenches_ the junction.

33. I have above (Art. 30) referred to the difficulty of getting
hold of the right conception, as a proof that induction is not a
mere juxtaposition of facts. Mr. Mill does not dispute that it is
often difficult to hit upon the right conception. He says (i. 360),
"that a conception of the mind is introduced, is indeed most certain,
and Mr. Whewell has rightly stated elsewhere, that to hit upon the
right conception is often a far more difficult, and more meritorious
achievement, than to prove its applicability when obtained. But," he
adds, "a conception implies and corresponds to something conceived; and
although the conception itself is not in the facts, but in our mind, it
must be a conception of something which really is in the facts." But to
this I reply, that its being really in the facts, does not help us at
all towards knowledge, if we cannot see it there. As the poet says,

    It is the mind that sees: the outward eyes
    Present the object, but the mind descries.

And this is true of the sight which produces knowledge, as well as of
the sight which produces pleasure and pain, which is referred to in the
Tale.

34. Mr. Mill puts his view, as opposed to mine, in various ways, but,
as will easily be understood, the answers which I have to offer are
in all cases nearly to the same effect. Thus, he says (ii. 216), "the
tardy development of several of the physical sciences, for example,
of Optics, Electricity, Magnetism, and the higher generalizations of
Chemistry, Mr. Whewell ascribes to the fact that mankind had not yet
possessed themselves of the idea of Polarity, that is, of opposite
properties in opposite directions. But what was there to suggest such
an idea, until by a separate examination of several of these different
branches of knowledge it was shown that the facts of each of them did
present, in some instances at least, the curious phenomena of opposite
properties in opposite directions?" But on this I observe, that these
facts did not, nor do yet, present this conception to ordinary minds.
The opposition of properties, and even the opposition of directions,
which are thus apprehended by profound cultivators of science, are
of an abstruse and recondite kind; and to conceive any one kind of
polarity in its proper generality, is a process which few persons
hitherto appear to have mastered; still less, have men in general
come to conceive of them all as modifications of a general notion of
Polarity. The description which I have given of Polarity in general,
"opposite properties in opposite directions," is of itself a very
imperfect account of the manner in which corresponding antitheses are
involved in the portions of science into which Polar relations enter.
In excuse of its imperfection, I may say, that I believe it is the
first attempt to define Polarity in general; but yet, the conception
of Polarity has certainly been strongly and effectively present in the
minds of many of the sagacious men who have discovered and unravelled
polar phenomena. They attempted to convey this conception, each in his
own subject, sometimes by various and peculiar expressions, sometimes
by imaginary mechanism by which the antithetical results were produced;
their mode of expressing themselves being often defective or imperfect,
often containing what was superfluous; and their meaning was commonly
very imperfectly apprehended by most of their hearers and readers.
But still, the conception was there, gradually working itself into
clearness and distinctness, and in the mean time, directing their
experiments, and forming an essential element of their discoveries. So
far would it be from a sufficient statement of the case to say, that
they conceived polarity because they saw it;--that they saw it as soon
as it came into view;--and that they described it as they saw it.

35. The way in which such conceptions acquire clearness and
distinctness is often by means of Discussions of Definitions. To define
well a thought which already enters into trains of discovery, is often
a difficult matter. The business of such definition is a part of the
business of discovery. These, and other remarks connected with these,
which I had made in the _Philosophy_, Mr. Mill has quoted and adopted
(ii. 242). They appear to me to point very distinctly to the doctrine
to which he refuses his assent,--that there is a special process in the
mind, in addition to the mere observation of facts, which is necessary
at every step in the progress of knowledge. The Conception must be
_formed_ before it can be _defined_. The Definition gives the last
stamp of distinctness to the Conception; and enables us to express, in
a compact and lucid form, the new scientific propositions into which
the new Conception enters.

36. Since Mr. Mill assents to so much of what has been said in the
_Philosophy_, with regard to the process of scientific discovery, how,
it may be asked, would he express these doctrines so as to exclude that
which he thinks erroneous? If he objects to our saying that when we
obtain a new inductive truth, we connect phenomena by applying to them
a new Conception which fits them, in what terms would he describe the
process? If he will not agree to say, that in order to discover the law
of the facts, we must find an appropriate Conception, what language
would he use instead of this? This is a natural question; and the
answer cannot fail to throw light on the relation in which his views
and mine stand to each other.

Mr. Mill would say, I believe, that when we obtain a new inductive law
of facts, we find something in which the facts _resemble each other_;
and that the business of making such discoveries is the business of
discovering such resemblances. Thus, he says (of me,) (ii. 211),
"his Colligation of Facts by means of appropriate Conceptions, is
but the ordinary process of finding by a comparison of phenomena, in
what consists their agreement or resemblance." And the Methods of
experimental Inquiry which he gives (i. 450, &c.), proceed upon the
supposition that the business of discovery may be thus more properly
described.

37. There is no doubt that when we discover a law of nature by
induction, we find some point in which all the particular facts agree.
All the orbits of the planets agree in being ellipses, as Kepler
discovered; all falling bodies agree in being acted on by a uniform
force, as Galileo discovered; all refracted rays agree in having
the sines of incidence and refraction in a constant ratio, as Snell
discovered; all the bodies in the universe agree in attracting each
other, as Newton discovered; all chemical compounds agree in being
constituted of elements in definite proportions, as Dalton discovered.
But it appears to me a most scanty, vague, and incomplete account of
these steps in science, to say that the authors of them discovered
something in which the facts in each case agreed. The point in which
the cases agree, is of the most diverse kind in the different cases--in
some, a relation of space, in others, the action of a force, in others,
the mode of composition of a substance;--and the point of agreement,
visible to the discoverer alone, does not come even into his sight,
till after the facts have been connected by thoughts of his own, and
regarded in points of view in which he, by his mental acts, places
them. It would seem to me not much more inappropriate to say, that an
officer, who disciplines his men till they move together at the word of
command, does so by finding something in which they agree. If the power
of consentaneous motion did not exist in the individuals, he could not
create it: but that power being there, he finds it and uses it. Of
course I am aware that the parallel of the two cases is not exact; but
in the one case, as in the other, that in which the particular things
are found to agree, is something formed in the mind of him who brings
the agreement into view.


IV. _Mr. Mill's Four Methods of Inquiry._--38. Mr. Mill has not only
thus described the business of scientific discovery; he has also given
rules for it, founded on this description. It may be expected that we
should bestow some attention upon the methods of inquiry which he thus
proposes. I presume that they are regarded by his admirers as among the
most valuable parts of his book; as certainly they cannot fail to be,
if they describe methods of scientific inquiry in such a manner as to
be of use to the inquirer.

Mr. Mill enjoins four methods of experimental inquiry, which he calls
_the Method of Agreement_, _the Method of Difference_, _the Method
of Residues_, and _the Method of Concomitant Variations_[271]. They
are all described by formulæ of this kind:--Let there be, in the
observed facts, combinations of antecedents, _ABC_, _BC_, _ADE_, &c.
and combinations of corresponding consequents, _abc_, _bc_, _ade_, &c.;
and let the object of inquiry be, the consequence of some cause _A_, or
the cause of some consequence _a_. The Method of Agreement teaches us,
that when we find by experiment such facts as _abc_ the consequent of
_ABC_, and _ade_ the consequent of _ADE_, then _a_ is the consequent of
_A_. The Method of Difference teaches us that when we find such facts
as _abc_ the consequent of _ABC_, and _bc_ the consequent of _BC_, then
_a_ is the consequent of _A_. The Method of Residues teaches us, that
if _abc_ be the consequent of _ABC_, and if we have already ascertained
that the effect of _A_ is _a_, and the effect of _B_ is _b_, then we
may infer that the effect of _C_ is _c_. The Method of Concomitant
Variations teaches us, that if a phenomenon _a_ varies according as
another phenomenon _A_ varies, there is some connexion of causation
direct or indirect, between _A_ and _a_.

39. Upon these methods, the obvious thing to remark is, that they take
for granted the very thing which is most difficult to discover, the
reduction of the phenomena to formulæ such as are here presented to
us. When we have any set of complex facts offered to us; for instance,
those which were offered in the cases of discovery which I have
mentioned,--the facts of the planetary paths, of falling bodies, of
refracted rays, of cosmical motions, of chemical analysis; and when, in
any of these cases, we would discover the law of nature which governs
them, or, if any one chooses so to term it, the feature in which all
the cases agree, where are we to look for our _A_, _B_, _C_ and _a_,
_b_, _c_? Nature does not present to us the cases in this form; and
how are we to reduce them to this form? You say, _when_ we find the
combination of _ABC_ with _abc_ and _ABD_ with _abd_, then we may
draw our inference. Granted: but when and where are we to find such
combinations? Even now that the discoveries are made, who will point
out to us what are the _A_, _B_, _C_ and _a_, _b_, _c_ elements of the
cases which have just been enumerated? Who will tell us which of the
methods of inquiry those historically real and successful inquiries
exemplify? Who will carry these formulæ through the history of the
sciences, as they have really grown up; and show us that these four
methods have been operative in their formation; or that any light is
thrown upon the steps of their progress by reference to these formulæ?

40. Mr. Mill's four methods have a great resemblance to Bacon's
"Prerogatives of Instances;" for example, the Method of Agreement to
the _Instantiæ Ostensivæ_; the Method of Differences to the _Instantiæ
Absentiæ in Proximo_, and the _Instantiæ Crucis_; the Method of
Concomitant Variations to the _Instantiæ Migrantes_. And with regard to
the value of such methods, I believe all study of science will convince
us more and more of the wisdom of the remarks which Sir John Herschel
has made upon them[272].

"It has always appeared to us, we must confess, that the help which
the classification of instances under their different titles of
prerogative, affords to inductions, however just such classification
may be in itself, is yet more apparent than real. The force of the
instance must be felt in the mind before it can be referred to
its place in the system; and before it can be either referred or
appreciated it must be known; and when it _is_ appreciated, we are
ready enough to weave our web of induction, without greatly troubling
ourselves whence it derives the weight we acknowledge it to have in our
decisions.... No doubt such instances as these are highly instructive;
but the difficulty in physics is to find such, not to perceive their
force when found."


V. _His Examples._--41. If Mr. Mill's four methods had been applied by
him in his book to a large body of conspicuous and undoubted examples
of discovery, well selected and well analysed, extending along the
whole history of science, we should have been better able to estimate
the value of these methods. Mr. Mill has certainly offered a number
of examples of his methods; but I hope I may say, without offence,
that they appear to me to be wanting in the conditions which I have
mentioned. As I have to justify myself for rejecting Mr. Mill's
criticism of doctrines which I have put forward, and examples which I
have adduced, I may, I trust, be allowed to offer some critical remarks
in return, bearing upon the examples which he has given, in order to
illustrate his doctrines and precepts.

42. The first remark which I have to make is, that a large proportion
of his examples (i. 480, &c.) is taken from one favourite author;
who, however great his merit may be, is too recent a writer to have
had his discoveries confirmed by the corresponding investigations and
searching criticisms of other labourers in the same field, and placed
in their proper and permanent relation to established truths; these
alleged discoveries being, at the same time, principally such as deal
with the most complex and slippery portions of science, the laws of
vital action. Thus Mr. Mill has adduced, as examples of discoveries,
Prof. Liebig's doctrine--that death is produced by certain metallic
poisons through their forming indecomposable compounds; that the effect
of respiration upon the blood consists in the conversion of peroxide
of iron into protoxide--that the antiseptic power of salt arises from
its attraction for moisture--that chemical action is contagious; and
others. Now supposing that we have no doubt of the truth of these
discoveries, we must still observe that they cannot wisely be cited,
in order to exemplify the nature of the progress of knowledge, till
they have been verified by other chemists, and worked into their places
in the general scheme of chemistry; especially, since it is tolerably
certain that in the process of verification, they will be modified and
more precisely defined. Nor can I think it judicious to take so large
a proportion of our examples from a region of science in which, of all
parts of our material knowledge, the conceptions both of ordinary
persons, and even of men of science themselves, are most loose and
obscure, and the genuine principles most contested; which is the case
in physiology. It would be easy, I think, to point out the vague and
indeterminate character of many of the expressions in which the above
examples are propounded, as well as their doubtful position in the
scale of chemical generalization; but I have said enough to show why I
cannot give much weight to these, as cardinal examples of the method
of discovery; and therefore I shall not examine in detail how far they
support Mr. Mill's methods of inquiry.

43. Mr. Liebig supplies the first and the majority of Mr. Mill's
examples in chapter IX. of his Book on Induction. The second is
an example for which Mr. Mill states himself to be indebted to
Mr. Alexander Bain; the law established being this, that (i. 487)
electricity cannot exist in one body without the simultaneous
excitement of the opposite electricity in some neighbouring body, which
Mr. Mill also confirms by reference to Mr. Faraday's experiments on
voltaic wires.

I confess I am quite at a loss to understand what there is in the
doctrine here ascribed to Mr. Bain which was not known to the
electricians who, from the time of Franklin, explained the phenomena of
the Leyden vial. I may observe also that the mention of an "electrified
atmosphere" implies a hypothesis long obsolete. The essential point in
all those explanations was, that each electricity produced by induction
the opposite electricity in neighbouring bodies, as I have tried to
make apparent in the _History_[273]. Faraday has, more recently,
illustrated this universal co-existence of opposite electricities with
his usual felicity.

But the conjunction of this fact with voltaic phenomena, implies a
non-recognition of some of the simplest doctrines of the subject.
"Since," it is said (i. 488), "common or machine electricity, and
voltaic electricity may be considered for the present purpose to be
identical, Faraday wished to know, &c." I think Mr. Faraday would be
much astonished to learn that he considered electricity in equilibrium,
and electricity in the form of a voltaic current, to be, for any
purpose, identical. Nor do I conceive that he would assent to the
expression in the next page, that "from the nature of a voltaic charge,
the two opposite currents necessary to the existence of each other are
both accommodated in one wire." Mr. Faraday has, as it appears to me,
studiously avoided assenting to this hypothesis.

44. The next example is the one already so copiously dwelt upon by Sir
John Herschel, Dr. Wells's researches on the production of Dew. I have
already said[274] that "this investigation, although it has sometimes
been praised as an original discovery, was in fact only resolving the
phenomenon into principles already discovered namely, the doctrine of a
_constituent temperature_ of vapour, the different conducting power of
different bodies, and the like. And this agrees in substance with what
Mr. Mill says (i. 497); that the discovery, when made, was corroborated
by deduction from the known laws of aqueous vapour, of conduction, and
the like. Dr. Wells's researches on Dew tended much in this country
to draw attention to the general principles of Atmology; and we may
see, in this and in other examples which Mr. Mill adduces, that the
explanation of special phenomena by means of general principles,
already established, has, for common minds, a greater charm, and
is more complacently dwelt on, than the discovery of the general
principles themselves.

45. The next example, (i. 502) is given in order to illustrate the
Method of Residues, and is the discovery by M. Arago that a disk
of copper affects the vibrations of the magnetic needle. But this
apparently detached fact affords little instruction compared with the
singularly sagacious researches by which Mr. Faraday discovered the
cause of this effect to reside in the voltaic currents which the motion
of the magnetic needle developed in the copper. I have spoken of this
discovery in the _History_[275]. Mr. Mill however is quoting Sir John
Herschel in thus illustrating the Method of Residues. He rightly gives
the Perturbations of the Planets and Satellites as better examples of
the method[276].

46. In the next chapter (c. x.) Mr. Mill speaks of Plurality of causes
and of the Intermixture of effects, and gives examples of such cases.
He here teaches (i. 517) that chemical synthesis and analysis, (as when
oxygen and hydrogen compose water, and when water is resolved into
oxygen and hydrogen,) is properly _transformation_, but that because we
find that the weight of the compound is equal to the sum of the weights
of the elements, we take up the notion of chemical _composition_. I
have endeavoured to show[277] that the maxim, that the sum of the
weights of the elements is equal to the weight of the compound, was,
historically, not _proved_ from experiment, but _assumed_ in the
reasonings upon experiments.

47. I have now made my remarks upon nearly all the examples which Mr.
Mill gives of scientific inquiry, so far as they consist of knowledge
which has really been obtained. I may mention, as points which
appear to me to interfere with the value of Mr. Mill's references to
examples, expressions which I cannot reconcile with just conceptions
of scientific truth; as when he says (i. 523), "some other force which
_impinges on_ the first force;" and very frequently indeed, of the
"tangential _force_," as co-ordinate with the centripetal force.

When he speaks (ii. 20, Note) of "the doctrine now universally received
that the earth is a great natural magnet with two poles," he does not
recognize the recent theory of Gauss, so remarkably coincident with a
vast body of facts[278]. Indeed in his statement, he rejects no less
the earlier views proposed by Halley, theorized by Euler, and confirmed
by Hansteen, which show that we are compelled to assume at least _four_
poles of terrestrial magnetism; which I had given an account of in the
first edition of the _History_.

There are several other cases which he puts, in which, the knowledge
spoken of not having been yet acquired, he tells us how he would
set about acquiring it; for instance, if the question were (i. 526)
whether mercury be a cure for a given disease; or whether the brain be
a voltaic pile (ii. 21); or whether the moon be inhabited (ii. 100);
or whether all crows are black (ii. 124); I confess that I have no
expectation of any advantage to philosophy from discussions of this
kind.

48. I will add also, that I do not think any light can be thrown upon
scientific methods, at present, by grouping along with such physical
inquiries as I have been speaking of, speculations concerning the
human mind, its qualities and operations. Thus he speaks (i. 508) of
human characters, as exemplifying the effect of plurality of causes;
of (i. 518) the phenomena of our mental nature, which are analogous to
chemical rather than to dynamical phenomena; of (i. 518) the reason why
susceptible persons are imaginative; to which I may add, the passage
where he says (i. 444), "let us take as an example of a phenomenon
which we have no means of fabricating artificially, a human mind."
These, and other like examples, occur in the part of his work in which
he is speaking of scientific inquiry in general, not in the Book on the
Logic of the Moral Sciences; and are, I think, examples more likely to
lead us astray than to help our progress, in discovering the laws of
Scientific Inquiry, in the ordinary sense of the term.


VI. _Mr. Mill against Hypothesis._--49. I will now pass from Mr. Mill's
methods, illustrated by such examples as those which I have been
considering, to the views respecting the conditions of Scientific
Induction to which I have been led, by such a survey as I could
make, of the whole history of the principal Inductive Sciences; and
especially, to those views to which Mr. Mill offers his objections[279].

Mr. Mill thinks that I have been too favourable to the employment
of hypotheses, as means of discovering scientific truth; and that
I have countenanced a laxness of method, in allowing hypotheses to
be established, merely in virtue of the accordance of their results
with the phenomena. I believe I should be as cautious as Mr. Mill, in
accepting mere hypothetical explanations of phenomena, in any case in
which we had the phenomena, and their relations, placed before both of
us in an equally clear light. I have not accepted the Undulatory theory
of Heat, though recommended by so many coincidences and analogies[280].
But I see some grave reasons for not giving any great weight to Mr.
Mill's admonitions;--reasons drawn from the language which he uses on
the subject, and which appears to me inconsistent with the conditions
of the cases to which he applies it. Thus, when he says (ii. 22) that
the condition of a hypothesis accounting for all the known phenomena
is "often fulfilled equally well by two conflicting hypotheses," I can
only say that I know of no such case in the history of Science, where
the phenomena are at all numerous and complicated; and that if such
a case were to occur, one of the hypotheses might always be resolved
into the other. When he says, that "this evidence (the agreement of the
results of the hypothesis with the phenomena) cannot be of the smallest
value, because we cannot have in the case of such an hypothesis the
assurance that if the hypothesis be false it must lead to results at
variance with the true facts," we must reply, with due submission, that
we have, in the case spoken of, the most complete evidence of this;
for any change in the hypothesis would make it incapable of accounting
for the facts. When he says that "if we give ourselves the license
of inventing the causes as well as their laws, a person of fertile
imagination might devise a hundred modes of accounting for any given
fact;" I reply, that the question is about accounting for a large and
complex series of facts, of which the laws have been ascertained: and
as a test of Mr. Mill's assertion, I would propose as a challenge to
any person of fertile imagination to devise any _one_ other hypothesis
to account for the perturbations of the moon, or the coloured fringes
of shadows, besides the hypothesis by which they have actually been
explained with such curious completeness. This challenge has been
repeatedly offered, but never in any degree accepted; and I entertain
no apprehension that Mr. Mill's supposition will ever be verified by
such a performance.

50. I see additional reason for mistrusting the precision of Mr. Mill's
views of that accordance of phenomena with the results of a hypothesis,
in several others of the expressions which he uses (ii. 23). He speaks
of a hypothesis being a "_plausible_ explanation of all or most of the
phenomena;" but the case which we have to consider is where it gives an
_exact_ representation of all the phenomena in which its results can be
traced. He speaks of its being certain that the laws of the phenomena
are "_in some measure analogous_" to those given by the hypothesis; the
case to be dealt with being, that they are in every way identical. He
speaks of this analogy being certain, from the fact that the hypothesis
can be "for a moment _tenable_;" as if any one had recommended a
hypothesis which is tenable only while a small part of the facts
are considered, when it is inconsistent with others which a fuller
examination of the case discloses. I have nothing to say, and have said
nothing, in favour of hypotheses which are _not_ tenable. He says there
are many such "_harmonies_ running through the laws of phenomena in
other respects radically distinct;" and he gives as an instance, the
laws of light and heat. I have never alleged such harmonies as grounds
of theory, unless they should amount to identities; and if they should
do this, I have no doubt that the most sober thinkers will suppose
the causes to be of the same kind in the two harmonizing instances.
If chlorine, iodine and brome, or sulphur and phosphorus, have, as
Mr. Mill says, analogous properties, I should call these substances
_analogous_: but I can see no temptation to frame an hypothesis that
they are _identical_ (which he seems to fear), so long as Chemistry
proves them distinct. But any hypothesis of an analogy in the
constitution of these elements (suppose, for instance, a resemblance
in their atomic form or composition) would seem to me to have a fair
claim to trial; and to be capable of being elevated from one degree of
probability to another by the number, variety, and exactitude of the
explanations of phenomena which it should furnish.


VII. _Against prediction of Facts._--51. These expressions of Mr.
Mill have reference to a way in which hypotheses may be corroborated,
in estimating the value of which, it appears that he and I differ.
"It seems to be thought," he says (ii. 23), "that an hypothesis of
the sort in question is entitled to a more favourable reception, if,
besides accounting for the facts previously known, it has led to the
anticipation and prediction of others which experience afterwards
verified." And he adds, "Such predictions and their fulfilment are
indeed well calculated to strike the ignorant vulgar;" but it is
strange, he says, that any considerable stress should be laid upon such
a coincidence by scientific thinkers. However strange it may seem to
him, there is no doubt that the most scientific thinkers, far more than
the ignorant vulgar, have allowed the coincidence of results predicted
by theory with fact afterwards observed, to produce the strongest
effects upon their conviction; and that all the best-established
theories have obtained their permanent place in general acceptance
in virtue of such coincidences, more than of any other evidence. It
was not the ignorant vulgar alone, who were struck by the return of
Halley's comet, as an evidence of the Newtonian theory. Nor was it the
ignorant vulgar, who were struck with those facts which did so much
strike men of science, as curiously felicitous proofs of the undulatory
theory of light,--the production of darkness by two luminous rays
interfering in a special manner; the refraction of a single ray of
light into a conical pencil; and other complex yet precise results,
predicted by the theory and verified by experiment. It must, one would
think, strike all persons in proportion to their thoughtfulness, that
when Nature thus does our bidding, she acknowledges that we have learnt
her true language. If we can predict new facts which we have not seen,
as well as explain those which we have seen, it must be because our
explanation is not a mere formula of observed facts, but a truth of a
deeper kind. Mr. Mill says, "If the laws of the propagation of light
agree with those of the vibrations of an elastic fluid in so many
respects as is necessary to make the hypothesis a plausible explanation
of all or most of the phenomena known at the time, it is nothing
strange that they should accord with each other in one respect more."
Nothing strange, if the theory be true; but quite unaccountable,
if it be not. If I copy a long series of letters of which the last
half-dozen are concealed, and if I guess those aright, as is found to
be the case when they are afterwards uncovered, this must be because
I have made out the import of the inscription. To say, that because I
have copied all that I could see, it is nothing strange that I should
guess those which I cannot see, would be absurd, without supposing such
a ground for guessing. The notion that the discovery of the laws and
causes of phenomena is a loose haphazard sort of guessing, which gives
"plausible" explanations, accidental coincidences, casual "harmonies,"
laws, "in some measure analogous" to the true ones, suppositions
"tenable" for a time, appears to me to be a misapprehension of the
whole nature of science; as it certainly is inapplicable to the case to
which it is principally applied by Mr. Mill.

52. There is another kind of evidence of theories, very closely
approaching to the verification of untried predictions, and to which,
apparently, Mr. Mill does not attach much importance, since he has
borrowed the term by which I have described it, _Consilience_, but
has applied it in a different manner (ii. 530, 563, 590). I have
spoken, in the _Philosophy_[281], of the _Consilience of Inductions_,
as one of the _Tests of Hypotheses_, and have exemplified it by many
instances; for example, the theory of universal gravitation, obtained
by induction from the motions of the planets, was found to explain
also that peculiar motion of the spheroidal earth which produces the
Precession of the Equinoxes. This, I have said, was a striking and
surprising coincidence which gave the theory a stamp of truth beyond
the power of ingenuity to counterfeit. I may compare such occurrences
to a case of interpreting an unknown character, in which two different
inscriptions, deciphered by different persons, had given the same
alphabet. We should, in such a case, believe with great confidence
that the alphabet was the true one; and I will add, that I believe the
history of science offers no example in which a theory supported by
such consiliences, had been afterwards proved to be false.

53. Mr. Mill accepts (ii. 21) a rule of M. Comte's, that we may apply
hypotheses, provided they are capable of being afterwards verified as
facts. I have a much higher respect for Mr. Mill's opinion than for
M. Comte's[282]; but I do not think that this rule will be found of
any value. It appears to me to be tainted with the vice which I have
already noted, of throwing the whole burthen of explanation upon the
unexplained word _fact_--unexplained in any permanent and definite
opposition to theory. As I have said, the Newtonian theory _is_ a
fact. Every true theory is a fact. Nor does the distinction become
more clear by Mr. Mill's examples. "The vortices of Descartes would
have been," he says, "a perfectly legitimate hypothesis, if it had
been possible by any mode of explanation which we could entertain
the hope of possessing, to bring the question whether such vortices
exist or not, within the reach of our observing faculties." But this
was possible, and was done. The free passage of comets through the
spaces in which these vortices should have been, convinced men that
these vortices did not exist. In like manner Mr. Mill rejects the
hypothesis of a luminiferous ether, "because it can neither be seen,
heard, smelt, tasted, or touched." It is a strange complaint to make of
the vehicle of light, that it cannot be heard, smelt, or tasted. Its
vibrations _can_ be seen. The fringes of shadows for instance, show its
vibrations, just as the visible lines of waves near the shore show the
undulations of the sea. Whether this can be touched, that is, whether
it resists motion, is hardly yet clear. I am far from saying there are
not difficulties on this point, with regard to _all_ theories which
suppose a _medium_. But there are no more difficulties of this kind in
the undulatory theory of light, than there are in Fourier's theory of
heat, which M. Comte adopts as a model of scientific investigation; or
in the theory of voltaic _currents_, about which Mr. Mill appears to
have no doubt; or of electric _atmospheres_, which, though generally
obsolete, Mr. Mill appears to favour; for though it had been said that
we _feel_ such atmospheres, no one had said that they have the other
attributes of matter.


VIII. _Newton's Vera Causa._--54. Mr. Mill conceives (ii. 17) that his
own rule concerning hypotheses coincides with Newton's Rule, that the
cause assumed must be a _vera causa_. But he allows that "Mr. Whewell
... has had little difficulty in showing that his (Newton's) conception
was neither precise nor consistent with itself." He also allows that
"Mr. Whewell is clearly right in denying it to be necessary that the
cause assigned should be a cause already known; else how could we ever
become acquainted with new causes?" These points being agreed upon, I
think that a little further consideration will lead to the conviction
that Newton's Rule of philosophizing will best become a valuable guide,
if we understand it as asserting that when the explanation of two or
more different kinds of phenomena (as the revolutions of the planets,
the fall of a stone, and the precession of the equinoxes,) lead us to
_the same_ cause, such a coincidence gives a reality to the cause. We
have, in fact, in such a case, a Consilience of Inductions.

55. When Mr. Mill condemns me (ii. 24) (using, however, expressions of
civility which I gladly acknowledge,) for having recognized no mode of
Induction except that of trying hypothesis after hypothesis until one
is found which fits the phenomena, I must beg to remind the readers of
our works, that Mr. Mill himself allows (i. 363) that the process of
finding a conception which binds together observed facts "is tentative,
that it consists of a succession of guesses, many being rejected until
one at last occurs fit to be chosen." I must remind them also that I
have given a Section upon the _Tests of Hypotheses_, to which I have
just referred,--that I have given various methods of Induction, as
the _Method of Gradation_, the _Method of Natural Classification_,
the _Method of Curves_, the _Method of Means_, the _Method of Least
Squares_, the _Method of Residues_: all which I have illustrated by
conspicuous examples from the History of Science; besides which, I
conceive that what I have said of the Ideas belonging to each science,
and of the construction and explication of conceptions, will point
out in each case, in what region we are to look for the Inductive
Element in order to make new discoveries. I have already ventured to
say, elsewhere, that the methods which I have given, are as definite
and practical as any others which have been proposed, with the
great additional advantage of being the methods by which all great
discoveries in science have really been made.


IX. _Successive Generalizations._--56. There is one feature in the
construction of science which Mr. Mill notices, but to which he does
not ascribe, as I conceive, its due importance: I mean, that process by
which we not only ascend from particular facts to a general law, but
when this is done, ascend from the first general law to others more
general; and so on, proceeding to the highest point of generalization.
This character of the scientific process was first clearly pointed
out by Bacon, and is one of the most noticeable instances of his
philosophical sagacity. "There are," he says, "two ways, and can
be only two, of seeking and finding truth. The one from sense and
particulars, takes a flight to the most general axioms, and from these
principles and their truth, settled once for all, invents and judges of
intermediate axioms. The other method collects axioms from sense and
particulars, ascending _continuously and by degrees_, so that in the
end it arrives at the most general axioms:" meaning by _axioms_, laws
or principles. The structure of the most complete sciences consists
of several such steps,--_floors_, as Bacon calls them, of successive
generalization; and thus this structure may be exhibited as a kind
of scientific pyramid. I have constructed this pyramid in the case
of the science of Astronomy[283]: and I am gratified to find that
the illustrious Humboldt approves of the design, and speaks of it as
executed with complete success[284]. The capability of being exhibited
in this form of successive generalizations, arising from particulars
upward to some very general law, is the condition of all tolerably
perfect sciences; and the steps of the successive generalizations are
commonly the most important events in the history of the science.

57. Mr. Mill does not reject this process of generalization; but he
gives it no conspicuous place, making it only one of three modes of
reducing a law of causation into other laws. "There is," he says (i.
555), "the _subsumption_ of one law under another; ... the gathering up
of several laws into one more general law which includes them all. He
adds afterwards, that the general law is the _sum_ of the partial ones
(i. 557), an expression which appears to me inadequate, for reasons
which I have already stated. The general law is not the mere sum of
the particular laws. It is, as I have already said, their amount _in a
new point of view_. A new conception is introduced; thus, Newton did
not merely add together the laws of the motions of the moon and of the
planets, and of the satellites, and of the earth; he looked at them
altogether as the result of a universal force of mutual gravitation;
and therein consisted his generalization. And the like might be pointed
out in other cases.

58. I am the more led to speak of Mr. Mill as not having given due
importance to this process of successive generalization, by the way in
which he speaks in another place (ii. 525) of this doctrine of Bacon.
He conceives Bacon "to have been radically wrong when he enunciates,
as a universal rule, that induction should proceed from the lowest to
the middle principles, and from those to the highest, never reversing
that order, and consequently, leaving no room for the discovery of new
principles by way of deduction[285] at all."

59. I conceive that the Inductive Table of Astronomy, to which I have
already referred, shows that in that science,--the most complete which
has yet existed,--the history of the science has gone on, as to its
general movement, in accordance with the view which Bacon's sagacity
enjoined. The successive generalizations, _so far as they were true_,
were made by successive generations. I conceive also that the Inductive
Table of Optics shows the same thing; and this, without taking for
granted the truth of the Undulatory Theory; for with regard to all the
steps of the progress of the science, lower than that highest one,
there is, I conceive, no controversy.

60. Also, the Science of Mechanics, although Mr. Mill more especially
refers to it, as a case in which the highest generalizations (for
example the Laws of Motion) were those earliest ascertained with any
scientific exactness, will, I think, on a more careful examination of
its history, be found remarkably to confirm Bacon's view. For, in that
science, we have, in the first place, very conspicuous examples of the
vice of the method pursued by the ancients in flying to the highest
generalizations first; as when they made their false distinctions of
the laws of _natural_ and _violent_ motions, and of _terrestrial_
and _celestial_ motions. Many erroneous laws of motion were asserted
through neglect of facts or want of experiments. And when Galileo and
his school had in some measure succeeded in discovering some of the
true laws of the motions of terrestrial bodies, they did not at once
assert them as general: for they did not at all apply those laws to
the celestial motions. As I have remarked, all Kepler's speculations
respecting the causes of the motions of the planets, went upon the
supposition that the First Law of terrestrial Motion did not apply to
celestial bodies; but that, on the contrary, some continual force was
requisite to keep up, as well as to originate, the planetary motions.
Nor did Descartes, though he enunciated the Laws of Motion with more
generality than his predecessors, (but not with exactness,) venture
to trust the planets to those laws; on the contrary, he invented his
machinery of Vortices in order to keep up the motions of the heavenly
bodies. Newton was the first who extended the laws of terrestrial
motion to the celestial spaces; and in doing so, he used all the laws
of the celestial motions which had previously been discovered by
more limited inductions. To these instances, I may add the gradual
generalization of the Third Law of motion by Huyghens, the Bernoullis,
and Herman, which I have described in the _History_[286] as preceding
that Period of Deduction, to which the succeeding narrative[287] is
appropriated. In Mechanics, then, we have a cardinal example of the
historically gradual and successive ascent of science from particulars
to the most general laws.

61. The Science of Hydrostatics may appear to offer a more favourable
example of the ascent to the most general laws, without going through
the intermediate particular laws; and it is true, with reference
to this science, as I have observed[288], that it does exhibit the
_peculiarity_ of our possessing the most general principles on which
the phenomena depend, and from which many cases of special facts are
explained by deduction; while other cases cannot be so explained,
from the want of principles intermediate between the highest and the
lowest. And I have assigned, as the reason of this peculiarity, that
the general principles of the Mechanics of Fluids were not obtained
with reference to the science itself, but by extension from the sister
science of the Mechanics of Solids. The two sciences are parts of the
same Inductive Pyramid; and having reached the summit of this Pyramid
on one side, we are tempted to descend on the other from the highest
generality to more narrow laws. Yet even in this science, the best
part of our knowledge is mainly composed of inductive laws, obtained
by inductive examination of particular classes of facts. The mere
mathematical investigations of the laws of waves, for instance, have
not led to any results so valuable as the experimental researches of
Bremontier, Emy, the Webers, and Mr. Scott Russell. And in like manner
in Acoustics, the Mechanics of Elastic Fluids[289], the deductions of
mathematicians made on general principles have not done so much for
our knowledge, as the cases of vibrations of plates and pipes examined
experimentally by Chladni, Savart, Mr. Wheatstone and Mr. Willis. We
see therefore, even in these sciences, no reason to slight the wisdom
which exhorts us to ascend from particulars to intermediate laws,
rather than to hope to deduce these latter better from the more general
laws obtained once for all.

62. Mr. Mill himself indeed, notwithstanding that he slights Bacon's
injunction to seek knowledge by proceeding from less general to more
general laws, has given a very good reason why this is commonly
necessary and wise. He says (ii. 526), "Before we attempt to explain
deductively, from more general laws, any new class of phenomena, it is
desirable to have gone as far as is practicable in ascertaining the
empirical laws of these phenomena; so as to compare the results of
deduction, not with one individual instance after another, but with
general propositions expressive of the points of agreement which have
been found among many instances. For," he adds with great justice,
"if Newton had been obliged to verify the theory of gravitation, not
by deducing from it Kepler's laws, but by deducing all the observed
planetary positions which had served Kepler to establish those laws,
the Newtonian theory would probably never have emerged from the state
of an hypothesis." To which we may add, that it is certain, from the
history of the subject, that in that case the hypothesis would never
have been framed at all.


X. _Mr. Mill's Hope from Deduction._--63. Mr. Mill expresses a hope
of the efficacy of Deduction, rather than Induction, in promoting
the future progress of Science; which hope, so far as the physical
sciences are concerned, appears to me at variance with all the lessons
of the history of those sciences. He says (i. 579), "that the advances
henceforth to be expected even in physical, and still more in mental
and social science, will be chiefly the result of deduction, is evident
from the general considerations already adduced:" these considerations
being, that the phenomena to be considered are very complex, and are
the result of many known causes, of which we have to disentangle the
results.

64. I cannot but take a very different view from this. I think that
any one, looking at the state of physical science, will see that there
are still a vast mass of cases, in which we do not at all know the
causes, at least, in their full generality; and that the knowledge of
new causes, and the generalization of the laws of those already known,
can only be obtained by new _inductive_ discoveries. Except by new
Inductions, equal, in their efficacy for grouping together phenomena
in new points of view, to any which have yet been performed in the
history of science, how are we to solve such questions as those which,
in the survey of what we already know, force themselves upon our minds?
Such as, to take only a few of the most obvious examples--What is the
nature of the connexion of heat and light? How does heat produce the
expansion, liquefaction and vaporization of bodies? What is the nature
of the connexion between the optical and the chemical properties of
light? What is the relation between optical, crystalline and chemical
polarity? What is the connexion between the atomic constitution and
the physical qualities of bodies? What is the tenable definition of a
mineral species? What is the true relation of the apparently different
types of vegetable life (monocotyledons, dicotyledons, and cryptogamous
plants)? What is the relation of the various types of animal life
(vertebrates, articulates, radiates, &c.)? What is the number, and
what are the distinctions of the Vital Powers? What is the internal
constitution of the earth? These, and many other questions of equal
interest, no one, I suppose, expects to see solved by deduction from
principles already known. But we can, in many of them, see good hope of
progress by a large use of induction; including, of course, copious and
careful experiments and observations.

65. With such questions before us, as have now been suggested, I
can see nothing but a most mischievous narrowing of the field and
enfeebling of the spirit of scientific exertion, in the doctrine that
"Deduction is the great scientific work of the present and of future
ages;" and that "A revolution is peaceably and progressively effecting
itself in philosophy the reverse of that to which Bacon has attached
his name." I trust, on the contrary, that we have many new laws of
nature still to discover; and that our race is destined to obtain a
sight of wider truths than any we yet discern, including, as cases, the
general laws we now know, and obtained from these known laws as they
must be, by Induction.

66. I can see, however, reasons for the comparatively greater favour
with which Mr. Mill looks upon Deduction, in the views to which he has
mainly directed his attention. The explanation of remarkable phenomena
by known laws of Nature, has, as I have already said, a greater charm
for many minds than the discovery of the laws themselves. In the case
of such explanations, the problem proposed is more definite, and the
solution more obviously complete. For the process of induction includes
a mysterious step, by which we pass from particulars to generals,
of which step the reason always seems to be inadequately rendered
by any words which we can use; and this step to most minds is not
demonstrative, as to few is it given to perform it on a great scale.
But the process of explanation of facts by known laws is deductive,
and has at every step a force like that of demonstration, producing
a feeling peculiarly gratifying to the clear intellects which are
most capable of following the process. We may often see instances in
which this admiration for deductive skill appears in an extravagant
measure; as when men compare Laplace with Newton. Nor should I think
it my business to argue against such a preference, unless it were
likely to leave us too well satisfied with what we know already, to
chill our hope of scientific progress, and to prevent our making any
further strenuous efforts to ascend, higher than we have yet done, the
mountain-chain which limits human knowledge.

67. But there is another reason which, I conceive, operates in leading
Mr. Mill to look to Deduction as the principal means of future progress
in knowledge, and which is a reason of considerable weight in the
subjects of research which, as I conceive, he mainly has in view. In
the study of our own minds and of the laws which govern the history of
society, I do not think that it is very likely that we shall hereafter
arrive at any wider principles than those of which we already possess
some considerable knowledge; and this, for a special reason; namely,
that our knowledge in such cases is not gathered by mere external
observation of a collection of external facts; but acquired by
attention to internal facts, our own emotions, thoughts, and springs of
action; facts are connected by ties existing in our own consciousness,
and not in mere observed juxtaposition, succession, or similitude.
How the character, for instance, is influenced by various causes, (an
example to which Mr. Mill repeatedly refers, ii. 518, &c.), is an
inquiry which may perhaps be best conducted by considering what we know
of the influence of education and habit, government and occupation,
hope and fear, vanity and pride, and the like, upon men's characters,
and by tracing the various effects of the intermixture of such
influences. Yet even here, there seems to be room for the discovery
of laws in the way of experimental inquiry: for instance, what share
race or family has in the formation of character; a question which can
hardly be solved to any purpose in any other way than by collecting
and classing instances. And in the same way, many of the principles
which regulate the material wealth of states, are obtained, if not
exclusively, at least most clearly and securely, by induction from
large surveys of facts. Still, however, I am quite ready to admit that
in Mental and Social Science, we are much less likely than in Physical
Science, to obtain new truths by any process which can be distinctively
termed _Induction_; and that in those sciences, what may be called
_Deductions_ from principles of thought and action of which we are
already conscious, or to which we assent when they are felicitously
picked out of our thoughts and put into words, must have a large share;
and I may add, that this observation of Mr. Mill appears to me to be
important, and, in its present connexion, new.


XI. _Fundamental opposition of our doctrines._--68. I have made nearly
all the remarks which I now think it of any consequence to make upon
Mr. Mill's _Logic_, so far as it bears upon the doctrines contained
in my _History_ and _Philosophy_. And yet there remains still
untouched one great question, involving probably the widest of all the
differences between him and me. I mean the question whether geometrical
axioms, (and, as similar in their evidence to these, _all_ axioms,) be
truths derived from experience, or be necessary truths in some deeper
sense. This is one of the fundamental questions of philosophy; and all
persons who take an interest in metaphysical discussions, know that the
two opposite opinions have been maintained with great zeal in all ages
of speculation. To me it appears that there are _two_ distinct elements
in our knowledge, Experience, without, and the Mind, within. Mr. Mill
derives all our knowledge from Experience _alone_. In a question thus
going to the root of all knowledge, the opposite arguments must needs
cut deep on both sides. Mr. Mill cannot deny that our knowledge of
geometrical axioms and the like, _seems_ to be _necessary_. I cannot
deny that our knowledge, axiomatic as well as other, _never is_
acquired _without experience_.

69. Perhaps ordinary readers may despair of following our reasonings,
when they find that they can only be made intelligible by supposing,
on the one hand, a person who thinks distinctly and yet has never seen
or felt any external object; and on the other hand, a person who is
transferred, as Mr. Mill supposes (ii. 117), to "distant parts of the
stellar regions where the phenomena may be entirely unlike those with
which we are acquainted," and where even the axiom, that every effect
must have a cause, does not hold good. Nor, in truth, do I think it
necessary here to spend many words on this subject. Probably, for those
who take an interest in this discussion, most of the arguments on each
side have already been put forwards with sufficient repetition. I have,
in an "Essay on the Fundamental Antithesis of Philosophy," and in some
accompanying "Remarks," printed[290] at the end of the second edition
of my _Philosophy_, given my reply to what has been said on this
subject, both by Mr. Mill, and by the author of a very able critique on
my _History_ and _Philosophy_ which appeared in the _Quarterly Review_
in 1841: and I will not here attempt to revive the general discussion.

70. Perhaps I may be allowed to notice, that in one part of Mr. Mill's
work where this subject is treated, there is the appearance of one of
the parties to the controversy pronouncing judgment in his own cause.
This indeed is a temptation which it is especially difficult for an
author to resist, who writes a treatise upon _Fallacies_, the subject
of Mr. Mill's fifth Book. In such a treatise, the writer has an easy
way of disposing of adverse opinions by classing them as "Fallacies,"
and putting them side by side with opinions universally acknowledged to
be false. In this way, Mr. Mill has dealt with several points which are
still, as I conceive, matters of controversy (ii. 357, &c.).

71. But undoubtedly, Mr. Mill has given his argument against my
opinions with great distinctness in another place (i. 319). In order
to show that it is merely habitual association which gives to an
experimental truth the character of a necessary truth, he quotes
the case of the laws of motion, which were really discovered from
experiment, but are now looked upon as the only conceivable laws; and
especially, what he conceives as "the _reductio ad absurdum_ of the
theory of inconceivableness," an opinion which I had ventured to throw
out, that if we could conceive the Composition of bodies distinctly,
we might be able to see that it is necessary that the modes of their
composition should be definite. I do not think that readers in general
will see anything absurd in the opinion, that the laws of Mechanics,
and even the laws of the Chemical Composition of bodies, may depend
upon principles as necessary as the properties of space and number; and
that this necessity, though not at all perceived by persons who have
only the ordinary obscure and confused notions on such subjects, may
be evident to a mind which has, by effort and discipline, rendered its
ideas of Mechanical Causation, Elementary Composition and Difference of
Kind, clear and precise. It may easily be, I conceive, that while such
necessary principles are perceived to be necessary only by a few minds
of highly cultivated insight, such principles as the axioms of Geometry
and Arithmetic may be perceived to be necessary by _all_ minds which
have any habit of abstract thought at all: and I conceive also, that
though these axioms are brought into distinct view by a certain degree
of intellectual cultivation, they may still be much better described
as conditions of experience, than as results of experience:--as laws
of the mind and of its activity, rather than as facts impressed upon a
mind merely passive.


XII. _Absurdities in Mr. Mill's Logic._--72. I will not pursue the
subject further: only, as the question has arisen respecting the
absurdities to which each of the opposite doctrines leads, I will point
out opinions connected with this subject, which Mr. Mill has stated in
various parts of his book.

He holds (i. 317) that it is merely from habit that we are unable to
conceive the _last point_ of space or the _last instant_ of time.
He holds (ii. 360) that it is strange that any one should rely upon
the _à priori_ evidence that space or extension is infinite, or that
nothing can be made of nothing. He holds (i. 304) that the first law
of _motion_ is _rigorously true_, but that the axioms respecting
the _lever_ are only _approximately_ true. He holds (ii. 110) that
there may be sidereal firmaments in which events succeed each other
at random, without obeying any laws of causation; although one might
suppose that even if space and cause are both to have their limits,
still they might terminate together: and then, even on this bold
supposition, we should no _where_ have a world in which events were
_casual_. He holds (ii. 111) that the axiom, that every event must
have a cause, is established by means of an "induction by simple
enumeration:" and in like manner, that the principles of number and
of geometry are proved by this method of simple enumeration alone. He
ascribes the proof (i. 162) of the axiom, "things which are equal to
the same are equal to each other," to the fact that this proposition
has been perpetually _found_ true and never false. He holds (i. 338)
that "In all propositions concerning numbers, a condition is implied,
without which none of them would be true; and that condition is an
assumption which _may be false_. _The condition is that_ 1 = 1."

73. Mr. Mill further holds (i. 309), that it is a characteristic
property of geometrical forms, that they are capable of being painted
in the imagination with a distinctness equal to reality:--that our
ideas of forms exactly resemble our sensations: which, it is implied,
is not the case with regard to any other class of our ideas;--that we
thus may have mental pictures of all possible combinations of lines
and angles, which are as fit subjects of geometrical experimentation
as the realities themselves. He says, that "we know that the imaginary
lines exactly resemble real ones;" and that we obtain this knowledge
respecting the characteristic property of the idea of space by
experience; though it does not appear _how_ we can compare our _ideas_
with the _realities_, since we know the realities only _by_ our ideas;
or why this property of their resemblance should be confined to _one
class_ of ideas alone.

74. I have now made such remarks as appear to me to be necessary, on
the most important parts of Mr. Mill's criticism of my _Philosophy_. I
hope I have avoided urging any thing in a contentious manner; as I have
certainly written with no desire of controversy, but only with a view
to offer to those who may be willing to receive it, some explanation of
portions of my previous writings. I have already said, that if this had
not have been my especial object, I could with pleasure have noted the
passages of Mr. Mill's _Logic_ which I admire, rather than the points
in which we differ. I will in a very few words refer to some of these
points, as the most agreeable way of taking leave of the dispute.

I say then that Mr. Mill appears to me especially instructive in
his discussion of the nature of the proof which is conveyed by the
syllogism; and that his doctrine, that the force of the syllogism
consists in an _inductive assertion, with an interpretation added
to it_, solves very happily the difficulties which baffle the
other theories of this subject. I think that this doctrine of his
is made still more instructive, by his excepting from it the cases
of Scriptural Theology and of Positive Law (i. 260), as cases in
which general propositions, not particular facts, are our original
data. I consider also that the recognition of _Kinds_ (i. 166) as
classes in which we have, not a finite but an _inexhaustible_ body of
resemblances among individuals, and as groups made by nature, not by
mere definition, is very valuable, as stopping the inroad to an endless
train of false philosophy. I conceive that he takes the right ground
in his answer to Hume's argument against miracles (ii. 183): and I
admire the acuteness with which he has criticized Laplace's tenets on
the Doctrine of Chances, and the candour with which he has, in the
second edition, acknowledged oversights on this subject made in the
first. I think that much, I may almost say all, which he says on the
subject of Language, is very philosophical; for instance, what he says
(ii. 238) of the way in which words acquire their meaning in common
use. I especially admire the acuteness and force with which he has
shown (ii. 255) how moral principles expressed in words degenerate into
formulas, and yet how the formula cannot be rejected without a moral
loss. This "perpetual oscillation in spiritual truths," as he happily
terms it, has never, I think, been noted in the same broad manner,
and is a subject of most instructive contemplation. And though I have
myself refrained from associating moral and political with physical
science in my study of the subject, I see a great deal which is full of
promise for the future progress of moral and political knowledge in Mr.
Mill's sixth Book, "On the Logic of the Moral and Political Sciences."
Even his arrangement of the various methods which have been or may
be followed in "the Social Science,"--"the Chemical or Experimental
Method," "the Geometrical or Abstract Method," "the Physical or
Concrete Deductive Method," "the Inverse Deductive or Historical
Method," though in some degree fanciful and forced, abounds with
valuable suggestions; and his estimate of "the interesting philosophy
of the Bentham school," the main example of "the geometrical method,"
is interesting and philosophical. On some future occasion, I may,
perhaps, venture into the region of which Mr. Mill has thus essayed
to map the highways: for it is from no despair either of the great
progress to be made in such truth as that here referred to, or of the
effect of philosophical method in arriving at such truth, that I have,
in what I have now written, confined myself to the less captivating but
more definite part of the subject.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 264: [_A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive, being
a connected view of the Principles of Evidence, and of the Methods of
Scientific Investigation._ By John Stuart Mill.]]

[Footnote 265: These Remarks were published in 1849, under the title
_Of Induction, with especial reference to Mr. J. S. Mill's System of
Logic_.]

[Footnote 266: My references are throughout (except when otherwise
expressed) to the volume and the page of Mr. Mill's first edition of
his _Logic_.]

[Footnote 267: On this subject see an Essay _On the Transformation of
Hypotheses_, given in the Appendix.]

[Footnote 268: B. vii. c. iii. sect. 3.]

[Footnote 269: B. iii. c. ix. art. 7.]

[Footnote 270: B. i. c. iii.]

[Footnote 271: B. iii. c. viii.]

[Footnote 272: _Discourse_, Art. 192.]

[Footnote 273: B. xi. c. xi.]

[Footnote 274: _Phil._ b. xiii. c. ix. art. 7.]

[Footnote 275: B. xiii. c. viii.]

[Footnote 276: Given also in the _Phil. Ind. Sc._ b. xiii. c. vii.
sect. 17.]

[Footnote 277: _Ibid._ b. vi. c. iv.]

[Footnote 278: See _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. xii. note D, in the second
edition.]

[Footnote 279: There are some points in my doctrines on the subject
of the Classificatory Sciences to which Mr. Mill objects, (ii. 314,
&c.), but there is nothing which I think it necessary to remark here,
except one point. After speaking of Classification of organized beings
in general, Mr. Mill notices (ii. 321) as an additional subject, the
arrangement of natural groups into a Natural Series; and he says, that
"all who have attempted a theory of natural arrangement, including
among the rest Mr. Whewell, have stopped short of this: all except M.
Comte." On this I have to observe, that I stopped short of, or rather
passed by, the doctrine of a Series of organized beings, because I
thought it bad and narrow philosophy: and that I sufficiently indicated
that I did this. In the _History_ (b. xvi. c. vi.) I have spoken of the
doctrine of Circular Progression propounded by Mr. Macleay, and have
said, "so far as this view _negatives_ a mere _linear_ progression in
nature, which would place each genus in contact with the preceding and
succeeding ones, and so far as it requires us to attend to the more
varied and ramified resemblances, there can be no doubt that it is
supported by the result of all the attempts to form natural systems."
And with regard to the difference between Cuvier and M. de Blainville,
to which Mr. Mill refers (ii. 321), I certainly cannot think that M.
Comte's suffrage can add any weight to the opinion of either of those
great naturalists.]

[Footnote 280: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. x. note (VA) in the second edition.]

[Footnote 281: B. xi. c. v. art. 11.]

[Footnote 282: I have given elsewhere (see last chapter) reasons why I
cannot assign to M. Comte's _Philosophie Positive_ any great value as a
contribution to the philosophy of science. In this judgment I conceive
that I am supported by the best philosophers of our time. M. Comte
owes, I think, much of the notice which has been given to him to his
including, as Mr. Mill does, the science of society and of human nature
in his scheme, and to his boldness in dealing with these. He appears
to have been received with deference as a mathematician: but Sir John
Herschel has shown that a supposed astronomical discovery of his is a
mere assumption. I conceive that I have shown that his representation
of the history of science is erroneous, both in its details and in its
generalities. His distinction of the three stages of sciences, the
theological, metaphysical, and positive, is not at all supported by the
facts of scientific history. Real discoveries always involve what he
calls _metaphysics_; and the doctrine of final causes in physiology,
the main element of science which can properly be called _theological_,
is retained at the end, as well as the beginning of the science, by all
except a peculiar school.]

[Footnote 283: I have also, in the same place, given the Inductive
Pyramid for the science of Optics. These Pyramids are necessarily
inverted in their form, in order that, in reading in the ordinary way,
we may proceed _to_ the vertex. _Phil. Ind. Sc._ b. xi. c. vi.]

[Footnote 284: _Cosmos_, vol. ii. note 35.]

[Footnote 285: The reader will probably recollect that as _Induction_
means the inference of general propositions from particular cases,
_Deduction_ means the inference by the application of general
propositions to particular cases, and by combining such applications;
as when from the most general principles of Geometry or of Mechanics,
we prove some less general theorem; for instance, the number of the
possible regular solids, or the principle of _vis viva_.]

[Footnote 286: B. vi. c. v.]

[Footnote 287: c. vi.]

[Footnote 288: _Hist._ b. vi. c. vi. sect. 13.]

[Footnote 289: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. viii.]

[Footnote 290: Reprinted in the Appendix to this volume.]




