CHAPTER VIII.

ARABIAN PHILOSOPHERS.


I have noticed certain additions to Physical Science made by the
Arabians; namely, in Astronomy[45]. The discovery of the motion of
the Sun's Apogee by Albategnius, and the discovery of the Moon's
_Variation_ by Aboul-Wefa; and in Optics[46] the assertion of Alhazen
that the angle of refraction is not proportional to the angle of
incidence, as Ptolemy had supposed: and certain steps in the philosophy
of vision. We must also suppose, as the Arabic word _alkali_ reminds
us, that the Arabians contributed to lay the foundations of chemistry.
The question which we have here to ask is, whether the Arabians made
any steps beyond their predecessors in the philosophy of discovery.
And to this question, I conceive the answer must be this: that among
them as among the Greeks, those who practically observed nature, and
especially those who made discoveries in Science, must have had a
practical acquaintance with some of the maxims which are exemplified
in the formation of Science. To discover that the Apogee of the Sun
was 17 degrees distant from the point where Ptolemy had placed it,
Albategnius made careful observations, and referred them to the theory
of the eccentric, so as to verify or correct that theory. And when, in
the eleventh century, Arzachel found the Apogee to be less advanced
than Albategnius had found it, he proceeded again to correct the
theory by introducing a new movement of the equinoctial points, which
was called the _Trepidation_. It appeared afterwards, however, that,
in doing this, he had had too much confidence in the observations of
his predecessors, and that no such movement as the Trepidation really
existed. In like manner to correct Ptolemy's law of refraction, Alhazen
had recourse to experiment: but he did not put his experiments in the
form of a Table, as Ptolemy had done. If he had done this, he might
possibly have discovered the law of sines, which Snell afterwards
discovered.

But though the Arabian philosophers thus, in some cases, observed
facts, and referred those facts to general mathematical laws, it does
not appear that they were led to put in any new or striking general
form such maxims as this: That the progress of Science consists in the
exact observation of facts and in colligating them by ideas. Those of
them who were dissatisfied with the existing philosophy as barren and
useless (for instance Algazel[47]), were led to point at the faults
and contradictions of that philosophy, but did not attempt, so far
as I know, to substitute for it anything better. If they rejected
Aristotle's _Organon_, they did not attempt to construct a new Organon
for themselves.

Indeed they do not appear even to have had sufficient confidence in the
real truth of the astronomical theories which they had adopted from the
Greeks, always to correct and extend those where their observations
showed that they required correction and extension. Sometimes they did
this, but not generally enough. When Arzachel found by observation
the Apogee of the Sun to be situated too far back, he ventured to
correct Ptolemy's statement of its motion. But when Aboul-Wefa had
really discovered the _Variation_ of the Moon's motion, he did not
express it by means of an epicycle. If he had done so, he would have
made it unnecessary for Tycho Brahe at a later period to make the same
discovery.

The moral of this incident is the same moral which we have perpetually
to note as taught us at every step by the history of Science:--namely,
the necessity of constant, careful and exact observation of Facts; and
the advantage of devising a Theory, (even if it have to be afterwards
rejected,) by which the Facts shall be bound together into a coherent
whole.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 45: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. iii. c. iv. sect. 8.]

[Footnote 46: _Ibid._ b. ix. c. ii.]

[Footnote 47: See _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. iv. c. i.]




CHAPTER IX.

THE SCHOOLMEN OF THE MIDDLE AGES.


In the _History of the Sciences_ I have devoted a Book to the state
of Science in the middle ages, and have endeavoured to analyse the
intellectual defects of that period. Among the characteristic features
of the human mind during those times, I have noticed Indistinctness of
Ideas, a Commentatorial Spirit, Mysticism, and Dogmatism. The account
there given of this portion of the history of man belongs, in reality,
rather to the History of Ideas than to the History of Progressive
Science. For, as we have there remarked, theoretical Science was,
during the period of which we speak, almost entirely stationary; and
the investigation of the causes of such a state of things may be
considered as a part of that review in which we are now engaged, of the
vicissitudes of man's acquaintance with the methods of discovery. But
when we offered to the world a history of science, to leave so large a
chasm unexplained, would have made the series of events seem defective
and broken; and the survey of the Middle Ages was therefore inserted.
I would beg to refer to that portion of the former work the reader who
wishes for information in addition to what is here given.

The Indistinctness of Ideas and the Commentatorial Disposition of those
ages have already been here brought under our notice. Viewed with
reference to the opposition between Experience and Ideas, on which
point, as we have said, the succession of opinions in a great measure
turns, it is clear that the commentatorial method belongs to the ideal
side of the question: for the commentator seeks for such knowledge
as he values, by analysing and illustrating what his author has said;
and, content with this material of speculation, does not desire to
add to it new stores of experience and observation. And with regard
to the two other features in the character which we gave to those
ages, we may observe that Dogmatism demands for philosophical theories
the submission of mind, due to those revealed religious doctrines
which are to guide our conduct and direct our hopes: while Mysticism
elevates ideas into realities, and offers them to us as the objects
of our religious regard. Thus the Mysticism of the middle ages and
their Dogmatism alike arose from not discriminating the offices of
theoretical and practical philosophy. Mysticism claimed for ideas the
dignity and reality of principles of moral action and religious hope:
Dogmatism imposed theoretical opinions respecting speculative points
with the imperative tone of rules of conduct and faith.

If, however, the opposite claims of theory and practice interfered
with the progress of science by the confusion they thus occasioned,
they did so far more by drawing men away altogether from mere physical
speculations. The Christian religion, with its precepts, its hopes, and
its promises, became the leading subject of men's thoughts; and the
great active truths thus revealed, and the duties thus enjoined, made
all inquiries of mere curiosity appear frivolous and unworthy of man.
The Fathers of the Church sometimes philosophized ill; but far more
commonly they were too intent upon the great lessons which they had to
teach, respecting man's situation in the eyes of his Heavenly Master,
to philosophize at all respecting things remote from the business of
life and of no importance in man's spiritual concerns.

Yet man has his intellectual as well as his spiritual wants. He has
faculties which demand systems and reasons, as well as precepts and
promises. The Christian doctor, who knew so much more than the heathen
philosopher respecting the Creator and Governor of the universe, was
not long content to know or to teach less, respecting the universe
itself. While it was still maintained that Theology was the only
really important study, Theology was so extended and so fashioned as to
include all other knowledge: and after no long time, the Fathers of the
Church themselves became the authors of systems of universal knowledge.

But when this happened, the commentatorial spirit was still in its
full vigour. The learned Christians could not, any more than the
later Greeks or the Romans, devise, by the mere force of their own
invention, new systems, full, comprehensive, and connected, like those
of the heroic age of philosophy. The same mental tendencies which led
men to look for speculative coherence and completeness in the view of
the universe, led them also to admire and dwell upon the splendid and
acute speculations of the Greeks. They were content to find, in those
immortal works, the answers to the questions which their curiosity
prompted; and to seek what further satisfaction they might require,
in analysing and unfolding the doctrines promulgated by those great
masters of knowledge. Thus the Christian doctors became, as to general
philosophy, commentators upon the ancient Greek teachers.

Among these, they selected Aristotle as their peculiar object of
admiration and study. The vast store, both of opinions and facts, which
his works contain, his acute distinctions, his cogent reasons in some
portions of his speculations, his symmetrical systems in almost all,
naturally commended him to the minds of subtle and curious men. We
may add that Plato, who taught men to contemplate Ideas separate from
Things, was not so well fitted for general acceptance as Aristotle, who
rejected this separation. For although the due apprehension of this
opposition of Ideas and Sensations is a necessary step in the progress
of true philosophy, it requires a clearer view and a more balanced mind
than the common herd of students possess; and Aristotle, who evaded the
necessary perplexities in which this antithesis involves us, appeared,
to the temper of those times, the easier and the plainer guide of the
two.

The Doctors of the middle ages having thus adopted Aristotle as
their master in philosophy, we shall not be surprised to find them
declaring, after him, that experience is the source of our knowledge
of the visible world. But though, like the Greeks, they thus talked of
experiment, like the Greeks, they showed little disposition to discover
the laws of nature by observation of facts. This barren and formal
recognition of experience or sensation as one source of knowledge,
not being illustrated by a practical study of nature, and by real
theoretical truths obtained by such a study, remained ever vague,
wavering, and empty. Such a mere acknowledgment cannot, in any times,
ancient or modern, be considered as indicating a just apprehension of
the true basis and nature of science.

In imperfectly perceiving how, and how far, experience is the source of
our knowledge of the external world, the teachers of the middle ages
were in the dark; but so, on this subject, have been almost all the
writers of all ages, with the exception of those who in recent times
have had their minds enlightened by contemplating philosophically the
modern progress of science. The opinions of the doctors of the middle
ages on such subjects generally had those of Aristotle for their basis;
but the subject was often still further analysed and systematized, with
an acute and methodical skill hardly inferior to that of Aristotle
himself.

The Stagirite, in the beginning of his _Physics_, had made the
following remarks. "In all bodies of doctrine which involve principles,
causes, or elements, Science and Knowledge arise from the knowledge
of these; (for we then consider ourselves to _know_ respecting any
subject, when we know its first cause, its first principles, its
ultimate elements.) It is evident, therefore, that in seeking a
knowledge of nature, we must first know what are its principles. But
the course of our knowledge is, from the things which are better known
and more manifest to us, to the things which are more certain and
evident in nature. For those things which are most evident in truth,
are not most evident to us. [And consequently we must advance from
things obscure in nature, but manifest to us, towards the things which
are really in nature more clear and certain.] The things which are
first obvious and apparent to us are complex; and from these we obtain,
by analysis, principles and elements. We must proceed from universals
to particulars. For the whole is better known to our senses than the
parts, and for the same reason, the universal better known than the
particular. And thus words signify things in a large and indiscriminate
way, which is afterwards analysed by definition; as we see that the
children at first call all men _father_, and all women _mother_, but
afterwards learn to distinguish."

There are various assertions contained in this extract which came to
be considered as standard maxims, and which occur constantly in the
writers of the middle ages. Such are, for instance, the maxim, "Verè
scire est per causas scire;" the remark, that compounds are known
to us before their parts, and the illustration from the expressions
used by children. Of the mode in which this subject was treated by
the schoolmen, we may judge by looking at passages of Thomas Aquinas
which treat of the subject of the human understanding. In the _Summa
Theologiæ_, the eighty-fifth Question is _On the manner and order of
understanding_, which subject he considers in eight Articles; and
these must, even now, be looked upon as exhibiting many of the most
important and interesting points of the subject. They are, _First_,
Whether our understanding understands by abstracting ideas (_species_)
from appearances; _Second_, Whether intelligible species abstracted
from appearances are related to our understanding as that _which_ we
understand, or that _by which_ we understand; _Third_, Whether our
understanding does naturally understand universals first; _Fourth_,
Whether our understanding can understand many things at once; _Fifth_,
Whether our understanding understands by compounding and dividing;
_Sixth_, Whether the understanding can err; _Seventh_, Whether one
person can understand the same thing better than another; _Eighth_,
Whether our understanding understands the indivisible sooner than
the divisible. And in the discussion of the last point, for example,
reference is made to the passage of Aristotle which we have already
quoted. "It may seem," he says, "that we understand the indivisible
before the divisible; for _the Philosopher_ says that we understand
and know by knowing principles and elements; but indivisibles are the
principles and elements of divisible things. But to this we may reply,
that in our receiving of science, principles and elements are not
always first; for sometimes from the sensible effects we go on to the
knowledge of intelligible principles and causes." We see that both the
objection and the answer are drawn from Aristotle.

We find the same close imitation of Aristotle in Albertus Magnus, who,
like Aquinas, flourished in the thirteenth century. Albertus, indeed,
wrote treatises corresponding to almost all those of the Stagirite, and
was called the _Ape of Aristotle_. In the beginning of his _Physics_,
he says, "Knowledge does not always begin from that which is first
according to the nature of things, but from that of which the knowledge
is easiest. For the human intellect, on account of its relation to the
senses (_propter reflexionem quam habet ad sensum_), collects science
from the senses; and thus it is easier for our knowledge to begin from
that which we can apprehend by sense, imagination, and intellect, than
from that which we apprehend by intellect alone." We see that he has
somewhat systematized what he has borrowed.

This disposition to dwell upon and systematize the leading doctrines
of metaphysics assumed a more definite and permanent shape in the
opposition of the Realists and Nominalists. The opposition involved
in this controversy is, in fact, that fundamental antithesis of Sense
and Ideas about which philosophy has always been engaged; and of
which we have marked the manifestation in Plato and Aristotle. The
question, What is the object of our thoughts when we reason concerning
the external world? must occur to all speculative minds: and the
difficulties of the answer are manifest. We must reply, either that our
own Ideas, or that Sensible Things, are the elements of our knowledge
of nature. And then the scruples again occur,--how we have any
_general_ knowledge if our thoughts are fixed on particular objects;
and, on the other hand,--how we can attain to any _true_ knowledge of
nature by contemplating ideas which are not identical with objects in
nature. The two opposite opinions maintained on this subject were, on
the one side,--that our general propositions refer to objects which
are _real_, though divested of the peculiarities of individuals; and,
on the other side,--that in such propositions, individuals are not
represented by any reality, but bound together by a _name_. These two
views were held by the Realists and Nominalists respectively: and thus
the Realist manifested the adherence to Ideas, and the Nominalist the
adherence to the impressions of Sense, which have always existed as
opposite yet correlative tendencies in man.

The Realists were the prevailing sect in the Scholastic times: for
example, both Thomas Aquinas and Duns Scotus, the _Angelical_ and the
_Subtle_ Doctor, held this opinion, although opposed to each other
in many of their leading doctrines on other subjects. And as the
Nominalist, fixing his attention upon sensible objects, is obliged to
consider what is the _principle of generalization_, in order that the
possibility of any general proposition may be conceivable; so on the
other hand, the Realist, beginning with the contemplation of universal
ideas, is compelled to ask what is the _principle of individuation_, in
order that he may comprehend the application of general propositions
in each particular instance. This inquiry concerning the principle of
individuation was accordingly a problem which occupied all the leading
minds among the Schoolmen[48]. It will be apparent from what has
been said, that it is only one of the many forms of the fundamental
antithesis of the Ideas and the Senses, which we have constantly before
us in this review.

The recognition of the derivation of our knowledge, in part at least,
from Experience, though always loose and incomplete, appears often
to be independent of the Peripatetic traditions. Thus Richard of St.
Victor, a writer of contemplative theology in the twelfth century,
says[49], that "there are three sources of knowledge, experience,
reason, faith. Some things we prove by experiment, others we collect
by reasoning, the certainty of others we hold by believing. And
with regard to temporal matters, we obtain our knowledge by actual
experience; the other guides belong to divine knowledge." Richard
also propounds a division of human knowledge which is clearly not
derived directly from the ancients, and which shows that considerable
attention must have been paid to such speculations. He begins by laying
down clearly and broadly the distinction, which, as we have seen, is
of primary importance, between _practice_ and _theory_. _Practice_,
he says, includes seven mechanical arts; those of the clothier, the
armourer, the navigator, the hunter, the physician, and the player.
_Theory_ is threefold, divine, natural, doctrinal; and is thus divided
into Theology, Physics, and Mathematics. _Mathematics_, he adds,
treats of the invisible _forms_ of visible things. We have seen that
by many profound thinkers this word _forms_ has been selected as best
fitted to describe those relations of things which are the subject of
mathematics. Again, Physics discovers causes from their effects and
effects from their causes. It would not be easy at the present day to
give a better account of the object of physical science. But Richard
of St. Victor makes this account still more remarkably judicious, by
the examples to which he alludes; which are earthquakes, the tides,
the virtues of plants, the instincts of animals, the classification of
minerals, plants and reptiles.

    Unde tremor terris, quâ vi maria alta tumescant,
    Herbarum vires, animos irasque ferarum,
    Omne genus fruticum, lapidum quoque, reptiliumque.

He further adds[50], "Physical science ascends from effects to
causes, and descends again from causes to effects." This declaration
Francis Bacon himself might have adopted. It is true, that Richard
would probably have been little able to produce any clear and
definite instances of knowledge, in which this ascent and descent
were exemplified; but still the statement, even considered as a
mere conjectural thought, contains a portion of that sagacity and
comprehensive power which we admire so much in Bacon.

Richard of St. Victor, who lived in the twelfth century, thus exhibits
more vigour and independence of speculative power than Thomas Aquinas,
Albertus Magnus, and Duns Scotus, in the thirteenth. In the interval,
about the end of the twelfth century, the writings of Aristotle had
become generally known in the West; and had been elevated into the
standard of philosophical doctrine, by the divines mentioned above, who
felt a reverent sympathy with the systematizing and subtle spirit of
the Stagirite as soon as it was made manifest to them. These doctors,
following the example of their great forerunner, reduced every part
of human knowledge to a systematic form; the systems which they thus
framed were presented to men's minds as the only true philosophy, and
dissent from them was no longer considered to be blameless. It was an
offence against religion as well as reason to reject the truth, and
the truth could be but one. In this manner arose that claim which the
Doctors of the Church put forth to control men's opinions upon all
subjects, and which we have spoken of in the _History of Science_ as
the Dogmatism of the Middle Ages. There is no difficulty in giving
examples of this characteristic. We may take for instance a Statute of
the University of Paris, occasioned by a Bull of Pope John XXI., in
which it is enacted, "that no Master or Bachelor of any faculty, shall
presume to read lectures upon any author in a private room, on account
of the many perils which may arise therefrom; but shall read in public
places, where all may resort, and may faithfully report what is there
taught; excepting only books of Grammar and Logic, in which there can
be no presumption." And certain errors of Brescian are condemned in a
Rescript[51] of the papal Legate Odo, with the following expressions:
"Whereas, as we have been informed, certain Logical professors
treating of Theology in their disputations, and Theologians treating
of Logic, contrary to the command of the law are not afraid to mix and
confound the lots of the Lord's heritage; we exhort and admonish your
University, all and singular, that they be content with the landmarks
of the Sciences and Faculties which our Fathers have fixed; and that
having due fear of the curse pronounced in the law against him who
removeth his neighbour's landmark, you hold such sober wisdom according
to the Apostles, that ye may by no means incur the blame of innovation
or presumption."

The account which, in the _History of Science_, I gave of Dogmatism as
a characteristic of the middle ages, has been indignantly rejected by
a very pleasing modern writer, who has, with great feeling and great
diligence, brought into view the merits and beauties of those times,
termed by him _Ages of Faith_. He urges[52] that religious authority
was never claimed for physical science: and he quotes from Thomas
Aquinas, a passage in which the author protests against the practice
of confounding opinions of philosophy with doctrines of faith. We
might quote in return the Rescript[53] of Stephen, bishop of Paris,
in which he declares that there can be but one truth, and rejects
the distinction of things being true according to philosophy and not
according to the Catholic faith; and it might be added, that among the
errors condemned in this document are some of Thomas Aquinas himself.
We might further observe, that if no physical doctrines were condemned
in the times of which we now speak, this was because, on such subjects,
no new opinions were promulgated, and not because opinion was free.
As soon as new opinions, even on physical subjects, attracted general
notice, they were prohibited by authority, as we see in the case of
Galileo[54].

But this disinclination to recognize philosophy as independent of
religion, and this disposition to find in new theories, even in
physical ones, something contrary to religion or scripture, are, it
would seem, very natural tendencies of theologians; and it would be
unjust to assert that these propensities were confined to the periods
when the authority of papal Rome was highest; or that the spirit which
has in a great degree controlled and removed such habits was introduced
by the Reformation of religion in the sixteenth century. We must trace
to other causes, the clear and general recognition of Philosophy,
as distinct from Theology, and independent of her authority. In
the earlier ages of the Church, indeed, this separation had been
acknowledged. St. Augustin says, "A Christian should beware how he
speaks on questions of natural philosophy, as if they were doctrines of
Holy Scripture; for an infidel who should hear him deliver absurdities
could not avoid laughing. Thus the Christian would be confused, and the
infidel but little edified; for the infidel would conclude that our
authors really entertained these extravagant opinions, and therefore
they would despise them, to their own eternal ruin. Therefore the
opinions of philosophers should never be proposed as dogmas of faith,
or rejected as contrary to faith, when it is not certain that they are
so." These words are quoted with approbation by Thomas Aquinas, and
it is said[55], are cited in the same manner in every encyclopedical
work of the middle ages. This warning of genuine wisdom was afterwards
rejected, as we have seen; and it is only in modern times that its
value has again been fully recognized. And this improvement we must
ascribe, mainly, to the progress of physical science. For a great body
of undeniable truths on physical subjects being accumulated, such as
had no reference to nor connexion with the truths of religion, and
yet such as possessed a strong interest for most men's minds, it was
impossible longer to deny that there were wide provinces of knowledge
which were not included in the dominions of Theology, and over which
she had no authority. In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, the
fundamental doctrines of mechanics, hydrostatics, optics, magnetics,
chemistry, were established and promulgated; and along with them,
a vast train of consequences, attractive to the mind by the ideal
relations which they exhibited, and striking to the senses by the power
which they gave man over nature. Here was a region in which philosophy
felt herself entitled and impelled to assert her independence. From
this region, there is a gradation of subjects in which philosophy
advances more and more towards the peculiar domain of religion;
and at some intermediate points there have been, and probably will
always be, conflicts respecting the boundary line of the two fields
of speculation. For the limit is vague and obscure, and appears to
fluctuate and shift with the progress of time and knowledge.

Our business at present is not with the whole extent and limits
of philosophy, but with the progress of physical science more
particularly, and the methods by which it may be attained: and we are
endeavouring to trace historically the views which have prevailed
respecting such methods, at various periods of man's intellectual
progress. Among the most conspicuous of the revolutions which opinions
on this subject have undergone, is the transition from an implicit
trust in the internal powers of man's mind to a professed dependence
upon external observation; and from an unbounded reverence for the
wisdom of the past, to a fervid expectation of change and improvement.
The origin and progress of this disposition of mind;--the introduction
of a state of things in which men not only obtained a body of
indestructible truths from experience, and increased it from generation
to generation, but professedly, and we may say, ostentatiously,
declared such to be the source of their knowledge, and such their
hopes of its destined career;--the rise, in short, of Experimental
Philosophy, not only as a habit, but as a Philosophy of Experience, is
what we must now endeavour to exhibit.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 48: See the opinion of Aquinas, in Degerando, _Hist. Com. des
Syst._ iv. 499; of Duns Scotus, _ibid._ iv. 523.]

[Footnote 49: _Liber Excerptionum_, Lib. i. c. i.]

[Footnote 50: _Tr. Ex._ Lib. i. c. vii.]

[Footnote 51: Tenneman, viii. 461.]

[Footnote 52: _Mores Catholici, or Ages of Faith_, viii. p. 247.]

[Footnote 53: Tenneman, viii. 460.]

[Footnote 54: If there were any doubt on this subject, we might
refer to the writers who afterwards questioned the supremacy of
Aristotle, and who with one voice assert that an infallible authority
had been claimed for him. Thus Laurentius Valla: "Quo minus ferendi
sunt recentes Peripatetici, qui nullius sectæ hominibus interdicunt
libertate ab Aristotele dissentiendi, quasi sophos hic, non
philosophus." _Pref. in Dial._ (Tenneman, ix. 29.) So Ludovicus Vives:
"Sunt ex philosophis et ex theologis qui non solum quo Aristoteles
pervenit extremum esse aiunt naturæ, sed quâ pervenit eam rectissimam
esse omnium et certissimam in natura viam." (Tenneman, ix. 43.) We
might urge too, the evasions practised by philosophical Reformers,
through fear of the dogmatism to which they had to submit; for example,
the protestation of Telesius at the end of the Proem to his work, _De
Rerum Natura_: "Nec tamen, si quid eorum quæ nobis posita sunt, sacris
literis, Catholicæve ecclesiæ decretis non cohæreat, tenendum id, quin
penitus rejiciendum asseveramus contendimusque. Neque enim _humana_
modo _ratio_ quævis, sed _ipse_ etiam _sensus_ illis _posthabendus_, et
si illis non congruat, abnegandus omnino et ipse etiam est sensus."]

[Footnote 55: _Ages of Faith_, viii. 247: to the author of which I am
obliged for this quotation.]




