CHAPTER XII.

THE REVIVAL OF PLATONISM.


1. _Causes of Delay in the Advance of Knowledge._--In the insight
possessed by learned men into the method by which truth was to be
discovered, the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries went backwards,
rather than forwards, from the point which had been reached in the
thirteenth. Roger Bacon had urged them to have recourse to experiment;
but they returned with additional and exclusive zeal to the more
favourite employment of reasoning upon their own conceptions. He had
called upon them to look at the world without; but their eyes forthwith
turned back upon the world within. In the constant oscillation of the
human mind between Ideas and Facts, after having for a moment touched
the latter, it seemed to swing back more impetuously to the former.
Not only was the philosophy of Aristotle firmly established for a
considerable period, but when men began to question its authority, they
attempted to set up in its place a philosophy still more purely ideal,
that of Plato. It was not till the actual progress of experimental
knowledge for some centuries had given it a vast accumulation of force,
that it was able to break its way fully into the circle of speculative
science. The new Platonist schoolmen had to run their course, the
practical discoverers had to prove their merit by their works, the
Italian innovators had to utter their aspirations for a change, before
the second Bacon could truly declare that the time for a fundamental
reform was at length arrived.

It cannot but seem strange, to any one who attempts to trace the
general outline of the intellectual progress of man, and who considers
him as under the guidance of a Providential sway, that he should
thus be permitted to wander so long in a wilderness of intellectual
darkness; and even to turn back, by a perverse caprice as it might
seem, when on the very border of the brighter and better land which was
his destined inheritance. We do not attempt to solve this difficulty:
but such a course of things naturally suggests the thought, that a
progress in physical science is not the main object of man's career,
in the eyes of the Power who directs the fortunes of our race. We
can easily conceive that it may have been necessary to man's general
welfare that he should continue to turn his eyes inwards upon his own
heart and faculties, till Law and Duty, Religion and Government, Faith
and Hope, had been fully incorporated with all the past acquisitions of
human intellect; rather than that he should have rushed on into a train
of discoveries tending to chain him to the objects and operations of
the material world. The systematic Law[86] and philosophical Theology
which acquired their ascendancy in men's minds at the time of which
we speak, kept them engaged in a region of speculations which perhaps
prepared the way for a profounder and wider civilization, for a more
elevated and spiritual character, than might have been possible without
such a preparation. The great Italian poet of the fourteenth century
speaks with strong admiration of the founders of the system which
prevailed in his time. Thomas, Albert, Gratian, Peter Lombard, occupy
distinguished places in the Paradise. The first, who is the poet's
instructor, says,--

      Io fui degli agni della santa greggia
    Che Domenico mena per cammino
    U' ben s'impingua se non si vaneggia.
      Questo che m'è a destra piu vicino
    Frate e maestro fummi; ed esso Alberto
    E di Cologna, ed io Tomas d'Aquino....
      Quell' altro fiammeggiar esce del riso
      De Grazian, che l'uno et l'altro foro
        Ajutò si che piace in Paradiso.

      I, then, was of the lambs that Dominic
    Leads, for his saintly flock, along the way
    Where well they thrive not swoln with vanity.
    He nearest on my right-hand brother was
    And master to me; Albert of Cologne
    Is this; and of Aquinum Thomas, I....
    That next resplendence issues from the smile
    Of Gratian, who to either forum lent
    Such help as favour wins in Paradise.

It appears probable that neither poetry, nor painting, nor the other
arts which require for their perfection a lofty and spiritualized
imagination, would have appeared in the noble and beautiful forms which
they assumed in the fourteenth and fifteenth century, if men of genius
had, at the beginning of that period, made it their main business
to discover the laws of nature, and to reduce them to a rigorous
scientific form. Yet who can doubt that the absence of these touching
and impressive works would have left one of the best and purest parts
of man's nature without its due nutriment and development? It may
perhaps be a necessary condition in the progress of man, that the Arts
which aim at beauty should reach their excellence before the Sciences
which seek speculative truth; and if this be so, we inherit, from the
middle ages, treasures which may well reconcile us to the delay which
took place in their cultivation of experimental science.

However this may be, it is our business at present to trace the
circumstances of this very lingering advance. We have already noticed
the contest of the Nominalists and Realists, which was one form,
though, with regard to scientific methods, an unprofitable one, of
the antithesis of Ideas and Things. Though, therefore, this struggle
continued, we need not dwell upon it. The Nominalists denied the real
existence of Ideas, which doctrine was to a great extent implied
in the prevailing systems; but the controversy in which they thus
engaged, did not lead them to seek for knowledge in a new field and
by new methods. The arguments which Occam the Nominalist opposes to
those of Duns Scotus the Realist, are marked with the stamp of the
same system, and consist only in permutations and combinations of the
same elementary conceptions. It was not till the impulse of external
circumstances was added to the discontent, which the more stirring
intellects felt towards the barren dogmatism of their age, that the
activity of the human mind was again called into full play, and a new
career of progression entered upon, till then undreamt of, except by a
few prophetic spirits.


2. _Causes of Progress._--These circumstances were principally the
revival of Greek and Roman literature, the invention of Printing, the
Protestant Reformation, and a great number of curious discoveries and
inventions in the arts, which were soon succeeded by important steps
in speculative physical science. Connected with the first of these
events, was the rise of a party of learned men who expressed their
dissatisfaction with the Aristotelian philosophy, as it was then
taught, and manifested a strong preference for the views of Plato. It
is by no means suitable to our plan to give a detailed account of this
new Platonic school; but we may notice a few of the writers who belong
to it, so far at least as to indicate its influence upon the Methods of
pursuing science.

In the fourteenth century[87], the frequent intercourse of the most
cultivated persons of the Eastern and Western Empire, the increased
study of the Greek language in Italy, the intellectual activity of the
Italian States, the discovery of manuscripts of the classical authors,
were circumstances which excited or nourished a new and zealous study
of the works of Greek and Roman genius. The genuine writings of the
ancients, when presented in their native life and beauty, instead of
being seen only in those lifeless fragments and dull transformations
which the scholastic system had exhibited, excited an intense
enthusiasm. Europe, at that period, might be represented by Plato's
beautiful allegory, of a man who, after being long kept in a dark
cavern, in which his knowledge of the external world is gathered from
the images which stream through the chinks of his prison, is at last
led forth into the full blaze of day. It was inevitable that such a
change should animate men's efforts and enlarge their faculties. Greek
literature became more and more known, especially by the influence of
learned men who came from Constantinople into Italy: these teachers,
though they honoured Aristotle, reverenced Plato no less, and had never
been accustomed to follow with servile submission of thought either
these or any other leaders. The effect of such influences soon reveals
itself in the works of that period. Dante has woven into his _Divina
Commedia_ some of the ideas of Platonism. Petrarch, who had formed his
mind by the study of Cicero, and had thus been inspired with a profound
admiration for the literature of Greece, learnt Greek from Barlaam, a
monk who came as ambassador from the Emperor of the East to the Pope,
in 1339. With this instructor, the poet read the works of Plato; struck
by their beauty, he contributed, by his writings and his conversation,
to awake in others an admiration and love for that philosopher, which
soon became strongly and extensively prevalent among the learned in
Italy.


3. _Hermolaus Barbarus, &c._--Along with the feeling there prevailed
also, among those who had learnt to relish the genuine beauties of
the Greek and Latin writers, a strong disgust for the barbarisms in
which the scholastic philosophy was clothed. Hermolaus Barbarus[88],
who was born in 1454, at Venice, and had formed his taste by the
study of classical literature, translated, among other learned works,
Themistius's paraphrastic expositions of the Physics of Aristotle;
with the view of trying whether the Aristotelian Natural Philosophy
could not be presented in good Latin, which the scholastic teachers
denied. In his Preface he expresses great indignation against those
philosophers who have written and disputed on philosophical subjects
in barbarous Latin, and in an uncultured style, so that all refined
minds are repelled from these studies by weariness and disgust. They
have, he says, by this barbarism, endeavoured to secure to themselves,
in their own province, a supremacy without rivals or opponents. Hence
they maintain that mathematics, philosophy, jurisprudence, cannot
be expounded in correct Latin;--that between these sciences and the
genuine Latin language there is a great gulf, as between things that
cannot be brought together: and on this ground they blame those who
combine the study of philology and eloquence with that of science.
This opinion, adds Hermolaus, perverts and ruins our studies; and is
highly prejudicial and unworthy in respect to the state. Hermolaus
awoke in others, as for instance, in John Picus of Mirandula, the same
dislike to the reigning school philosophy. As an opponent of the same
kind, we may add Marius Nizolius of Bersallo, a scholar who carried
his admiration of Cicero to an exaggerated extent, and who was led,
by a controversy with the defenders of the scholastic philosophy,
to publish (1553) a work _On the True Principles and True Method of
Philosophizing_. In the title of this work, he professes to give "the
true principles of almost all arts and sciences, refuting and rejecting
almost all the false principles of the Logicians and Metaphysicians."
But although, in the work, he attacks the scholastic philosophy, he
does little or nothing to justify the large pretensions of his title;
and he excited, it is said, little notice. It is therefore curious that
Leibnitz should have thought it worth his while to re-edit this work,
which he did in 1670, adding remarks of his own.


4. _Nicolaus Cusanus._--Without dwelling upon this opposition to the
scholastic system on the ground of taste, I shall notice somewhat
further those writers who put forwards Platonic views, as fitted to
complete or to replace the doctrines of Aristotle. Among these, I may
place Nicolaus Cusanus, (so called from Cus, a village on the Moselle,
where he was born in 1401;) who was afterwards raised to the dignity
of cardinal. We might, indeed, at first be tempted to include Cusanus
among those persons who were led to reject the old philosophy by being
themselves agents in the progressive movement of physical science.
For he published, before Copernicus, and independently of him, the
doctrine that the earth is in motion[89]. But it should be recollected
that in order to see the possibility of this doctrine, and its claims
to acceptance, no new reference to observation was requisite. The
Heliocentric System was merely a new mode of representing to the mind
facts, with which all astronomers had long been familiar. The system
might very easily have been embraced and inculcated by Plato himself;
as indeed it is said to have been actually taught by Pythagoras. The
mere adoption of the Heliocentric view, therefore, without attempting
to realize the system in detail, as Copernicus did, cannot entitle a
writer of the fifteenth century to be looked upon as one of the authors
of the discoveries of that period; and we must consider Cusanus as a
speculative anti-Aristotelian, rather than as a practical reformer.

The title of Cusanus's book, _De Doctâ Ignorantiâ_, shows how far
he was from agreeing with those who conceived that, in the works
of Aristotle, they had a full and complete system of all human
knowledge. At the outset of this book[90], he says, after pointing
out some difficulties in the received philosophy, "If, therefore,
the case be so, (as even the very profound Aristotle, in his _First
Philosophy_, affirms,) that in things most manifest by nature, there
is a difficulty, no less than for an owl to look at the sun; since
the appetite of knowledge is not implanted in us in vain, we ought
to desire to know that we are ignorant. If we can fully attain to
this, we shall arrive at _Instructed Ignorance_." How far he was from
placing the source of knowledge in experience, as opposed to ideas,
we may see in the following passage[91] from another work of his,
_On Conjectures_. "Conjectures must proceed from our mind, as the
real world proceeds from the infinite Divine Reason. For since the
human mind, the lofty likeness of God, participates, as it may, in
the fruitfulness of the creative nature, it doth from itself, as the
image of the Omnipotent Form, bring forth reasonable thoughts which
have a similitude to real existences. Thus the Human Mind exists as a
conjectural form of the world, as the Divine Mind is its real form." We
have here the Platonic or ideal side of knowledge put prominently and
exclusively forwards.


5. _Marsilius Ficinus, &c._--A person who had much more influence
on the diffusion of Platonism was Marsilius Ficinus, a physician
of Florence. In that city there prevailed, at the time of which we
speak, the greatest enthusiasm for Plato. George Gemistius Pletho,
when in attendance upon the Council of Florence, had imparted to
many persons the doctrines of the Greek philosopher; and, among
others, had infused a lively interest on this subject into the elder
Cosmo, the head of the family of the Medici. Cosmo formed the plan
of founding a Platonic academy. Ficinus[92], well instructed in the
works of Plato, Plotinus, Proclus, and other Platonists, was selected
to further this object, and was employed in translating the works of
these authors into Latin. It is not to our present purpose to consider
the doctrines of this school, except so far as they bear upon the
nature and methods of knowledge; and therefore I must pass by, as I
have in other instances done, the greater part of their speculations,
which related to the nature of God, the immortality of the soul, the
principles of Goodness and Beauty, and other points of the same order.
The object of these and other Platonists of this school, however, was
not to expel the authority of Aristotle by that of Plato. Many of
them had come to the conviction that the highest ends of philosophy
were to be reached only by bringing into accordance the doctrines
of Plato and of Aristotle. Of this opinion was John Picus, Count of
Mirandula and Concordia; and under this persuasion he employed the
whole of his life in labouring upon a work, _De Concordiâ Platonis et
Aristotelis_, which was not completed at the time of his death, in
1494; and has never been published. But about a century later, another
writer of the same school, Francis Patricius[93], pointing out the
discrepancies between the two Greek teachers, urged the propriety of
deposing Aristotle from the supremacy he had so long enjoyed. "Now all
these doctrines, and others not a few," he says[94], "since they are
Platonic doctrines, philosophically most true, and consonant with the
Catholic faith, whilst the Aristotelian tenets are contrary to the
faith, and philosophically false, who will not, both as a Christian and
a Philosopher, prefer Plato to Aristotle? And why should not hereafter,
in all the colleges and monasteries of Europe, the reading and study
of Plato be introduced? Why should not the philosophy of Aristotle be
forthwith exiled from such places? Why must men continue to drink the
mortal poison of impiety from that source?" with much more in the same
strain.

The Platonic school, of which we have spoken, had, however, reached
its highest point of prosperity before this time, and was already
declining. About 1500, the Platonists appeared to triumph over the
Peripatetics[95]; but the death of their great patron, Cardinal
Bessarion, about this time, and we may add, the hollowness of their
system in many points, and its want of fitness for the wants and
expectations of the age, turned men's thoughts partly back to the
established Aristotelian doctrines, and partly forwards to schemes of
bolder and fresher promise.


6. _Francis Patricius._--Patricius, of whom we have just spoken, was
one of those who had arrived at the conviction that the formation of
a new philosophy, and not merely the restoration of an old one, was
needed. In 1593, appeared his _Nova de Universis Philosophia_; and
the mode in which it begins[96] can hardly fail to remind us of the
expressions which Francis Bacon soon afterwards used in the opening of
a work of the same nature. "Francis Patricius, being about to found
anew the true philosophy of the universe, dared to begin by announcing
the following indisputable principles." Here, however, the resemblance
between Patricius and true inductive philosophers ends. His principles
are barren _à priori_ axioms; and his system has one main element,
_Light_, (_Lux_, or _Lumen_,) to which all operations of nature are
referred. In general cultivation, and practical knowledge of nature,
he was distinguished among his contemporaries. In various passages of
his works he relates[97] observations which he had made in the course
of his travels, in Cyprus, Corfu, Spain, the mountains of the Modenese,
and Dalmatia, which was his own country; his observations relate to
light, the saltness of the sea, its flux and reflux, and other points
of astronomy, meteorology, and natural history. He speaks of the sex of
plants[98]; rejects judicial astrology; and notices the astronomical
systems of Copernicus, Tycho, Fracastoro, and Torre. But the mode in
which he speaks of experiments proves, what indeed is evident from the
general scheme of his system, that he had no due appreciation of the
place which observation must hold in real and natural philosophy.


7. _Picus, Agrippa, &c._--It had been seen in the later philosophical
history of Greece, how readily the ideas of the Platonic school lead
on to a system of unfathomable and unbounded mysticism. John Picus,
of Mirandula[99], added to the study of Plato and the Neoplatonists,
a mass of allegorical interpretations of the Scriptures, and the
dreams of the Cabbala, a Jewish system[100], which pretends to explain
how all things are an emanation of the Deity. To this his nephew,
Francis Picus, added a reference to inward illumination[101], by which
knowledge is obtained, independently of the progress of reasoning.
John Reuchlin, or Capnio, born 1455; John Baptist Helmont, born 1577;
Francis Mercurius Helmont, born 1618, and others, succeeded John Picus
in his admiration of the Cabbala: while others, as Jacob Bœhmen,
rested upon internal revelations like Francis Picus. And thus we have
a series of mystical writers, continued into modern times, who may
be considered as the successors of the Platonic school; and who all
exhibit views altogether erroneous with regard to the nature and origin
of knowledge. Among the various dreams of this school are certain wide
and loose analogies of terrestrial and spiritual things. Thus in the
writings of Cornelius Agrippa (who was born 1487, at Cologne) we have
such systems as the following[102]:--"Since there is a threefold world,
elemental, celestial, and intellectual, and each lower one is governed
by that above it, and receives the influence of its powers: so that
the very Archetype and Supreme Author transfuses the virtues of his
omnipotence into us through angels, heavens, stars, elements, animals,
plants, stones,--into us, I say, for whose service he has framed and
created all these things;--the Magi do not think it irrational that
we should be able to ascend by the same degrees, the same worlds, to
this Archetype of the world, the Author and First Cause of all, of whom
all things are, and from whom they proceed; and should not only avail
ourselves of those powers which exist in the nobler works of creation,
but also should be able to attract other powers, and add them to these."

Agrippa's work, _De Vanitate Scientiarum_, may be said rather to
have a skeptical and cynical, than a Platonic, character. It is a
declamation[103], in a melancholy mood, against the condition of the
sciences in his time. His indignation at the worldly success of men
whom he considered inferior to himself, had, he says, metamorphosed him
into a dog, as the poets relate of Hecuba of Troy, so that his impulse
was to snarl and bark. His professed purpose, however, was to expose
the dogmatism, the servility, the self-conceit, and the neglect of
religious truth which prevailed in the reigning Schools of philosophy.
His views of the nature of science, and the modes of improving its
cultivation, are too imperfect and vague to allow us to rank him among
the reformers of science.


8. _Paracelsus, Fludd, &c._--The celebrated Paracelsus[104] put himself
forwards as a reformer in philosophy, and obtained no small number of
adherents. He was, in most respects, a shallow and impudent pretender;
and had small knowledge of the literature or science of his time:
but by the tone of his speaking and writing he manifestly belongs
to the mystical school of which we are now speaking. Perhaps by the
boldness with which he proposed new systems, and by connecting these
with the practical doctrines of medicine, he contributed something to
the introduction of a new philosophy. We have seen in the History of
Chemistry that he was the author of the system of Three Principles,
(salt, sulphur, and mercury,) which replaced the ancient doctrine of
Four Elements, and prepared the way for a true science of chemistry.
But the salt, sulphur, and mercury of Paracelsus were not, he tells his
disciples, the visible bodies which we call by those names, but certain
invisible, astral, or sidereal elements. The astral salt is the basis
of the solidity and incombustible parts in bodies; the astral sulphur
is the source of combustion and vegetation; the astral mercury is the
origin of fluidity and volatility. And again, these three elements are
analogous to the three elements of man,--Body, Spirit, and Soul.

A writer of our own country, belonging to this mystical school, is
Robert Fludd, or De Fluctibus, who was born in 1571, in Kent, and
after pursuing his studies at Oxford, travelled for several years.
Of all the Theosophists and Mystics, he is by much the most learned;
and was engaged in various controversies with Mersenne, Gassendi,
Kepler, and others. He thus brings us in contact with the next class
of philosophers whom we have to consider, the practical reformers
of philosophy;--those who furthered the cause of science by making,
promulgating, or defending the great discoveries which now began
to occupy men. He adopted the principle, which we have noticed
elsewhere[105], of the analogy of the Macrocosm and Microcosm, the
world of nature and the world of man. His system contains such a
mixture and confusion of physical and metaphysical doctrines as might
be expected from his ground-plan, and from his school. Indeed his
object, the general object of mystical speculators, is to identify
physical with spiritual truths. Yet the influence of the practical
experimental philosophy which was now gaining ground in the world may
be traced in him. Thus he refers to experiments on distillation to
prove the existence and relation of the regions of water, air, and
fire, and of the spirits which correspond to them; and is conceived, by
some persons[106], to have anticipated Torricelli in the invention of
the Barometer.

We need no further follow the speculations of this school. We see
already abundant reason why the reform of the methods of pursuing
science could not proceed from the Platonists. Instead of seeking
knowledge by experiment, they immersed themselves deeper than even the
Aristotelians had done in traditionary lore, or turned their eyes
inwards in search of an internal illumination. Some attempts were made
to remedy the defects of philosophy by a recourse to the doctrines
of other sects of antiquity, when men began to feel more distinctly
the need of a more connected and solid knowledge of nature than the
established system gave them. Among these attempts were those of
Berigard[107], Magernus, and especially Gassendi, to bring into repute
the philosophy of the Ionian school, of Democritus and of Epicurus. But
these endeavours were posterior in time to the new impulse given to
knowledge by Copernicus, Kepler, and Galileo, and were influenced by
views arising out of the success of these discoveries, and they must,
therefore, be considered hereafter. In the mean time, some independent
efforts (arising from speculative rather than practical reformers)
were made to cast off the yoke of the Aristotelian dogmatism, and to
apprehend the true form of that new philosophy which the most active
and hopeful minds saw to be needed; and we must give some account of
these attempts, before we can commit ourselves to the full stream of
progressive philosophy.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 86: Gratian published the _Decretals_ in the twelfth century;
and the Canon and Civil Law became a regular study in the universities
soon afterwards.]

[Footnote 87: Tenneman, ix. 4.]

[Footnote 88: Tenneman, ix. 25.]

[Footnote 89: "Jam nobis manifestum est terram istam in veritate
moveri," &c.--_De Doctâ Ignorantiâ_, lib. ii. c. xii.]

[Footnote 90: _De Doct. Ignor._ lib. i. c. i.]

[Footnote 91: _De Conjecturis_, lib. i. c. iii. iv.]

[Footnote 92: Born in 1433.]

[Footnote 93: Born 1529, died 1597.]

[Footnote 94: _Aristoteles Exotericus_, p. 50.]

[Footnote 95: Tiraboschi, t. vii. pt. ii. p. 411.]

[Footnote 96: "Franciscus Patricius, novam veram integram de universis
conditurus philosophiam, sequentia uti verissima prænuntiare est
ausus. Prænunciata ordine persecutus, divinis oraculis, geometricis
rationibus, clarissimisque experimentis comprobavit.

  Ante primum nihil,
  Post primum omnia,
  A principio omnia," &c.

His other works are _Panaugia_, _Pancosmia_, _Dissertations
Peripateticæ_.]

[Footnote 97: Tiraboschi, t. vii. pt. ii. p. 411.]

[Footnote 98: _Dissert. Perip._ t. ii. lib. v. sub fin.]

[Footnote 99: Tenneman, ix. 148.]

[Footnote 100: Tenneman, ix. 167.]

[Footnote 101: _Ibid._ 158.]

[Footnote 102: Agrippa, _De Occult. Phil._ lib. i. c. l.]

[Footnote 103: Written in 1526.]

[Footnote 104: Philip Aurelius Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim,
also called Paracelsus Eremita, born at Einsiedlen in Switzerland, in
1493.]

[Footnote 105: _Hist. Sc. Id._ b. ix. c. 2. sect. 1. The Mystical
School of Biology.]

[Footnote 106: Tenneman, ix. 221.]

[Footnote 107: Tenneman, ix. 265.]




