CHAPTER XVII.

FROM BACON TO NEWTON.


1. _Harvey._--We have already seen that Bacon was by no means the
first mover or principal author of the revolution in the method of
philosophizing which took place in his time; but only the writer who
proclaimed in the most impressive and comprehensive manner, the scheme,
the profit, the dignity, and the prospects of the new philosophy.
Those, therefore, who after him, took up the same views are not to be
considered as his successors, but as his fellow-labourers; and the
line of historical succession of opinions must be pursued without
special reference to any one leading character, as the principal figure
of the epoch. I resume this line, by noticing a contemporary and
fellow-countryman of Bacon, Harvey, the discoverer of the circulation
of the blood. This discovery was not published and generally accepted
till near the end of Bacon's life; but the anatomist's reflections
on the method of pursuing science, though strongly marked with the
character of the revolution that was taking place, belong to a very
different school from the Chancellor's. Harvey was a pupil of Fabricius
of Acquapendente, whom we noticed among the practical reformers of the
sixteenth century. He entertained, like his master, a strong reverence
for the great names which had ruled in philosophy up to that time,
Aristotle and Galen; and was disposed rather to recommend his own
method by exhibiting it as the true interpretation of ancient wisdom,
than to boast of its novelty. It is true, that he assigns, as his
reason for publishing some of his researches[200], "that by revealing
the method I use in searching into things, I might propose to studious
men, a new and (if I mistake not) a surer path to the attainment of
knowledge[201];" but he soon proceeds to fortify himself with the
authority of Aristotle. In doing this, however, he has the very great
merit of giving a living and practical character to truths which exist
in the Aristotelian works, but which had hitherto been barren and empty
professions. We have seen that Aristotle had asserted the importance
of experience as one root of knowledge; and in this had been followed
by the schoolmen of the middle ages: but this assertion came with very
different force and effect from a man, the whole of whose life had been
spent in obtaining, by means of experience, knowledge which no man had
possessed before. In Harvey's general reflections, the necessity of
both the elements of knowledge, sensations and ideas, experience and
reason, is fully brought into view, and rightly connected with the
metaphysics of Aristotle. He puts the antithesis of these two elements
with great clearness. "Universals are chiefly known to us, for science
is begot by reasoning from universals to particulars; yet that very
comprehension of universals in the understanding springs from the
perception of singulars in our sense." Again, he quotes Aristotle's
apparently opposite assertions:--that made in his _Physics_[202],
"that we must advance from things which are first known to us, though
confusedly, to things more distinctly intelligible in themselves;
from the whole to the part; from the universal to the particular;"
and that made in the _Analytics_[203]; that "Singulars are more known
to us and do first exist according to sense: for nothing is in the
understanding which was not before in the sense." Both, he says, are
true, though at first they seem to clash: for "though in knowledge
we begin with sense, sensation itself is a universal thing." This he
further illustrates; and quotes Seneca, who says, that "Art itself is
nothing but the _reason_ of the work, implanted in the Artist's mind:"
and adds, "the same way by which we gain an Art, by the very same way
we attain any kind of science or knowledge whatever; for as Art is
a habit whose object is something to be done, so Science is a habit
whose object is something to be known; and as the former proceedeth
from the imitation of examples, so this latter, from the knowledge of
things natural. The source of both is from sense and experience; since
[but?] it is impossible that Art should be rightly purchased by the one
or Science by the other without a direction from ideas." Without here
dwelling on the relation of Art and Science, (very justly stated by
Harvey, except that ideas exist in a very different form in the mind
of the Artist and the Scientist) it will be seen that this doctrine,
of science springing from experience with a direction from ideas, is
exactly that which we have repeatedly urged, as the true view of the
subject. From this view, Harvey proceeds to infer the importance of a
reference to sense in his own subject, not only for first discovering,
but for receiving knowledge: "Without experience, not other men's but
our own, no man is a proper disciple of any part of natural knowledge;
without experimental skill in anatomy, he will no better apprehend
what I shall deliver concerning generation, than a man born blind can
judge of the nature and difference of colours, or one born deaf, of
sounds." "If we do otherwise, we may get a humid and floating opinion,
but never a solid and infallible knowledge: as is happenable to those
who see foreign countries only in maps, and the bowels of men falsely
described in anatomical tables. And hence it comes about, that in this
rank age, we have many sophisters and bookwrights, but few wise men
and philosophers." He had before declared "how unsafe and degenerate a
thing it is, to be tutored by other men's commentaries, without making
trial of the things themselves; especially since Nature's book is so
open and legible." We are here reminded of Galileo's condemnation
of the "paper philosophers." The train of thought thus expressed by
the practical discoverers, spread rapidly with the spread of the
new knowledge that had suggested it, and soon became general and
unquestioned.


2. _Descartes._--Such opinions are now among the most familiar and
popular of those which are current among writers and speakers; but
we should err much if we were to imagine that after they were once
propounded they were never resisted or contradicted. Indeed, even in
our own time, not only are such maxims very often practically neglected
or forgotten, but the opposite opinions, and views of science quite
inconsistent with those we have been explaining, are often promulgated
and widely accepted. The philosophy of pure ideas has its commonplaces,
as well as the philosophy of experience. And at the time of which
we speak, the former philosophy, no less than the latter, had its
great asserter and expounder; a man in his own time more admired than
Bacon, regarded with more deference by a large body of disciples all
over Europe, and more powerful in stirring up men's minds to a new
activity of inquiry. I speak of Descartes, whose labours, considered
as a philosophical system, were an endeavour to revive the method
of obtaining knowledge by reasoning from our own ideas only, and to
erect it in opposition to the method of observation and experiment.
The Cartesian philosophy contained an attempt at a counter-revolution.
Thus in this author's _Principia Philosophiæ_[204], he says that "he
will give a short account of the principal phenomena of the world,
not that he may use them as reasons to prove anything; for," adds he,
"we desire to deduce effects from causes, not causes from effects;
but only in order that out of the innumerable effects which we learn
to be capable of resulting from the same causes, we may determine our
mind to consider some rather than others." He had before said, "The
principles which we have obtained [by pure _à priori_ reasoning] are so
vast and so fruitful, that many more consequences follow from them than
we see contained in this visible world, and even many more than our
mind can ever take a full survey of." And he professes to apply this
method in detail. Thus in attempting to state the three fundamental
laws of motion, he employs only _à priori_ reasonings, and is in fact
led into error in the third law which he thus obtains[205]. And in
his _Dioptrics_[206] he pretends to deduce the laws of reflection
and refraction of light from certain comparisons (which are, in
truth, arbitrary,) in which the radiation of light is represented
by the motion of a ball impinging upon the reflecting or refracting
body. It might be represented as a curious instance of the caprice
of fortune, which appears in scientific as in other history, that
Kepler, professing to derive all his knowledge from experience, and
exerting himself with the greatest energy and perseverance, failed in
detecting the law of refraction; while Descartes, who professed to be
able to despise experiment, obtained the true law of sines. But as we
have stated in the _History_[207], Descartes appears to have learnt
this law from Snell's papers. And whether this be so or not, it is
certain that notwithstanding the profession of independence which his
philosophy made, it was in reality constantly guided and instructed by
experience. Thus in explaining the Rainbow (in which his portion of
the discovery merits great praise) he speaks[208] of taking a globe
of glass, allowing the sun to shine on one side of it, and noting the
colours produced by rays after two refractions and one reflection.
And in many other instances, indeed in all that relates to physics,
the reasonings and explanations of Descartes and his followers were,
consciously or unconsciously, directed by the known facts, which they
had observed themselves or learnt from others.

But since Descartes thus, speculatively at least, set himself in
opposition to the great reform of scientific method which was going
on in his time, how, it may be asked, did he acquire so strong an
influence over the most active minds of his time? How is it that he
became the founder of a large and distinguished school of philosophers?
How is it that he not only was mainly instrumental in deposing
Aristotle from his intellectual throne, but for a time appeared to have
established himself with almost equal powers, and to have rendered the
Cartesian school as firm a body as the Peripatetic had been?

The causes to be assigned for this remarkable result are, I conceive,
the following. In the first place, the physicists of the Cartesian
school did, as I have just stated, found their philosophy upon
experiment, and did not practically, or indeed, most of them,
theoretically, assent to their master's boast of showing what the
phenomena _must be_, instead of looking to see what they _are_. And
as Descartes had really incorporated in his philosophy all the chief
physical discoveries of his own and preceding times, and had delivered,
in a more general and systematic shape than any one before him, the
principles which he thus established, the physical philosophy of his
school was in reality far the best then current; and was an immense
improvement upon the Aristotelian doctrines, which had not yet been
displaced as a system. Another circumstance which gained him much
favour, was the bold and ostentatious manner in which he professed
to begin his philosophy by liberating himself from all preconceived
prejudice. The first sentence of his philosophy contains this
celebrated declaration: "Since," he says, "we begin life as infants,
and have contracted various judgments concerning sensible things before
we possess the entire use of our reason, we are turned aside from the
knowledge of truth by many prejudices: from which it does not appear
that we can be any otherwise delivered, than if once in our life we
make it our business to doubt of everything in which we discern the
smallest suspicion of uncertainty." In the face of this sweeping
rejection or unhesitating scrutiny of all preconceived opinions,
the power of the ancient authorities and masters in philosophy must
obviously shrink away; and thus Descartes came to be considered as
the great hero of the overthrow of the Aristotelian dogmatism. But
in addition to these causes, and perhaps more powerful than all in
procuring the assent of men to his doctrines, came the deductive and
systematic character of his philosophy. For although all knowledge of
the external world is in reality only to be obtained from observation,
by inductive steps,--minute, perhaps, and slow, and many, as Galileo
and Bacon had already taught;--the human mind conforms to these
conditions reluctantly and unsteadily, and is ever ready to rush to
general principles, and then to employ itself in deducing conclusions
from these by synthetical reasonings; a task grateful, from the
distinctness and certainty of the result, and the accompanying feeling
of our own sufficiency. Hence men readily overlooked the precarious
character of Descartes' fundamental assumptions, in their admiration
of the skill with which a varied and complex Universe was evolved out
of them. And the complete and systematic character of this philosophy
attracted men no less than its logical connexion. I may quote here
what a philosopher[209] of our own time has said of another writer:
"He owed his influence to various causes; at the head of which may be
placed that genius for system which, though it cramps the growth of
knowledge, perhaps finally atones for that mischief by the zeal and
activity which it rouses among followers and opponents, who discover
truth by accident when in pursuit of weapons for their warfare. A
system which attempts a task so hard as that of subjecting vast
provinces of human knowledge to one or two principles, if it presents
some striking instances of conformity to superficial appearances, is
sure to delight the framer; and for a time to subdue and captivate the
student too entirely for sober reflection and rigorous examination. In
the first instance consistency passes for truth. When principles in
some instances have proved sufficient to give an unexpected explanation
of facts, the delighted reader is content to accept as true all other
deductions from the principles. Specious premises being assumed to be
true, nothing more can be required than logical inference. Mathematical
forms pass current as the equivalent of mathematical certainty. The
unwary admirer is satisfied with the completeness and symmetry of the
plan of his house, unmindful of the need of examining the firmness of
the foundation and the soundness of the materials. The system-maker,
like the conqueror, long dazzles and overawes the world; but when their
sway is past, the vulgar herd, unable to measure their astonishing
faculties, take revenge by trampling on fallen greatness." Bacon
showed his wisdom in his reflections on this subject, when he said
that "Method, carrying a show of total and perfect knowledge, hath a
tendency to generate acquiescence."

The main value of Descartes' physical doctrines consisted in their
being arrived at in a way inconsistent with his own professed method,
namely, by a reference to observation. But though he did in reality
begin from facts, his system was nevertheless a glaring example
of that error which Bacon had called _Anticipation_; that illicit
generalization which leaps at once from special facts to principles
of the widest and remotest kind; such, for instance, as the Cartesian
doctrine, that the world is an absolute _plenum_, every part being
full of matter of some kind, and that all natural effects depend on
the laws of motion. Against this fault, to which the human mind is
so prone, Bacon had lifted his warning voice in vain, so far as the
Cartesians were concerned; as indeed, to this day, one theorist after
another pursues his course, and turns a deaf ear to the Verulamian
injunctions; perhaps even complacently boasts that he founds his theory
upon observation; and forgets that there are, as the aphorism of the
_Novum Organon_ declares, two ways by which this may be done;--the one
hitherto in use and suggested by our common tendencies, but barren and
worthless; the other almost untried, to be pursued only with effort and
self-denial, but alone capable of producing true knowledge.


3. _Gassendi._--Thus the lessons which Bacon taught were far from being
generally accepted and applied at first. The amount of the influence of
these two men, Bacon and Descartes, upon their age, has often been a
subject of discussion. The fortunes of the Cartesian school have been
in some measure traced in the History of Science. But I may mention the
notice taken of these two philosophers by Gassendi, a contemporary and
countryman of Descartes. Gassendi, as I have elsewhere stated[210],
was associated with Descartes in public opinion, as an opponent of the
Aristotelian dogmatism; but was not in fact a follower or profound
admirer of that writer. In a Treatise on Logic, Gassendi gives an
account of the Logic of various sects and authors; treating, in order,
of the Logic of Zeno (the Eleatic), of Euclid (the Megarean), of
Plato, of Aristotle, of the Stoics, of Epicurus, of Lullius, of Ramus;
and to these he adds the Logic of Verulam, and the Logic of Cartesius.
"We must not," he says, "on account of the celebrity it has obtained,
pass over the Organon or Logic of Francis Bacon Lord Verulam, High
Chancellor of England, whose noble purpose in our time it has been, to
make an Instauration of the Sciences." He then gives a brief account
of the _Novum Organon_, noticing the principal features in its rules,
and especially the distinction between the vulgar induction which leaps
at once from particular experiments to the more general axioms, and
the chastised and gradual induction, which the author of the _Organon_
recommends. In his account of the Cartesian Logic, he justly observes,
that "He too imitated Verulam in this, that being about to build up a
new philosophy from the foundation, he wished in the first place to lay
aside all prejudice: and having then found some solid principle, to
make that the groundwork of his whole structure. But he proceeds by a
very different path from that which Verulam follows; for while Verulam
seeks aid from things, to perfect the cogitation of the intellect,
Cartesius conceives, that when we have laid aside all knowledge of
things, there is, in our thoughts alone, such a resource, that the
intellect may by its own power arrive at a perfect knowledge of all,
even the most abstruse things."

The writings of Descartes have been most admired, and his method
most commended, by those authors who have employed themselves upon
metaphysical rather than physical subjects of inquiry. Perhaps we might
say that, in reference to such subjects, this method is not so vicious
as at first, when contrasted with the Baconian induction, it seems to
be: for it might be urged that the _thoughts_ from which Descartes
begins his reasonings are, in reality, _experiments_ of the kind which
the subject requires us to consider: each such thought is a fact in
the intellectual world; and of such facts, the metaphysician seeks to
discover the laws. I shall not here examine the validity of this plea;
but shall turn to the consideration of the actual progress of physical
science, and its effect on men's minds.


4. _Actual progress in Science._--The practical discoverers were indeed
very active and very successful during the seventeenth century, which
opened with Bacon's survey and exhortations. The laws of nature, of
which men had begun to obtain a glimpse in the preceding century, were
investigated with zeal and sagacity, and the consequence was that the
foundations of most of the modern physical sciences were laid. That
mode of research by experiment and observation, which had, a little
time ago, been a strange, and to many, an unwelcome innovation, was now
become the habitual course of philosophers. The revolution from the
philosophy of tradition to the philosophy of experience was completed.
The great discoveries of Kepler belonged to the preceding century.
They are not, I believe, noticed, either by Bacon or by Descartes; but
they gave a strong impulse to astronomical and mechanical speculators,
by showing the necessity of a sound science of motion. Such a science
Galileo had already begun to construct. At the time of which I speak,
his disciples[211] were still labouring at this task, and at other
problems which rapidly suggested themselves. They had already convinced
themselves that air had weight; in 1643 Torricelli proved this
practically by the invention of the Barometer; in 1647 Pascal proved
it still further by sending the Barometer to the top of a mountain.
Pascal and Boyle brought into clear view the fundamental laws of fluid
equilibrium; Boyle and Mariotte determined the law of the compression
of air as regulated by its elasticity. Otto Guericke invented the
air-pump, and by his "Madgeburg Experiments" on a vacuum, illustrated
still further the effects of the air. Guericke pursued what Gilbert
had begun, the observation of electrical phenomena; and these two
physicists made an important step, by detecting repulsion as well as
attraction in these phenomena. Gilbert had already laid the foundations
of the science of Magnetism. The law of refraction, at which Kepler
had laboured in vain, was, as we have seen, discovered by Snell (about
1621), and published by Descartes. Mersenne had discovered some of
the more important parts of the theory of Harmonics. In sciences of
a different kind, the same movement was visible. Chemical doctrines
tended to assume a proper degree of generality, when Sylvius in 1679
taught the opposition of acid and alkali, and Stahl, soon after,
the phlogistic theory of combustion. Steno had remarked the most
important law of crystallography in 1669, that the angles of the same
kind of crystals are always equal. In the sciences of classification,
about 1680, Ray and Morison in England resumed the attempt to form a
systematic botany, which had been interrupted for a hundred years, from
the time of the memorable essay of Cæsalpinus. The grand discovery of
the circulation of the blood by Harvey about 1619, was followed in 1651
by Pecquet's discovery of the course of the chyle. There could now no
longer be any question whether science was progressive, or whether
observation could lead to new truths.

Among these cultivators of science, such sentiments as have been
already quoted became very familiar;--that knowledge is to be sought
from nature herself by observation and experiment;--that in such
matters tradition is of no force when opposed to experience, and that
mere reasonings without facts cannot lead to solid knowledge. But I
do not know that we find in these writers any more special rules of
induction and scientific research which have since been confirmed
and universally adopted. Perhaps too, as was natural in so great a
revolution, the writers of this time, especially the second-rate
ones, were somewhat too prone to disparage the labours and talents
of Aristotle and the ancients in general, and to overlook the ideal
element of our knowledge, in their zealous study of phenomena. They
urged, sometimes in an exaggerated manner, the superiority of modern
times in all that regards science, and the supreme and sole importance
of facts in scientific investigations. There prevailed among them also
a lofty and dignified tone of speaking of the condition and prospects
of science, such as we are accustomed to admire in the Verulamian
writings; for this, in a less degree, is epidemic among those who a
little after his time speak of the new philosophy.


5. _Otto Guericke, &c._--I need not illustrate these characteristics
at any great length. I may as an example notice Otto Guericke's
Preface to his _Experimenta Magdeburgica_ (1670). He quotes a passage
from Kircher's Treatise on the Magnetic Art, in which the author
says, "Hence it appears how all philosophy, except it be supported by
experiments, is empty, fallacious, and useless; what monstrosities
philosophers, in other respects of the highest and subtlest genius,
may produce in philosophy by neglecting experiment. Thus Experience
alone is the Dissolver of Doubts, the Reconciler of Difficulties, the
sole Mistress of Truth, who holds a torch before us in obscurity,
unties our knots, teaches us the true causes of things." Guericke
himself reiterates the same remark, adding that "philosophers,
insisting upon their own thoughts and arguments merely, cannot come
to any sound conclusion respecting the natural constitution of the
world." Nor were the Cartesians slow in taking up the same train of
reflection. Thus Gilbert Clark who, in 1660, published[212] a defence
of Descartes' doctrine of a _plenum_ in the universe, speaks in a
tone which reminds us of Bacon, and indeed was very probably caught
from him: "Natural philosophy formerly consisted entirely of loose
and most doubtful controversies, carried on in high-sounding words,
fit rather to delude than to instruct men. But at last (by the favour
of the Deity) there shone forth some more divine intellects, who
taking as their counsellors reason and experience together, exhibited
a new method of philosophizing. Hence has been conceived a strong hope
that philosophers may embrace, not a shadow or empty image of Truth,
but Truth herself: and that Physiology (Physics) scattering these
controversies to the winds, will contract an alliance with Mathematics.
Yet this is hardly the work of one age; still less of one man. Yet let
not the mind despond, or doubt not that, one party of investigators
after another following the same method of philosophizing, at last,
under good auguries, the mysteries of nature being daily unlocked as
far as human feebleness will allow, Truth may at last appear in full,
and these nuptial torches may be lighted."

As another instance of the same kind, I may quote the preface to the
First volume of the Transactions of the Academy of Sciences at Paris:
"It is only since the present century," says the writer, "that we can
reckon the revival of Mathematics and Physics. M. Descartes and other
great men have laboured at this work with so much success, that in this
department of literature, the whole face of things has been changed.
Men have quitted a sterile system of physics, which for several
generations had been always at the same point; the reign of words
and terms is passed; men will have things; they establish principles
which they understand, they follow those principles; and thus they
make progress. Authority has ceased to have more weight than Reason:
that which was received without contradiction because it had been
long received, is now examined, and often rejected: and philosophers
have made it their business to consult, respecting natural things,
Nature herself rather than the Ancients." These had now become the
commonplaces of those who spoke concerning the course and method of the
Sciences.


6. _Hooke._--In England, as might be expected, the influence of
Francis Bacon was more directly visible. We find many writers, about
this time, repeating the truths which Bacon had proclaimed, and in
almost every case showing the same imperfections in their views
which we have noticed in him. We may take as an example of this
Hooke's Essay, entitled "A General Scheme or Idea of the present
state of Natural Philosophy, and how its defects may be remedied by
a Methodical proceeding in the making Experiments and collecting
Observations; whereby to compile a Natural History as a solid basis
for the superstructure of true Philosophy." This Essay may be looked
upon as an attempt to adapt the _Novum Organon_ to the age which
succeeded its publication. We have in this imitation, as in the
original, an enumeration of various mistakes and impediments which had
in preceding times prevented the progress of knowledge; exhortations
to experiment and observation as the only solid basis of Science; very
ingenious suggestions of trains of inquiry, and modes of pursuing them;
and a promise of obtaining scientific truths when facts have been
duly accumulated. This last part of his scheme the author calls _a
Philosophical Algebra_; and he appears to have imagined that it might
answer the purpose of finding unknown causes from known facts, by means
of certain regular processes, in the same manner as Common Algebra
finds unknown from known quantities. But this part of the plan appears
to have remained unexecuted. The suggestion of such a method was a
result of the Baconian notion that invention in a discoverer might be
dispensed with. We find Hooke adopting the phrases in which this notion
is implied: thus he speaks of the understanding as "being very prone to
run into the affirmative way of judging, and wanting patience to follow
and prosecute the negative way of inquiry, by rejection of disagreeing
natures." And he follows Bacon also in the error of attempting at
once to obtain from the facts the discovery of a "nature," instead of
investigating first the measures and the laws of phenomena. I return to
more general notices of the course of men's thoughts on this subject.


7. _Royal Society._--Those who associated themselves together for the
prosecution of science quoted Bacon as their leader, and exulted in the
progress made by the philosophy which proceeded upon his principles.
Thus in Oldenburg's Dedication of the Transactions of the Royal Society
of London for 1670, to Robert Boyle, he says; "I am informed by such as
well remember the best and worst days of the famous Lord Bacon, that
though he wrote his _Advancement of Learning_ and his _Instauratio
Magna_ in the time of his greatest power, yet his greatest reputation
rebounded first from the most intelligent foreigners in many parts
of Christendom:" and after speaking of his practical talents and his
public employments, he adds, "much more justly still may we wonder how,
without any great skill in Chemistry, without much pretence to the
Mathematics or Mechanics, without optic aids or other engines of late
invention, he should so much transcend the philosophers then living,
in judicious and clear instructions, in so many useful observations
and discoveries, I think I may say beyond the records of many ages."
And in the end of the Preface to the same volume, he speaks with
great exultation of the advance of science all over Europe, referring
undoubtedly to facts then familiar. "And now let envy snarl, it
cannot stop the wheels of active philosophy, in no part of the known
world;--not in France, either in Paris or in Caen;--not in Italy,
either in Rome, Naples, Milan, Florence, Venice, Bononia or Padua;--in
none of the Universities either on this or on that side of the seas,
Madrid and Lisbon, all the best spirits in Spain and Portugal, and
the spacious and remote dominions to them belonging;--the Imperial
Court and the Princes of Germany; the Northern Kings and their best
luminaries; and even the frozen Muscovite and Russian have all taken
the operative ferment: and it works high and prevails every way, to the
encouragement of all sincere lovers of knowledge and virtue."

Again, in the Preface for 1672, he pursues the same thought into
detail: "We must grant that in the last age, when operative philosophy
began to recover ground, and to tread on the heels of triumphant
Philology; emergent adventures and great successes were encountered by
dangerous oppositions and strong obstructions. Galilæus and others in
Italy suffered extremities for their celestial discoveries; and here
in England Sir Walter Raleigh, when he was in his greatest lustrous,
was notoriously slandered to have erected a school of atheism, because
he gave countenance to chemistry, to practical arts, and to curious
mechanical operations, and designed to form the best of them into
a college. And Queen Elizabeth's Gilbert was a long time esteemed
extravagant for his magnetisms; and Harvey for his diligent researches
in pursuance of the circulation of the blood. But when our renowned
Lord Bacon had demonstrated the methods for a perfect restoration
of all parts of real knowledge; and the generous and philosophical
Peireskius had, soon after, agitated in all parts to redeem the most
instructive antiquities, and to excite experimental essays and fresh
discoveries; the success became on a sudden stupendous; and effective
philosophy began to sparkle, and even to flow into beams of shining
light all over the world."

The formation of the Royal Society of London and of the Academy
of Sciences of Paris, from which proceeded the declamations just
quoted, were among many indications, belonging to this period, of
the importance which states as well as individuals had by this time
begun to attach to the cultivation of science. The English Society was
established almost immediately when the restoration of the monarchy
appeared to give a promise of tranquillity to the nation (in 1660), and
the French Academy very soon afterwards (in 1666). These measures were
very soon followed by the establishment of the Observatories of Paris
and Greenwich (in 1667 and 1675); which may be considered to be a kind
of public recognition of the astronomy of observation, as an object
on which it was the advantage and the duty of nations to bestow their
wealth.


8. _Bacon's New Atalantis._--When philosophers had their attention
turned to the boundless prospect of increase to the knowledge and
powers and pleasures of man which the cultivation of experimental
philosophy seemed to promise, it was natural that they should think of
devising institutions and associations by which such benefits might be
secured. Bacon had drawn a picture of a society organized with a view
to such purpose, in his fiction of the "New Atalantis." The imaginary
teacher who explains this institution to the inquiring traveller,
describes it by the name of _Solomon's House_; and says[213], "The end
of our foundation is the knowledge of causes and secret motions of
things; and the enlarging the bounds of the human empire to effecting
of things possible." And, as parts of this House, he describes caves
and wells, chambers and towers, baths and gardens, parks and pools,
dispensatories and furnaces, and many other contrivances, provided
for the purpose of making experiments of many kinds. He describes
also the various employments of the Fellows of this College, who take
a share in its researches. There are _merchants of light_, who bring
books and inventions from foreign countries; _depredators_, who gather
the experiments which exist in books; _mystery-men_, who collect the
experiments of the mechanical arts; _pioneers_ or _miners_, who invent
new experiments; and _compilers_, "who draw the experiments of the
former into titles and tables, to give the better light for the drawing
of observations and axioms out of them." There are also _dowry-men_ or
_benefactors_, that cast about how to draw out of the experiments of
their fellows things of use and practice for man's life; _lamps_, that
direct new experiments of a more penetrating light than the former;
_inoculators_, that execute the experiments so directed. Finally, there
are the _interpreters of nature_, that raise the former discoveries by
experiments into greater observations (that is, more general truths),
axioms and aphorisms. Upon this scheme we may remark, that fictitious
as it undisguisedly is, it still serves to exhibit very clearly some of
the main features of the author's philosophy:--namely, his steady view
of the necessity of ascending from facts to the most general truths
by several stages;--an exaggerated opinion of the aid that could be
derived in such a task from technical separation of the phenomena and a
distribution of them into tables;--a belief, probably incorrect, that
the offices of experimenter and interpreter may be entirely separated,
and pursued by different persons with a certainty of obtaining
success!--and a strong determination to make knowledge constantly
subservient to the uses of life.


9. _Cowley._--Another project of the same kind, less ambitious but
apparently more directed to practice, was published a little later
(1657) by another eminent man of letters in this country. I speak of
Cowley's "Proposition for the Advancement of Experimental Philosophy."
He suggests that a College should be established at a short distance
from London, endowed with a revenue of four thousand pounds, and
consisting of twenty professors with other members. The objects of the
labours of these professors he describes to be, first, to examine all
knowledge of nature delivered to us from former ages and to pronounce
it sound or worthless; second, to recover the lost inventions of the
ancients; third, to improve all arts that we now have; lastly, to
discover others that we yet have not. In this proposal we cannot help
marking the visible declension from Bacon's more philosophical view.
For we have here only a very vague indication of improving old arts
and discovering new, instead of the two clear Verulamian antitheses,
Experiments and Axioms deduced from them, on the one hand, and on the
other an ascent to general Laws, and a derivation, from these, of Arts
for daily use. Moreover the prominent place which Cowley has assigned
to the verifying the knowledge of former ages and recovering "the lost
inventions and drowned lands of the ancients," implies a disposition to
think too highly of traditionary knowledge; a weakness which Bacon's
scheme shows _him_ to have fully overcome. And thus it has been up to
the present day, that with all Bacon's mistakes, in the philosophy of
scientific method few have come up to him, and perhaps none have gone
beyond him.

Cowley exerted himself to do justice to the new philosophy in verse as
well as prose, and his Poem to the Royal Society expresses in a very
noble manner those views of the history and prospects of philosophy
which prevailed among the men by whom the Royal Society was founded.
The fertility and ingenuity of comparison which characterize Cowley's
poetry are well known; and these qualities are in this instance largely
employed for the embellishment of his subject. Many of the comparisons
which he exhibits are apt and striking. Philosophy is a ward whose
estate (human knowledge) is, in his nonage, kept from him by his
guardians and tutors; (a case which the ancient rhetoricians were fond
of taking as a subject of declamation;) and these wrong-doers retain
him in unjust tutelage and constraint for their own purposes; until

      Bacon at last, a mighty man, arose,
      (Whom a wise King, and Nature, chose
      Lord Chancellor of both their laws,)
    And boldly undertook the injured pupil's cause.

Again, Bacon is one who breaks a scarecrow Priapus which stands in the
garden of knowledge. Again, Bacon is one who, instead of a picture of
painted grapes, gives us real grapes from which we press "the thirsty
soul's refreshing wine." Again, Bacon is like Moses, who led the
Hebrews forth from the barren wilderness, and ascended Pisgah;--

        Did on the very border stand
        Of the blest promised land,
    And from the mountain's top of his exalted wit
    Saw it himself and showed us it.

The poet however adds, that Bacon discovered, but did not conquer
this new world; and that the men whom he addresses must subdue these
regions. These "champions" are then ingeniously compared to Gideon's
band:

    Their old and empty pitchers first they brake,
    And with their hands then lifted up the light.

There were still at this time some who sneered at or condemned the new
philosophy; but the tide of popular opinion was soon strongly in its
favour. I have elsewhere[214] noticed a pasquinade of the poet Boileau
in 1682, directed against the Aristotelians. At this time, and indeed
for long afterwards, the philosophers of France were Cartesians. The
English men of science, although partially and for a time they accepted
some of Descartes' opinions, for the most part carried on the reform
independently, and in pursuance of their own views. And they very soon
found a much greater leader than Descartes to place at their head, and
to take as their authority, so far as they acknowledged authority,
in their speculations. I speak of Newton, whose influence upon the
philosophy of science I must now consider.


10. _Barrow._--I will, however, first mention one other writer who may,
in more than one way, be regarded as the predecessor of Newton. I speak
of Isaac Barrow, whom Newton succeeded as Professor of Mathematics in
the University of Cambridge, and who in his mathematical speculations
approached very near to Newton's method of Fluxions. He afterwards
(in 1673) became Master of Trinity College, which office he held
till his death in 1677. But the passages which I shall quote belong
to an earlier period, (when Barrow was about 22 years old,) and may
be regarded as expressions of the opinions which were then current
among active-minded and studious young men. They manifest a complete
familiarity with the writings both of Bacon and of Descartes, and a
very just appreciation of both. The discourse of which I speak is
an academical exercise delivered in 1652, on the thesis _Cartesiana
hypothesis haud satisfacit præcipuis naturæ phænomenis_. By the
"Cartesian hypothesis," he does not mean the hypothesis that the
planets are moved by vortices of etherial matter: I believe that this
Cartesian tenet never had any disciples in England; it certainly
never took any hold of Cambridge. By the Cartesian hypothesis, Barrow
means the doctrine that all the phenomena of nature can be accounted
for by matter and motion; and allowing that the motions of the planets
are to be so accounted for, (which is Newtonian as well as Cartesian
doctrine,) he denies that the Cartesian hypothesis accounts for "the
generations, properties, and specific operations of animals, plants,
minerals, stones, and other natural bodies," in doing which he shows
a sound philosophical judgment. But among the parts of this discourse
most bearing on our present purpose are those where he mentions Bacon.
"Against Cartesius," he says, "I pit the chymists and others, but
especially as the foremost champion of this battle, our Verulam, a man
of great name and of great judgment, who condemned this philosophy
before it was born." "He," adds Barrow, "several times in his
_Organon_, warned men against all hypotheses of this kind, and noticed
beforehand that there was not much to be expected from those principles
which are brought into being by violent efforts of argumentation from
the brains of particular men: for that, as upon the phenomena of the
stars, various constructions of the heavens may be devised, so also
upon the phenomena of the Universe, still more dogmas may be founded
and constructed; and yet all such are mere inventions: and as many
philosophies of this kind as are or shall be extant, so many fictitious
and theatrical worlds are made." The reference is doubtless to Aphorism
LXII. of the First Book of the _Novum Organon_, in which Bacon is
speaking of his "Idols of the Theatre." After making the remark which
Barrow has adopted, Bacon adds, "Such theatrical fables have also
this in common with those of dramatic poets, that the dramatic story
is more regular and elegant than true histories are, and is made so
as to be agreeable." Barrow, having this in his mind, goes on to say:
"And though Cartesius has dressed up the stage of his theatre more
prettily than any other person, and made his drama more like history,
still he is not exempt from the like censure." And he then refers to
Cartesius's own declaration, that he did not learn his system from
things themselves, but tried to impose his own laws upon things; thus
inverting the order of true philosophy.

Other parts of Bacon's work to which Barrow refers are those where
he speaks of the Form, or Formal Cause of a body, and says that in
comparison with that, the Efficient Cause and the Material Cause are
things unimportant and superficial, and contribute little to true and
active science[215]. And again, his classification of the various
kinds of motions[216],--the motus libertatis, motus nexus, motus
continuitatis, motus ad lucrum, fugæ, unionis, congregationis; and the
explanation of electrical attraction (about which Gilbert and others
had written) as _motus ad lucrum_.

These passages show that Barrow had read the _Novum Organon_ in a
careful and intelligent manner, and presumed his Cambridge hearers to
be acquainted with the work. Nor is his judgment of Descartes less wise
and philosophical. He rejects, as we have seen, his system as a true
scheme of the universe, and condemns altogether his _à priori_ mode
of philosophizing; but this does not prevent his accepting Descartes'
real discoveries, and admiring the boldness and vigour of his attempts
to reform philosophy. There is, in Barrow's works, academic verse, as
well as prose, on the subject of the Cartesian hypothesis. In this,
Descartes himself is highly praised, though his doctrines are very
partially accepted. The writer says: "Pardon us, great Cartesius, if
the Muse resists you. Pardon! We follow you, Inquiring Spirit that you
are, while we reject your system. As you have taught us free thought,
and broken down the rule of tyranny, we undauntedly speculate, even in
opposition to you."

Descartes is even yet spoken of, especially by French writers, as the
person who first asserted and established the freedom of inquiry which
is the boast of modern philosophy; but this is said with reference to
metaphysics, not to physics. In physical philosophy, though he caught
hold of some of the discoveries which were then coming into view, the
method in which he reasoned or professed to reason was altogether
vicious; and was, as I have already said, an attempt to undo what
the reformers, both theoretical and practical, had been doing:--to
discredit the philosophy of experience, and to restore the reign of _à
priori_ systems.

It was, however, now, too late to make any such attempt; and nothing
came of it to interrupt the progress of a better philosophy of
discovery.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 200: _Anatomical Exercitations concerning the Generation of
Living Creatures_, 1653. Preface.]

[Footnote 201: He used similar expressions in conversation. George Ent,
who edited his _Generation of Animals_, visited him, "at that time
residing not far from the city; and found him very intent upon the
perscrutation of nature's works, and with a countenance as cheerful,
as mind unperturbed; Democritus-like, chiefly searching into the cause
of natural things." In the course of conversation the writer said, "It
hath always been your choice about the secrets of Nature, to consult
Nature herself." "'Tis true," replied he; "and I have constantly been
of opinion that from thence we might acquire not only the knowledge
of those less considerable secrets of Nature, but even a certain
admiration of that Supreme Essence, the Creator. And though I have
ever been ready to acknowledge, that many things have been discovered
by learned men of former times; yet do I still believe that the number
of those which remain yet concealed in the darkness of impervestigable
Nature is much greater. Nay, I cannot forbear to wonder, and sometimes
smile at those, who persuade themselves, that all things were so
consummately and absolutely delivered by Aristotle, Galen, or some
other great name, as that nothing was left to the superaddition of any
that succeeded."]

[Footnote 202: Lib. i. c. 2, 3.]

[Footnote 203: _Anal. Post._ ii.]

[Footnote 204: Pars iii. p. 45.]

[Footnote 205: See _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. vi. c. ii.]

[Footnote 206: Cap. i. ii.]

[Footnote 207: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. ix. c. ii.]

[Footnote 208: _Meteorum_, c. viii. p. 187.]

[Footnote 209: Mackintosh, _Dissertation on Ethical Science_.]

[Footnote 210: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. vii. c. i.]

[Footnote 211: Castelli, Torricelli, Viviani, Baliani, Gassendi,
Mersenne, Borelli, Cavalleri.]

[Footnote 212: _De Plenitudine Mundi, in qua defenditur Cartesiana
Philosophia contra sententias Francisci Baconi, Th. Hobbii et Sethi
Wardi._]

[Footnote 213: Bacon's _Works_, vol. ii. 111.]

[Footnote 214: _Hist. Ind. Sc._ b. vii. c. i.]

[Footnote 215: _Nov. Org._ lib. ii. Aph. 2.]

[Footnote 216: _Ib._ lib. ii. Aph. 45.]




