CHAPTER V.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE WILL VIEWED IN CONNECTION WITH CERTAIN TRUTHS OF
RELIGION.


_The Relation of Psychology to Theology._--The very close connection
between the philosophy of the will, and the science of theology, has
already been remarked. We have discussed the questions which have come
before us thus far, on purely psychological grounds, without reference
to their theological bearing. It would be manifest injustice to the
matter in hand, however, were we to overlook entirely the relation of
our philosophy to those higher truths which pertain to the domain of
theological science.

The whole question respecting the freedom of the human will,
especially, assumes a new importance, when viewed in connection with
the truths of natural and revealed religion. It ceases to be a
speculative, and becomes an eminently practical question when thus
viewed.

There are two points which require special attention, as regards that
connection; the one, _God's power over man_, the other, _man's power
over himself_.


§ I.--THE POWER WHICH GOD EXERTS OVER THE HUMAN MIND AND WILL.

_Dependence of Man._--It seems to be the teaching of reason, no less
than of religion, that man stands to the Creator in the relation of
absolute dependence. The one is the subject, the other the sovereign.
The control of Deity extends, not merely to the elements and forces
of nature, which are by no means the chief and most important part of
his works, but over all intelligent, rational beings. This is implied,
not only in the fact that he is the Creator of all, but in the fact
of moral government, and of a superintending providence. Manifestly,
there could be no such thing as moral government, and no control over
the affairs of the world, if the conduct of men, the minds and hearts
of intelligent beings, were not subject to that control. This is not
only the inference which reason draws from the acknowledged supremacy
of the Creator, it is not only thus a tenet of natural religion, but it
is also one of the plainest doctrines of revealed truth. In the most
explicit and direct terms, the Scriptures ascribe to God the supreme
control of human conduct, of the human mind and heart. This power over
the thoughts and purposes of intelligent beings is the very highest
power.

_This Control unlimited._--This control, moreover, in order to be
complete and effective, must reach beyond the present and passing
moment, must take in the future, must sweep through the whole range of
coming duration, and comprehend whatever is to be. Nothing must take
place without his foreknowledge and permission. The minutest events,
the falling of a sparrow, the number of the forest leaves, and of the
hairs of our head, must be no exception to this general law.

_Implies a Plan, and that Plan embraces human Conduct._--If we suppose
the supreme Being to be, not only a Creator and Ruler, but a wise
and intelligent one, then we must suppose him to have some _plan_ of
operations. The very idea of _providence_, indeed, implies this. And
this plan must be supposed to extend to, and include, future events,
all events, minute events; for the little and the great are linked
together, the future and the present are linked together, and the plan
and government that has to do with one, must have to do with all, and
with human conduct among the rest. This, again, is not more clearly the
doctrine of reason than of revelation.

_The Difficulty stated._--Whatever freedom man has, then, it must
be such a freedom as is consistent with God's complete control and
government of him. Neither his present nor his future conduct, neither
his thoughts, his feelings, nor his purposes, must be beyond the reach
of the divine purpose and control. But how are these things to be
reconciled--man's entire freedom, God's entire control and government
of him?

_Different Positions assumed._--Both are facts, and, therefore, true.
Either, by itself, can be well enough conceived and comprehended,
but, taken together, they appear inconsistent. Many do not hesitate
to pronounce them so. Some, who accept them both as true, regard them
as still inexplicable and incomprehensible. Others receive one and
reject the other, or, at least, assume such a position as amounts to a
virtual rejection of one of these truths. Thus the fatalist secures the
supreme government of God, only at the expense of human freedom, and
thus weakens, if not destroys, the foundation of human accountability.
Others again, in their horror of fatalism, preserve the freedom and
accountability of man, at the expense of the divine government and
purposes, thus virtually placing man beyond the power and control of
Deity.

_Application of the preceding Psychology to this Question._--How, then,
are these two great facts to be reconciled? If we mistake not, a true
psychology, a correct view of the nature of the will, prepares the way
for this. What have we found to be the process of the mind in volition?
The several steps of the process are found to be these: In the first
place, some object to be accomplished is presented, as such, to the
understanding. This object, thus presented, appealing to the desires
or to the sense of duty influences or inclines the mind. This, again,
leads to choice, choice to volition, volition to action.

_Freedom lies where._--Now in this whole process, _where_ does the
element of freedom lie? Not in the final executive act--the doing as we
will to do--for that is merely a bodily function, a physical and not
a mental power; nor yet in the control of the motives which influence
or incline us; for these are, for the most part, out of our power.
Evidently freedom, so far as it pertains to the human will, lies in
the power of forming and putting forth such volitions as we please, in
other words, of choosing as we like, and willing as we choose, so that
whatever our inclinations may be, we shall be at liberty to choose and
to will accordingly. This is the highest practical freedom of which it
is possible to conceive, and it is all the freedom which pertains to
the human will.

_How this may consist with the divine Control._--Let us see, now, if
this be not a liberty perfectly compatible with the divine government
and control over us. These volitions and choices of ours are by no
means arbitrary or casual; there is a reason for them; a reason why we
choose as we do. We choose thus and thus, because we are, on the whole,
so disposed or _inclined_; and this inclination or disposition depends
on a great variety of circumstances, on the nature and strength of the
motive presented, our physical and mental constitution and habits, our
power of self-control, the strength of our desires, as compared with
our sense of duty, the presence or absence of the exciting object; in
fine, on a great variety of predisposing causes and circumstances, all
of which are to be taken into the account, when the question is, why
do we choose thus, and not otherwise? Now, these circumstances which
go to determine our inclinations, and so our choices and volitions,
are, in a great measure, beyond our direct control. Our physical and
mental constitution, our external condition, our state of mind, and
circumstances at any given moment, whatever in the shape of motive or
inducement may be present with moving power to the mind, inclining us
this way or that, all this lies much more under divine control than
under our own.

_The Point of Connection._--Here, then, to speak reverently, lies the
avenue of approach, through which Deity may come in and take possession
of the human mind, and influence and shape its action, without
infringing, in the least, on its perfect freedom. He has only to
present such motives as shall seem to the mind weighty and sufficient,
has only to touch the main-spring of human inclination, lying back of
actual choice, has only to secure within us a disposition or liking
to any given course, and our choice follows with certainty, and our
volition, and our action; and that action and volition are _free_ in
the highest sense, because our choice was free. We acted just as we
pleased, just as we were inclined.

_The Influence of Man over his fellow Men an Illustration of the same
Principle._--Now this is just what we, in a limited way, and to a
small extent, are constantly doing with respect to our fellow men. We
present motives, inducements, to a given course, we work upon their
inclinations, we appeal to their sensibilities, their natural desires,
their sense of duty, and in proportion as we gain access to their
hearts, we are successful in shaping and controlling their conduct. The
great and difficult art of governing men lies in this. We have only to
suppose a _like_ power, but complete and perfect, to be exercised by
the supreme disposer and controller of events, so shaping and ordering
circumstances as to determine the inclinations of men, gaining access,
not in an uncertain and indirect manner, but by immediate approach to
the human heart, all whose springs lie under his control, so that he
can touch and command them as he will; we have only to conceive this,
and we have, as it seems to me, a full and sufficient explanation of
the fact that man acts freely, and just as he is inclined, while yet he
is perfectly under the divine control.

_Power which the Scriptures ascribe to God._--And this, if I mistake
not, is precisely the sort of control and power over man which the
Scriptures always ascribe to God, viz., power over the inclinations,
affections, dispositions, from which proceed all our voluntary actions.
In his hand are the _hearts_ of men, and he can turn them as the rivers
of water are turned.

_The Theory does not suppose a divine Influence to Evil._--It is
not necessary to suppose that God ever influences men to evil; the
supposition is inconsistent with the divine character, with all we know
and conceive of Deity. Nor is any such influence over man necessary
in order to the accomplishment of evil, but, on the contrary, much
is needed to restrain and prevent him from sin. Sufficient already
are the motives and influences that incline him to go astray; feeble
and inefficient, the inducements to a better life. Could we suppose,
however, any influence of this sort to be exerted over man, inclining
him to evil, we can still see how such influence might be perfectly
consistent with his entire freedom. It is not the integrity of human
freedom, but the integrity of the divine character, that forbids such a
supposition.

_Does not interfere with Responsibility._--Does such a power over human
conduct, as that now attributed to the supreme Being, interfere with
human _responsibility_? Not in the least. Responsibility rests with
him who acts freely and as he pleases, doing that which is right or
wrong, of his own accord, knowing what he does, and because he has a
mind to do it. And it is thus man acts, under whatever decree of divine
influence we may suppose him placed.


§ II.--MAN'S POWER OVER HIMSELF.

_Unjust to require what it is impossible to perform._--Have I power, in
all cases, to do what the divine will requires; power to do _right_?
It would seem to be the verdict of reason, and the common sense of
mankind, that to require of any man what is literally and absolutely
beyond his power, is unjust, and that such a requirement, if it were
made, would impose no obligation, since obedience would be impossible.
We cannot suppose God to be guilty of such manifest injustice. His
commands are right. They carry with them the judgment and reason of
men. Conscience approves them. Obligation attends them. They must,
therefore, be such commands as it is possible for us to obey. It would
be manifest injustice and wrong to require of me what it is actually
and absolutely out of my power to do.

_Supposed Disinclination._--But suppose I have really no inclination,
no disposition, to do right. My affections and desires are all wrong,
inclining me to evil, and my sense of duty or moral obligation is
not strong enough to prevail against these natural desires and evil
inclinations; suppose this, which, alas! is too often true, and what
then becomes of my _power_ to do right? Does it any longer exist?
Have I any power to change those affections and inclinations; or,
they remaining as they are, have I any power to go contrary to them?
A question this, at once profoundly philosophical, and intensely
practical.

_Position of the Fatalist._--The fatalist has no hesitation in replying
_no_, to these questions. Man has no power to change the current of his
own inclinations, nor yet to go against that current. He is wholly
under the influence of motives; they turn him this way and that. He has
power to do as he wills, but no power over the _volitions_ themselves.
He has power to do only what he has a mind to do. He has no mind, no
inclination to do right, therefore, no power to do so.

_This Position at Variance with a true Psychology._--A correct
psychology, as we have already seen, gives a different answer. It is
not true, as a matter of fact in the philosophy of the human mind, that
man has no _power_ to do what he has no _disposition_ to do; nor is it
true that his inclinations and affections are wholly out of his power
and control. In both respects, fatalism is at war, not more with the
common sense of mankind, than with a sound and true philosophy.

_Confounds Power with Inclination._--To say that man has no _power_
to do what he is not _inclined_ to do, is to confound power with
inclination. They are distinct things. The one may exist without the
other. I have power to do what I have no disposition to do; on the
other hand, I may have the disposition to do what is not in my power.
I have power to set fire to my own house, or to my neighbor's, or to
cut off my right hand; power, but no disposition. Present a motive
sufficiently weighty to change my mind, and incline me to the act, and
you create, in that way, a new disposition, but no new power. This
point has been fully discussed in the previous chapter, and I need not
here repeat the argument. It was shown that in order to the actual
doing of a thing, two things are requisite, namely, the _power_ to do,
and the inclination to _exert_ that power; and that neither involves
the other. Where the power alone exists, the thing _can be_ done, but
_will not be_; where both exist, it both _can_ and _will_ be done. It
is not true, then, in any proper use of terms, that want of inclination
is want of power.

_Our Inclinations not wholly beyond our Control._--Equally incorrect
is the position that our inclinations and affections are wholly
out of our own control. Within certain limits it is in our power to
change them. Inclination is not a fixed quantity. It may change. It
ought to change. In many respects it is constantly changing. We take
different views of things, and so our feelings and inclinations change.
Circumstances change, the course of events changes; and our disposition
is modified accordingly. So that while the affections and inclinations
are certainly not under the _direct_ and _immediate_ control of the
will, it is still, in a great measure, in our power to modify and
control them. While they remain as they are, it is quite certain that
we shall do as we do; but it is not _necessary_ that they _should_, nor
_certain_ that they _will_, remain as they are.

_The true Answer._--To the question, then, _can_ the man whose
inclinations are to evil, whose heart is wrong, do right? a true
psychology answers _yes_. He _can_ do what he is not inclined to do;
nor is that evil inclination itself a fixed quantity; he can be, he may
be, otherwise inclined.

_Something else needed beside Power._--- It must be admitted, however,
that so long as the heart is wrong, so long as the evil disposition
continues, so long the man _will_ continue to do evil, notwithstanding
all his _power_ to the contrary. Left to himself, there is very little
probability of his effecting any material change in himself for the
better. In order to do this, there is needed an influence from without,
and from above; an influence that shall _incline_ him to obedience,
that shall make him _willing_ to obey.

_The Gospel meets this Necessity._--This is precisely the want of his
nature which divine grace meets. It creates within him a _clean heart_,
and renews within him a _right spirit_. This is the sublime mystery of
regeneration. The soul that is thus born of God is made _willing_ to do
right. The inclinations are no longer to evil, but to good, and the man
still doing that which he pleases, is pleased to do the will of God.
The change is in the disposition; it is a change of the affections, of
the _heart_; thus the Scriptures always represent it. This was all
that was wanted to secure obedience, and this divine grace supplies.

It is not our province to discuss theological questions, as such. It
has been our aim, simply, to show the relation of a true psychology
to the system of truth revealed in the Scriptures. The perfect
_coincidence_ of the two is an argument in favor of each.




