CHAPTER VI.

POWER OF WILL.


_Differences in this respect._--There are great differences among
men, as regards the strength and energy of this, as compared with the
other departments of mental activity. The difference is, perhaps, as
great in this respect, as in regard to the other mental faculties. Not
all are gifted with equal power of imagination, not all with equal
strength of memory, or of the reasoning faculty; not all with equal
strength of the executive power of the mind. Some persons exhibit a
weakness of will, a want of decision and firmness, an irresolution of
character and purpose. They waver and hesitate in cases of doubt and
emergency, requiring decision and energy. They are governed by no fixed
purpose. The course which they adopt to-day, they abandon to-morrow for
the opposite. They are controlled by circumstances. Opposition turns
them from their course, difficulties discourage them. They are easily
persuaded, easily led; ill fitted to be themselves leaders of men.

Others, again, are firm and inflexible as a rock. They choose their
course, and pursue it, regardless of difficulties and consequences.
Difficulties only arouse them to new effort. Opposition only
strengthens their decision and purpose. They are hard to be persuaded,
when once their minds are made up, and harder still to be driven.
They take their stand, nothing daunted by opposing numbers, and, with
Fitz-James, when suddenly confronted and surrounded by the hosts of
Roderic Dhu, exclaim,

    "Come one, come all, this _rock_ shall fly
    From its firm base, as soon as _I_."

_Instances of Firmness._--Napoleon, fiery and impetuous as he was,
possessed this energy and strength of will. Obstacles, difficulties,
insurmountable to other men, established usages, institutions, armies,
thrones, all were swept away before the irresistible energy of that
mighty will, and that determined purpose, as the wave, driven before
the storm, clears itself a path among the pebbles and shells that lie
strewn upon the shore. In the character of his brother Joseph, King of
Spain, we have an example of the opposite. Mild, cultivated, refined,
amiable, of elegant tastes, a man of letters, loving retirement and
leisure, he was lacking in that energy and decision of character
which fit men for command in camps and courts. We have in the firm
and terrible energy of Cromwell, as contrasted with the mildness and
inefficiency of his son and successor Richard, the same difference
illustrated. The Puritan leaders of the English Revolution were men
of stern and determined energy of character. Among the Romans, Cæsar
presents a notable example of that strength of will which fits men
for great enterprises; while the great Roman orator, with all his
acquisitions of varied learning, and all his philosophy, and all his
eloquence, was deficient in firmness of purpose.

_Often exhibited in military Leaders._--In general it may be remarked
that great military commanders have usually been distinguished for this
trait of character. It was by virtue of their energy, and decision, and
firmness of purpose, that they accomplished what they did, succeeding
where other men would have failed. Thus it was with Hannibal, with
Frederic the Great, with Wellington, with our own Washington. They
were, by nature, endowed with those qualities which fitted them for
their important and difficult stations; while, at the same time, the
work to which they were called, and the circumstances in which they
were placed, tended greatly to develop and strengthen those peculiar
traits and qualities, and this among the rest.

_The same Trait exhibited in other Stations of Life._--Strength of will
shows itself, however, in other relations and stations of life, as well
as in the military commander. The leader of a great political party,
as, for example, of the Administration, or of the Opposition, in the
English Parliament, has abundant occasion for firmness and strength of
purpose. It was not less strength of will, than of moral principle,
in Socrates, that led him resolutely to withstand the popular clamor,
and the opinions of his associate judges, and refuse to sentence the
unsuccessful military commanders, on the day when the decision lay
in his hands; the same trait showed itself in that retreat after the
battle of Delius, so graphically described by Plato, when he walked
alone and slowly from the field, where all was confusion and flight,
with such coolness and such an air of calm self-reliance, that no enemy
ventured to approach him; it was shown not less in his determined
refusal to escape from prison, and the unjust sentence of death,
notwithstanding all the entreaties and remonstrances of friends.

_Strength of Will in the Orator._--The truly great orator, rising
to repel the assaults of his antagonist, or to allay the prejudices
and take command of the passions and opinions of a popular assembly,
calm and collected, and conscious of his strength, master of his own
emotions, and of all his powers, presents an illustration of the same
principle. It was seen in Webster, when he rose in the Senate to reply
to Hayne. The very aspect of the man conveyed to all beholders the idea
of power--a strength, not merely of gigantic intellect, but of resolute
will _determined_ to conquer.

_Strength of Will as shown in the Endurance of Suffering._--The same
principle is sometimes manifested in a different manner, and in
different circumstances. If it leads to heroic _actions_, it leads
also to heroic _endurance_ and suffering. It was the firm and stubborn
will of Regulus, that sent him back to Carthage, to endure all that
the disappointed malice of his foes could invent. It was the firm will
of Jerome of Prague, that kept him from recantation in the face of
death; the firm will of Cranmer, that thrust his right hand into the
flames, and kept it there till it was quite consumed. A like firmness
of purpose has been exhibited in thousands of instances, both in the
earlier and later annals of Christian martyrdom. Rather than renounce
a principle, or abandon the deeply-cherished convictions of the soul,
natures, the most frail and feeble, have calmly met and endured the
greatest sufferings, with a firmness, and courage, and power of
endurance, that nothing could shake or overcome.

_How to be attained._--To multiply instances is needless. But how shall
this strength of will, so desirable, so essential to true greatness and
nobleness of character, be attained?

In part it is the gift of nature, doubtless--the result of that
physical and mental constitution with which some are more fortunately
endowed; in part it is an acquisition to be made, as any other
mental or physical acquisition, by due care and training. It will be
of service, especially, in any endeavor of this sort, to accustom
ourselves to decide with promptness, and act with energy in the many
smaller and less important affairs of life, and to carry out a purpose,
once deliberately formed, with persistence, even in trivial matters.
The habit thus formed, we may be able afterward, and gradually, to
carry into higher departments of action, and into circumstances of
greater embarrassment and difficulty. On the other hand, this must
not be carried to the extreme of _obstinacy_, which is the refusal to
correct a mistake, or acknowledge an error, or listen to the wiser and
better counsels of others.




