CHAPTER I

Of Crystal.


Hereof the common Opinion hath been, and still remaineth amongst us,
that Crystal is nothing else but Ice or Snow concreted, and by duration
of time, congealed beyond liquation. Of which assertion, if prescription
of time, and numerosity of Assertors, were a sufficient demonstration,
we might sit down herein, as an unquestionable truth; nor should there
need _ulterior_ disquisition. For few Opinions there are which have
found so many friends, or been so popularly received, through all
Professions and Ages. _Pliny_ is positive in this Opinion: _Crystallus
sit gelu vehementius concreto_: the same is followed by _Seneca_,
elegantly described by _Claudian_, not denied by _Scaliger_, some way
affirmed by _Albertus_, _Brasavolus_, and directly by many others. The
venerable Fathers of the Church have also assented hereto; As _Basil_ in
his _Hexameron_, _Isidore_ in his Etymologies, and not only _Austin_ a
Latine Father, but _Gregory_ the Great, and _Jerome_ upon occasion of
that term expressed in the first of _Ezekiel_.

[Sidenote: _That Crystal is not Ice or Snow congealed._]

All which notwithstanding, upon a strict enquiry, we find the matter
controvertible, and with much more reason denied then is as yet
affirmed. For though many have passed it over with easie affirmatives,
yet are there also many Authors that deny it, and the exactest
Mineralogists have rejected it. _Diodorus_ in his eleventh Book denieth
it, (if Crystal be there taken in its proper acception, as _Rhodiginus_
hath used it, and not for a Diamond, as _Salmatius_ hath expounded it)
for in that place he affirmeth; _Crystallum esse lapidem ex aqua pura
concretum, non tamen frigore sed divini caloris vi_. _Solinus_ who
transcribed _Pliny_, and therefore in almost all subscribed unto him,
hath in this point dissented from him. _Putant quidam glaciem coire, et
in Crystallum corporari, sed frustra._ _Mathiolus_ in his Comment upon
_Dioscorides_, hath with confidence rejected it. The same hath been
performed by _Agricola de natura fossilium_; by _Cardan_, _Boetius de
Boot_, _Caesius Bernardus_, _Sennertus_, and many more.

Now besides Authority against it, there may be many reasons deduced from
their several differences which seem to overthrow it. And first, a
difference is probable in their concretion. For if Crystal be a stone
(as in the number thereof it is confessedly received,) it is not
immediately concreted by the efficacy of cold, but rather by a Mineral
spirit, and lapidifical principles of its own, and therefore while it
lay _in solutis principiis_, and remained in a fluid Body, it was a
subject very unapt for proper conglaciation; for Mineral spirits do
generally resist and scarce submit thereto. So we observe that many
waters and springs will never freeze, and many parts in Rivers and
Lakes, where there are Mineral eruptions, will still persist without
congelations, as we also observe in _Aqua fortis_, or any Mineral
solution, either of Vitriol, Alum, Salt-petre, Ammoniac, or Tartar,
which although to some degree exhaled, and placed in cold
Conservatories, will Crystallize and shoot into white and glacious
bodies; yet is not this a congelation primarily effected by cold, but an
intrinsecal induration from themselves; and a retreat into their proper
solidities, which were absorbed by the liquor, and lost in a full
imbibition thereof before. And so also when wood and many other bodies
do putrifie, either by the Sea, other waters, or earths abounding in
such spirits; we do not usually ascribe their induration to cold, but
rather unto salinous spirits, concretive juices, and causes
circumjacent, which do assimilate all bodies not indisposed for their
impressions.

But Ice is water congealed by the frigidity of the air, whereby it
acquireth no new form, but rather a consistence or determination of its
diffluency, and amitteth not its essence, but condition of fluidity.
Neither doth there any thing properly conglaciate but water, or watery
humidity; for the determination of quick-silver is properly fixation,
that of milk coagulation, and that of oyl and unctious bodies, only
incrassation; And therefore _Aristotle_ makes a trial of the fertility
of humane seed, from the experiment of congelation; for that (saith he)
which is not watery and improlifical will not conglaciate; which perhaps
must not be taken strictly, but in the germ and spirited particles: For
Eggs I observe will freeze, in the albuginous part thereof. And upon
this ground _Paracelsus_ in his Archidoxis, extracteth the magistery of
wine; after four moneths digestion in horse-dung, exposing it unto the
extremity of cold; whereby the aqueous parts will freeze, but the
Spirit retire and be found congealed in the Center.

[Sidenote: _How to make Ice at any time of the year._]

But whether this congelation be simply made by cold, or also by
co-operation of any nitrous coagulum, or spirit of Salt the principle of
concretion; whereby we observe that ice may be made with Salt and Snow
by the fire side; as is also observable from Ice made by Saltpetre and
water, duly mixed and strongly agitated at any time of the year, were a
very considerable enquiry. For thereby we might clear the generation of
Snow, Hail, and hoary Frosts, the piercing qualities of some winds, the
coldness of Caverns, and some Cells. We might more sensibly conceive how
Salt-petre fixeth the flying spirits of Minerals in Chymical
Preparations, and how by this congealing quality it becomes an useful
medicine in Fevers.

Again, The difference of their concretion is collectible from their
dissolution; which being many ways performable in Ice, is few ways
effected in Crystal. Now the causes of liquation are contrary to those
of concretion; and as the Atoms and indivisible parcels are united, so
are they in an opposite way disjoyned. That which is concreted by
exsiccation or expression of humidity, will be resolved by humectation,
as Earth, Dirt, and Clay; that which is coagulated by a fiery siccity,
will suffer colliquation from an aqueous humidity, as Salt and Sugar,
which are easily dissoluble in water, but not without difficulty in oyl,
and well rectified spirits of Wine. That which is concreted by cold,
will dissolve by a moist heat, if it consist of watery parts, as Gums,
Arabick, Tragacanth, Ammoniac and others; in an airy heat or oyl, as all
resinous bodies, Turpentine, Pitch, and Frankincense; in both, as gummy
resinous bodies, Mastick, Camphire and Storax; in neither, as neutrals
and bodies anomalous hereto, as Bdellium, Myrrhe, and others. Some by a
violent dry heat, as Metals; which although corrodible by waters, yet
will they not suffer a liquation from the powerfullest heat,
communicable unto that element. Some will dissolve by this heat although
their ingredients be earthy, as Glass, whose materials are fine Sand,
and the ashes of Chali or Fearn; [SN: _The original ingredients of
Glass._] and so will Salt run with fire, although it be concreted by
heat. And this way may be effected a liquation in Crystal, but not
without some difficulty; that is, calcination or reducing it by Art into
a subtle powder; by which way and a vitreous commixture, Glasses are
sometime made hereof, and it becomes the chiefest ground for artificial
and factitious gemms. But the same way of solution is common also unto
many Stones; and not onely Beryls and Cornelians, but Flints and
Pebbles, are subject unto fusion, and will run like Glass in fire.

But Ice will dissolve in any way of heat, for it will dissolve with
fire, it will colliquate in water, or warm oyl; nor doth it only submit
unto an actual heat, but not endure the potential calidity of many
waters. For it will presently dissolve in cold _Aqua fortis_, sp. of
Vitriol, Salt, or Tartar, nor will it long continue its fixation in
spirits of Wine, as may be observed in Ice injected therein.

Again, The concretion of Ice will not endure a dry attrition without
liquation; for if it be rubbed long with a cloth, it melteth. But
Crystal will calefie unto electricity, that is, a power to attract
straws or light bodies, and convert the needle freely placed. Which is a
declarement of very different parts, wherein we shall not inlarge, as
having discoursed concerning such bodies in the Chap. of Electricks.

They are differenced by supernatation or floating upon water; for
Crystal will sink in water, as carrying in its own bulk a greater
ponderosity then the space in any water it doth occupy; and will
therefore only swim in molten Metal and Quicksilver. But Ice will swim
in water of what thinness soever; and though it sink in oyl, will float
in spirits of Wine or _Aqua vitae_. And therefore it may swim in water,
not only as being water it self, and in its proper place, but perhaps as
weighing somewhat less then the water it possesseth. And therefore as it
will not sink unto the bottom, so will it neither float above like
lighter bodies, but being near in weight, lie superficially or almost
horizontally unto it. And therefore also an Ice or congelation of Salt
or Sugar, although it descend not unto the bottom, yet will it abate,
and decline below the surface in thin water, but very sensibly in
spirits of Wine. For Ice although it seemeth as transparent and compact
as Crystal, yet is it short in either; for its atoms are not concreted
into continuity, which doth diminish its translucency; it is also full
of spumes and bubbles, which may abate its gravity. And therefore waters
frozen in Pans, and open Glasses, after their dissolution do commonly
leave a froth and spume upon them, which are caused by the airy parts
diffused in the congealable mixture which uniting themselves and finding
no passage at the surface, do elevate the mass, and make the liquor take
up a greater place then before: as may be observed in Glasses filled
with water, which being frozen, will seem to swell above the brim. So
that if in this condensation any one affirmeth there is also some
rarefaction, experience may assert it.

They are distinguished in substance of parts and the accidents thereof,
that is, in colour and figure; for Ice is a similary body, and
homogeneous concretion, whose material is properly water, and but
accidentally exceeding the simplicity of that element. But the body of
Crystal is mixed; its ingredients many, and sensibly containeth those
principles into which mixt bodies are reduced. For beside the spirit and
mercurial principle it containeth a sulphur or inflamable part, and that
in no small quantity; for besides its Electrick attraction, which is
made by a sulphureous effluvium, it will strike fire upon percussion
like many other stones, and upon collision with Steel actively send
forth its sparks, not much inferiourly unto a flint. Now such bodies as
strike fire have sulphureous or ignitible parts within them, and those
strike best, which abound most in them. For these scintillations are not
the accension of the air, upon the collision of two hard bodies, but
rather the inflamable effluencies or vitrified sparks discharged from
the bodies collided. For Diamonds, Marbles, Heliotropes and Agaths,
though hard bodies, will not readily strike fire with a steel, much less
with one another: Nor a Flint so readily with a Steel, if they both be
very wet, for then the sparks are sometimes quenched in their eruption.

[Sidenote: _The Physical causes of liquation or melting of Mettals,
etc._]

It containeth also a salt, and that in some plenty, which may occasion
its fragility, as is also observable in Coral. This by the Art of
Chymistry is separable, unto the operations whereof it is liable, with
other concretions, as calcination, reverberation, sublimation,
distillation: And in the preparation of Crystal, _Paracelsus_ [SN: _de
Praeparationibus._] hath made a rule for that of Gemms. Briefly, it
consisteth of parts so far from an Icie dissolution, that powerful
menstruums are made for its emollition; whereby it may receive the
tincture of Minerals, and so resemble Gemms, as _Boetius_ hath declared
in the distillation of Urine; spirits of Wine and Turpentine; and is
not only triturable, and reducible into powder, by contrition, but will
subsist in a violent fire, and endure a vitrification. Whereby are
testified its earthly and fixed parts. For vitrification is the last
work of fire, and a fusion of the Salt and Earth, which are the fixed
elements of the composition, wherein the fusible Salt draws the Earth
and infusible part into one continuum, and therefore ashes will not run
from whence the Salt is drawn, as bone ashes prepared for the Test of
Metals. Common fusion in Metals is also made by a violent heat, acting
upon the volatile and fixed, the dry and humid parts of those bodies;
which notwithstanding are so united, that upon attenuation from heat,
the humid parts will not fly away, but draw the fixed ones into fluor
with them. Ordinary liquation in wax and oily bodies is made by a
gentler heat, where the oyl and salt, the fixed and fluid principles
will not easily separate. All which, whether by vitrification, fusion or
liquation, being forced into fluent consistencies, do naturally regress
into their former solidities. Whereas the melting of Ice is a simple
resolution, or return from solid to fluid parts, wherein it naturally
resteth.

As for colour, although Crystal in his pellucid body seems to have none
at all, yet in its reduction into powder, it hath a vail and shadow of
blew; and in its courser pieces, is of a sadder hue then the powder of
Venice glass; and this complexion it will maintain although it long
endure the fire. Which notwithstanding needs not move us unto wonder;
for vitrified and pellucid bodies, are of a clearer complexion in their
continuities, then in their powders and Atomical divisions. So _Stibium_
or glass of _Antimony_, appears somewhat red in glass, but in its
powder yellow; so painted glass of a sanguine red will not ascend in
powder above a murrey.

[Sidenote: _In Stone-pits and chalk-mines. Which seemeth to be Echinites
decima Aldrovandi._ Musaei Metallici, lib. 4. _Rather Echinometrites, as
best resembling the Echinometra found commonly on our Sea-shore._]

As for the figure of Crystal (which is very strange, and forced _Pliny_
to despair of resolution) it is for the most part hexagonal or six
cornered; being built upon a confused matter, from whence as it were
from a root angular figures arise, even as in the Amethyst and Basaltes.
Which regular figuration hath made some opinion, it hath not its
determination from circumscription, or as conforming unto contiguities,
but rather from a seminal root, and formative principle of its own, even
as we observe in several other concretions. So the stones which are
sometime found in the gall of a man, are most triangular and pyramidal,
although the figure of that part seems not to co-operate thereto. So the
_Asteria_ or _lapis stellaris_; hath on it the figure of a Star, so
_Lapis Judaicus_ hath circular lines in length all down its body, and
equidistant, as though they had been turned by Art. So that we call a
Fayrie stone, and is often found in _gravel pits_ amongst us, being of
an hemispherical figure, hath five double lines rising from the center
of its basis, which if no accretion distract them, do commonly concur,
and meet in the pole thereof. The figures are regular in many other
stones, as in the Belemnites, _Lapis Anguinus_, _Cornu Ammonis_, and
many more; as by those which have not the experience hereof may be
observed in their figures expressed by Mineralogists. But Ice receiveth
its figure according unto the surface wherein it concreteth, or the
circumambiency which conformeth it. So it is plain upon the surface of
water, but round in Hayl (which is also a glaciation,) and figured in
its guttulous descent from the air, and so growing greater or lesser
according unto the accretion or pluvious aggelation about the mother and
fundamental Atomes thereof; which seems to be some feathery particle of
Snow; although Snow it self be sexangular, or at least of a starry and
many-pointed figure.

They are also differenced in the places of their generation; for though
Crystal be found in cold countries, and where Ice remaineth long, and
the air exceedeth in cold, yet is it also found in regions, where Ice is
seldom seen or soon dissolved; as _Pliny_ and _Agricola_ relate of
_Cyprus_, _Caramania_ and an Island in the Red sea; It hath been also
found in the veins of Minerals, sometimes agglutinated unto lead,
sometimes in Rocks, opacous stones, and the marble face of _Octavius_
Duke of _Parma_. [SN: _Wherein the Sculptor found a piece of pure
Crystal._] It hath also constant veins; as beside others, that of mount
_Salvino_ about the Territory of _Bergamo_; from whence if part be
taken, in no long tract of time out of the same place, as from its
mineral matrix, others are observed to arise. Which made the learned
_Cerautus_ to conclude, _Videant hi an sit glacies, an vero corpus
fossile_. [SN: _Mus. Calceolar._] It is also found in the veins of
Minerals, in rocks, and sometime in common earth. But as for Ice, it
will not readily concrete but in the approachment of the air, as we have
made trial in glasses of water, covered an inch with oyl, which will not
easily freeze in hard frosts of our climate. For water commonly
concreteth first in its surface, and so conglaciates downward; and so
will it do although it be exposed in the coldest metal of lead, which
well accordeth with that expression of _Job_, _The waters are hid as
with a stone, and the face of the deep is frozen_. [SN: _Chap. 38._] But
whether water which hath been boiled or heated, doth sooner receive this
congelation, as commonly is delivered, we rest in the experiment of
_Cabeus_, who hath rejected the same in his excellent discourse of
Meteors.

They have contrary qualities elemental, and uses medicinal; for Ice is
cold and moist, of the quality of water; but Crystal is cold and dry,
according to the condition of earth. The use of Ice is condemned by most
Physicians, that of Crystal commended by many. For although
_Dioscorides_ and _Galen_ have left no mention thereof, yet hath
_Mathiolus_, _Agricola_, and many commended it in dysenteries and
fluxes; all for the increase of milk, most Chymists for the Stone, and
some, as _Brassavolus_ and _Boetius_, as an antidote against poyson.
Which occult and specifical operations are not expectable from Ice; for
being but water congealed, it can never make good such qualities; nor
will it reasonably admit of secret proprieties, which are the affections
of forms, and compositions at distance from their elements.

[Sidenote: _What Crystal is._]

Having thus declared what Crystal is not, it may afford some
satisfaction to manifest what it is. To deliver therefore what with the
judgement of approved Authors, and best reason consisteth, It is a
Mineral body in the difference of stones, and reduced by some unto that
subdivision, which comprehendeth gemms, transparent and resembling Glass
or Ice, made of a lentous percolation of earth, drawn from the most pure
and limpid juice thereof, owing unto the coldness of the earth some
concurrence or coadjuvancy, but not immediate determination and
efficiency, which are wrought by the hand of its concretive spirit, the
seeds of petrification and Gorgon of it self. As sensible Philosophers
conceive of the generation of Diamonds, Iris, Berils. Not making them of
frozen icecles, or from meer aqueous and glaciable substances,
condensing them by frosts into solidities, vainly to be expected even
from Polary congelations: but from thin and finest earths, so well
contempered and resolved, that transparency is not hindred; and
containing lapidifical spirits, able to make good their solidities
against the opposition and activity of outward contraries, and so leave
a sensible difference between the bonds of glaciation, which in the
mountains of Ice about the Northern Seas, are easily dissolved by
ordinary heat of the Sun, and between the finer ligatures of
petrification, whereby not only the harder concretions of Diamonds and
Saphirs, but the softer veins of Crystal remain indissolvable in
scorching Territories, and the _Negro_ land of Congor.

And therefore I fear we commonly consider subterranities, not in
contemplations sufficiently respective unto the Creation. For though
_Moses_ have left no mention of Minerals, nor made any other description
then sutes unto the apparent and visible Creation, yet is there
unquestionably, a very large Classis of Creatures in the Earth, far
above the condition of elementarity. And although not in a distinct and
indisputable way of vivency, or answering in all points the properties
or affections of Plants, yet in inferiour and descending constitutions,
they do like these contain specifical distinctions, and are determined
by seminalities, that is, created and defined seeds committed unto the
Earth from the beginning. Wherein although they attain not the
indubitable requisites of Animation, yet have they a near affinity
thereto. And though we want a proper name and expressive appellation,
yet are they not to be closed up in the general name of concretions; or
lightly passed over as only Elementary and Subterraneous mixtions.

[Sidenote: _Exact continuity of parts a cause of transparency in things,
and why._]

The principle and most gemmary affection is its Tralucency: as for
irradiancy or sparkling which is found in many gemms, it is not
discoverable in this, for it cometh short of their compactness and
durity: and therefore requireth not the Emery, as the Saphir, Granate,
and Topaz, but will receive impression from Steel, in a manner like the
Turchois. As for its diaphanity or perspicuity, it enjoyeth that most
eminently; and the reason thereof is its continuity; as having its
earthy and salinous parts so exactly resolved, that its body is left
imporous and not discreted by atomical terminations. For, that
continuity of parts is the cause of perspicuity, it is made perspicuous
by two ways of experiment. That is, either in effecting transparency in
those bodies which were not so before, or at least far short of the
additional degree: So Snow becomes transparent upon liquation, so Horns
and Bodies resolvable into continued parts or gelly. The like is
observable in oyled paper, wherein the interstitial divisions being
continuated by the accession of oyl, it becometh more transparent, and
admits the visible rayes with less umbrosity. Or else the same is
effected by rendring those bodies opacous, which were before pellucid
and perspicuous.

So Glass which was before diaphanous, being by powder reduced into
multiplicity of superficies, becomes an opacous body, and will not
transmit the light. So it is in Crystal powdered, and so it is also
before; for if it be made hot in a crucible, and presently projected
upon water, it will grow dim, and abate its diaphanity; for the water
entering the body, begets a division of parts, and a termination of
Atoms united before unto continuity.

The ground of this Opinion might be, first the conclusions of some men
from experience; for as much as Crystal is found sometimes in rocks, and
in some places not much unlike the stirious or stillicidious
dependencies of Ice. Which notwithstanding may happen either in places
which have been forsaken or left bare by the earth, or may be
petrifications, or Mineral indurations, like other gemms, proceeding
from percolations of the earth disposed unto such concretions.

The second and most common ground is from the name _Crystallus_, whereby
in Greek both Ice and Crystal are expressed; which many not duly
considering, have from their community of name, conceived a community of
nature; and what was ascribed unto the one, not unfitly appliable unto
the other. But this is a fallacy of AEquivocation, from a society in name
inferring an Identity in nature. By this fallacy was he deceived that
drank _Aqua fortis_ for strong water. By this are they deluded, who
conceive _sperma Coeti_ which is found about the head, to be the spawn
of the Whale: Or take _sanguis draconis_ (which is the gumme of a tree,)
to be the blood of a Dragon. By the same Logick we may infer, the
Crystalline humour of the eye, or rather the Crystalline heaven above,
to be of the substance of Crystal here below; Or that God sendeth down
Crystal, because it is delivered in the vulgar translation, Psal. 47.
_Mittit Crystallum suum sicut Buccellas_. [SN: _Agreement in name._]
Which translation although it literally express the Septuagint; yet is
there no more meant thereby, than what our translation in plain English
expresseth; that is, he casteth forth his Ice like morsels, or what
_Tremellius_ and _Junius_ as clearly deliver, _Deficit gelu suum sicut
frusta, coram frigore ejus quis consistet?_ which proper and latine
expressions, had they been observed in ancient translations, elder
Expositors had not been misguided by the Synonomy; nor had they
afforded occasion unto _Austin_, the Gloss, _Lyranus_, and many others,
to have taken up the common conceit, and spoke of this Text conformably
unto the opinion rejected.




