CHAPTER II

Concerning the Loadstone.

     Of things particularly spoken thereof, evidently or probably true.
     Of things generally believed, or particularly delivered, manifestly
     or probably false. In the first of the Magnetical vertue of the
     Earth, of the four motions of the stone, that is, its Verticity or
     Direction, its Attraction or Coition, its Declination, its
     Variation, and also of its Antiquity. In the second a rejection of
     sundry opinions and relations thereof, Natural, Medical,
     Historical, Magical.


[Sidenote: _How the earth is a Magnetical body._]

And first we conceive the earth to be a Magnetical body. A Magnetical
body, we term not onely that which hath a power attractive, but that
which seated in a convenient medium, naturally disposeth it self to one
invariable and fixed situation. And such a Magnetical vertue we conceive
to be in the Globe of the Earth, whereby as unto its natural points and
proper terms, it disposeth it self unto the poles; being so framed,
constituted, and ordered unto these points, that those parts which are
now at the poles, would not naturally abide under the AEquator, nor
_Greenland_ remain in the place of _Magellanica_. And if the whole earth
were violently removed, yet would it not foregoe its primitive points,
nor pitch in the East or West, but return unto its polary position
again. For though by compactness or gravity it may acquire the lowest
place, and become the center of the universe, yet that it makes good
that point, not varying at all by the accession of bodies upon, or
secession thereof from its surface, perturbing the equilibration of
either Hemisphere (whereby the altitude of the stars might vary) or that
it strictly maintains the North and Southern points; that neither upon
the motions of the heavens, air, and winds without, large eruptions and
division of parts within, its polary parts should never incline or veer
unto the Equator (whereby the latitude of places should also vary) it
cannot so well be salved from gravity as a Magnetical verticity. [SN:
_The foundation of the Earths stability._] This is probably, that
foundation the wisdom of the Creator hath laid unto the earth; in this
sense we may more nearly apprehend, and sensibly make out the
expressions of holy Scripture [SN: _Psal. 93._], as _Firmavit orbem
terrae qui non commovebitur_, he hath made the round world so sure that
it cannot be moved: as when it is said by _Job, Extendit Aquilonem super
vacuo, &c._ [SN: _Job 38._] He stretcheth forth the North upon the empty
place, and hangeth the earth upon nothing. And this is the most probable
answer unto that great question. Whereupon are the foundations of the
Earth fastened, or who laid the corner stone thereof? Had they been
acquainted with this principle, _Anaxagoras_, _Socrates_, and
_Democritus_, had better made out the ground of this stability;
_Xenophanes_ had not been fain to say the Earth had no bottom; and
_Thales Milesius_ to make it swim in water.

[Sidenote: _The magnetical vertue of the Earth diffused_ extra se _and
communicated to bodies adjacent._]

Nor is the vigour of this great body included only in its self, or
circumferenced by its surface, but diffused at indeterminate distances
through the air, water, and all bodies circumjacent. Exciting and
impregnating Magnetical bodies within its surface or without it, and
performing in a secret and invisible way what we evidently behold
effected by the Loadstone. For these effluxions penetrate all bodies,
and like the species of visible objects are ever ready in the medium,
and lay hold on all bodies proportionate or capable of their action,
those bodies likewise being of a congenerous nature, do readily receive
the impressions of their motor; and if not fettered by their gravity,
conform themselves to situations, wherein they best unite unto their
Animator. And this will sufficiently appear from the observations that
are to follow, which can no better way be made out then by this we speak
of, the Magnetical vigour of the Earth. Now whether these effluviums do
flye by striated Atoms and winding particles as _Renatus des Cartes_
conceiveth; or glide by streams attracted from either Pole and
Hemisphere of the Earth unto the Equator, as Sir _Kenelm Digby_
excellently declareth, it takes not away this vertue of the Earth, but
more distinctly sets down the gests and progress thereof, and are
conceits of eminent use to salve Magnetical Phenomena's. [SN:
_Apparencies observations._] And as in Astronomy those hypotheses though
never so strange are best esteemed which best do salve apparencies; so
surely in Philosophy those principles (though seeming monstrous) may
with advantage be embraced, which best confirm experiment, and afford
the readiest reason of observation.[SN: _The doctrine of effluxions
acknowledged by the Author._] And truly the doctrine of effluxions,
their penetrating natures, their invisible paths, and insuspected
effects, are very considerable; for besides this Magnetical one of the
Earth, several effusions there may be from divers other bodies, which
invisibly act their parts at any time, and perhaps through any medium; a
part of Philosophy but yet in discovery, and will, I fear, prove the
last leaf to be turned over in the Book of Nature.

[Sidenote: _Point to the North._]

[Sidenote: _Point to the South._]

First, Therefore it is true, and confirmable by every experiment, that
Steel and good Iron never excited by the Loadstone, discover in
themselves a verticity; that is, a directive or polary faculty, whereby,
conveniently placed, they do Septentrionate at one extream, and
Australize at another. This is manifestable in long and thin plates of
Steel perforated in the middle and equilibrated; or by an easier way in
long wires equiponderate with untwisted Silk and soft Wax; for in this
manner pendulous, they will conform themselves Meridionally, directing
one extream unto the North, another to the South. The same is also
manifest in Steel wires thrust through little sphears or globes of Cork
and floated on the water, or in naked Needles gently let fall thereon;
for so disposed they will not rest, until they have found out the
Meridian, and as near as they can lye parallel unto the Axis of the
Earth: Sometimes the eye, sometimes the point Northward in divers
Needles, but the same point always in most: Conforming themselves unto
the whole Earth, in the same manner as they do unto every Loadstone. For
if a Needle untoucht he hanged above a Loadstone, it will convert into a
parallel position thereto; for in this situation it can best receive its
verticity and be excited proportionably at both extreams. Now this
direction proceeds not primitively from themselves, but is derivative
and contracted from the Magnetical effluxions of the Earth; which they
have winded in their hammering and formation; or else by long
continuance in one position, as we shall declare hereafter.

It is likewise true what is delivered of Irons heated in the fire, that
they contract a verticity in their refrigeration; for heated red hot and
cooled in the Meridian from North to South, they presently contract a
polary power, and being poised in air or water, convert that part unto
the North which respected that point in its refrigeration, so that if
they had no sensible verticity before, it may be acquired by this way;
or if they had any, it might be exchanged by contrary position in the
cooling. For by the fire they omit not onely many drossie and scorious
parts, but whatsoever they had received either from the Earth or
Loadstone; and so being naked and despoiled of all verticity, the
Magnetical Atomes invade their bodies with more effect and agility.

Neither is it only true what _Gilbertus_ first observed, that Irons
refrigerated North and South acquire a Directive faculty; but if they be
cooled upright and perpendicularly, they will also obtain the same. That
part which is cooled toward the North on this side the Equator,
converting it self unto the North, and attracting the South point of the
Needle: the other and highest extream respecting the South, and
attracting the Northern, according unto Laws Magnetical: For (what must
be observed) contrary Poles or faces attract each other, as the North
the South; and the like decline each other, as the North the North. Now
on this side of the Equator, that extream which is next the Earth is
animated unto the North, and the contrary unto the South; so that in
coition it applies it self quite oppositely, the coition or attraction
being contrary to the Verticity or Direction. Contrary, If we speak
according unto common use, yet alike, if we conceive the vertue of the
North Pole to diffuse it self and open at the South, and the South at
the North again.

[Sidenote: _Some conceive that the figure of the Tree or Spread-eagle in
the root of Brake or Fern stands North and South, but not truly._]

This polarity from refrigeration upon extremity and in defect of a
Loadstone might serve to invigorate and touch a Needle any where; and
this, allowing variation, is also the readiest way at any season to
discover the North or South; and surely far more certain then what is
affirmed of the grains and circles in trees, or the figure in the root
of Fern. For if we erect a red hot wire until it cool, then hang it up
with wax and untwisted Silk, where the lower end and that which cooled
next the earth doth rest, that is the Northern point; and this we affirm
will still be true whether it be cooled in the air or extinguished in
water, oyl of Vitriol, _Aqua fortis_, or Quicksilver. And this is also
evidenced in culinary utensils and Irons that often feel the force of
fire, as Tongs, Fire-shovels, Prongs, and Andirons; all which acquire a
Magnetical and polary condition, and being suspended, convert their
lower extreams unto the North; with the same attracting the Southern
point of the Needle. For easier experiment, if we place a Needle touched
at the foot of Tongs or Andirons, it will obvert or turn aside its
lillie or North point, and conform its cuspis or South extream unto the
Andiron. The like verticity though more obscurely is also contracted by
Bricks and Tiles, as we have made trial in some taken out of the backs
of chimneys. Now to contract this Direction, there needs not a total
ignition, nor is it necessary the Irons should be red hot all over. For
if a wire be heated only at one end, according as that end is cooled
upward or downward, it respectively acquires a verticity, as we have
declared in wires totally candent. Nor is it absolutely requisite they
should be cooled perpendicularly, or strictly lie in the Meridian; for
whether they be refrigerated inclinatorily or somewhat AEquinoxially,
that is toward the Eastern or Western points; though in a lesser degree,
they discover some verticity.

Nor is this onely true in Irons, but in the Loadstone it self. For if a
Loadstone be made red hot, it loseth the magnetical vigour it had before
in it self, and acquires another from the Earth in its refrigeration;
for that part which cooleth toward the Earth will acquire the respect of
the North, and attract the Southern point or cuspis of the Needle. The
experiment hereof we made in a Loadstone of a parallelogram or long
square figure; wherein onely inverting the extreams, as it came out of
the fire, we altered the poles or faces thereof at pleasure.

It is also true what is delivered of the Direction and coition of Irons,
that they contract a verticity by long and continued position: that is,
not onely being placed from North to South, and lying in the Meridian,
but respecting the Zenith and perpendicular unto the Center of the
Earth; as is manifest in bars of windows, casements, hinges and the
like. For if we present the Needle unto their lower extreams, it wheels
about and turns its Southern point unto them. The same condition in long
time do Bricks contract which are placed in walls, and therefore it may
be a fallible way to find out the Meridian by placing the Needle on a
wall; for some Bricks therein by a long and continued position, are
often magnetically enabled to distract the polarity of the Needle. And
therefore those Irons which are said to have been converted into
Loadstones; whether they were real conversions, or onely attractive
augmentations, might be much promoted by this position: as the Iron
cross of an hundred weight upon the Church of St. _John_ in _Ariminum_,
or that Loadston'd Iron of _Caesar Moderatus_, set down by _Aldrovandus_.
[SN: _De miner. l. 1._]

Lastly, Irons do manifest a verticity not only upon refrigeration and
constant situation, but (what is wonderful and advanceth the magnetical
Hypothesis) they evidence the same by meer position according as they
are inverted, and their extreams disposed respectively unto the Earth.
For if an Iron or Steel not firmly excited, be held perpendicularly or
inclinatorily unto the Needle, the lower end thereof will attract the
_cuspis_ or Southern point; but if the same extream be inverted and held
under the Needle, it will then attract the lilly or Northern point; for
by inversion it changeth its direction acquired before, and receiveth a
new and Southern polarity from the Earth, as being the upper extream.
Now if an Iron be touched before, it varieth not in this manner; for
then it admits not this magnetical impression, as being already informed
by the Loadstone, and polarily determined by its preaction.

And from these grounds may we best determine why the Northern Pole of
the Loadstone attracteth a greater weight than the Southern on this side
the AEquator; why the stone is best preserved in a natural and polary
situation; and why as _Gilbertus_ observeth, it respecteth that Pole out
of the Earth, which it regarded in its Mineral bed and subterraneous
position.

It is likewise true and wonderful what is delivered of the Inclination
or Declination of the Loadstone; that is, the descent of the Needle
below the plain of the Horizon. For long Needles which stood before upon
their _axis_, _parallel_ unto the Horizon, being vigorously excited,
incline and bend downward, depressing the North extream below the
Horizon. That is the North on this, the South on the other side of the
Equator; and at the very Line or middle circle stand without deflexion.
And this is evidenced not onely from observations of the Needle in
several parts of the earth, but sundry experiments in any part thereof,
as in a long Steel wire, equilibrated or evenly ballanced in the air;
for excited by a vigorous Loadstone it will somewhat depress its
animated extream, and intersect the horizontal circumference. It is also
manifest in a Needle pierced through a Globe of Cork so cut away and
pared by degrees, that it will swim under water, yet sink not unto the
bottom, which may be well effected; for if the Cork be a thought too
light to sink under the surface, the body of the water may be attenuated
with spirits of wine; if too heavy, it may be incrassated with salt; and
if by chance too much be added, it may again be thinned by a
proportionable addition of fresh water. If then the Needle be taken out,
actively touched and put in again, it will depress and bow down its
Northern head toward the bottom, and advance its Southern extremity
toward the brim. This way invented by _Gilbertus_ may seem of
difficulty; the same with less labour may be observed in a needled
sphere of Cork equally contiguous unto the surface of the water; for if
the Needle be not exactly equiponderant, that end which is a thought too
light, if touched becometh even; that Needle also which will but just
swim under the water, if forcibly touched will sink deeper, and sometime
unto the bottom. If likewise that inclinatory vertue be destroyed by a
touch from the contrary Pole, that end which before was elevated will
then decline, and this perhaps might be observed in some scales exactly
ballanced, and in such Needles which for their bulk can hardly be
supported by the water. For if they be powerfully excited and equally
let fall, they commonly sink down and break the water at that extream
whereat they were septentrionally excited: and by this way it is
conceived there may be some fraud in the weighing of precious
commodities, and such as carry a value in quarter-grains; by placing a
powerful Loadstone above or below, according as we intend to depress or
elevate one extream.

Now if these Magnetical emissions be onely qualities, and the gravity of
bodies incline them onely unto the earth; surely that which alone moveth
other bodies to descent, carrieth not the stroak in this, but rather the
Magnetical alliciency of the Earth; unto which with alacrity it applieth
it self, and in the very same way unto the whole Earth, as it doth unto
a single Loadstone. For if an untouched Needle be at a distance
suspended over a Loadstone, it will not hang parallel, but decline at
the North extream, and at that part will first salute its Director.
Again, what is also wonderful, this inclination is not invariable; for
just under the line the Needle lieth parallel with the Horizon, but
sailing North or South it beginneth to incline, and encreaseth according
as it approacheth unto either Pole; and would at last endeavour to erect
it self. And this is no more then what it doth upon the Loadstone, and
that more plainly upon the Terrella or spherical magnet Cosmographically
set out with circles of the Globe. For at the Equator thereof, the
Needle will stand rectangularly; but approaching Northward toward the
Tropick it will regard the stone obliquely, and when it attaineth the
Pole, directly; and if its bulk be no impediment, erect it self and
stand perpendicularly thereon. And therefore upon strict observation of
this inclination in several latitudes and due records preserved,
instruments are made whereby without the help of Sun or Star, the
latitude of the place may be discovered; and yet it appears the
observations of men have not as yet been so just and equal as is
desirable; for of those Tables of declination which I have perused,
there are not any two that punctually agree; though some have been
thought exactly calculated, especially that which _Ridley_ received from
Mr. _Brigs_, in our time Geometry Professor in _Oxford_.

[Sidenote: _What the variation of the Compass is._]

It is also probable what is delivered concerning the variation of the
Compass that is the cause and ground thereof, for the manner as being
confirmed by observation we shall not at all dispute. The variation of
the Compass is an Arch of the Horizon intercepted between the true and
Magnetical Meridian; or more plainly, a deflexion and siding East and
West from the true Meridian. The true Meridian is a major Circle passing
through the Poles of the World, and the Zenith or Vertex of any place,
exactly dividing the East from the West. Now on this line the Needle
exactly lieth not, but diverts and varieth its point, that is, the North
point on this side the Equator, the South on the other; sometimes on the
East, sometime toward the West, and in some few places varieth not at
all. First, therefore it is observed that betwixt the Shore of
_Ireland_, _France_, _Spain_, _Guiny_, and the _Azores_, the North point
varieth toward the East, and that in some variety; at _London_ it
varieth eleven degrees, at _Antwerp_ nine, at _Rome_ but five: at some
parts of the _Azores_ it deflecteth not, but lieth in the true Meridian;
on the other side of the _Azores_, and this side of the Equator, the
North point of the Needle wheeleth to the West; so that in the latitude
of 36 near the shore, the variation is about eleven degrees; but on the
other side the Equator, it is quite otherwise: for about _Capio Frio_ in
_Brasilia_, the South point varieth twelve degrees unto the West, and
about the mouth of the Straits of _Magellan_ five or six; but elongating
from the coast of _Brasilia_ toward the shore of _Africa_ it varieth
Eastward, and arriving at _Capo de las Agullas_, it resteth in the
Meridian, and looketh neither way.

[Sidenote: _The cause of the variation of the Compass._]

Now the cause of this variation was thought by _Gilbertus_ to be the
inequality of the Earth, variously disposed, and indifferently
intermixed with the Sea: withal the different disposure of its
Magnetical vigor in the eminencies and stronger parts thereof. For the
Needle naturally endeavours to conform unto the Meridian, but being
distracted, driveth that way where the greater and powerfuller part of
the Earth is placed. Which may be illustrated from what hath been
delivered and may be conceived by any that understands the generalities
of Geography. For whereas on this side the Meridian, or the Isles of
_Azores_, where the first Meridian is placed, the Needle varieth
Eastward; it may be occasioned by that vast Tract of Earth, that is, of
_Europe_, _Asia_, and _Africa_, seated toward the East, and disposing
the Needle that way. For arriving at some part of the _Azores_, or
Islands of Saint _Michael_, which have a middle situation between these
Continents, and that vast and almost answerable Tract of _America_, it
seemeth equally distracted by both; and diverting unto neither, doth
parallel and place it self upon the true Meridian. But sailing farther,
it veers its Lilly to the West, and regardeth that quarter wherein the
Land is nearer or greater; and in the same latitude as it approacheth
the shore augmenteth its variation. And therefore as some observe, if
_Columbus_ or whosoever first discovered _America_, had apprehended the
cause of this variation, having passed more then half the way, he might
have been confirmed in the discovery, and assuredly foretold there lay a
vast and mighty continent toward the West. The reason I confess and
inference is good, but the instance perhaps not so. For _Columbus_ knew
not the variation of the compass, whereof _Sebastian Cabot_ first took
notice, who after made discovery in the Northern part of that continent.
And it happened indeed that part of _America_ was first discovered,
which was on this side farthest distant, that is, _Jamaica_, _Cuba_, and
the Isles in the Bay of _Mexico_. And from this variation do some new
discoverers deduce a probability in the attempts of the Northern passage
toward the _Indies_.

Now because where the greater continents are joyned, the action and
effluence is also greater; therefore those Needles do suffer the
greatest variation which are in Countries which most do feel that
action. And therefore hath _Rome_ far less variation then _London_; for
on the West side of _Rome_ are seated the great continents of _France_,
_Spain_, _Germany_, which take off the exuperance, and in some way
ballance the vigor of the Eastern parts. But unto _England_ there is
almost no Earth West, but the whole extent of _Europe_ and _Asia_ lieth
Eastward; and therefore at _London_ it varieth eleven degrees, that is
almost one _Rhomb_. Thus also by reason of the great continent of
_Brasilia_, _Peru_, and _Chili_, the Needle deflecteth toward the Land
twelve degrees; but at the straits of _Magellan_ where the Land is
narrowed, and the Sea on the other side, it varieth but five or six.
And so likewise, because the Cape _de las Agullas_ hath Sea on both
sides near it, and other Land remote, and as it were aequidistant from
it, therefore at that point the Needle conforms unto the true Meridian,
and is not distracted by the vicinity of Adjacencies. This is the
general and great cause of variation. But if in certain Creeks and
Vallies the Needle prove irregular, and vary beyond expectation, it may
be imputed unto some vigorous part of the Earth, or Magnetical eminence
not far distant. And this was the invention of _D. Gilbert_, not many
years past, a Physician in _London_. And therefore although some assume
the invention of its direction, and other have had the glory of the
Card; yet in the experiments, grounds, and causes thereof, _England_
produced the Father Philosopher, and discovered more in it then
_Columbus_ or _Americus_ did ever by it.

Unto this in great part true the reason of _Kircherus_ may be added:
That this variation proceedeth not only from terrestrious eminencies,
and magnetical veins of the Earth, laterally respecting the Needle, but
the different coagmentation of the Earth disposed unto the Poles, lying
under the Sea and Waters, which affect the Needle with great or lesser
variation, according to the vigour or imbecility of these subterraneous
lines, or the entire or broken compagination of the magnetical fabrick
under it. As is observable from several Loadstones placed at the bottom
of any water, for a Loadstone or Needle upon the surface, will variously
conform it self, according to the vigour or faintness of the Loadstones
under it.

Thus also a reason may be alledged for the variation of the variation,
and why, according to observation, the variation of the Needle hath
after some years been found to vary in some places. For this may
proceed from mutations of the earth, by subterraneous fires, fumes,
mineral spirits, or otherwise; which altering the constitution of the
magnetical parts, in process of time, doth vary the variation over the
place.

It is also probable what is conceived of its Antiquity, that the
knowledge of its polary power and direction unto the North was unknown
unto the Ancients; and though _Levinus Lemnius_, and _Caelius
Colcagninus_, are of another belief, is justly placed with new
inventions by _Pancirollus_. For their _Achilles_ and strongest argument
is an expression in _Plautus_, a very Ancient author, and contemporary
unto _Ennius_. _Hic ventus jam secundus est, cape modo versoriam._ Now
this _versoriam_ they construe to be the compass, which notwithstanding
according unto _Pineda_, who hath discussed the point, _Turnebus_,
_Cabeus_, and divers others, is better interpreted the rope that helps
to turn the Ship, or as we say, doth make it tack about; the Compass
declaring rather the Ship is turned, then conferring unto its
conversion. As for the long expeditions and sundry voyages of elder
times, which might confirm the Antiquity of this invention, it is not
improbable they were performed by the help of Stars; and so might the
Phoenicean navigators, and also _Ulisses_ sail about the
Mediterranean, by the flight of Birds, or keeping near the shore; and so
might _Hanno_ coast about _Africa_; or by the help of Oars, as is
expressed in the voyage of _Jonah_. And whereas it is contended that
this verticity was not unknown unto _Solomon_, in whom is presumed an
universality of knowledge; it will as forcibly follow, he knew the Art
of Typography, Powder and Guns, or had the Philosophers Stone, yet sent
unto _Ophir_ for Gold. It is not to be denied, that beside his
Political wisdom, his knowledge in Philosophy was very large; and
perhaps from his works therein, the ancient Philosophers, especially
_Aristotle_, who had the assistance of _Alexanders_ acquirements,
collected great observables. Yet if he knew the use of the Compass, his
Ships were surely very slow, that made a three years voyage from
_Eziongeber_ in the red Sea unto _Ophir_; which is supposed to be
_Taprobana_ or _Malaca_ in the _Indies_, not many moneths sail; and
since in the same or lesser time, _Drake_ and _Candish_ performed their
voyage about the Earth.

And as the knowledge of its verticity is not so old as some conceive, so
it is more ancient then most believe; nor had its discovery with Guns,
Printing, or as many think, some years before the discovery of
_America_. For it was not unknown unto _Petrus Peregrinus_ a Frenchman,
who two hundred years since left a Tract of the Magnet, and a perpetual
motion to be made thereby, preserved by _Gasserus_. _Paulus Venetus_,
and about five hundred years past _Albertus Magnus_ make mention hereof,
and quote for it a Book of _Aristotle_, _De Lapide_; which Book although
we find in the Catalogue of _Laertius_, yet with _Cabeus_ we may rather
judge it to be the work of some Arabick Writer, not many years before
the days of _Albertus_.

Lastly, It is likewise true what some have delivered of _Crocus Martis_,
that is, Steel corroded with Vinegar, Sulphur, or otherwise, and after
reverberated by fire. For the Loadstone will not at all attract it, nor
will it adhere, but lye therein like Sand. This to be understood of
_Crocus Martis_ well reverberated, and into a violet colour: for common
_chalybs praeparatus_, or corroded and powdered Steel, the Loadstone
attracts like ordinary filings of Iron; and many times most of that
which passeth for _Crocus Martis_. So that this way may serve as a test
of its preparation; after which it becometh a very good medicine in
fluxes. The like may be affirmed of flakes of Iron that are rusty and
begin to tend unto Earth; for their cognation then expireth, and the
Loadstone will not regard them.

And therefore this may serve as a trial of good Steel. The Loadstone
taking up a greater mass of that which is most pure, it may also decide
the conversion of Wood into Iron, as is pretended from some Waters: and
the common conversion of Iron into Copper by the mediation of blew
Coperose, for the Loadstone will not attract it. Although it may be
questioned, whether in this operation, the Iron or Coperose be
transmuted, as may be doubted from the cognation of Coperose with
Copper; and the quantity of Iron remaining after the conversion. And the
same may be useful to some discovery concerning Vitriol or Coperose of
Mars, by some called Salt of Steel, made by the spirits of Vitriol or
Sulphur. For the corroded powder of Steel will after ablution be
actively attracted by the Loadstone, and also remaineth in little
diminished quantity. And therefore whether those shooting Salts partake
but little of Steel, and be not rather the vitriolous spirits fixed into
Salt by the effluvium or odor of Steel, is not without good question.




