CHAPTER II

EVERYBODY GETS THERE


JANE sat on the rear seat with old Mr. Cattermole, who was coming home
to his daughter, Mrs. Mead.

"Ever been here before?" old Mr. Cattermole asked her.

"No, never."

"Hey?"

"No, never."

"Once?"

"Never."

"What?"

"Never!"

"I'll tell you what it is," said Mr. Cattermole, beaming benevolently,
"it's the jolting. It keeps me from hearing what you say."

Jane nodded, smiling.

But old Mr. Cattermole wasn't long inconvenienced by the jolting.

"Who you going to stop with?" he asked next.

"Mrs. Ralston and Miss Drew."

"Who?"

"Mrs. Ralston and Miss Drew."

"Who? I don't hear you."

"Miss Drew."

"The Crews?--There ain't no such people in town."

"Miss Drew!" Jane became slightly crimson.

"I'll tell you," said Mr. Cattermole, "we'll wait. I can't hear. Really
I can't."

The next minute they arrived at Mrs. Cowmull's, since she lived in the
first house on the street. Lorenzo Rath, the artist, who had been
sitting on the middle seat with Madeleine, now pressed her hand, twisted
about and shook Jane's, nodded to old Mr. Cattermole, leaned forward and
dragged his suit-case from under the seat, and then wriggled out, over
two boxes and under a flapping curtain, and down on to the sidewalk.
Mrs. Cowmull was standing on the porch, trying to look hospitable and
unconscious at the same time. "Here," said the stage driver, suddenly
delivering Lorenzo's trunk on to the top of his head,--"and here's the
lampshade and the codfish,--they get down here, too."

Lorenzo couldn't help laughing. "Au revoir," he cried, waving the
lampshade as the steps began to move.

"We'll meet again soon," Madeleine cried, her face full of bright color.

"Yes, of course."

Then they were off.

"Seemed a nice young feller," said old Mr. Cattermole to Jane.

"Yes." She tried to speak loudly.

"Hey!"

"Yes."

"I'll tell you," said old Mr. Cattermole benevolently, "you come and see
my granddaughter Emily, and then we'll talk. My granddaughter's a great
student. You'll like her. She's full of the new ideas and new books and
all that. We're very proud of her. Only she don't get married."

Then the stage stopped, and Mrs. Mead came running out. "Oh, Father, did
you buy the new magazines,--on the train, you know?"

Old Mr. Cattermole was descending backwards with the care of a cat in an
apple-tree. "It's my daughter," he said to Jane. "I can always hear her
because she speaks so plain. Yes, Emma, it _was_ dusty, very dusty."

"This lawn-sprinkler is your's, ain't it?" said the stage driver,
jerking it off the roof into Mrs. Mead's arms. "Here's his bag, too."

And then they went on again. Madeleine now had space to turn about.
"You'll come and see me?" she asked Jane earnestly; "it'll be so nice.
We're both strangers here."

"I'll try," Jane answered, "but I shall be closely tied to the house.
Aunt Susan is an invalid, you see. I'll not only have all the work, but
if I go out, that poor sick woman will be left helpless and alone
up-stairs."

"Perhaps I can come and see you, then," said Madeleine. "I'll have the
time to come, if you'll have the time to see me."

"I don't know anything about what my life will be," said Jane. "As I
told you on the train, I've only seen my aunts once in my life and that
was fifteen years ago. But I should think that you could come and see
us. I should think that a little company would do Aunt Susan a lot of
good. I'm sure that it would, in fact. But she may not like to see
strangers. I really don't know a thing about it. I'm all in the dark."

"I'll come and ask if I may come," said Madeleine brightly. "If she sees
me, maybe she'll like me. Most everybody does." She laughed.

"I'm sure of that," Jane said, laughing, too. Then the stage stopped at
Miss Debby Vane's, and Miss Debby came flying down to embrace her
cousin. "Thanks be to God that you're here safe, my dear. These awful
storms at sea have just about frightened me to death."

"But I was on land, Aunt Deborah." Madeleine, in getting down, had
gotten into a warm embrace at the same time.

"I know, dear, I know. But one can't remember that all the time--can
one?" Miss Debby was kissing her over and over.

"Your step-ladder. Look out!" cried the stage driver, and they had
barely time to jump from under.

Then Madeleine reached up and clasped Jane's hand. "We shall be
friends," she said earnestly; "I've never met any one whom I've liked
quite in the same way that I like you. Do let us see all that we can of
one another."

"_I_ want to, I know," Jane answered.

The stage driver was already remounting his seat.

"Au revoir," Madeleine cried, just as Lorenzo had done.

"Just for a little," Jane called back, and then she was alone in the
stage, rattling down the long, green-arched street to its furthest end.

"There goes the stage," Katie Croft called out to her mother-in-law in
the next room. "Now Miss Drew'll have her niece and be able to get away
for a little rest."

"If it was a daughter-in-law, she couldn't, maybe," said a voice from
the next room; "the rest is going to be poor, sweet Susan Ralston's,
anyhow. Oh, my Susan Ralston, my dear, sweet Susan Ralston, my loving
Susan Ralston, where I used to go and call!"

"Why, Mother, you haven't so much as thought of Mrs. Ralston for years."
Katie's voice was very sharp.

"Nobody knows what I think of," wailed the voice from the other room.
"My thoughts is music. They fly and sing all night. They sing Caw, Caw,
and they fly like feathers."

Katie Croft walked over and shut the door with a bang. Katie was almost
beside herself.

The stage now drew up before the Ralston house.

Miss Matilda quitted the window, where she had stood watching for an
hour, and went to the gate. Her emotions were quite tumultuous--for her.
Single-handed she had tended her sister for five years, and now she was
going to have a rest. She had had very trying symptoms, and the doctor
had advised a rest,--three weeks of freedom, night and day. She was
going away on a real holiday, going back to the place where she had
taught school before the summons had come to cherish, love, and protect
her only sister, who was not strong and had property. It seemed like a
dream,--a wild, lively, and joyful dream. She almost smiled as she
thought of what was at hand.

Jane descended, her small trunk came bang down beside her in the same
instant, and the driver was paid and drove off. The aunt and niece then
turned to go into the house.

"Well, and so it's you!" Matilda's tone and glance were slightly
inquisitorial, and more than slightly dictatorial. "I'm glad to see
you're strong. You'll need be. She's an awful care. She ain't up much
now. Isn't up at all sometimes for weeks. Sleeps considerable. Take off
your hat and coat and hang them there. That's the place where they
belong."

Jane obeyed without saying anything. But her smile spoke for her.

"Hungry?" inquired Matilda.

"A little."

"I surmised you would be and waited supper. Thought you'd see how I
fixed hers then. She's eating very little. Less and less all the time.
There's a garden to weed, too. Awful inconvenient out there across two
stiles. But she won't give it up. She pays me to tend it, or I'd let the
dandelions root it out in short order. But I tend it."

They had gone into the kitchen, where a kettle stewed feebly over a
half-dead fire. "Sit down," said Matilda. "I'll fix her supper first.
She takes her tea cold, so I save it from morning and heat it up with a
little boiling water, _so_. Then there's this bit of fish I saved from
day before yesterday, and I cut a piece of bread. No butter, because her
stomach's delicate. You'll see that she'll hardly eat this. Watch now."

Jane sat and watched, still smiling.

"Mr. Rath, the artist, came down in the stage with you, didn't he?" Miss
Matilda went on. "What kind of a young man was he? Somebody'll tell you,
so it might as well be me, what's brought him here. Mrs. Cowmull's
trying to marry off her niece, Emily Mead. There aren't any men in town,
so she advertised. She gave it out that she wanted a boarder, but
everybody see through that. That's what marriage has come to these days,
catching men to board 'em and then marrying them when they're thinking
of something else. I thank Heaven I ain't had nothing to do with any
marriage. They're a bad business. There, that's your supper."

Jane started slightly. Her own cold fish and lukewarm tea sat before
her. "Shan't I take Aunt Susan's up first?" she asked, recollecting that
she still had some lunch in her bag, and that Matilda would be leaving
early in the morning.

"No need. She likes things cold. You ought to see her face if she gets
anything boiling in her mouth. It's no use to give her nothing hot.
You'd think it was a snake. I give it up the third time she burnt her."

"But I ought to go up and see her, I think; she hasn't seen me since I
was such a little girl."

"No need. You go ahead and enjoy your supper without bothering over her.
She knows you're here, and she isn't one that's interested in things.
She'll read an old shelf paper for hours, but carry her up a new paper
and like as not when you get to the bed with it, you'll find her asleep.
She sleeps a lot."

Jane--thus urged--picked the chilled fish with a fork and considered.

"I'll show you about the house after you've done eating," the aunt
continued presently; "it's easy taken care of, for I keep it all shut
up. Just Susan's room and mine and the kitchen is open. The neighbors
won't bother you, for I give them to understand long ago as I wasn't one
with time to waste. There isn't any one in the place that a woman with
any sense would want to bother with, anyhow."

"I don't fancy that I'll have time to be lonesome," smiled Jane, bravely
swallowing some tea.

"You'd have if it wasn't for the garden. I don't know whatever in the
world makes Susan set such store by that garden. She will have it that
it shall be kept up in memory of her husband, and you never saw such
weeds. I've often sat down backwards when one come up--often."

"I can't see it at all," with a glance out of the window.

"You can't from here. And it's got to be watered, and she counts every
pot full of water from her bed. She can hear me pumping. The birds dig
up the seeds as fast as I can plant 'em, and I never saw no sense in
slaving in the sun over what you can buy in the shade any day.--Are you
done?"

"Yes, I'm done."

"Then come on."

"Can I spread the tray?"

"Tray! She doesn't have a tray. What should I fuss with a tray for, when
I've got two hands?"

Jane rose and stood by the table in silence, watching the cup filled
from the standing teapot and the plate ornamented with a lonely bit of
fish and a slice of bread. "Don't you butter the bread?"

"She's in bed so much she mustn't have rich food," Matilda answered;
"there, now it's ready. Come on."

"Shan't I carry anything?"

"I can take it, I guess. I've carried it alone for five years; I guess I
can manage it to-night."

Jane followed up the stairs in silence; Matilda marched ahead with a
firm, heavy tread.

"Shall I knock for you?"

"I don't know what for. She yells anyway, whenever I come in, whether
she's knocked or not. Just open the door."

Jane opened the door gently, and they went in together. The room was
half darkened, and only a little sharp nose showed over the top of the
bedquilt.

"Here's your supper," said the affectionate sister, "and here's Jane."

A shrill cry was followed by two eyes tipping upward beyond the nose.
"Oh, are you Jane?" There was a lot of pathos in the tone.

The girl moved quickly to the bedside. "I hope that we're going to be
very happy," she said; "we must love one another very much, you know."

The invalid hoisted herself on to an elbow and looked towards the plate
which Matilda was holding forth.

"Oh, my! Fish again!" she wailed.

Later--on their way back to the kitchen fire--Matilda said
significantly: "Most ungrateful person I ever saw, she is. But just
don't notice what she says. It's the only way to get on. I keep her room
tidy and I keep her house clean and I keep her garden weeded. I'm
careful of her money, and she's well fed. I don't know what more any one
could ask, but she ain't satisfied and she ain't always polite, but
you'll only have three weeks of what I've had for five years, so I guess
it won't kill you."

"Oh, I think that I'll be all right," Jane answered cheerfully.

"The stage is ordered for seven in the morning, and I shall get up at
half-past four," the aunt continued. "You can sleep till five just as
well. I'm going to bed now, and you'd better do the same thing."

"Yes, I think so," said Jane cheerfully; "good night."




