CHAPTER VI

LORENZO RATH


IT wasn't to be supposed for a minute that Lorenzo Rath, a real live
young man and an artist, shouldn't take first place in the town talk.
Jane's remarkable religion might attract the attention of a few who were
sufficiently religious themselves to be naturally shocked over the
waffles and depressed over the invalid's recovery, but Lorenzo was of
interest to every one.

"If he ain't took already, there's a fine chance for Emily," Mr.
Cattermole said benevolently to his daughter. Being a man, he naturally
supposed that Mrs. Mead would never have come by such an idea if she
hadn't had a bright old father to point it out to her.

"Emily doesn't want to marry," said Mrs. Mead, compressing her lips and
expanding her dignity simultaneously; "she wouldn't marry an artist,
anyway."

"Maybe he ain't much of an artist," said Mr. Cattermole, with a tendency
to look on the bright side. "Why don't Emily want to marry? I thought
girls always wanted to marry. They did when I was young."

"It's different nowadays," said Mrs. Mead, with condescending reserve.
"You don't understand, Father, but nothing is like it used to be. The
world is getting all changed. When Emily was an only child, she was
looked upon as very odd, but most women have an only child nowadays.
Life is quite different."

"I'd like to see Emily married," said Mr. Cattermole, thoughtfully.

"Emily has had plenty of chances," said her mother, waving the brave,
tattered mother-lie that seems to cover over such cruel wounds.

"Has she really?" said Mr. Cattermole, in genuine surprise. "I didn't
know that. And she wouldn't have 'em! Laws sakes! Who, for instance?"

"No one you knew," said his daughter, telling the truth then.

"Sarah knew 'em, I suppose?" (Sarah was Mrs. Cowmull.)

"No, no one Sarah knew."

"Think of that now! Why, I s'posed there wasn't nothing Sarah didn't
know."

In voicing this opinion Mr. Cattermole voiced the town opinion, too. It
was popularly supposed that Sarah Cowmull always knew everything. But
she didn't know the status of Lorenzo Rath's heart, and Lorenzo Rath
himself puzzled her not a little.

Lorenzo puzzled everybody, mainly because he was so open and simple that
even a child must have suspected him of keeping something back. Such
frankness was unthinkable, such innocence incredible.

"Why, he's gallivanting all over with Madeleine, and yet she's gotten
another man's picture on her table!" said Miss Debby to Katie Croft.

"And he's skipping in Mrs. Ralston's gate at all hours," said Katie
Croft--"no kind of ceremony to him. The other day he see mother in the
window, and he waved his hat at her and give her an awful turn. She
don't see well, and thought he threw a stone at her. She ain't used to
city ways; she's used to country ways. I had to let her smell camphor
for a good hour, and while she was smelling, the kitchen fire went out.
I wish he'd keep his hat on his head another time. My life's hard enough
without having a artist suddenly set to, to cheer up mother."

"What do you think of Mrs. Ralston's niece? Think she's nice?"

"Nice! With Susan Ralston about as lively as a cricket! I don't think
much of such new ways. I don't know whatever Matilda will say. She's
just got life all systematized, and now here's Susan up and out of bed.
I'm so scared the girl'll come over and go at mother, I don't know what
to do."

"My, suppose Mrs. Croft was to be up and about!" said Miss Debby,
opening her eyes widely. "Whatever would you do?"

"Do! I know what I'd do." Young Mrs. Croft looked dark and mysterious.
"I know just exactly what I'll do. And I'm all ready to do it, and if
I'm interfered with, I will do it,--good and quick, too."

"How is old Mrs. Croft now?" Miss Debby asked.

"Oh, she's grabbin' as ever. I never see such a disposition. She's
always catching at me or the cat or something. Seems to consider it a
way of attracting attention. Crazy folks has such crazy ideas, and she's
crazy,--crazy as a loon."

Katie Croft took up her market basket and went on up the street. Miss
Debby stayed behind to wait for the noon mail. "Katie's so bitter," she
said to herself, shaking her head; "she ought to be more grateful for
being supported."

Miss Debby forgot that there are few things so irritating in this world
as being supported. It is a situation which has become especially
unpopular lately, particularly with women and political motives.

But no old worn-out aphorism held for one minute in the breezy bloom of
the House Where Jane Lived.

"Oh, I'm so happy," Susan exclaimed many times daily, "I'm so happy. I
never felt nothing like your sunshining in all my life before, you
Sunshine Jane, you! I feel like my own cupboards, all unlocked and aired
and nice and used again."

Jane stopped caroling as she kneaded bread and laughed--which sounded
equally pleasant.

"I'm as happy as you are, Auntie; it's so nice to be in heaven."

"I used to think maybe I'd die suddenly and find myself there some day,"
said Susan. "I'm glad I didn't."

"It's better to live suddenly than to die suddenly," said Jane, merrily;
"when people are awfully bothered sometimes, I've heard their friends
say: 'But if you died suddenly, it would work out somehow,' and I wanted
to say: 'Why not live suddenly instead of dying suddenly, and then
everything's bound to come out splendidly.'"

"Oh, Jane, what a grand idea,--to live suddenly! That's what I've done,
surely."

"Yes," said Jane, "that's what I did, too. Instead of fading out of
life, we just bloomed into life. It's just as easy, and a million times
more fun."

"And it's all so awfully agreeable," said Susan. "My things look so
nice, all set different, and it's so pleasant having folks coming in,
and I like it all, and we haven't to fuss with the garden."

"I attend to the garden!" cried a voice outside, and a mysterious hand
shoved a basket of peas over the window-ledge.

"I know who that is," said Susan; "it's that boy, and he's smelt
cinnamon rolls and come to lunch. How do you do?"

Lorenzo, brown and merry, was getting in at the window.

"Why, you've really been weeding!" exclaimed Susan.

"Of course! I've tended the garden ever since you gave it up."

"I declare! Well, I never. Jane, we must give him a bite of something."

"Yes, that's what I came for," said Lorenzo, cheerfully, "cookies,
jelly-roll,--anything simple and handy. Madeleine and I were out
walking, discussing our affairs, and when I stopped for the garden, she
went on for her mail. I'm awfully hungry."

"People say you're engaged to her," said Susan. Jane turned to get the
tin of cookies.

"Yes, naturally. People say so much. She is a pretty girl, isn't
she?--but then there's Emily Mead. I must look at myself on all sides
and consider carefully. Old Mr. Cattermole took me to drive yesterday
and told me that he was healthy and his dead wife was healthy and that,
except for what killed him, Mr. Mead was healthy, too; and there was
Emily, perfectly healthy and the only grandchild, and why didn't I come
over often,--it wasn't but a step."

"Well, you do beat all," said Susan. Jane offered the tin of cookies.
Lorenzo took six. They were all laughing.

Later, when he'd gone away, Susan said, almost shyly this time: "Jane, I
don't want to interfere, but he _is_ in love."

"With Madeleine?"

"With you."

"Auntie," Jane came to her side, "you mustn't speak in that way about
me. I can't marry,--not possibly. I'm a Sunshine Nurse, and I shall be a
Sunshine Nurse till I die. I'll make homes happy, but I shall never have
one of my own."

Susan looked frightened and timid. "But why?"

"For many reasons. And all good ones."

There was that in the young girl's tone that ended the subject for the
time being.

But Susan thought of it a great deal, and alone in her room that night,
Jane thought, too. She had made herself ready for bed, and then sat down
by the window, clasping her hands on the sill. Lorenzo Rath was
buoyantly dear and jolly, and she realized that he was the nicest man
that she had ever met. It had all been fun, great fun, and she had
enjoyed it mightily. But with all her learning Jane was not so very much
farther along the Highway to Happiness than some others. In many cases
she was only a holder of keys as yet--the distinct knowledge to be
gained by unlocking secrets with their aid was as yet not hers. To hold
the keys and look at the doors is to realize what power means,--but to
unlock is to use it. Jane was still a novice; she left the doors locked
and was content to hold the keys, and no more.

The next night Lorenzo appeared again. "I'm half-dead," he said. "I've
tramped twelve miles, sketching."

"Dear, dear," said Susan, "seems like nobody in this world ever wants
what's close to."

"Sometimes it's no use to want what's close to," said Lorenzo, "or else
what's close to is like Emily Mead, and you just ache to run."

"Emily Mead is a very nice girl," said Jane, in a tone clearly
reproachful.

Lorenzo just laughed. But then Susan made some excuse to slip away. "I
wonder if you'd help me a little," he said then, hesitating a bit.

"Is it something that I can do? Of course I'll help you if I can."

"It's something very necessary."

"Necessary?"

"To my welfare and happiness."

"What is it?"

"I think--I'm--falling in love."

"Oh, dear," Jane was carefully tranquil.

"I've never really been in love in my life, so I can't be sure. But I
think it's that."

Jane said nothing. The room was getting dark.

"I've never seen any one so pretty in all my life as Miss Mar," said the
young artist, slowly. "You know we're old friends."

"Oh, she's lovely," said Jane, with sudden fervor.

"I thought that we might make up little picnics and walks and things?"
hesitated the young man.

"Of course," said Jane, heartily. "And you can come here all you like.
Auntie likes you both so much."

Lorenzo Rath stood by the door. "Were you ever in love?" he asked
bluntly.

"No," said Jane. "I've never had the least little touch of it."

"Haven't you ever thought about it?"

"No, I've never had time. I've never seen any man that I could or would
marry."

"Never?"

"Never."

"That's too bad," said Lorenzo Rath slowly. "Seems to me you'd make such
a splendid wife."

She laughed a little. Then she had to wink quickly to drive back tears
which leapt suddenly.

"I won't say any more," said Lorenzo. She thought that he did not care
to speak of Madeleine to her.

Then she went. And later she found herself sitting in her own room
again, sitting by the same window, thinking. "Poor Emily Mead and her
illusory millionaire! I'm about as silly as she is," thought Jane. "And
yet I know it's higher and more beautiful to make life lovely for others
than to make it lovely for one's self." She sighed because the
reflection--all altruistic as it was--was not quite the truth, and she
was true enough herself to feel jarred by the slightest cross-shadow of
falsehood. Truth plays as widely and freely as the sunbeams themselves
and goes as straight to the heart of each and all.

Finally she opened a little book and read aloud a few pages to herself
in a low tone. "I know I'm on the right path," she said, when she had
closed the book; "the thing is to stick resolutely to keeping on
straight ahead. And I must be absolutely content with all that comes.
You have to be content if you're going to grow in goodness, for you have
to know that you've been trying and been successful." She sat still a
while longer and then rose with a deep, long breath. "Well, to-day's
been something, and to-morrow I'll be something better, I know."

The truth did shine then, and she went to bed calmed, but was hardly
stretched down between the cool sheets when Susan rapped at the door.

"Come in."

"Oh, Jane, I can't sleep. I've got to thinking of when Matilda comes
back, and I'm scared blue."




