CHAPTER VIII

SOUL-UPLIFTING


IT was the next morning about eleven o'clock.

"You see," said Jane, sitting in the Crofts' sitting-room opposite Katie
Croft who, whatever else she might or might not be, was certainly not
pleasant of expression, "you see, my aunt has been an invalid so much
that she appreciates what a change means to both the sick one and the
one who cares for her, and so we thought that it would be so nice if
you'd let me wheel your mother--"

"She ain't my mother--she's my mother-in-law," broke in Mrs. Katie
Croft, instantly indignant over so false an imputation. "Good lands, the
very idea! My mother! And never one single stroke of paralysis nor
nothing in my family, and all reading the Bible without glasses right up
till they died."

"You see, it would give you a little rest, too," Jane continued, "and it
would do Aunt Susan good to feel that she was helping a weaker--"

"She ain't weak," broke in Katie Croft, again; "my lands, she's strong
as a lady-ox. Anything she makes up her mind to keep she lays hold of
with a grip as makes you fairly sick all up and down your back. You
don't know perhaps, Miss Grey, as my husband died in our youth, and I
come to live with his mother as a sacred duty, and I tell you frankly
that I wish I'd never been born or that he'd never been born, forty
times an hour--I do."

"You'll like a week alone, I'm sure," said Jane serenely, "and we'll
like to have your mother-in-law. Perhaps she'll get a few new ideas--"

"She's stubborn as a mule," interrupted the daughter-in-law.

"But may I see her and ask her? I do so want to help you a little. Life
must have been so hard for you these last years."

"Hard!" said Katie Croft, with emphasis. "Hard! Well, I'll tell you what
it is, Miss Grey,--to marry a young man as was meek as Moses and then
have him just fade right straight out and get a mother-in-law like that
old--that old--that old--well, I'll tell you frankly she's a siren and
nothing else." (Young Mrs. Croft probably meant "vixen," but Jane did
not notice.) "My life ain't really worth a shake-up of mustard and
vinegar some days. What I have suffered!"

"I know more than you think," said Jane sympathetically; "nurses take
care of so many kinds of people. But do let me ask her. If she likes to
come to us, it'll be a great rest to you, and perhaps it'll do her a
little good, too."

"I can't understand you're wanting her," said Katie. "It's all over town
how queer you are, but I never thought that anybody could be as queer as
that!"

"Do let us go to her," Jane urged.

Katie rose and forthwith conducted the caller to old Mrs. Croft's room,
a large, square place adorned with no end of black daguerreotypes and
faded photographs.

"Mother, it's Miss Grey. You know?--she's Mrs. Ralston's niece."

Old Mrs. Croft received her visitor with acutely suspicious eyes.
"Well?" she said tartly.

Jane took her hand, but she jerked it smartly away.

"Sit down anywhere," said Katie; "she hears well."

"Hear!" said old Mrs. Croft. "I should say I did hear. There ain't a pan
fell in the neighborhood for the last ten years as hasn't woke me out of
a sound sleep, dreaming of my husband--"

"Miss Grey's come to see you about something," interrupted Katie;
"she--"

"I had a husband," continued old Mrs. Croft, raising her voice from Do
to Re, "and such a one! Wednesday he'd go to sleep and Thursdays he'd
wake, so regular you could tell the days of the week just from his
habits. He--"

"Miss Grey wants--" interrupted Katie.

"I came to--" said Jane.

"I had a husband," continued old Mrs. Croft, going from Re to Mi now;
"oh, my, but I did have a husband. In May I had him and in December I
had him, but he was always the same to me. You can see his picture
there, Miss Grey; it's all faded out, just from being looked at; but
I'll tell you where it never fades, Miss Grey--it never so much as turns
a hair in my heart. My heart is engraved--"

"You'd better go on and say what you've got to say," said Katie to Jane.
"I often put her to bed talking, and she talks all the night through."

"I want to ask you--" Jane began.

"Ask me no questions and I'll tell you no lies," sang Mrs. Croft. "Oh, I
had--"

"--I want you to come and stay with us," Jane said, with forceful
accents.

There was a sudden tense hush.

"My aunt and I want you to come and make us a little visit," the caller
added.

The hush grew awful.

"A little change would be so good for you--you've been shut up so long."

Old Mrs. Croft lifted her two hands towards the ceiling.

"What do you want to take me out of my own house for? Going to do
something to it that I wouldn't approve, I expect. Oh, I see it all.
There was Macbeth and there was Othello, and now there's my house--What
are you going to do to it, anyhow?" The question was pitched so high and
sharp that Jane jumped.

"We just want to give you a little change."

"Change! I had a change once. Went to Cuba with my husband and nearly
died. I don't want no change of _house_," with deep meaning in the
emphasis; "the change that I want is another change. Change is a great
thing to have. My husband never changed. Only his collars. Never no
other way."

"You and Aunt Susan are old friends--" suggested Jane.

"Never nothing special," broke in old Mrs. Croft. "My goodness, I do
hope your aunt ain't calling me her friend, because if she is, it's a
thing I can't allow."

Jane thanked her stars that her powers of mental concentration forbade
her mind to wander. "I'm sure if you came to us, you'd enjoy it," she
said persuasively; "we've such a pretty bedroom down-stairs, and I'll
sleep on the dining-room sofa, so you won't feel lonely."

"Lonely. I never feel lonely. I'd thank Heaven if I could be let alone
for a little, once in a while. I don't want to come, and that's a fact.
If that be treason, make the most of it."

"Oh, but you must come," said Jane; "you'll like it. We want you, and
you must come."

"Well, get me my bonnet then," said old Mrs. Croft. "Run, Katie, I've
been sitting here waiting for it for over an hour."

Katie and Jane regarded one another in consternation. They hadn't quite
counted on this.

"I'm going visiting," said Mrs. Croft gaily. "Oh, my, and how I shall
visit. Years may come and years may go, and still I shall sit there
visiting away, and when I hear the door-bell, I shall know it's time for
Christmas dinner."

Katie took Jane's hand and drew her out of the room. "I don't believe
you'd better take her," she said; "she's so flighty. I know how to
manage her, and you don't. Just give it up."

"No, I won't," said Jane, smiling. "I know that it's a kind thing to do
and that I must do it. I'm going to take her."

"Seems so odd you're wanting to," said Katie. "You're very funny, I
think. People are saying that you think that everything's for the best.
Do you really believe that?"

"Of course. We can't get outside of God's plan, whatever we may do. If
we do wrong, we have to bear the consequences because it's as easy to
_see_ the right thing to do as the wrong, but the great Plan never
wavers."

"Oh, my," said Katie. "I'm glad to know that."

Jane pressed her hand. "I'll get things all ready, and we'll bring her
over tomorrow night," she said; "that'll be best. Then she can go right
to bed and get rested from the effort."

So it was arranged, and the Sunshine Nurse went home to tell Susan that
Mrs. Croft had consented to come. She felt quite positive that now they
would both attain unto a higher plane without any difficulty, if they
kept such a guest in the house for a week.

"It isn't going to be easy, Auntie," she said, a bit later, "but it will
teach you and me a lot, and if one wants to voyage greatly, one must get
out into the deep water."

"I'll do anything to get hold of some different way of getting on with
Matilda," said Susan, "and I begin to see what you mean when you say
that if I change _me_, I'll change it all. If you could make flour into
sugar, you'd have cake instead of biscuit, but, oh, my! Old Mrs. Croft!"

"It won't be for so very long," said Jane, "and think of Katie Croft
through all these years! She's been splendid, I think."

"Well, she didn't have any other place to live, you know," Susan
promptly reminded her niece.

"Work's work, no matter why you do it," Jane said, "and all the big laws
work greatly. This having old Mrs. Croft is a pretty big step for you
and me to take, and you'll see that when Aunt Matilda returns, we'll be
so strongly settled in our new ways that she can't unsettle us. We'll be
absolutely different people."

"Y--yes," said Susan, confidence fighting doubt stoutly. "I'm willing to
try, although left to myself I should never have thought of old Mrs.
Croft as a way of getting different."

"Anything that we do with earnest purpose is a way of getting better,"
said Jane. She looked out of the window for a minute, and her lip almost
quivered. Susan didn't notice. "Everything is always for the best, if
we're sure of it," she then said firmly.




