CHAPTER X

OLD MRS. CROFT


OLD Mrs. Croft arrived the next afternoon about half after four. She was
rolled up in her chair, and her small trunk followed on a wheelbarrow.

"How old you have grown!" she said to Susan, by way of greeting, as she
grated up the gravel. "My, to think you ever looked young!"

They wheeled her into the hall. "Same hall," she said, looking about,
"same paper you had thirty years ago. Oh, my, to think of it. I've
papered and papered and scraped off, and papered and papered and scraped
off, and then papered again in those same thirty years."

They got her into the room on the ground floor, which had been prepared
for her. "I suppose this was the most convenient place to put me," she
said, "and so you put me in it. Put me where you please, only I do hope
you haven't beetles. It makes me very nervous to hear 'em chipping about
all night, and when I'm nervous, I don't sleep, and when I don't sleep,
I just can't help lying awake. It's a way I've got. I caught it from my
husband when he was a baby. He'd wake up and give it to me."

Susan went out with Jane to get her some supper. "I never thought much
about Katie Croft," she said, "but I never doubted she had a hard time."

"Yes," said Jane, "and one of the nicest things in this world is to be
able to give some one who's had a hard time a rest."

"Wouldn't it be dreadful if she died, though, while she was here?"

"Who? Old Mrs. Croft?"

"Oh, no, she won't ever die. I meant Katie. Everybody says she's going
to run away, but if she don't do that and dies, we'll be just as badly
off as if she did it."

"Oh, Auntie!"

"Well, Jane, we'd have to keep old Mrs. Croft till she died."

"I guess there's not much chance of that," Jane said; "she won't die.
She has come here to do us good and to receive good herself, that's
all."

Susan looked appalled. "Surely you don't expect to sunshine _her_ up, do
you?"

"Yes, I do."

Then Susan looked amazed. "Well, I never did! I thought she was just
here to do us good. I--"

Their conversation was suddenly interrupted by a piercing shriek. Jane
flew.

"I'm so happy I just had to let it out," Mrs. Croft announced. "I can't
hold in joy or sorrow. Sorrow I let out in the low of my voice--like a
cow, you know--but joy I let rise to the skies. You'll hear to-night."

Jane looked at her and smiled. She looked like a story-book witch in a
nice, white, modern bed. "I thought that perhaps you wanted something,"
she said, turning to leave the room again.

"No, indeed, I never want anything. I ain't by no means so bad off as is
give out."

"I guessed as much. You can make a fresh start now, and we shan't remind
you of the past."

"Oh, then I'm coming to the table," exclaimed Mrs. Croft, "and I'm going
to be helped like a Christian and feed myself like a human being. This
being put to bed and just all but tied there with a rope isn't going to
go on much longer, I can tell you."

"Don't speak of it at all," said Jane; "you just do what you please
here, and we'll let you. I'm going to get you your supper now."

"Stop!" cried old Mrs. Croft sharply. "Stop! I won't have it! I won't
stand it. Oh, I've had such a time," she went on, bringing her clenched
fist down vigorously on her knee under the bedclothes and raising
her voice very high indeed, "such a time! I had a beautiful son that
you or any girl might have been proud to marry, and then he must go and
marry that Katie Croft creature. There ain't many things to cut a
mother's heart to the quick like seeing her own son marry her own
daughter-in-law. Such a nice raised boy as he was, so neat, and she
kicking her clothes under the bed at night to tidy up the room. Oh!"
cried Mrs. Croft, lifting her voice to a still more surprising pitch,
"what I have suffered! Nothing ain't been spared me. I lost my son and
the use of my legs from the shock and--"

"Supper is all ready," Jane interrupted sweetly and calmly.

"What you got?"

"Sardines--"

"I never eat 'em."

"Toast."

"I hate it."

"Plum preserves."

"Lord have mercy on me, I wouldn't swallow one if you gave it to me."

Jane stood still at the door.

Susan, having heard the screams, came running in.

"Oh, Mrs. Ralston," cried Mrs. Croft, "I had"--Jane rose, approached the
bed, and laid a firm hand on her arm. "What do you want for supper?" she
asked in a quiet, penetrating tone.

"I don't want nothing," cried Mrs. Croft; "days I eat and days I don't.
This is a day I don't eat, and on such a day I only take a little ham
and eggs from time to time. Oh, my husband, how I did love you! It's
just come over me how I loved him, and I love him so I can't hardly
stand it--"

"We'll go out and have supper ourselves, then," said Jane.

"Eat, drink, and be merry while you can," fairly yelled Mrs. Croft. "The
handwriting is on the wall and the Medes and Persians is in the chicken
yard right now. Oh, what a--"

They slipped out and shut the door after them. Susan turned a scared
face Jane's way. "Why, she's crazy!" she said. "Katie always said so,
and folks thought she was just talking. It's awful."

"She's a little excited with the change," said Jane soothingly; "she'll
be calmer soon. It's very bad to shut one's self off from others. It's
better to fuss along with disagreeable people than to live altogether
alone. She's grown flighty through being left alone. It's a wonder that
you didn't get odd yourself."

When they went back after supper, Mrs. Croft was sound asleep.

"Don't wake her, for goodness' sake," whispered Susan, in the doorway.
Jane left the room quietly, and her aunt took her by the arm and led her
up-stairs. "This is pretty serious," she said. "I think Katie Croft
ought to have told us."

"She didn't want her to come; we insisted," said Jane.

"I tell you what," said Susan, "we were too happy."

Susan's tone was so solemn that Jane had an odd little qualm. But the
next instant she knew that all was right, because all is always right.
"Auntie," she said, putting her hand on the older woman's shoulder, "you
must try to realize that you've moved out of the world where things go
wrong into the world where things go right. When you go out of the cold,
dark winter night into a cosy, warm house, you don't fear that the house
will turn dark and cold any minute."

"But old Mrs. Croft isn't a house; she's moved into us, instead."

Jane smiled her customary smile of tranquil sweetness. "She has come to
show us ourselves," she said, "and to bring us to some kind of better
things. I know it."

Susan's eyes altered to confidence. "Well, Sunshine Jane," she said,
"I'll try to believe that you know. I'll try."

They went to bed early, and Jane slept on the dining-room sofa. In the
night Mrs. Croft, calling, woke her. She jumped up and went to her at
once.

"I'm hungry. You didn't ask me here to starve me, did you? Oh, how
hungry I am. I've never been so hungry before."

"I'll get you anything you like," the girl said. "What shall it be?"

Mrs. Croft shook her head lugubriously. "Whatever I eat is sure to kill
me. I wish I was home. You don't know how good dear Katie is to me, Miss
Grey. Nobody could, unless they lived with her year in and year out as I
do. Something told me never to leave my sweet child, and I disobeyed my
conscience which won't let me sleep for aching like a serpent's tooth.
Oh, my little Katie, my pretty little Katie, my loving little Katie that
I went and left at home! Take me to her."

"But she isn't at home," said Jane. "She's gone away on a little visit.
She went last evening."

"I shall never see her again," said Mrs. Croft mournfully. "I shall
never see no one again. Oh, dear; oh, dear. My eyes. My eyes."

"What shall I get you? A glass of milk?"

"It doesn't matter. Whatever you like. I was never one to make trouble.
Whatever you like."

When Jane returned with the milk and some hastily prepared bread and
butter, Mrs. Croft was praying rapidly. "I think I've got religion,"
said she, in a bright, chatty tone; "if you'll sit down, I'll convert
you. It's never too late to mend, and so get your darning basket and
come right here." She began to eat and drink very rapidly. "It's going
to kill me," she said, between bites, "but I don't care a mite. What is
life after all,--a vain fleeting shadow of vanity,--why, you ain't put
no jam on this bread!"

"Do you like jam? I'll get you some at once."

"Oh, merciful heavens, waking me up in the dead of night to give me
plain bread and no jam! I shall never see Katie again, and perhaps it's
just as well, for she'd not stand such doings. Oh, you idle, thriftless
girl, take me home, take me home at once."

"In the morning," said Jane gently.

"Oh, my,--why did I ever come! Katie, my Katie, my long-loving Katie; my
dear little Katie that's gone to New York!"

Then, having swallowed the milk in great gulps and the bread in great
bites, she shut her eyes and lay back again in bed.

"Shan't I bring you anything else?" Jane asked.

"No," said the invalid, "not by no means, and I'll trouble you to get
out and keep out and don't make a noise in the morning, for I want my
last hours to be peaceful, and I'm going to take a screw-driver and fix
my thoughts firmly to heaven at once."

Jane went softly out.




