CHAPTER IX

MADELEINE'S SECRET


THE two girls were enjoying a pleasant time in Susan's big, tidy
kitchen.

"I never knew that a kitchen could be so perfectly lovely," said
Madeleine, as they took tea by the little table by the window. "Jane,
you are a genius! One opens the gate here with a bubbling feeling that
everything in the whole world's all right."

"I'm so glad," said Jane; "it's grand to feel that one is a real channel
of happiness. I always seem to see people as made to form that kind of
connection between God and earth, and that happiness is the visible sign
of success, a good 'getting through,' so to speak."

"Do you know, the English language is awfully indefinite. That sentence
might mean good flowing like water through people, or people so made
that good can go through them easily. Do you see?"

"Yes, I see. But either meaning is all right. It isn't what I say that
matters so much, anyway. It's how you take it."

"I took that two ways."

"Yes, and both were good. That's so fine,--to get two good meanings,
where I only meant one."

They smiled together.

"Mr. Rath and I were talking about that last evening," said Madeleine,
the color coming into her face a little. "Do you know, he's really a
very dear man. He's awfully nice."

Jane jumped up to drive a wasp out of the window. "You know him better
than I do," she said, very busy.

"I've known him for several years, but never as well as here."

Jane came back and sat down. Madeleine was silent, seeming to search for
words.

"You were going to tell me a secret," her friend said, after a little.

"I know, but I--I can't."

Jane lifted her eyes almost pitifully. "Why not?"

"I don't feel that I have the right, after all. Secrets are such
precious things."

"If I can help you--?"

"Oh, no, no.--It isn't any trouble. It's something quite different--I--I
thought that perhaps I could tell you my thoughts, but--I can't."

There was a silence.

"There are such wonderful feelings in the world," Madeleine went on,
after a little; "they don't seem to fit into words at all. One feels
ashamed to have even planned to talk about them. One feels so humble
when--" she paused--then closed her lips.

Jane put out her hand and took the hand upon the other side of the
little table, close. "Don't mind me, dear; I understand."

"Do you really?"

"Yes."

Madeleine's eyes were anxious. "Do you guess? Did you guess?"

"Yes."

"And how--what--what do you think?"

"I think that it would be lovely, only, of course, I don't quite know it
all, for I shall never have anything like it."

Madeleine started. "Oh, Jane, don't say that."

"But it's so, dear."

"Oh, _no_."

"No, dear,--I can guess and sympathize. But I shall never have any such
happiness. It's--it's quite settled."

Madeleine left her seat, went round by the side of the other girl, flung
herself down on the floor, and looked as if she were about to cry. "Oh,
Jane, you mustn't feel so. Why shouldn't you marry?"

"I can't, dear; I've debts of my father's to pay, and I'm pledged to my
Order."

"But they'll get paid after a while."

"It will take all my youth."

"But a way can be found?"

"No way can ever be. There is no one in the wide world to help me. I'm
quite alone."

"Why, Jane," said Madeleine, always kneeling and always looking up, "I
know some one who can manage everything, and you do, too."

Jane stared a little. "My aunt, do you mean?"

"No,--God."

Jane smiled suddenly. "Thank you, dear. I hadn't forgotten, but I just
didn't think. Still, I think God means me to be brave about my burdens.
I don't think that He sees them as things from which to be relieved."

Madeleine was still looking up. "But the channel doesn't think; the
channel just conveys what pours along it," she whispered.

Just at this second the scene altered.

"Oh, there's my aunt!" Jane exclaimed. Susan passed the window, and the
next minute she came in the door. "I've had the most bee--youtiful
afternoon," she announced radiantly. "I did Jane lots of credit, for I
never said a word about anybody, but oh, how splendid it was to just be
good and silent, and hear all the others talk. They talked about
everybody, and a good many were of my own opinion, so I had considerable
satisfaction without doing a thing wrong."

Jane couldn't help laughing or Madeleine, either. "Was young Mrs. Croft
there?"

"No, and most everybody says that she'll go off to-morrow and never come
back, and we'll have old Mrs. Croft till she dies. They looked at me
pretty hard, but I stuck to my soul and never said a word."

"It was noble in you, Auntie," Jane said warmly.

"Yes, it was," assented Susan. Then she turned to Madeleine, who had
returned to her chair. "Jane's religion's pretty hard on me, but I like
its results, and I can do anything I set out to do, and I don't mean to
not get a future if I can help it. You see, my sister Matilda is a very
peculiar person. You must know that by this time?"

"I have heard a good deal about her," Madeleine admitted.

"Well, I hope it isn't unkind in me to say that I know more than anybody
else can possibly imagine."

"But she's coming back all right," Jane interrupted firmly; "we mustn't
forget that."

"No," said Susan, with a quick gasp in her breath; "no, I'm not
forgetting a thing. I'm only talking a little. And oh, how Mrs. Cowmull
did talk about you, Madeleine. She says Mr. Rath can't put his nose out
of the door alone."

"That's dreadful," said Madeleine, trying not to color, "especially as
we always come straight here."

"Well, I tell you it's pretty hard work being good," said Susan, with a
cheerful sigh; "it's a relief to get home and take off one's bonnet."

"And don't you want some tea, Auntie? It's all hot under the cozy."

"Yes, I will, you Sunshine Jane, you. I'll never cease to be grateful
for good tea again as long as I live. I've had five years of the other
kind to help me remember."

Later, when Madeleine was gone, Susan said: "Do you know, Jane, Katie
Croft is certainly going to desert that awful old woman when we get her
here? Everybody says so."

"No, she isn't, Auntie; the expected is never what happens."

"Jane, any one with your religion can't rely on proverbs to help them
out, because the whole thing puts you right outside of common-sense to
begin with."

Jane was sitting looking out upon the pretty garden. "I know, Auntie; I
only quoted that in reference to the Sewing Society gossip. It's never
the expected that happens in their world; it's the expected that always
happens in my world. And proverbs don't exist in my world; they're every
one of them a human limitation."

"Well, Jane, I don't know; some of them are very pretty, and when I've
seen Matilda over the fence and run down to get a few scraps, I've taken
considerable comfort in 'No cloud without a silver lining' and 'It never
rains but it pours.' They were a great help to me."

Jane kissed her tenderly. "Bless you, Auntie,--everything's all right
and all lovely, and Madeleine made me so happy to-day. I'm sure that
she's engaged."

"Yes, I've thought that, too."

"Yes, and I'm so glad for her."

"I hope he's good enough for her."

"Oh, I'm sure that he is." Jane thought a minute. "And Madeleine gave me
a big lesson, too," she added.

"What?"

"She showed me that with all my teaching and preaching, I don't trust
God half enough yet."

"Well, Jane," said Susan solemnly, "I s'pose trusting God is like being
grateful for the sunshine,--human beings ain't big enough to hold all
they ought to feel."

"Perhaps we'd be nothing but trust and gratitude, then," said Jane,
smiling.

"They're nice feelings to be made of," said Susan serenely, "but I must
go and put my bonnet away. But, oh, heavens, when I think that to-morrow
old Mrs. Croft is coming!"

"And that lots of good is coming with her; she is coming to bring
happiness and happiness only."

"Yes, I know," Susan's air was completely submissive. "I can hardly wait
for her to get here. They wondered at the Sewing Society if she'd sing
Captain Jinks all night often. She does sometimes, you know. But I'm
sure we'll like her. She's a nice woman."




