CHAPTER XXVII


The general object of the Law is twofold: the well-being of the soul,
and the well-being of the body. The well-being of the soul is promoted
by correct opinions communicated to the people according to their
capacity. Some of these opinions are therefore imparted in a plain
form, others allegorically; because certain opinions are in their plain
form too strong for the capacity of the common people. The well-being
of the body is established by a proper management of the relations in
which we live one to another. This we can attain in two ways: first by
removing all violence from our midst; that is to say, that we do not do
every one as he pleases, desires, and is able to do; but every one of
us does that which contributes towards the common welfare. Secondly, by
teaching every one of us such good morals as must produce a good social
state. Of these two objects, the one, the well-being of the soul, or
the communication of correct opinions, comes undoubtedly first in rank,
but the other, the well-being of the body, the government of the state,
and the establishment of the best possible relations among men, is
anterior in nature and time. The latter object is required first; it is
also treated [in the Law] most carefully and most minutely, because the
well-being of the soul can only be obtained after that of the body has
been secured. For it has already been found that man has a double
perfection: the first perfection is that of the body, and the second
perfection is that of the soul. The first consists in the most healthy
condition of his material relations, and this is only possible when man
has all his wants supplied, as they arise; if he has his food, and
other things needful for his body, e.g., shelter, bath, and the like.
But one man alone cannot procure all this; it is impossible for a
single man to obtain this comfort; it is only possible in society,
since man, as is well known, is by nature social.

The second perfection of man consists in his becoming an actually
intelligent being; i.e., he knows about the things in existence all
that a person perfectly developed is capable of knowing. This second
perfection certainly does not include any action or good conduct, but
only knowledge, which is arrived at by speculation, or established by
research.

It is clear that the second and superior kind of perfection can only be
attained when the first perfection has been acquired; for a person that
is suffering from great hunger, thirst, heat, or cold, cannot grasp an
idea even if communicated by others, much less can he arrive at it by
his own reasoning. But when a person is in possession of the first
perfection, then he may possibly acquire the second perfection, which
is undoubtedly of a superior kind, and is alone the source of eternal
life. The true Law, which as we said is one, and beside which there is
no other Law, viz., the Law of our teacher Moses, has for its purpose
to give us the twofold perfection. It aims first at the establishment
of good mutual relations among men by removing injustice and creating
the noblest feelings. In this way the people in every land are enabled
to stay and continue in one condition, and every one can acquire his
first perfection. Secondly, it seeks to train us in faith, and to
impart correct and true opinions when the intellect is sufficiently
developed. Scripture clearly mentions the twofold perfection, and tells
us that its acquisition is the object of all the divine commandments.
Comp. “And the Lord commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear the
Lord our God, for our good always, that he might preserve us alive as
it is this day” (Deut. vi. 24). Here the second perfection is first
mentioned because it is of greater importance, being, as we have shown,
the ultimate aim of man’s existence. This perfection is expressed in
the phrase, “for our good always.” You know the interpretation of our
Sages, “‘that it may be well with thee’ (ibid. xxii. 7), namely, in the
world that is all good, ‘and that thou mayest prolong thy days’
(ibid.), i.e., in the world that is all eternal.” In the same sense I
explain the words, “for our good always,” to mean that we may come into
the world that is all good and eternal, where we may live permanently;
and the words, “that he might preserve us alive as it is this day,” I
explain as referring to our first and temporal existence, to that of
our body, which cannot be in a perfect and good condition except by the
co-operation of society, as has been shown by us.






CHAPTER XXVIII


It is necessary to bear in mind that Scripture only teaches the chief
points of those true principles which lead to the true perfection of
man, and only demands in general terms faith in them. Thus Scripture
teaches the Existence, the Unity, the Omniscience, the Omnipotence, the
Will, and the Eternity of God. All this is given in the form of final
results, but they cannot be understood fully and accurately except
after the acquisition of many kinds of knowledge. Scripture further
demands belief in certain truths, the belief in which is indispensable
in regulating our social relations; such is the belief that God is
angry with those who disobey Him, for it leads us to the fear and dread
of disobedience [to the will of God]. There are other truths in
reference to the whole of the Universe which form the substance of the
various and many kinds of speculative sciences, and afford the means of
verifying the above-mentioned principles as their final result. But
Scripture does not so distinctly prescribe the belief in them as it
does in the first case; it is implied in the commandment, “to love the
Lord” (Deut. xi. 13). It may be inferred from the words, “And thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy might” (ibid. vi. 5), what stress is laid on this
commandment to love God. We have already shown in the Mishneh-torah
(Yes. ha-torah ii. 2) that this love is only possible when we
comprehend the real nature of things, and understand the divine wisdom
displayed therein. We have likewise mentioned there what our Sages
remark on this subject.

The result of all these preliminary remarks is this: The reason of a
commandment, whether positive or negative, is clear, and its usefulness
evident, if it directly tends to remove injustice, or to teach good
conduct that furthers the well-being of society, or to impart a truth
which ought to be believed either on its own merit or as being
indispensable for facilitating the removal of injustice or the teaching
of good morals. There is no occasion to ask for the object of such
commandments; for no one can, e.g., be in doubt as to the reason why we
have been commanded to believe that God is one; why we are forbidden to
murder, to steal, and to take vengeance, or to retaliate, or why we are
commanded to love one another. But there are precepts concerning which
people are in doubt, and of divided opinions, some believing that they
are mere commands, and serve no purpose whatever, whilst others believe
that they serve a certain purpose, which, however, is unknown to man.
Such are those precepts which in their literal meaning do not seem to
further any of the three above-named results: to impart some truth, to
teach some moral, or to remove injustice. They do not seem to have any
influence upon the well-being of the soul by imparting any truth, or
upon the well-being of the body by suggesting such ways and rules as
are useful in the government of a state, or in the management of a
household. Such are the prohibitions of wearing garments containing
wool and linen; of sowing divers seeds, or of boiling meat and milk
together; the commandment of covering the blood [of slaughtered beasts
and birds], the ceremony of breaking the neck of a calf [in case of a
person being found slain, and the murderer being unknown]; the law
concerning the first-born of an ass, and the like. I am prepared to
tell you my explanation of all these commandments, and to assign for
them a true reason supported by proof, with the exception of some minor
rules, and of a few commandments, as I have mentioned above. I will
show that all these and similar laws must have some bearing upon one of
the following three things, viz., the regulation of our opinions, or
the improvement of our social relations, which implies two things, the
removal of injustice, and the teaching of good morals. Consider what we
said of the opinions [implied in the laws]; in some cases the law
contains a truth which is itself the only object of that law, as e.g.,
the truth of the Unity, Eternity, and Incorporeality of God; in other
cases, that truth is only the means of securing the removal of
injustice, or the acquisition of good morals; such is the belief that
God is angry with those who oppress their fellow-men, as it is said,
“Mine anger will be kindled, and I will slay,” etc. (Exod. xxii. 23);
or the belief that God hears the crying of the oppressed and vexed, to
deliver them out of the hands of the oppressor and tyrant, as it is
written, “And it shall come to pass, when he will cry unto me, that I
will hear, for I am gracious” (Exod. xxii. 25).






