CHAPTER V


It is necessary to notice that the plural marot elohim, “visions of
God,” is here used, and not the singular mareh, “vision,” for there
were several things, of different kinds, that were perceived by the
prophet. The following three things were perceived by him: the Ofannim,
the Ḥayyot, and the man above the Ḥayyot. The description of each of
these visions is introduced by the word va-ereh, “and I beheld.” For
the account of the Ḥayyot, begins, “And I looked (va-ereh), and behold
a whirlwind,” etc. (Ezek. i. 4). The account of the Ofannim begins:
“Now as I beheld (va-ereh) the Ḥayyot, behold one Ofan upon the earth”
(ver. 15). The vision of that which is above the Ḥayyot in order and
rank begins: “And I saw (va-ereh) as the colour of the amber, etc.,
from the appearance of his loins even upward” (ver. 27). The word
va-ereh, “and I beheld,” only occurs these three times in the
description of the Mercabah. The doctors of the Mishnah have already
explained this fact, and my attention was called to it by their
remarks. For they said that only the two first visions, namely, that of
the Ḥayyot and the Ofannim, might be interpreted to others; but of the
third vision, viz., that of the ḥashmal and all that is connected with
it, only the heads of the sections may be taught. Rabbi [Jehudah], the
Holy, is of opinion that all the three visions are called maʻaseh
mercabah, and nothing but the heads of the sections could be
communicated to others. The exact words of the discussion are as
follows:—Where does maʻaseh mercabhah end? Rabbi says, with the last
va-ereh; Rabbi Yiẓḥak says it ends at the word ḥashmal (ver. 27). The
portion from va-ereh to ḥashmal may be fully taught; of that which
follows, only the heads of the sections; according to some it is the
passage from va-ereh to ḥashmal, of which the heads of the sections may
be taught, but that which follows may only be studied by those who
possess the capacity, whilst those that cannot study it by themselves
must leave it.—It is clear from the words of our Sages that different
visions are described, as may also be inferred from the repetition of
the word va-ereh, and that these visions are different from each other
in degree; the last and highest of them is the vision commencing, “And
I saw as the colour of ḥashmal”; that is to say, the divided figure of
the man, described as “the appearance of fire, etc., from the
appearance of his loins even upward, and from the appearance of his
loins even downward,” etc. There is a difference of opinion among our
Sages whether it is permitted to give by way of hints an exposition of
any part of this third vision, or whether it is prohibited even to
teach of it the heads of the sections, so that only the wise can arrive
at understanding it by their own studies. You will also notice a
difference of opinion among our Sages in reference to the two first
visions, viz., that of the Ḥayyot and that of the Ofannim whether these
may be taught explicitly or only by way of hints, dark sayings, and
heads of sections. You must also notice the order of these three
visions. First comes the vision of the Ḥayyot, because they are first
in rank and in the causal relation, as it is said, “For the spirit of
the Ḥayyah was in the Ofannim” and also for other reasons. The vision
of the Ofannim [comes next, and] is followed by one which is higher
than the Ḥayyot, as has been shown. The cause of this arrangement is,
that in study the first two must necessarily precede the third, and in
fact they lead to it.






CHAPTER VI


The sublime and great subject which Ezekiel by prophetic impulse began
to teach us in the description of the Mercabah, is exactly the same
which Isaiah taught us in general outlines, because he did not require
all the detail. Isaiah says, “I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne,
high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple. Above it stood
seraphims,” etc. (Isa. vi. 1 seq.). Our Sages have already stated all
this clearly, and called our attention to it. For they say that the
vision of Ezekiel is the same as that of Isaiah, and illustrate their
view by the following simile:—Two men saw the king riding, the one a
townsman, the other a countryman. The former, seeing that his
neighbours know well how the king rides, simply tells them that he saw
the king; but the villager, wishing to tell his friends things which
they do not know, relates in detail how the king was riding, describes
his followers, and the officers who execute his order and command. This
remark is a most useful hint; it is contained in the following passage
(Ḥagigah, 13 b): “Isaiah saw all that has been seen by Ezekiel; Isaiah
is like a townsman that sees the king, Ezekiel like a countryman that
sees the king.” These words can be explained in the manner which I have
just mentioned, viz., the generation of Isaiah did not require the
detailed description; his account, “I saw the Lord,” etc., sufficed.
The generation of the Babylonian exile wanted to learn all the details.
It is, however, possible that the author of this saying held Isaiah as
more perfect than Ezekiel, so that the vision might have overawed
Ezekiel and appeared fearful to him; but Isaiah was so familiar with it
that he did not consider it necessary to communicate it to others as a
new thing, especially as it was well known to the intelligent.






CHAPTER VII


One of the points that require investigation is the connexion between
the vision of the mercabah and the year, month, and day, and also the
place of the vision. A reason must be found for this connexion, and we
must not think that it is an indifferent element in the vision. We must
consider the words, “the heavens were opened” (Ezek. i. 1); they give
the key to the understanding of the whole. The figure of opening, also
that of opening the gates, occurs frequently in the books of the
prophets; e.g., “Open ye the gates that the righteous nation may enter
in” (Isa. xxvi. 2); “He opened the doors of heaven” (Ps. lxxviii. 23);
“Lift them up, ye everlasting doors” (ibid. xxiv. 9); “Open to me the
gates of righteousness, I will go into them, and I will praise the
Lord” (ibid. cxviii. 19). There are many other instances of this kind.
You must further notice that the whole description refers undoubtedly
to a prophetic vision, as it is said, “And the hand of the Lord was
there upon him” (Ezek. i. 3); and yet there is a very great difference
between the various parts of the description, for in the account of the
Ḥayyot the prophet does not say four Ḥayyot, but “the likeness of the
four Ḥayyot” (ibid. ver. 5); similarly he says, “And the likeness of a
firmament was over the heads of the Ḥayyot” (ver. 22); “as the
appearance of a sapphire stone, the likeness of a throne,” and “the
likeness of the appearance of man above it” (ver. 26). In all these
instances the word “likeness” is used, whilst in the account of the
Ofannim the phrases, “the likeness of Ofannim,” the “likeness of an
Ofan,” are not employed, but they are described in a positive manner as
beings in actual existence, with their real properties. The sentence
“they four had one likeness” must not mislead you, for here the word
“likeness” is not used in the same connexion or in the same sense as
indicated above. In the description of the last vision the prophet
confirms and explains this view. When he commences to describe the
firmament in detail, he says, “the firmament,” without adding the words
“the likeness of,” for he says, “And I looked, and behold, in the
firmament that was above the head of the cherubims there appeared over
them as it were a sapphire stone, as the appearance of the likeness of
a throne” (x. 1). Here the prophet speaks of “the firmament” and not of
“the likeness of the firmament,” as he does when he connects the
firmament with the heads of the likeness of the Ḥayyot (i. 22). But, as
regards the throne, he says, “the likeness of a throne appeared over
them,” in order to indicate that the firmament was first perceived and
then the likeness of the throne was seen over it. Consider this well.

You must further notice that in the description of the first vision the
Ḥayyot have wings and at the same time human hands, whilst in the
second vision, in which the term cherubim is substituted for Ḥayyot, at
first only wings were perceived, and later on human hands were seen.
Comp. “And there appeared in the cherubims the form of a man’s hand
under their wings” (x. 8). Here “form” (tabnit) is used instead of
“likeness” (demut); and the hands are placed under the wings. Note
this.

Consider that in reference to the ofannim, the prophet says,
le-ʻummatam, “over against them,” although he does not ascribe to them
any form.

He further says, “As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in
the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about.
This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory,” etc. (i. 28).
The substance and true essence of the bow described here is well known.
The simile and comparison is in this case very extraordinary, and is
undoubtedly part of the prophecy; and note it well.

It is also noteworthy that the likeness of man above the throne is
divided, the upper part being like the colour of ḥashmal, the lower
part like the appearance of fire. As regards the word ḥashmal, it has
been explained to be a compound of two words ḥash and mal, including
two different notions, viz., ḥash signifying “swiftness,” and mal
denoting “pause.” The two different notions are here joined in one word
in order to indicate figuratively the two different parts,—the upper
part and the lower. We have already given a second explanation, namely,
that ḥashmal includes the two notions of speech and silence; in
accordance with the saying of our Sages, “At times they are silent, at
times they speak,” thus deriving hash of the same root as heḥeshethi,
“I have been silent” (Isa. xlii. 14); the word ḥashmal thus includes
two notions, and indicates “speech without sound.” There is no doubt
that the words, “at times they are silent, at times they speak,” refer
to a created object. Now consider how they clearly stated that the
divided likeness of man over the throne does not represent God, who is
above the whole chariot, but represents a part of the creation. The
prophet likewise says “that is the likeness of the glory of the Lord”;
but “the glory of the Lord” is different from “the Lord” Himself, as
has been shown by us several times. All the figures in this vision
refer to the glory of the Lord, to the chariot, and not to Him who
rides upon the chariot; for God cannot be compared to anything. Note
this. I have thus given you also in this chapter as much of the heads
of the sections as will be useful to you for the comprehension of this
subject, if you fill out [the sections of] these heads. If you consider
all that has been said in this part up to this chapter, the greater
part of this subject or the whole of it will be clear to you, except a
few points and some repetitions the meaning of which is unknown.
Perhaps further study will help to reveal even these things so that
nothing will remain unintelligible.

Do not expect or hope to hear from me after this chapter a word on this
subject, either explicitly or implicitly, for all that could be said on
it has been said, though with great difficulty and struggle. I will now
begin to treat of some of the other subjects which I hope to elucidate
in this treatise.






