CHAPTER XXV


We do not reject the Eternity of the Universe, because certain passages
in Scripture confirm the Creation; for such passages are not more
numerous than those in which God is represented as a corporeal being;
nor is it impossible or difficult to find for them a suitable
interpretation. We might have explained them in the same manner as we
did in respect to the Incorporeality of God. We should perhaps have had
an easier task in showing that the Scriptural passages referred to are
in harmony with the theory of the Eternity of the Universe if we
accepted the latter, than we had in explaining the anthropomorphisms in
the Bible when we rejected the idea that God is corporeal. For two
reasons, however, we have not done so, and have not accepted the
Eternity of the Universe. First, the Incorporeality of God has been
demonstrated by proof; those passages in the Bible, which in their
literal sense contain statements that can be refuted by proof, must and
can be interpreted otherwise. But the Eternity of the Universe has not
been proved; a mere argument in favour of a certain theory is not
sufficient reason for rejecting the literal meaning of a Biblical text,
and explaining it figuratively, when the opposite theory can be
supported by an equally good argument.

Secondly, our belief in the Incorporeality of God is not contrary to
any of the fundamental principles of our religion; it is not contrary
to the words of any prophet. Only ignorant people believe that it is
contrary to the teaching of Scripture; but we have shown that this is
not the case; on the contrary, Scripture teaches the Incorporeality of
God. If we were to accept the Eternity of the Universe as taught by
Aristotle, that everything in the Universe is the result of fixed laws,
that Nature does not change, and that there is nothing supernatural, we
should necessarily be in opposition to the foundation of our religion,
we should disbelieve all miracles and signs, and certainly reject all
hopes and fears derived from Scripture, unless the miracles are also
explained figuratively. The Allegorists amongst the Mohammedans have
done this, and have thereby arrived at absurd conclusions. If, however,
we accepted the Eternity of the Universe in accordance with the second
of the theories which we have expounded above (ch. xxiii.), and
assumed, with Plato, that the heavens are likewise transient, we should
not be in opposition to the fundamental principles of our religion;
this theory would not imply the rejection of miracles, but, on the
contrary, would admit them as possible. The Scriptural text might have
been explained accordingly, and many expressions might have been found
in the Bible and in other writings that would confirm and support this
theory. But there is no necessity for this expedient, so long as the
theory has not been proved. As there is no proof sufficient to convince
us, this theory need not be taken into consideration, nor the other
one; we take the text of the Bible literally, and say that it teaches
us a truth which we cannot prove; and the miracles are evidence for the
correctness of our view.

Accepting the Creation, we find that miracles are possible, that
Revelation is possible, and that every difficulty in this question is
removed. We might be asked, Why has God inspired a certain person and
not another? why has He revealed the Law to one particular nation, and
at one particular time? why has He commanded this, and forbidden that?
why has He shown through a prophet certain particular miracles? what is
the object of these laws? and why has He not made the commandments and
the prohibitions part of our nature, if it was His object that we
should live in accordance with them? We answer to all these questions:
He willed it so; or, His wisdom decided so. Just as He created the
world according to His will, at a certain time, in a certain form, and
as we do not understand why His will or His wisdom decided upon that
peculiar form, and upon that peculiar time, so we do not know why His
will or wisdom determined any of the things mentioned in the preceding
questions. But if we assume that the Universe has the present form as
the result of fixed laws, there is occasion for the above questions;
and these could only be answered in an objectionable way, implying
denial and rejection of the Biblical texts, the correctness of which no
intelligent person doubts. Owing to the absence of all proof, we reject
the theory of the Eternity of the Universe; and it is for this very
reason that the noblest minds spent and will spend their days in
research. For if the Creation had been demonstrated by proof, even if
only according to the Platonic hypothesis, all arguments of the
philosophers against us would be of no avail. If, on the other hand,
Aristotle had a proof for his theory, the whole teaching of Scripture
would be rejected, and we should be forced to other opinions. I have
thus shown that all depends on this question. Note it.






CHAPTER XXVI


In the famous chapters known as the Chapters of Rabbi Eliezer, I find
R. Eliezer the Great saying something more extraordinary than I have
ever seen in the utterances of any believer in the Law of Moses. I mean
the following passage: “Whence were the heavens created? He took part
of the light of His garment, stretched it like a cloth, and thus the
heavens were extending continually, as it is said: He covereth Himself
with light as with a garment, He stretcheth the heavens like a curtain”
(Ps. civ. 2). “Whence was the earth created? He took of the snow under
the throne of glory, and threw it; according to the words: He saith to
the snow, Be thou earth” (Job xxxvii. 6). These are the words given
there; and I, in my surprise, ask, What was the belief of this sage?
did he think that nothing can be produced from nothing, and that a
substance must have existed of which the things were formed? and did he
for this reason ask whence were the heavens and the earth created? What
has he gained by the answer? We might ask him, Whence was the light of
His garment created? or the snow under the throne of His glory? or the
throne of glory itself? If the terms “the light of His garment” and
“the throne of glory” mean something eternal, they must be rejected;
the words would imply an admission of the Eternity of the Universe,
though only in the form taught by Plato. The creation of the throne of
glory is mentioned by our Sages, though in a strange way; for they say
that it has been created before the creation of the Universe.
Scripture, however, does not mention the creation of the throne, except
in the words of David, “The Lord hath established his throne in the
heavens” (Ps. ciii. 19), which words admit of figurative
interpretation; but the eternity of the throne is distinctly described,
“Thou, O Lord, dwellest for ever, thy throne for ever and ever” (Lam.
v. 19). Now, if R. Eliezer had believed that the throne was eternal, so
that the word “throne” expressed an attribute of God, and not something
created, how could anything be produced of a mere attribute? Stranger
still is his expression “of the light of His garment.”

In short, it is a passage that greatly confuses the notions of all
intelligent and religious persons. I am unable to explain it
sufficiently. I quoted it in order that you may not be misled by it.
One important thing R. Eliezer taught us here, that the substance of
the heavens is different from that of the earth; that there are two
different substances: the one is described as belonging to God, being
the light of His garment, on account of its superiority; and the other,
the earthly substance, which is distant from His splendour and light,
as being the snow under the throne of His glory. This led me to explain
the words, “And under his feet as the work of the whiteness of the
sapphire” (Exod. xxiv. 10), as expressing that the nobles of the
children of Israel comprehended in a prophetical vision the nature of
the earthly materia prima. For, according to Onkelos, the pronoun in
the phrase, “His feet” refers to “throne,” as I have shown; this
indicates that the whiteness under the throne signifies the earthly
substance. R. Eliezer has thus repeated the same idea, and told us that
there are two substances—a higher one, and a lower one; and that there
is not one substance common to all things. This is an important
subject, and we must not think light of the opinion which the wisest
men in Israel have held on this point. It concerns an important point
in explaining the existence of the Universe, and one of the mysteries
of the Law. In Bereshit Rabba (chap. xii.) the following passage
occurs: “R. Eliezer says, The things in the heavens have been created
of the heavens, the things on earth of the earth.” Consider how
ingeniously this sage stated that all things on earth have one common
substance; the heavens and the things in them have one substance,
different from the first. He also explains in the Chapters [of R.
Eliezer], in addition to the preceding things, the superiority of the
heavenly substance, and its proximity to God; and, on the other hand,
the inferiority of the earthly substance and its position. Note it.






