CHAPTER IX


The corporeal element in man is a large screen and partition that
prevents him from perfectly perceiving abstract ideals; this would be
the case even if the corporeal element were as pure and superior as the
substance of the spheres; how much more must this be the case with our
dark and opaque body. However great the exertion of our mind may be to
comprehend the Divine Being or any of the ideals, we find a screen and
partition between Him and ourselves. Thus the prophets frequently hint
at the existence of a partition between God and us. They say He is
concealed from us in vapours, in darkness, in mist, or in a thick
cloud; or use similar figures to express that on account of our bodies
we are unable to comprehend His essence. This is the meaning of the
words, “Clouds and darkness are round about Him” (Ps. xcvii. 2). The
prophets tell us that the difficulty consists in the grossness of our
substance; they do not imply, as might be gathered from the literal
meaning of their words, that God is corporeal, and is invisible because
He is surrounded by thick clouds, vapours, darkness, or mist. This
figure is also expressed in the passage, “He made darkness His secret
place” (Ps. xviii. 12). The object of God revealing Himself in thick
clouds, darkness, vapours, and mist was to teach this lesson; for every
prophetic vision contains some lesson by means of allegory; that mighty
vision, therefore, though the greatest of all visions, and above all
comparison, viz., His revelation in a thick cloud, did not take place
without any purpose, it was intended to indicate that we cannot
comprehend Him on account of the dark body that surrounds us. It does
not surround God, because He is incorporeal. A tradition is current
among our people that the day of the revelation on Mount Sinai was
misty, cloudy, and a little rainy. Comp. “Lord, when thou wentest forth
from Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of Edom, the earth
trembled, and the heavens dropped water” (Judges v. 4). The same idea
is expressed by the words “darkness, clouds, and thick darkness” (Deut.
iv. 11). The phrase does not denote that darkness surrounds God, for
with Him there is no darkness, but the great, strong, and permanent
light, which, emanating from Him, illuminates all darkness, as is
expressed by the prophetic simile, “And the earth shined with His
glory” (Ezek. xliii. 2).






CHAPTER X


The Mutakallemim, as I have already told you, apply the term
non-existence only to absolute non-existence, and not to the absence of
properties. A property and the absence of that property are considered
by them as two opposites, they treat, e.g., blindness and sight, death
and life, in the same way as heat and cold. Therefore they say, without
any qualification, non-existence does not require any agent, an agent
is required when something is produced. From a certain point of view
this is correct. Although they hold that non-existence does not require
an agent, they say in accordance with their principle that God causes
blindness and deafness, and gives rest to anything that moves, for they
consider these negative conditions as positive properties. We must now
state our opinion in accordance with the results of philosophical
research. You know that he who removes the obstacle of motion is to
some extent the cause of the motion, e.g., if one removes the pillar
which supports the beam he causes the beam to move, as has been stated
by Aristotle in his Physics (VIII., chap. iv.); in this sense we say of
him who removed a certain property that he produced the absence of that
property, although absence of a property is nothing positive. Just as
we say of him who puts out the light at night that he has produced
darkness, so we say of him who destroyed the sight of any being that he
produced blindness, although darkness and blindness are negative
properties, and require no agent. In accordance with this view we
explain the following passage of Isaiah: “I form the light and create
(bore) darkness: I make peace, and create (bore) evil” (Isa. xlv. 7),
for darkness and evil are non-existing things. Consider that the
prophet does not say, I make (ʻoseh) darkness, I make (ʻoseh) evil,
because darkness and evil are not things in positive existence to which
the verb “to make” would apply; the verb bara “he created” is used,
because in Hebrew this verb is applied to non-existing things, e.g.,
“In the beginning God created” (bara), etc.; here the creation took
place from nothing. Only in this sense can non-existence be said to be
produced by a certain action of an agent. In the same way we must
explain the following passage: “Who hath made man’s mouth? or who
maketh the dumb, or the deaf, or the seeing,” etc. (Exod. iv. 11). The
passage can also be explained as follows: Who has made man able to
speak? or can create him without the capacity of speaking, i.e., create
a substance that is incapable of acquiring this property? for he who
produces a substance that cannot acquire a certain property may be
called the producer of that privation. Thus we say, if any one abstains
from delivering a fellow-man from death, although he is able to do so,
that he killed him. It is now clear that according to all these
different views the action of an agent cannot be directly connected
with a thing that does not exist; only indirectly is non-existence
described as the result of the action of an agent, whilst in a direct
manner an action can only influence a thing really in existence;
accordingly, whoever the agent may be, he can only act upon an existing
thing.

After this explanation you must recall to memory that, as has been
proved, the [so-called] evils are evils only in relation to a certain
thing, and that which is evil in reference to a certain existing thing,
either includes the non-existence of that thing or the non-existence of
some of its good conditions. The proposition has therefore been laid
down in the most general terms, “All evils are negations.” Thus for man
death is evil; death is his non-existence. Illness, poverty, and
ignorance are evils for man; all these are privations of properties. If
you examine all single cases to which this general proposition applies,
you will find that there is not one case in which the proposition is
wrong except in the opinion of those who do not make any distinction
between negative and positive properties, or between two opposites, or
do not know the nature of things,—who, e.g., do not know that health in
general denotes a certain equilibrium, and is a relative term. The
absence of that relation is illness in general, and death is the
absence of life in the case of any animal. The destruction of other
things is likewise nothing but the absence of their form.

After these propositions, it must be admitted as a fact that it cannot
be said of God that He directly creates evil, or He has the direct
intention to produce evil; this is impossible. His works are all
perfectly good. He only produces existence, and all existence is good;
whilst evils are of a negative character, and cannot be acted upon.
Evil can only be attributed to Him in the way we have mentioned. He
creates evil only in so far as He produces the corporeal element such
as it actually is; it is always connected with negatives, and is on
that account the source of all destruction and all evil. Those beings
that do not possess this corporeal element are not subject to
destruction or evil; consequently the true work of God is all good,
since it is existence. The book which enlightened the darkness of the
world says therefore, “And God saw everything that He had made, and,
behold, it was very good” (Gen. i. 31). Even the existence of this
corporeal element, low as it in reality is, because it is the source of
death and all evils, is likewise good for the permanence of the
Universe and the continuation of the order of things, so that one thing
departs and the other succeeds. Rabbi Meir therefore explains the words
“and behold it was very good” (tob me’od); that even death was good in
accordance with what we have observed in this chapter. Remember what I
said in this chapter, consider it, and you will understand all that the
prophets and our Sages remarked about the perfect goodness of all the
direct works of God. In Bereshit Rabba (chap. i.) the same idea is
expressed thus: “No evil comes down from above.”






