CHAPTER XVI


In this chapter I will first expound my view on this question, and then
support it by argument—not by such arguments as those of the
Mutakallemim, who believe that they have proved the Creatio ex nihilo.
I will not deceive myself, and consider dialectical methods as proofs;
and the fact that a certain proposition has been proved by a
dialectical argument will never induce me to accept that proposition,
but, on the contrary, will weaken my faith in it, and cause me to doubt
it. For when we understand the fallacy of a proof, our faith in the
proposition itself is shaken. It is therefore better that a proposition
which cannot be demonstrated be received as an axiom, or that one of
the two opposite solutions of the problem be accepted on authority. The
methods by which the Mutakallemim proved the Creatio ex nihilo have
already been described by me, and I have exposed their weak points. As
to the proofs of Aristotle and his followers for the Eternity of the
Universe, they are, according to my opinion, not conclusive; they are
open to strong objections, as will be explained. I intend to show that
the theory of the Creation, as taught in Scripture, contains nothing
that is impossible; and that all those philosophical arguments which
seem to disprove our view contain weak points which make them
inconclusive, and render the attacks on our view untenable. Since I am
convinced of the correctness of my method, and consider either of the
two theories—viz., the Eternity of the Universe, and the Creation—as
admissible, I accept the latter on the authority of Prophecy, which can
teach things beyond the reach of philosophical speculation. For the
belief in prophecy is, as will be shown in the course of this treatise,
consistent even with the belief in the Eternity of the Universe. When I
have established the admissibility of our theory, I will, by
philosophical reasoning, show that our theory of the Creation is more
acceptable than that of the Eternity of the Universe; and although our
theory includes points open to criticism, I will show that there are
much stronger reasons for the rejection of the theory of our opponents.

I will now proceed to expound the method by which the proofs given for
the Eternity of the Universe can be refuted.






CHAPTER XVII


Everything produced comes into existence from non-existence; even when
the substance of a thing has been in existence, and has only changed
its form, the thing itself, which has gone through the process of
genesis and development, and has arrived at its final state, has now
different properties from those which it possessed at the commencement
of the transition from potentiality to reality, or before that time.
Take, e.g., the human ovum as contained in the female’s blood when
still included in its vessels; its nature is different from what it was
in the moment of conception, when it is met by the semen of the male
and begins to develop; the properties of the semen in that moment are
different from the properties of the living being after its birth when
fully developed. It is therefore quite impossible to infer from the
nature which a thing possesses after having passed through all stages
of its development, what the condition of the thing has been in the
moment when this process commenced; nor does the condition of a thing
in this moment show what its previous condition has been. If you make
this mistake, and attempt to prove the nature of a thing in potential
existence by its properties when actually existing, you will fall into
great confusion; you will reject evident truths and admit false
opinions. Let us assume, in our above instance, that a man born without
defect had after his birth been nursed by his mother only a few months;
the mother then died, and the father alone brought him up in a lonely
island, till he grew up, became wise, and acquired knowledge. Suppose
this man has never seen a woman or any female being; he asks some
person how man has come into existence, and how he has developed, and
receives the following answer: “Man begins his existence in the womb of
an individual of his own class, namely, in the womb of a female, which
has a certain form. While in the womb he is very small; yet he has
life, moves, receives nourishment, and gradually grows, till he arrives
at a certain stage of development. He then leaves the womb and
continues to grow till he is in the condition in which you see him.”
The orphan will naturally ask: “Did this person, when he lived, moved,
and grew in the womb, eat and drink, and breathe with his mouth and his
nostrils? Did he excrete any substance?” The answer will be, “No.”
Undoubtedly he will then attempt to refute the statements of that
person, and to prove their impossibility, by referring to the
properties of a fully developed person, in the following manner: “When
any one of us is deprived of breath for a short time he dies, and
cannot move any longer: how then can we imagine that any one of us has
been inclosed in a bag in the midst of a body for several months and
remained alive, able to move? If any one of us would swallow a living
bird, the bird would die immediately when it reached the stomach, much
more so when it came to the lower part of the belly; if we should not
take food or drink with our mouth, in a few days we should undoubtedly
be dead: how then can man remain alive for months without taking food?
If any person would take food and would not be able to excrete it,
great pains and death would follow in a short time, and yet I am to
believe that man has lived for months without that function! Suppose by
accident a hole were formed in the belly of a person, it would prove
fatal, and yet we are to believe that the navel of the fœtus has been
open! Why should the fœtus not open the eyes, spread forth the hands
and stretch out the legs, if, as you think, the limbs are all whole and
perfect.” This mode of reasoning would lead to the conclusion that man
cannot come into existence and develop in the manner described.

If philosophers would consider this example well and reflect on it,
they would find that it represents exactly the dispute between
Aristotle and ourselves. We, the followers of Moses, our Teacher, and
of Abraham, our Father, believe that the Universe has been produced and
has developed in a certain manner, and that it has been created in a
certain order. The Aristotelians oppose us, and found their objections
on the properties which the things in the Universe possess when in
actual existence and fully developed. We admit the existence of these
properties, but hold that they are by no means the same as those which
the things possessed in the moment of their production; and we hold
that these properties themselves have come into existence from absolute
non-existence. Their arguments are therefore no objection whatever to
our theory; they have demonstrative force only against those who hold
that the nature of things as at present in existence proves the
Creation. But this is not my opinion.

I will now return to our theme, viz., to the description of the
principal proofs of Aristotle, and show that they prove nothing
whatever against us, since we hold that God brought the entire Universe
into existence from absolute non-existence, and that He caused it to
develop into the present state. Aristotle says that the materia prima
is eternal, and by referring to the properties of transient beings he
attempts to prove this statement, and to show that the materia prima
could not possibly have been produced. He is right; we do not maintain
that the materia prima has been produced in the same manner as man is
produced from the ovum, and that it can be destroyed in the same manner
as man is reduced to dust. But we believe that God created it from
nothing, and that since its creation it has its own properties, viz.,
that all things are produced of it and again reduced to it, when they
cease to exist; that it does not exist without Form; and that it is the
source of all genesis and destruction. Its genesis is not like that of
the things produced from it, nor its destruction like theirs; for it
has been created from nothing, and if it should please the Creator, He
might reduce it to absolutely nothing. The same applies to motion.
Aristotle founds some of his proofs on the fact that motion is not
subject to genesis or destruction. This is correct; if we consider
motion as it exists at present, we cannot imagine that in its totality
it should be subject, like individual motions, to genesis and
destruction. In like manner Aristotle is correct in saying that
circular motion is without beginning, in so far as seeing the rotating
spherical body in actual existence, we cannot conceive the idea that
that rotation has ever been absent. The same argument we employ as
regards the law that a state of potentiality precedes all actual
genesis. This law applies to the Universe as it exists at present, when
everything produced originates in another thing; but nothing perceived
with our senses or comprehended in our mind can prove that a thing
created from nothing must have been previously in a state of
potentiality. Again, as regards the theory that the heavens contain no
opposites [and are therefore indestructible], we admit its correctness;
but we do not maintain that the production of the heavens has taken
place in the same way as that of a horse or ass, and we do not say that
they are like plants and animals, which are destructible on account of
the opposite elements they contain. In short, the properties of things
when fully developed contain no clue as to what have been the
properties of the things before their perfection. We therefore do not
reject as impossible the opinion of those who say that the heavens were
produced before the earth, or the reverse, or that the heavens have
existed without stars, or that certain species of animals have been in
existence, and others not. For the state of the whole Universe when it
came into existence may be compared with that of animals when their
existence begins; the heart evidently precedes the testicles, the veins
are in existence before the bones; although, when the animal is fully
developed, none of the parts is missing which is essential to its
existence. This remark is not superfluous, if the Scriptural account of
the Creation be taken literally; in reality, it cannot be taken
literally, as will be shown when we shall treat of this subject.

The principle laid down in the foregoing must be well understood; it is
a high rampart erected round the Law, and able to resist all missiles
directed against it. Aristotle, or rather his followers, may perhaps
ask us how we know that the Universe has been created; and that other
forces than those it has at present were acting in its Creation, since
we hold that the properties of the Universe, as it exists at present,
prove nothing as regards its creation? We reply, there is no necessity
for this according to our plan; for we do not desire to prove the
Creation, but only its possibility; and this possibility is not refuted
by arguments based on the nature of the present Universe, which we do
not dispute. When we have established the admissibility of our theory,
we shall then show its superiority. In attempting to prove the
inadmissibility of Creatio ex nihilo, the Aristotelians can therefore
not derive any support from the nature of the Universe; they must
resort to the notion our mind has formed of God. Their proofs include
the three methods which I have mentioned above, and which are based on
the notion conceived of God. In the next chapter I will expose the weak
points of these arguments, and show that they really prove nothing.






