CHAPTER XI


The primary meaning of the Hebrew yashab is “he was seated,” as “Now
Eli the priest sat (yashab) upon a seat” (1 Sam. i. 9); but, since a
person can best remain motionless and at rest when sitting, the term
was applied to everything that is permanent and unchanging; thus, in
the promise that Jerusalem should remain constantly and permanently in
an exalted condition, it is stated, “She will rise and sit in her
place” (Zech. xiv. 10); further, “He maketh the woman who was childless
to sit as a joyful mother of children” (Ps. cxiii. 9); i.e., He makes
her happy condition to be permanent and enduring.

When applied to God, the verb is to be taken in that latter sense:
“Thou, O Lord, remainest (tesheb) for ever” (Lam. v. 19); “O thou who
sittest (ha-yoshebi) in the heavens” (Ps. cxxiii. 1); “He who sitteth
in the heavens” (ii. 4), i.e., He who is everlasting, constant, and in
no way subject to change; immutable in His Essence, and as He consists
of nought but His Essence, He is mutable in no way whatever; not
mutable in His relation to other things; for there is no relation
whatever existing between Him and any other being, as will be explained
below, and therefore no change as regards such relations can take place
in Him. Hence He is immutable in every respect, as He expressly
declares, “I, the Lord, do not change” (Mal. iii. 6); i.e., in Me there
is not any change whatever. This idea is expressed by the term yashab
when referring to God.

The verb, when employed of God, is frequently complemented by “the
Heavens,” inasmuch as the heavens are without change or mutation, that
is to say, they do not individually change, as the individual beings on
earth, by transition from existence into non-existence.

The verb is also employed in descriptions of God’s relation (the term
“relation” is here used as a homonym) to existing species of evanescent
things; for those species are as constant, well organized, and
unvarying as the individuals of the heavenly hosts. Thus we find, “Who
sitteth over the circle of the earth” (Isa. xl. 22), Who remains
constantly and unremittingly over the sphere of the earth; that is to
say, over the things that come into existence within that sphere.

Again, “The Lord sitteth upon the flood” (Ps. xxix. 10), i.e., despite
the change and variation of earthly objects, no change takes place with
respect to God’s relation (to the earth): His relation to each of the
things which come into existence and perish again is stable and
constant, for it concerns only the existing species and not the
individuals. It should therefore be borne in mind, that whenever the
term “sitting” is applied to God, it is used in this sense.






CHAPTER XII


The term kam (he rose) is a homonym. In one of its significations it is
the opposite of “to sit,” as “He did not rise (kam) nor move for him”
(Esth. v. 9). It further denotes the confirmation and verification of a
thing, e.g.: “The Lord will verify (yakem) His promise” (1 Sam. i. 23);
“The field of Ephron was made sure (va-yakom) as the property of
Abraham” (Gen. xxiii. 17). “The house that is in the walled city shall
be established (ve-kam)” (Lev. xxv. 30); “And the kingdom of Israel
shall be firmly established (ve-kamah) in thy hand” (1 Sam. xxiv. 20).
It is always in this sense that the verb is employed with reference to
the Almighty; as “Now shall I rise (akum), saith the Lord” (Ps. xii.
7), which is the same as saying, “Now shall I verify my word and my
dispensation for good or evil.” “Thou shalt arise (takum) and have
mercy upon Zion” (Ps. cii. 13), which means: Thou wilt establish what
thou hast promised, viz., that thou wouldst pity Zion.

Generally a person who resolves to set about a matter, accompanies his
resolve by rising, hence the verb is employed to express “to resolve”
to do a certain thing; as, “That my son hath stirred up my servant
against me” (1 Sam. xxii. 8). The word is figuratively used to signify
the execution of a divine decree against a people sentenced to
extermination, as “And I will rise against the house of Jeroboam” (Amos
vii. 9); “but he will arise against the house of the evildoers” (Isa.
xxxi. 2). Possibly in Psalm xii. 7 the verb has this latter sense, as
also in Psalm cii. 13, namely: Thou wilt rise up against her enemies.

There are many passages to be interpreted in this manner, but in no way
should it be understood that He rises or sits—far be such a notion! Our
Sages expressed this idea in the formula, “In the world above there is
neither sitting nor standing (ʻamidah)”; for the two verbs ʻamad and
kam are synonyms [and what is said about the former is also applicable
to the latter].






CHAPTER XIII


The term ʻamad (he stood) is a homonym signifying in the first instance
“to stand upright,” as “When he stood (be-ʻomdo) before Pharaoh” (Gen.
xli. 46); “Though Moses and Samuel stood (yaʻamod)” (Jer. xv. 1); “He
stood by them” (Gen. xviii. 8). It further denotes “cessation and
interruption,” as “but they stood still (ʻamedu) and answered no more”
(Job xxxii. 16); “and she ceased (va-taʻamod) to bear” (Gen. xxix. 35).
Next it signifies “to be enduring and lasting,” as, “that they may
continue (yo-ʻamedu) many days” (Jer. xxxii. 14); “Then shalt thou be
able to endure (ʻamod)” (Exod. xviii. 23); “His taste remained (ʻamad)
in him” (Jer. xlviii. 11), i.e., it has continued and remained in
existence without any change; “His righteousness standeth for ever”
(Ps. cxi. 3), i.e., it is permanent and everlasting. The verb applied
to God must be understood in this latter sense, as in Zechariah xiv. 4,
“And his feet shall stand (ve-ʻamedu) in that day upon the Mount of
Olives” (Zech. xiv. 4), “His causes, i.e., the events of which He is
the cause, will remain efficient,” etc. This will be further elucidated
when we speak of the meaning of regel (foot). (Vide infra, chap,
xxviii.) In the same sense is this verb employed in Deuteronomy v. 28,
“But as for thee, stand thou here by me,” and Deuteronomy v. 5, “I
stood between the Lord and you.”






