CHAPTER IX


The original meaning of the word kisse, “throne,” requires no comment.
Since men of greatness and authority, as, e.g., kings, use the throne
as a seat, and “the throne” thus indicates the rank, dignity, and
position of the person for whom it is made, the Sanctuary has been
styled “the throne,” inasmuch as it likewise indicates the superiority
of Him who manifests Himself, and causes His light and glory to dwell
therein. Comp. “A glorious throne on high from the beginning is the
place of our sanctuary” (Jer. xvii. 12). For the same reason the
heavens are called “throne,” for to the mind of him who observes them
with intelligence they suggest the Omnipotence of the Being which has
called them into existence, regulates their motions, and governs the
sublunary world by their beneficial influence: as we read, “Thus saith
the Lord, The heavens are my throne and the earth my footstool” (Isa.
lxvi. 1); i.e., they testify to my Existence, my Essence, and my
Omnipotence, as the throne testifies to the greatness of him who is
worthy to occupy it.

This is the idea which true believers should entertain; not, however,
that the Omnipotent, Supreme God is supported by any material object;
for God is incorporeal, as we shall prove further on; how, then, can He
be said to occupy any space, or rest on a body? The fact which I wish
to point out is this: every place distinguished by the Almighty, and
chosen to receive His light and splendour, as, for instance, the
Sanctuary or the Heavens, is termed “throne”; and, taken in a wider
sense, as in the passage “For my hand is upon the throne of God” (Exod.
xvii. 16), “the throne” denotes here the Essence and Greatness of God.
These, however (the Essence and Greatness of God) need not be
considered as something separate from the God Himself or as part of the
Creation, so that God would appear to have existed both without the
throne, and with the throne; such a belief would be undoubtedly
heretical. It is distinctly stated, “Thou, O Lord, remainest for ever;
Thy throne from generation to generation” (Lam. v. 19). By “Thy throne”
we must, therefore, understand something inseparable from God. On that
account, both here and in all similar passages, the word “throne”
denotes God’s Greatness and Essence, which are inseparable from His
Being.

Our opinion will be further elucidated in the course of this Treatise.






CHAPTER X


We have already remarked that when we treat in this work of homonyms,
we have not the intention to exhaust the meanings of a word (for this
is not a philological treatise); we shall mention no other
significations but those which bear on our subject. We shall thus
proceed in our treatment of the terms ʻalah and yarad.

These two words, ʻalah, “he went up,” and yarad, “he went down,” are
Hebrew terms used in the sense of ascending and descending. When a body
moves from a higher to a lower place, the verb yarad, “to go down,” is
used; when it moves from a lower to a higher place, ʻalah, “to go up,”
is applied. These two verbs were afterwards employed with regard to
greatness and power. When a man falls from his high position, we say
“he has come down,” and when he rises in station “he has gone up.” Thus
the Almighty says, “The stranger that is within thee shall get up above
thee very high, and thou shalt come down very low” (Deut. xxviii. 43).
Again, “The Lord thy God will set thee on high (ʻelyon) above all
nations of the earth” (Deut. xxviii. 1): “And the Lord magnified
Solomon exceedingly” (lemaʻalah) (1 Chron. xxix. 25). The Sages often
employ these expressions, as: “In holy matters men must ascend
(maʻalin) and not descend (moridin).” The two words are also applied to
intellectual processes, namely, when we reflect on something beneath
ourselves we are said to go down, and when our attention is raised to a
subject above us we are said to rise.

Now, we occupy a lowly position, both in space and rank in comparison
with the heavenly sphere, and the Almighty is Most High not in space,
but with respect to absolute existence, greatness and power. When it
pleased the Almighty to grant to a human being a certain degree of
wisdom or prophetic inspiration, the divine communication thus made to
the prophet and the entrance of the Divine Presence into a certain
place is termed yeridah, “descending,” while the termination of the
prophetic communication or the departure of the divine glory from a
place is called ʻaliyah, “ascending.”

The expressions “to go up” and “to go down,” when used in reference to
God, must be interpreted in this sense. Again, when, in accordance with
the divine will, some misfortune befalls a nation or a region of the
earth, and when the biblical account of that misfortune is preceded by
the statement that the Almighty visited the actions of the people, and
that He punished them accordingly, then the prophetic author employs
the term “to descend”: for man is so low and insignificant that his
actions would not be visited and would not bring punishment on him,
were it not for the divine will: as is clearly stated in the Bible,
with regard to this idea, “What is man that thou shouldst remember him,
and the son of man that thou shouldst visit him” (Ps. viii. 5).

The design of the Deity to punish man is, therefore, introduced by the
verb “to descend”; comp. “Go to, let us go down and there confound
their language” (Gen. xi. 7); “And the Lord came down to see” (Gen. xi.
5); “I will go down now and see” (Gen. xviii. 21). All these instances
convey the idea that man here below is going to be punished.

More numerous, however, are the instances of the first case, viz., in
which these verbs are used in connection with the revelation of the
word and of the glory of God, e.g., “And I will come down and talk with
thee there” (Num. xi. 17); “And the Lord came down upon Mount Sinai”
(Exod. xix. 20); “The Lord will come down in the sight of all the
people” (Exod. xix. 11); “And God went up from him” (Gen. xxxv. 13);
“And God went up from Abraham” (Gen. xvii. 22). When, on the other
hand, it says, “And Moses went up unto God” (Exod. xix. 3), it must be
taken in the third signification of these verbs, in addition to its
literal meaning that Moses also ascended to the top of the mount, upon
which a certain material light (the manifestation of God’s glory) was
visible; but we must not imagine that the Supreme Being occupies a
place to which we can ascend, or from which we can descend. He is far
from what the ignorant imagine.






