CHAPTER XV


That which is impossible has a permanent and constant property, which
is not the result of some agent, and cannot in any way change, and
consequently we do not ascribe to God the power of doing what is
impossible. No thinking man denies the truth of this maxim; none ignore
it, but such as have no idea of Logic. There is, however, a difference
of opinion among philosophers with reference to the existence of any
particular thing. Some of them consider its existence to be impossible,
and hold that God cannot produce the thing in question, whilst others
think that it is possible, and that God can create it if He pleases to
do so. E.g., all philosophers consider that it is impossible for one
substratum to have at the same moment two opposite properties, or for
the elementary components of a thing, substance and accident, to
interchange, so that the substance becomes accident, and the accident
becomes substance, or for a material substance to be without accident.
Likewise it is impossible that God should produce a being like Himself,
or annihilate, corporify, or change Himself. The power of God is not
assumed to extend to any of these impossibilities. But the existence of
accidents independent of substance is possible according to one class
of philosophers, the Mutazilah, whilst according to others it is
impossible; it must, however, be added that those who admit the
existence of an accident independent of substance, have not arrived at
this conclusion by philosophical research alone; but it was mainly by
the desire to defend certain religious principles, which speculation
had greatly shaken, that they had recourse to this theory. In a similar
manner the creation of corporeal things, otherwise than from a
substance, is possible according to our view, whilst the philosophers
say that it is impossible. Again, whilst philosophers say that it is
impossible to produce a square with a diagonal equal to one of the
sides, or a solid angle that includes four right angles, or similar
things, it is thought possible by some persons who are ignorant of
mathematics, and who only know the words of these propositions, but
have no idea of that which is expressed by them. I wonder whether this
gate of research is open, so that all may freely enter, and whilst one
imagines a thing and considers it possible, another is at liberty to
assert that such a thing is impossible by its very nature; or whether
the gate is closed and guarded by certain rules, so that we are able to
decide with certainty whether a thing is physically impossible. I
should also like to know, in the latter case, whether imagination or
reason has to examine and test objects as to their being possible or
not; likewise how things imagined, and things conceived intellectually,
are to be distinguished from each other. For it occurs that we consider
a thing as physically possible, and then some one objects, or we
ourselves fear that our opinion is only the result of imagination, and
not that of reason. In such a case it would be desirable to ascertain
whether there exists some faculty to distinguish between imagination
and intellect, [and if so,] whether this faculty is different from
both, or whether it is part of the intellect itself to distinguish
between intellectual and imaginary objects. All this requires
investigation, but it does not belong to the theme of this chapter.

We have thus shown that according to each one of the different theories
there are things which are impossible, whose existence cannot be
admitted, and whose creation is excluded from the power of God, and the
assumption that God does not change their nature does not imply
weakness in God, or a limit to His power. Consequently things
impossible remain impossible, and do not depend on the action of an
agent. It is now clear that a difference of opinion exists only as to
the question to which of the two classes a thing belongs; whether to
the class of the impossible, or to that of the possible. Note it.






CHAPTER XVI


The philosophers have uttered very perverse ideas as regards God’s
Omniscience of everything beside Himself; they have stumbled in such a
manner that they cannot rise again, nor can those who adopt their
views. I will further on tell you the doubts that led them to these
perverse utterances on this question; and I will also tell you the
opinion which is taught by our religion, and which differs from the
evil and wrong principles of the philosophers as regards God’s
Omniscience.

The principal reason that first induced the philosophers to adopt their
theory is this: at first thought we notice an absence of system in
human affairs. Some pious men live a miserable and painful life, whilst
some wicked people enjoy a happy and pleasant life. On this account the
philosophers assumed as possible the cases which you will now hear.
They said that only one of two things is possible, either God is
ignorant of the individual or particular things on earth, and does not
perceive them, or He perceives and knows them. These are all the cases
possible. They then continued thus: If He perceives and knows all
individual things, one of the following three cases must take place:
(1) God arranges and manages human affairs well, perfectly and
faultlessly; (2) He is overcome by obstacles, and is too weak and
powerless to manage human affairs; (3) He knows [all things] and can
arrange and manage them, but leaves and abandons them, as too base,
low, and vile, or from jealousy; as we may also notice among ourselves
some who are able to make another person happy, well knowing what he
wants for his happiness, and still in consequence of their evil
disposition, their wickedness and jealousy against him, they do not
help him to his happiness.—This is likewise a complete enumeration of
all possible cases. For those who have a knowledge of a certain thing
necessarily either (1) take care of the thing which they know, and
manage it, or (2) neglect it (as we, e.g., neglect and forget the cats
in our house, or things of less importance); or (3) while taking care
of it, have not sufficient power and strength for its management,
although they have the will to do so. Having enumerated these different
cases, the philosophers emphatically decided that of the three cases
possible [as regards the management of a thing by one who knows that
thing], two are inadmissible in reference to God—viz., want of power,
or absence of will; because they imply either evil disposition or
weakness, neither of which can by any means be attributed to Him.
Consequently there remains only the alternative that God is altogether
ignorant of human affairs, or that He knows them and manages them well.
Since we, however, notice that events do not follow a certain order,
that they cannot be determined by analogy, and are not in accordance
with what is wanted, we conclude that God has no knowledge of them in
any way or for any reason. This is the argument which led the
philosophers to speak such blasphemous words. In the treatise On
Providence, by Alexander Aphrodisiensis, you will find the same as I
have said about the different views of the philosophers, and as I have
stated as to the source of their error.

You must notice with surprise that the evil into which these
philosophers have fallen is greater than that from which they sought to
escape, and that they ignore the very thing which they constantly
pointed out and explained to us. They have fallen into a greater evil
than that from which they sought to escape, because they refuse to say
that God neglects or forgets a thing, and yet they maintain that His
knowledge is imperfect, that He is ignorant of what is going on here on
earth, that He does not perceive it. They also ignore, what they
constantly point out to us, in as much as they judge the whole universe
by that which befalls individual men, although, according to their own
view, frequently stated and explained, the evils of man originate in
himself, or form part of his material nature. We have already discussed
this sufficiently. After having laid this foundation, which is the ruin
of all good principles, and destroys the majesty of all true knowledge,
they sought to remove the opprobrium by declaring that for many reasons
it is impossible that God should have a knowledge of earthly things,
for the individual members of a species can only be perceived by the
senses, and not by reason; but God does not perceive by means of any of
the senses. Again, the individuals are infinite, but knowledge
comprehends and circumscribes the object of its action, and the
infinite cannot be comprehended or circumscribed; furthermore,
knowledge of individual beings, that are subject to change,
necessitates some change in him who possesses it, because this
knowledge itself changes constantly. They have also raised the
following two objections against those who hold, in accordance with the
teaching of Scripture, that God knows things before they come into
existence. First, this theory implies that there can be knowledge of a
thing that does not exist at all; secondly, it leads to the conclusion
that the knowledge of an object in potentia is identical with the
knowledge of that same object in reality. They have indeed come to very
evil conclusions, and some of them assumed that God only knows the
species, not the individual beings, whilst others went as far as to
contend that God knows nothing beside Himself, because they believe
that God cannot have more than one knowledge.

Some of the great philosophers who lived before Aristotle agree with
us, that God knows everything, and that nothing is hidden from Him.
Alexander also refers to them in the above-mentioned treatise; he
differs from them, and says that the principal objection against this
theory is based on the fact that we clearly see evils befalling good
men, and wicked men enjoying happiness.

In short, you see that if these philosophers would find human affairs
managed according to rules laid down by the common people, they would
not venture or presume to speak on this subject. They are only led to
this speculation because they examine the affairs of the good and the
wicked, and consider them as being contrary to all rule, and say in the
words of the foolish in our nation, “The way of the Lord is not right”
(Ezek. xxxiii. 17).

After having shown that knowledge and Providence are connected with
each other, I will now proceed to expound the opinions of thinkers on
Providence, and then I shall attempt to remove their doubts as to God’s
knowledge of individual beings.






