CHAPTER XIV


The homonymous term adam is in the first place the name of the first
man, being, as Scripture indicates, derived from adamah, “earth.” Next,
it means “mankind,” as “My spirit shall not strive with man (adam)”
(Gen. vi. 3). Again “Who knoweth the spirit of the children of man
(adam)” (Eccles. iii. 21); “so that a man (adam) has no pre-eminence
above a beast” (Eccles. iii. 19). Adam signifies also “the multitude,”
“the lower classes” as opposed to those distinguished from the rest, as
“Both low (bene adam) and high (bene ish)” (Ps. xlix. 3).

It is in this third signification that it occurs in the verses, “The
sons of the higher order (Elohim) saw the daughters of the lower order
(adam)” (Gen. vi. 2); and “Forsooth! as the humble man (adam) you shall
die” (Ps. lxxxii. 7).






CHAPTER XV


Although the two roots naẓab and yaẓab are distinct, yet their meaning
is, as you know, identical in all their various forms.

The verb has several meanings: in some instances it signifies “to
stand” or “to place oneself,” as “And his sister stood (va-tetaẓẓab)
afar off” (Exod. ii. 4); “The kings of the earth set themselves”
(yityaẓẓebu) (Ps. ii. 2); “They came out and stood” (niẓẓabim) (Num.
xvi. 27). In other instances it denotes continuance and permanence, as,
“Thy word is established (niẓẓab) in Heaven” (Ps. cxix. 89), i.e., it
remains for ever.

Whenever this term is applied to God it must be understood in the
latter sense, as, “And, behold, the Lord stood (niẓẓab) upon it” (Gen.
xxviii. 13), i.e., appeared as eternal and everlasting “upon it,”
namely, upon the ladder, the upper end of which reached to heaven,
while the lower end touched the earth. This ladder all may climb up who
wish to do so, and they must ultimately attain to a knowledge of Him
who is above the summit of the ladder, because He remains upon it
permanently. It must be well understood that the term “upon it” is
employed by me in harmony with this metaphor. “Angels of God” who were
going up represent the prophets. That the term “angel” was applied to
prophets may clearly be seen in the following passages: “He sent an
angel” (Num. xx. 16); “And an angel of the Lord came up from Gilgal to
Bochim” (Judges ii. 1). How suggestive, too, is the expression
“ascending and descending on it”! The ascent is mentioned before the
descent, inasmuch as the “ascending” and arriving at a certain height
of the ladder precedes the “descending,” i.e., the application of the
knowledge acquired in the ascent for the training and instruction of
mankind. This application is termed “descent,” in accordance with our
explanation of the term yarad (chapter x.).

To return to our subject. The phrase “stood upon it” indicates the
permanence and constancy of God, and does not imply the idea of
physical position. This is also the sense of the phrase “Thou shalt
stand upon the rock” (Exod. xxxiii. 21). It is therefore clear that
niẓẓab and ʻamad are identical in this figurative signification. Comp.
“Behold, I will stand (ʻomed) before thee there upon the rock in Horeb”
(Exod. xvii. 6).






CHAPTER XVI


The word ẓur (rock) is a homonym. First, it denotes “rock,” as “And
thou shalt smite the rock” (ẓur) (Exod. xvii. 6). Then, “hard stone,”
like the flint, e.g., “Knives of stone” (ẓurim) (Josh. v. 2). It is
next employed to signify the quarry from which the stones are hewn;
comp. “Look unto the rock (ẓur) whence ye are hewn” (Isa. li. 1). From
this latter meaning of the term another figurative notion was
subsequently derived, viz., “the root and origin” of all things. It is
on this account that after the words “Look to the rock whence ye are
hewn,” the Prophet continues, “Look unto Abraham your father,” from
which we evidently may infer that the words “Abraham your father” serve
to explain “the rock whence ye are hewn”; and that the Prophet meant to
say, “Walk in his ways, put faith in his instruction, and conduct
yourselves according to the rule of his life! for the properties
contained in the quarry should be found again in those things which are
formed and hewn out of it.”

It is in the latter sense that the Almighty is called “rock,” He being
the origin and the causa efficiens of all things besides Himself. Thus
we read, “He is the Rock, His work is perfect” (Deut. xxxii. 4); “Of
the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful” (Deut. xxxii. 18); “Their
Rock had sold them” (xxxi. 30); “There is no rock like our God” (1 Sam.
ii. 2): “The Rock of Eternity” (Isa. xxvi. 4). Again, “And thou shalt
stand upon the Rock” (Exod. xxxiii. 21), i.e., Be firm and steadfast in
the conviction that God is the source of all things, for this will lead
you towards the knowledge of the Divine Being. We have shown (chap.
viii.) that the words “Behold, a place is with me” (Exod. xxxiii. 21)
contain the same idea.






