CHAPTER XVIII


Having shown in the preceding chapter that of all living beings mankind
alone is directly under the control of Divine Providence, I will now
add the following remarks: It is an established fact that species have
no existence except in our own minds. Species and other classes are
merely ideas formed in our minds, whilst everything in real existence
is an individual object, or an aggregate of individual objects. This
being granted, it must further be admitted that the result of the
existing Divine influence, that reaches mankind through the human
intellect, is identical with individual intellects really in existence,
with which, e.g., Zeid, Amr, Kaled and Bekr, are endowed. Hence it
follows, in accordance with what I have mentioned in the preceding
chapter, that the greater the share is which a person has obtained of
this Divine influence, on account of both his physical predisposition
and his training, the greater must also be the effect of Divine
Providence upon him, for the action of Divine Providence is
proportional to the endowment of intellect, as has been mentioned
above. The relation of Divine Providence is therefore not the same to
all men; the greater the human perfection a person has attained, the
greater the benefit he derives from Divine Providence. This benefit is
very great in the case of prophets, and varies according to the degree
of their prophetic faculty; as it varies in the case of pious and good
men according to their piety and uprightness. For it is the intensity
of the Divine intellectual influence that has inspired the prophets,
guided the good in their actions, and perfected the wisdom of the
pious. In the same proportion as ignorant and disobedient persons are
deficient in that Divine influence, their condition is inferior, and
their rank equal to that of irrational beings; and they are “like unto
the beasts” (Ps. xlix. 21). For this reason it was not only considered
a light thing to slay them, but it was even directly commanded for the
benefit of mankind. This belief that God provides for every individual
human being in accordance with his merits is one of the fundamental
principles on which the Law is founded.

Consider how the action of Divine Providence is described in reference
to every incident in the lives of the patriarchs, to their occupations,
and even to their passions, and how God promised to direct His
attention to them. Thus God said to Abraham, “I am thy shield” (Gen.
xv. 1); to Isaac, “I will be with thee, and I will bless thee” (ibid.
xxvi. 3); to Jacob, “I am with thee, and will keep thee” (ibid. xxviii.
15); to [Moses] the chief of the Prophets, “Certainly I will be with
thee, and this shall be a token unto thee” (Exod. iii. 12); to Joshua,
“As I was with Moses, so I shall be with thee” (Josh. i. 5). It is
clear that in all these cases the action of Providence has been
proportional to man’s perfection. The following verse describes how
Providence protects good and pious men, and abandons fools; “He will
keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be silent in
darkness; for by strength shall no man prevail” (1 Sam. ii. 9). When we
see that some men escape plagues and mishaps, whilst others perish by
them, we must not attribute this to a difference in the properties of
their bodies, or in their physical constitution, “for by strength shall
no man prevail”; but it must be attributed to their different degrees
of perfection, some approaching God, whilst others moving away from
Him. Those who approach Him are best protected, and “He will keep the
feet of his saints”; but those who keep far away from Him are left
exposed to what may befall them; there is nothing that could protect
them from what might happen; they are like those who walk in darkness,
and are certain to stumble. The protection of the pious by Providence
is also expressed in the following passages:—“He keepeth all his
bones,” etc. (Ps. xxxiv. 21); “The eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous” (ibid. ver. 16); “He shall call upon me and I shall answer
him” (ibid. xci. 15). There are in Scripture many more passages
expressing the principle that men enjoy Divine protection in proportion
to their perfection and piety. The philosophers have likewise discussed
this subject. Abu-nasr, in the Introduction to his Commentary on
Aristotle’s Nikomachean Ethics, says as follows:—Those who possess the
faculty of raising their souls from virtue to virtue obtain, according
to Plato, Divine protection to a higher degree.

Now consider how by this method of reasoning we have arrived at the
truth taught by the Prophets, that every person has his individual
share of Divine Providence in proportion to his perfection. For
philosophical research leads to this conclusion, if we assume, as has
been mentioned above, that Divine Providence is in each case
proportional to the person’s intellectual development. It is wrong to
say that Divine Providence extends only to the species, and not to
individual beings, as some of the philosophers teach. For only
individual beings have real existence, and individual beings are
endowed with Divine Intellect; Divine Providence acts, therefore, upon
these individual beings.

Study this chapter as it ought to be studied; you will find in it all
the fundamental principles of the Law; you will see that these are in
conformity with philosophical speculation, and all difficulties will be
removed; you will have a clear idea of Divine Providence.

After having described the various philosophical opinions on
Providence, and on the manner how God governs the Universe, I will
briefly state the opinion of our co-religionists on the Omniscience of
God, and what I have to remark on this subject.






CHAPTER XIX


It is undoubtedly an innate idea that God must be perfect in every
respect and cannot be deficient in anything. It is almost an innate
idea that ignorance in anything is a deficiency, and that God can
therefore not be ignorant of anything. But some thinkers assume, as I
said before, haughtily and exultingly, that God knows certain things
and is ignorant of certain other things. They did so because they
imagined that they discovered a certain absence of order in man’s
affairs, most of which are not only the result of physical properties,
but also of those faculties which he possesses as a being endowed with
free will and reason. The Prophets have already stated the proof which
ignorant persons offer for their belief that God does not know our
actions; viz., the fact that wicked people are seen in happiness, ease,
and peace. This fact leads also righteous and pious persons to think
that it is of no use for them to aim at that which is good and to
suffer for it through the opposition of other people. But the Prophets
at the same time relate how their own thoughts were engaged on this
question, and how they were at last convinced that in the instances to
which these arguments refer, only the end and not the beginning ought
to be taken into account. The following is a description of these
reflections (Ps. lxxiii. 11, seq.): “And they say, How does God know?
and is there knowledge in the Most High? Behold, these are the ungodly
who prosper in the world; they increase in riches. Verily I have
cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocency.” He then
continues, “When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me,
until I went into the sanctuary of God; then understood I their end.
Surely thou didst set them in slippery places; thou castedst them down
into destruction. How are they brought into desolation, as in a moment!
They are utterly consumed with terrors.” The very same ideas have also
been expressed by the prophet Malachi, for he says thus (Mal. iii.
13–18): “Your words have been stout against me, saith the Lord. As you
have said, It is vain to serve God; and what profit is it that we have
kept his ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord
of hosts? And now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work
wickedness are set up; yea, they that tempt God are even delivered.
Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another, etc. Then
shall ye return and discern between the righteous and the wicked,
between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not.” David
likewise shows how general this view was in his time, and how it led
and caused people to sin and to oppress one another. At first he argues
against this theory, and then he declares that God is omniscient. He
says as follows:—“They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the
fatherless. Yet they say, The Lord shall not see, neither shall the God
of Jacob regard it. Understand, ye brutish among the people, and ye
fools, when will you be wise? He that planted the ear, shall he not
hear? He that formed the eye, shall he not see? He that chastiseth
nations, shall not he correct? or he that teacheth man knowledge?” I
will now show you the meaning of these arguments, but first I will
point out how the opponents to the words of the Prophets misunderstood
this passage. Many years ago some intelligent co-religionists—they were
physicians—told me that they were surprised at the words of David; for
it would follow from his arguments that the Creator of the mouth must
eat and the Creator of the lungs must cry; the same applies to all
other organs of our body. You who study this treatise of mine, consider
how grossly they misunderstood David’s arguments. Hear now what its
true meaning is: He who produces a vessel must have had in his mind an
idea of the use of that instrument, otherwise he could not have
produced it. If, e.g., the smith had not formed an idea of sewing and
possessed a knowledge of it, the needle would not have had the form so
indispensable for sewing. The same is the case with all instruments.
When some philosopher thought that God, whose perception is purely
intellectual, has no knowledge of individual things, which are
perceivable only by the senses, David takes his argument from the
existence of the senses, and argues thus:—If the sense of sight had
been utterly unknown to God, how could He have produced that organ of
the sense of sight? Do you think that it was by chance that a
transparent humour was formed, and then another humour with certain
similar properties, and besides a membrane which by accident had a hole
covered with a hardened transparent substance? in short, considering
the humour of the eye, in membranes and nerves, with their well-known
functions, and their adaptation to the purpose of sight, can any
intelligent person imagine that all this is due to chance? Certainly
not; we see here necessarily design in nature, as has been shown by all
physicians and philosophers; but as nature is not an intellectual
being, and is not capable of governing [the universe], as has been
accepted by all philosophers, the government [of the universe], which
shows signs of design, originates, according to the philosophers, in an
intellectual cause, but is according to our view the result of the
action of an intellectual being, that endows everything with its
natural properties. If this intellect were incapable of perceiving or
knowing any of the actions of earthly beings, how could He have
created, or, according to the other theory, caused to emanate from
Himself, properties that bring about those actions of which He is
supposed to have no knowledge? David correctly calls those who believe
in this theory brutes and fools. He then proceeds to explain that the
error is due to our defective understanding; that God endowed us with
the intellect which is the means of our comprehension, and which on
account of its insufficiency to form a true idea of God has become the
source of great doubts; that He therefore knows what our defects are,
and how worthless the doubts are which originate in our faulty
reasoning. The Psalmist therefore says: “He who teaches man knowledge,
the Lord, knoweth the thoughts of man that they are vanity” (ibid.
xciv. 10–11).

My object in this chapter was to show how the belief of the ignorant,
that God does not notice the affairs of man because they are uncertain
and unsystematic, is very ancient. Comp. “And the Israelites uttered
things that were not right against the Lord” (2 Kings xvii. 9). In
reference to this passage the Midrash says: “What have they uttered?
This Pillar [i.e., God] does not see, nor hear, nor speak”; i.e., they
imagine that God takes no notice of earthly affairs, that the Prophets
received of God neither affirmative nor negative precepts; they imagine
so, simply because human affairs are not arranged as every person would
think it desirable. Seeing that these are not in accordance with their
wish, they say, “The Lord does not see us” (Ezek. viii. 12). Zephaniah
(i. 12) also describes those ignorant persons “who say in their heart
the Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil.” I will tell you my
own opinion as regards the theory that God knows all things on earth,
but I will before state some propositions which are generally adopted,
and the correctness of which no intelligent person can dispute.






