CHAPTER VII


We have already explained that the term “angel” is a homonym, and is
used of the intellectual beings, the spheres, and the elements; for all
these are engaged in performing a divine command. But do not imagine
that the Intelligences and the spheres are like other forces which
reside in bodies and act by the laws of nature without being conscious
of what they do. The spheres and the Intelligences are conscious of
their actions, and select by their own free will the objects of their
influence, although not in the same manner as we exercise free will and
rule over other things, which only concern temporary beings. I have
been led to adopt this theory by certain passages in Scripture; e.g.,
an angel says to Lot: “For I cannot do anything,” etc. (Gen. xix. 21);
and telling him to deliver himself, the angel says: “Behold I have
accepted thee concerning this thing” (ver. 21). Again: “Take heed
before him, and listen to his voice,” etc. (Exod. xxiii. 21). These
passages show that angels are conscious of what they do, and have free
will in the sphere of action intrusted to them, just as we have free
will within our province, and in accordance with the power given to us
with our very existence. The difference is that what we do is the
lowest stage of excellence, and that our influence and actions are
preceded by non-action; whilst the Intelligences and the spheres always
perform that which is good, they contain nothing except what is good
and perfect, as will be shown further on, and they have continually
been active from the beginning.






CHAPTER VIII


It is one of the ancient beliefs, both among the philosophers and other
people, that the motions of the spheres produced mighty and fearful
sounds. They observed how little objects produced by rapid motion a
loud, shrilling, and terrifying noise, and concluded that this must to
a far higher degree be the case with the bodies of the sun, the moon
and the stars, considering their greatness and their velocity. The
Pythagoreans believed that the sounds were pleasant, and, though loud,
had the same proportions to each other as the musical notes. They also
explained why these mighty and tremendous sounds are not heard by us.
This belief is also widespread in our nation. Thus our Sages describe
the greatness of the sound produced by the sun in the daily circuit in
its orbit. The same description could be given of all heavenly bodies.
Aristotle, however, rejects this, and holds that they produce no
sounds. You will find his opinion in the book The Heavens and the World
(De Cœlo). You must not find it strange that Aristotle differs here
from the opinion of our Sages. The theory of the music of the spheres
is connected with the theory of the motion of the stars in a fixed
sphere, and our Sages have, in this astronomical question, abandoned
their own theory in favour of the theory of others. Thus, it is
distinctly stated, “The wise men of other nations have defeated the
wise men of Israel.” It is quite right that our Sages have abandoned
their own theory; for speculative matters every one treats according to
the results of his own study, and every one accepts that which appears
to him established by proof.






CHAPTER IX


We have stated above that in the age of Aristotle the number of spheres
was not accurately known; and that those who at present count nine
spheres consider a sphere containing several rotating circles as one, a
fact well known to all who have a knowledge of astronomy. We need,
therefore, not reject the opinion of those who assume two spheres in
accordance with the words of Scripture: “Behold the heaven and the
heaven of heavens are the Lord’s” (Deut. x. 14). They reckon all the
spheres with stars, i.e., with all the circles in which the stars move,
as one; the all-encompassing sphere in which there are no stars, is
regarded by them as the second; hence they maintain that there are two
spheres.

I will here introduce an explanation which is necessary for the
understanding of our view on the present subject. There is a difference
among ancient astronomers whether the spheres of Mercury and Venus are
above or below the sun, because no proof can be given for the position
of these two spheres. At first it was generally assumed that they were
above the sun—note this well; later on Ptolemy maintained that they
were below the sun; because he believed that in this manner the whole
arrangement of the spheres would be most reasonable; the sun would be
in the middle, having three stars below and three above itself. More
recently some Andalusian scholars concluded, from certain principles
laid down by Ptolemy, that Venus and Mercury were above the sun. Ibn
Aflaḥ of Seville, with whose son I was acquainted, has written a famous
book on the subject; also the excellent philosopher Abu-Bekr
ibn-Alẓaig, one of whose pupils was my fellow-student, has treated of
this subject and offered certain proofs—which we have copied—of the
improbability of Venus and Mercury being above the sun. The proofs
given by Abu-Bekr show only the improbability, not the impossibility.
In short, whether it be so or not, the ancients placed Venus and
Mercury above the sun, and had, therefore, the following five spheres:
that of the moon, which is undoubtedly the nearest to us; that of the
sun, which is, of course, above the former; then that of the five
planets, the sphere of the fixed stars, and the outermost sphere, which
does not contain any star. Consequently there are four spheres
containing figures, i.e., stars, which were called figures by the
ancients in their well-known works—viz., the spheres of the fixed
stars, of the five planets, of the sun, and of the moon; above these
there is one sphere which is empty, without any star. This number is
for me of great importance in respect to an idea which none of the
philosophers clearly stated, though I was led to it by various
utterances of the philosophers and of our Sages. I will now state the
idea and expound it.






