CHAPTER V


Scripture supports the theory that the spheres are animate and
intellectual, i.e., capable of comprehending things; that they are not,
as ignorant persons believe, inanimate masses like fire and earth, but
are, as the philosophers assert, endowed with life, and serve their
Lord, whom they mightily praise and glorify; comp. “The heavens declare
the glory of God,” etc. (Ps. xix. 2). It is a great error to think that
this is a mere figure of speech; for the verbs “to declare” and “to
relate,” when joined together, are, in Hebrew, only used of
intellectual beings. That the Psalmist really means to describe the
heavens’ own doing, in other words, what the spheres actually do, and
not what man thinks of them, may be best inferred from the words,
“There is no speech, nor language, their voice is not heard” (ver. 4).
Here he clearly shows that he describes the heavens themselves as in
reality praising God, and declaring His wonders without words of lip
and tongue. When man praises God in words actually uttered, he only
relates the ideas which he has conceived, but these ideas form the real
praise. The reason why he gives expression to these ideas is to be
found in his desire to communicate them to others, or to make himself
sure that he has truly conceived them. Therefore it is said, “Commune
with your own heart upon your bed, and be still” (Ps. iv. 5). Only
ignorant or obstinate persons would refuse to admit this proof taken
from Scripture.

As to the opinion of our Sages, I do not see any necessity for
expounding or demonstrating it. Consider only the form they gave to the
blessing recited on seeing the new moon, the ideas repeatedly occurring
in the prayers and the remarks in the Midrash on the following and
similar passages:—“And the host of heaven worshippeth thee” (Neh. ix.
6); “When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God
shouted for joy” (Job xxxviii. 7). In Bereshit Rabba, on the
passage—“And the earth was empty and formless” (Gen. i. 2), our Sages
remark as follows: “The words tohu and bohu mean mourning and crying;
the earth mourned and cried on account of her evil lot, saying, ‘I and
the heavens were created together, and yet the beings above live for
ever, and we are mortal.’” Our Sages, by this remark, indicate their
belief that the spheres are animated beings, and not inanimate matter
like the elements.

The opinion of Aristotle, that the spheres are capable of comprehension
and conception, is in accordance with the words of our prophets and our
theologians or Sages. The philosophers further agree that this world
below is governed by influences emanating from the spheres, and that
the latter comprehend and have knowledge of the things which they
influence. This theory is also met with in Scripture; comp. [the stars
and all the host of heaven] “which the Lord thy God hath divided unto
all nations” (Deut. iv. 19), that is to say, the stars, which God
appointed to be the means of governing His creatures, and not the
objects of man’s worship. It has therefore been stated clearly: “And to
rule over the day and over the night” (Gen. i. 18). The term “ruling”
here refers to the power which the spheres possess of governing the
earth, in addition to the property of giving light and darkness. The
latter property is the direct cause of genesis and destruction; it is
described in the words, “And to divide the light from the darkness”
(ibid.). It is impossible to assume that those who rule a thing are
ignorant of that very thing which they rule, if we take “to rule” in
its proper sense. We will add another chapter on this subject.






CHAPTER VI


As for the existence of angels, there is no necessity to cite any proof
from Scripture, where the fact is frequently mentioned. The term elohim
signifies “judges”; comp. “The cause of both parties shall come before
the ‘judges’” (ha-elohim; Exod. xxii. 8). It has been figuratively
applied to angels, and to the Creator as being Judge over the angels.
When God says, “I am the Lord your God,” the pronoun “your” refers to
all mankind; but in the phrase elohe ha-elohim, He is described as the
God of the angels, and in adone ha-adonim, as the Lord of the spheres
and the stars, which are the masters of the rest of the corporeal
creation. The nouns elohim and adonim in these phrases do not refer to
human judges or masters, because these are in rank inferior to the
heavenly bodies; much less do they refer to mankind in general,
including masters and servants, or to objects of stone and wood
worshipped by some as gods; for it is no honour or greatness to God to
be superior to stone, wood, or a piece of metal. The phrases therefore
admit of no other meaning than this: God is the Judge over the judges;
i.e., over the angels, and the Lord over the spheres.

We have already stated above that the angels are incorporeal. This
agrees with the opinion of Aristotle: there is only this difference in
the names employed—he uses the term “Intelligences,” and we say instead
“angels.” His theory is that the Intelligences are intermediate beings
between the Prime Cause and existing things, and that they effect the
motion of the spheres, on which motion the existence of all things
depends. This is also the view we meet with in all parts of Scripture;
every act of God is described as being performed by angels. But “angel”
means “messenger”; hence every one that is intrusted with a certain
mission is an angel. Even the movements of the brute creation are
sometimes due to the action of an angel, when such movements serve the
purpose of the Creator, who endowed it with the power of performing
that movement; e.g., “God hath sent His angel, and hath shut the lions’
mouths that they have not hurt me” (Dan. vi. 22). Another instance may
be seen in the movements of Balaam’s ass, described as caused by an
angel. The elements are also called angels. Comp. “Who maketh winds His
angels, flaming fire His ministers” (Ps. civ. 4). There is no doubt
that the word “angel” is used of a messenger sent by man; e.g., “And
Jacob sent angels” (Gen. xxxii. 4); of a prophet, e.g., “And an angel
of the Lord came up from Gilgal to Bochim” (Judges ii. 1); “And He sent
an angel, and hath brought us forth out of Egypt” (Num. xx. 16). It is
also used of ideals, perceived by prophets in prophetic visions, and of
man’s animal powers, as will be explained in another place.

When we assert that Scripture teaches that God rules this world through
angels, we mean such angels as are identical with the Intelligences. In
some passages the plural is used of God, e.g., “Let us make man in our
image” (Gen. i. 26); “Go to, let us go down, and there confound their
language” (ibid. xi. 7). Our Sages explain this in the following
manner: God, as it were, does nothing without contemplating the host
above. I wonder at the expression “contemplating,” which is the very
expression used by Plato: God, as it were, “contemplates the world of
ideals, and thus produces the existing beings.” In other passages our
Sages expressed it more decidedly: “God does nothing without consulting
the host above” (the word familia, used in the original, is a Greek
noun, and signifies “host”). On the words, “what they have already
made” (Eccles. ii. 12), the following remark is made in Bereshit Rabba
and in Midrash Koheleth: “It is not said ‘what He has made,’ but ‘what
they have made’; hence we infer that He, as it were, with His court,
have agreed upon the form of each of the limbs of man before placing it
in its position, as it is said, ‘He hath made thee and established
thee’” (Deut. xxxii. 6). In Bereshit Rabba (chap. li.) it is also
stated, that wherever the term “and the Lord” occurred in Scripture,
the Lord with His court is to be understood. These passages do not
convey the idea that God spoke, thought, reflected, or that He
consulted and employed the opinion of other beings, as ignorant persons
have believed. How could the Creator be assisted by those whom He
created! They only show that all parts of the Universe, even the limbs
of animals in their actual form, are produced through angels; for
natural forces and angels are identical. How bad and injurious is the
blindness of ignorance! Say to a person who is believed to belong to
the wise men of Israel that the Almighty sends His angel to enter the
womb of a woman and to form there the fœtus, he will be satisfied with
the account; he will believe it, and even find in it a description of
the greatness of God’s might and wisdom; although he believes that the
angel consists of burning fire, and is as big as a third part of the
Universe, yet he considers it possible as a divine miracle. But tell
him that God gave the seed a formative power which produces and shapes
the limbs, and that this power is called “angel,” or that all forms are
the result of the influence of the Active Intellect, and that the
latter is the angel, the Prince of the world, frequently mentioned by
our Sages, and he will turn away; because he cannot comprehend the true
greatness and power of creating forces that act in a body without being
perceived by our senses. Our Sages have already stated—for him who has
understanding—that all forces that reside in a body are angels, much
more the forces that are active in the Universe. The theory that each
force acts only in one particular way, is expressed in Bereshit Rabba
(chap. l.) as follows: “One angel does not perform two things, and two
angels do not perform one thing”; this is exactly the property of all
forces. We may find a confirmation of the opinion that the natural and
psychical forces of an individual are called angels in a statement of
our Sages which is frequently quoted, and occurs originally in Bereshit
Rabba (chap. lxxviii.): “Every day God creates a legion of angels; they
sing before Him, and disappear.” When, in opposition to this statement,
other statements were quoted to the effect that angels are eternal—and,
in fact, it has repeatedly been shown that they live permanently—the
reply has been given that some angels live permanently, others perish;
and this is really the case; for individual forces are transient,
whilst the genera are permanent and imperishable. Again, we read (in
Bereshit Rabba, chap. lxxxv.), in reference to the relation between
Judah and Tamar: “R. Jochanan said that Judah was about to pass by
[without noticing Tamar], but God caused the angel of lust, i.e., the
libidinous disposition, to present himself to him.” Man’s disposition
is here called an angel. Likewise we frequently meet with the phrase
“the angel set over a certain thing.” In Midrash-Koheleth (on Eccles.
x. 7) the following passage occurs: “When man sleeps, his soul speaks
to the angel, the angel to the cherub.” The intelligent reader will
find here a clear statement that man’s imaginative faculty is also
called “angel,” and that “cherub” is used for man’s intellectual
faculty. How beautiful must this appear to him who understands it; how
absurd to the ignorant!

We have already stated that the forms in which angels appear form part
of the prophetic vision. Some prophets see angels in the form of man,
e.g., “And behold three men stood by him” (Gen. xviii. 2); others
perceive an angel as a fearful and terrible being, e.g., “And his
countenance was as the countenance of an angel of God, very terrible”
(Judges xiii. 6); others see them as fire, e.g., “And the angel of the
Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire” (Exod. iii. 2). In Bereshit
Rabba (chap. 1.) the following remark occurs: “To Abraham, whose
prophetic power was great, the angels appeared in the form of men; to
Lot, whose power was weak, they appeared as angels.” This is an
important principle as regards Prophecy; it will be fully discussed
when we treat of that subject (chap. xxxii. sqq.). Another passage in
Bereshit Rabba (ibid.) runs thus: “Before the angels have accomplished
their task they are called men, when they have accomplished it they are
angels.” Consider how clearly they say that the term “angel” signifies
nothing but a certain action, and that every appearance of an angel is
part of a prophetic vision, depending on the capacity of the person
that perceives it.

There is nothing in the opinion of Aristotle on this subject contrary
to the teaching of Scripture. The whole difference between him and
ourselves is this: he believes all these beings to be eternal,
co-existing with the First Cause as its necessary effect; but we
believe that they have had a beginning, that God created the
Intelligences, and gave the spheres the capacity of seeking to become
like them; that in creating the Intelligences and the spheres, He
endowed them with their governing powers. In this point we differ from
him.

In the course of this treatise we shall give his theory as well as the
theory of Creatio ex nihilo taught in Scripture.






