CHAPTER XXX


On examining these old and foolish doctrines we find that it was most
generally believed by the people that by the worship of stars the earth
will become inhabited, and the ground fertilized. The wise, pious, and
sin-fearing men among them reproved the people and taught them that
agriculture, on which the preservation of mankind depended, would
become perfect and satisfy man’s wishes, when he worshipped the sun and
the stars. If man provoked these beings by his rebelliousness, the
towns would become empty and waste. In the above-named books it is
stated that Mars was angry with [lands, that form now] deserts and
wastes, and in consequence of that anger they were deprived of water
and trees, and have become the habitation of demons. Tillers of the
ground and husbandmen are praised in those books, because they are
engaged with the cultivation of the land in accordance with the will
and desire of the stars. The idolaters also held cattle in esteem on
account of their use in agriculture, and went even so far as to say,
that it is not allowed to slay them, because they combine in themselves
strength and willingness to do the work of man in tilling the ground.
The oxen, notwithstanding their great strength, do this, and submit to
man, because it is the will of God that they should be employed in
agriculture. When these views became generally known, idolatry was
connected with agriculture, because the latter is indispensable for the
maintenance of man, and of most animals. The idolatrous priests then
preached to the people who met in the temples, and taught them that by
certain religious acts, rain would come down, the trees of the field
would yield their fruit, and the land would be fertile and inhabited.
See what is said in the Nabatean Agriculture in the chapter on
vineyards. The following words of the Sabeans are quoted there: “All
ancient wise men advised, and prophets likewise commanded and enjoined
to play before the images on certain instruments during the festivals.
They also said—and what they said is true—that the deities are pleased
with it, and reward those who do it. They promise, indeed, very great
reward for these things; e.g., length of life, protection from illness,
exemption from great bodily deformities, plenty of the produce of the
earth, and of the fruits of the trees.” These are the words of the
Sabeans. When these ideas spread, and were considered as true, God, in
His great mercy for us, intended to remove this error from our minds,
and to protect our bodies from trouble; and therefore desired us to
discontinue the practice of these useless actions. He gave us His Law
through Moses, our teacher, who told us in the name of God, that the
worship of stars and other corporeal beings would effect that rain
would cease, the land be waste, and would not produce anything, and the
fruit of the trees would wither; calamities would befall the people,
their bodies would be deformed, and life would be shortened. These are
the contents of “the words of the covenant which God made” (Deut.
xxviii. 6–9). It is frequently expressed in all parts of Scripture,
that the worship of the stars would be followed by absence of rain,
devastation of the land, bad times, diseases, and shortness of life.
But abandonment of that worship, and the return to the service of God,
would be the cause of the presence of rain, fertility of the ground,
good times, health and length of life. Thus Scripture teaches, in order
that man should abandon idolatry, the reverse of that which idolatrous
priests preached to the people, for, as has been shown by us, the
principal object of the Law is to remove this doctrine, and to destroy
its traces.






CHAPTER XXXI


There are persons who find it difficult to give a reason for any of the
commandments, and consider it right to assume that the commandments and
prohibitions have no rational basis whatever. They are led to adopt
this theory by a certain disease in their soul, the existence of which
they perceive, but which they are unable to discuss or to describe. For
they imagine that these precepts, if they were useful in any respect,
and were commanded because of their usefulness, would seem to originate
in the thought and reason of some intelligent being. But as things
which are not objects of reason and serve no purpose, they would
undoubtedly be attributed to God, because no thought of man could have
produced them. According to the theory of those weak-minded persons,
man is more perfect than his Creator. For what man says or does has a
certain object, whilst the actions of God are different; He commands us
to do what is of no use to us, and forbids us to do what is harmless.
Far be this! On the contrary, the sole object of the Law is to benefit
us. Thus we explained the Scriptural passage, “for our good always,
that He might preserve us alive, as it is this day” (Deut. vi. 24).
Again, “which shall hear all those statutes (ḥuḳḳim), and say, surely
this great nation is a wise and understanding people” (ibid. iv. 6). He
thus says that even every one of these “statutes” convinces all nations
of the wisdom and understanding it includes. But if no reason could be
found for these statutes, if they produced no advantage and removed no
evil, why then should he who believes in them and follows them be wise,
reasonable, and so excellent as to raise the admiration of all nations?
But the truth is undoubtedly as we have said, that every one of the six
hundred and thirteen precepts serves to inculcate some truth, to remove
some erroneous opinion, to establish proper relations in society, to
diminish evil, to train in good manners, or to warn against bad habits.
All this depends on three things: opinions, morals, and social conduct.
We do not count words, because precepts, whether positive or negative,
if they relate to speech, belong to those precepts which regulate our
social conduct, or to those which spread truth, or to those which teach
morals. Thus these three principles suffice for assigning a reason for
every one of the Divine commandments.






