CHAPTER XVII


Do not imagine that only Metaphysics should be taught with reserve to
the common people and to the uninitiated; for the same is also the case
with the greater part of Natural Science. In this sense we have
repeatedly made use of the expression of the Sages, “Do not expound the
chapter on the Creation in the presence of two” [vide Introd. page 2].
This principle was not peculiar to our Sages; ancient philosophers and
scholars of other nations were likewise wont to treat of the principia
rerum obscurely, and to use figurative language in discussing such
subjects. Thus Plato and his predecessors called Substance the female,
and Form the male. (You are aware that the principia of all existing
transient things are three, viz., Substance, Form, and Absence of a
particular form; the last-named principle is always inherent in the
substance, for otherwise the substance would be incapable of receiving
a new form; and it is from this point of view that absence [of a
particular form] is included among the principia. As soon, then, as a
substance has received a certain form, the privation of that form,
namely, of that which has just been received, has ceased, and is
replaced by the privation of another form, and so on with all possible
forms, as is explained in treatises on natural philosophy.)—Now, if
those philosophers who have nothing to fear from a lucid explanation of
these metaphysical subjects still were in the habit of discussing them
in figures and metaphors, how much more should we, having the interest
of religion at heart, refrain from elucidating to the mass any subject
that is beyond their comprehension, or that might be taken in a sense
directly opposite to the one intended. This also deserves attention.






CHAPTER XVIII


The three words karab, “to come near,” nagaʻ, “to touch,” and nagash,
“to approach,” sometimes signify “contact” or “nearness in space,”
sometimes the approach of man’s knowledge to an object, as if it
resembled the physical approach of one body to another. As to the use
of karab in the first meaning, viz., to draw near a certain spot, comp.
“As he drew near (karab) the camp” (Exod. xxxii. 19); “And Pharaoh drew
near (hikrib)” (Exod. xiv. 10). Nagaʻ, in the first sense, viz.,
expressing the contact of two bodies, occurs in “And she cast it
(va-taggaʻ) at his feet” (Exod. iv. 25); “He caused it to touch
(va-yaggaʻ) my mouth” (Isa. vi. 7). And nagash in the first sense,
viz., to approach or move towards another person, is found, e.g., in
“And Judah drew near (va-yiggash) unto him” (Gen. xliv. 1).

The second meaning of these three words is “approach by means of
knowledge,” or “contact by comprehension,” not in reference to space.
As to nagaʻ in this second sense, comp. “for her judgment reacheth
(nagaʻ) unto heaven” (Jer. li. 9). An instance of karab being used in
this meaning is contained in the following passage, “And the cause that
is too hard for you, bring (takribun) it unto me” (Deut. i. 17); this
is equivalent to saying, “Ye shall make it known unto me.” The verb
karab (in the Hiphil) is thus employed in the sense of giving
information concerning a thing. The verb nagash is used figuratively in
the phrase, “And Abraham drew near (va-yiggash), and said” (Gen. xviii.
23); this took place in a prophetic vision and in a trance, as will be
explained (Part I. chap, xxi., and Part II. chap, xli.); also in
“Forasmuch as this people draw near (niggash) me with their mouths and
with their lips” (Isa. xxix. 13). Wherever a word denoting approach or
contact is employed in the prophetic writings to describe a certain
relation between the Almighty and any created being, it has to be
understood in this latter sense [viz., to approach mentally]. For, as
will be proved in this treatise (II. chap, iv.), the Supreme is
incorporeal, and consequently He does not approach or draw near a
thing, nor can aught approach or touch Him; for when a being is without
corporeality, it cannot occupy space, and all idea of approach,
contact, distance, conjunction, separation, touch, or proximity is
inapplicable to such a being.

There can be no doubt respecting the verses “The Lord is nigh (karob)
unto all them that call upon him” (Ps. cxlv. 18); “They take delight in
approaching (kirbat) to God” (Isa. lviii. 2); “The nearness (kirbat) of
God is pleasant to me” (Ps. lxxiii. 28); all such phrases intimate a
spiritual approach, i.e., the attainment of some knowledge, not,
however, approach in space. Thus also “who hath God so nigh (kerobim)
unto him” (Deut. iv. 7); “Draw thou near (kerab) and hear” (Deut. v.
27); “And Moses alone shall draw near (ve-niggash) the Lord; but they
shall not come nigh (yiggashu)” (Exod. xxiv. 2).

If, however, you wish to take the words “And Moses shall draw near” to
mean that he shall draw near a certain place in the mountain, whereon
the Divine Light shone, or, in the words of the Bible, “where the glory
of the Lord abode,” you may do so, provided you do not lose sight of
the truth that there is no difference whether a person stand at the
centre of the earth or at the highest point of the ninth sphere, if
this were possible; he is no further away from God in the one case, or
nearer to Him in the other; those only approach Him who obtain a
knowledge of Him; while those who remain ignorant of Him recede from
Him. In this approach towards, or recession from God there are numerous
grades one above the other, and I shall further elucidate, in one of
the subsequent chapters of the Treatise (I. chap, lx., and II. chap,
xxxvi.) what constitutes the difference in our perception of God.

In the passage, “Touch (gaʻ) the mountains, and they shall smoke” (Ps.
cxliv. 5), the verb “touch” is used in a figurative sense, viz., “Let
thy word touch them.” So also the words, “Touch thou him himself” (Job
ii. 5), have the same meaning as “Bring thy infliction upon him.” In a
similar manner must this verb, in whatever form it may be employed, be
interpreted in each place, according to the context; for in some cases
it denotes contact of two material objects, in others knowledge and
comprehension of a thing, as if he who now comprehends anything which
he had not comprehended previously had thereby approached a subject
which had been distant from him. This point is of considerable
importance.






