CHAPTER XXV


The Hebrew shakan, as is well known, signifies “to dwell,” as, “And he
was dwelling (shoken) in the plains of Mamre” (Gen. xiv. 13); “And it
came to pass, when Israel dwelt (bishekon)” (Gen. xxxv. 22). This is
the most common meaning of the word. But “dwelling in a place” consists
in the continued stay in a place, general or special; when a living
being dwells long in a place, we say that it stays in that place,
although it unquestionably moves about in it, comp. “And he was staying
in the plains of Mamre” (Gen. xiv. 13), and, “And it came to pass, when
Israel stayed” (Gen. xxxv. 22).

The term was next applied metaphorically to inanimate objects, i.e., to
everything which has settled and remains fixed on one object, although
the object on which the thing remains is not a place, and the thing
itself is not a living being; for instance, “Let a cloud dwell upon it
[the day]” (Job iii. 5); there is no doubt that the cloud is not a
living being, and that the day is not a corporeal thing, but a division
of time.

In this sense the term is employed in reference to God, that is to say,
to denote the continuance of His Divine Presence (Shechinah) or of His
Providence in some place where the Divine Presence manifested itself
constantly, or in some object which was constantly protected by
Providence. Comp. “And the glory of the Lord abode” (Exod. xxiv. 16);
“And I will dwell among the children of Israel” (Exod. xxix. 45); “And
for the goodwill of him that dwelt in the bush” (Deut. xxxiii. 16).
Whenever the term is applied to the Almighty, it must be taken
consistently with the context in the sense either as referring to the
Presence of His Shechinah (i.e., of His light that was created for the
purpose) in a certain place, or of the continuance of His Providence
protecting a certain object.






CHAPTER XXVI


You, no doubt, know the Talmudical saying, which includes in itself all
the various kinds of interpretation connected with our subject. It runs
thus: “The Torah speaks according to the language of man,” that is to
say, expressions, which can easily be comprehended and understood by
all, are applied to the Creator. Hence the description of God by
attributes implying corporeality, in order to express His existence;
because the multitude of people do not easily conceive existence unless
in connection with a body, and that which is not a body nor connected
with a body has for them no existence. Whatever we regard as a state of
perfection, is likewise attributed to God, as expressing that He is
perfect in every respect, and that no imperfection or deficiency
whatever is found in Him. But there is not attributed to God anything
which the multitude consider a defect or want; thus He is never
represented as eating, drinking, sleeping, being ill, using violence,
and the like. Whatever, on the other hand, is commonly regarded as a
state of perfection is attributed to Him, although it is only a state
of perfection in relation to ourselves; for in relation to God, what we
consider to be a state of perfection, is in truth the highest degree of
imperfection. If, however, men were to think that those human
perfections were absent in God, they would consider Him as imperfect.

You are aware that locomotion is one of the distinguishing
characteristics of living beings, and is indispensable for them in
their progress towards perfection. As they require food and drink to
supply animal waste, so they require locomotion, in order to approach
that which is good for them and in harmony with their nature, and to
escape from what is injurious and contrary to their nature. It makes,
in fact, no difference whether we ascribe to God eating and drinking or
locomotion; but according to human modes of expression, that is to say,
according to common notions, eating and drinking would be an
imperfection in God, while motion would not, in spite of the fact that
the necessity of locomotion is the result of some want. Furthermore, it
has been clearly proved, that everything which moves is corporeal and
divisible; it will be shown below that God is incorporeal and that He
can have no locomotion; nor can rest be ascribed to Him; for rest can
only be applied to that which also moves. All expressions, however,
which imply the various modes of movement in living beings, are
employed with regard to God in the manner we have described and in the
same way as life is ascribed to Him; although motion is an accident
pertaining to living beings, and there is no doubt that, without
corporeality, expressions like the following could not be imagined: “to
descend, to ascend, to walk, to place, to stand, to surround, to sit,
to dwell, to depart, to enter, to pass, etc.”

It would have been superfluous thus to dilate on this subject, were it
not for the mass of the people, who are accustomed to such ideas. It
has been necessary to expatiate on the subject, as we have attempted,
for the benefit of those who are anxious to acquire perfection, to
remove from them such notions as have grown up with them from the days
of youth.






CHAPTER XXVII


Onkelos the Proselyte, who was thoroughly acquainted with the Hebrew
and Chaldaic languages, made it his task to oppose the belief in God’s
corporeality. Accordingly, any expression employed in the Pentateuch in
reference to God, and in any way implying corporeality, he paraphrases
in consonance with the context. All expressions denoting any mode of
motion, are explained by him to mean the appearance or manifestation of
a certain light that had been created [for the occasion], i.e., the
Shekhinah (Divine Presence), or Providence. Thus he paraphrases “the
Lord will come down” (Exod. xix. 11), “The Lord will manifest Himself”;
“And God came down” (xvi. 20), “And God manifested Himself”; and does
not say “And God came down”; “I will go down now and see” (Gen. xviii.
21), he paraphrases, “I will manifest myself now and see.” This is his
rendering [of the verb yarad, “he went down,” when used in reference to
God] throughout his version, with the exception of the following
passage, “I will go down (ered) with thee into Egypt” (Gen. xlvi. 4),
which he renders literally. A remarkable proof of this great man’s
talents, the excellence of his version, and the correctness of his
interpretation! By this version he discloses to us an important
principle as regards prophecy.

This narrative begins: “And God spake unto Israel in the visions of the
night, and said, Jacob, Jacob, etc. And He said, I am God, etc., I will
go down with thee into Egypt” (Gen. xlvi. 2, 3). Seeing that the whole
narrative is introduced as a vision of the night, Onkelos did not
hesitate to translate literally the words addressed to Jacob in the
nocturnal vision, and thus gave a faithful account of the occurrence.
For the passage in question contains a statement of what Jacob was
told, not what actually took place, as is the case in the words, “And
the Lord came down upon Mount Sinai” (Exod. xix. 20). Here we have an
account of what actually occurred in the physical world; the verb yarad
is therefore paraphrased “He manifested Himself,” and entirely detached
from the idea of motion. Accounts of what happened in the imagination
of man, I mean of what he was told, are not altered. A most remarkable
distinction!

Hence you may infer that there is a great difference between a
communication, designated as having been made in a dream, or a vision
of the night, and a vision or a manifestation simply introduced with
phrases like “And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying”; “And the
Lord spake unto me, saying.”

According to my opinion, it is also possible that Onkelos understood
Elohim in the above passage to signify “angel,” and that for this
reason he did not hesitate to translate literally, “I will go down with
thee to Egypt.” Do not think it strange that Onkelos should have
believed the Elohim, who said to Jacob, “I am God, the God of thy
father” (ib. 3), to be an angel, for this sentence can, in the same
form, also have been spoken by an angel. Thus Jacob says, “And the
angel of God spake unto me in a dream, saying, Jacob. And I said, Here
am I,” etc. (Gen. xxxi. 11); and concludes the report of the angel’s
words to him in the following way, “I am the God of Bethel, where thou
anointedst the pillar, and where thou vowedst a vow unto me” (ib. 13),
although there is no doubt that Jacob vowed to God, not to the angel.
It is the usual practice of prophets to relate words addressed to them
by an angel in the name of God, as though God Himself had spoken to
them. Such passages are all to be explained by supplying the nomen
regens, and by considering them as identical with “I am the messenger
of the God of thy father,” “I am the messenger of God who appeared to
thee in Bethel,” and the like. Prophecy with its various degrees, and
the nature of angels, will be fully discussed in the sequel, in
accordance with the object of this treatise (II. chap. xiv.).






