CHAPTER XLI


The Hebrew nefesh (soul) is a homonymous noun, signifying the vitality
which is common to all living, sentient beings. E.g. “wherein there is
a living soul” (nefesh) (Gen. i. 30). It denotes also blood, as in
“Thou shalt not eat the blood (nefesh) with the meat” (Deut. xii. 23).
Another signification of the term is “reason,” that is, the
distinguishing characteristic of man, as in “As the Lord liveth that
made us this soul” (Jer. xxxviii. 16). It denotes also the part of man
that remains after his death (nefesh, soul); comp. “But the soul
(nefesh) of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life” (1 Sam. xxv.
29). Lastly, it denotes “will”; comp. “To bind his princes at his will”
(be-nafsho) (Ps. cv. 22); “Thou wilt not deliver me unto the will
(be-nefesh) of my enemies” (Ps. xli. 3); and according to my opinion,
it has this meaning also in the following passages, “If it be your will
(nafshekem) that I should bury my dead” (Gen. xxiii. 8); “Though Moses
and Samuel stood before me, yet my will (nafshi) could not be toward
this people” (Jer. xv. 1), that is, I had no pleasure in them, I did
not wish to preserve them. When nefesh is used in reference to God, it
has the meaning “will,” as we have already explained with reference to
the passage, “That shall do according to that which is in my will
(bi-lebabi) and in mine intention (be-nafshi)” (1 Sam. ii. 35).
Similarly we explain the phrase, “And his will (nafsho) to trouble
Israel ceased” (Judg. x. 16). Jonathan, the son of Uzziel [in the
Targum of the Prophets], did not translate this passage, because he
understood nafshi to have the first signification, and finding,
therefore, in these words sensation ascribed to God, he omitted them
from his translation. If, however, nefesh be here taken in the last
signification, the sentence can well be explained. For in the passage
which precedes, it is stated that Providence abandoned the Israelites,
and left them on the brink of death; then they cried and prayed for
help, but in vain. When, however, they had thoroughly repented, when
their misery had increased, and their enemy had had power over them, He
showed mercy to them, and His will to continue their trouble and misery
ceased. Note it well, for it is remarkable. The preposition ba in this
passage has the force of the preposition min (“from” or “of”); and
baʻamal is identical with meʻamal. Grammarians give many instances of
this use of the preposition ba: “And that which remaineth of (ba) the
flesh and of (ba) the bread” (Lev. viii. 32); “If there remains but few
of (ba) the years” (ib. xxv. 52); “Of (ba) the strangers and of (ba)
those born in the land” (Exod. xii. 19).






CHAPTER XLII


Ḥai (“living”) signifies a sentient organism (lit. “growing” and
“having sensation”), comp. “Every moving thing that liveth” (Gen. ix.
3); it also denotes recovery from a severe illness: “And was recovered
(va-yeḥi) of his sickness” (Isa. xxxviii. 9); “In the camp till they
recovered” (ḥayotam) (Josh. v. 8); “quick, raw (ḥai) flesh” (Lev. xiii.
10).

Mavet signifies “death” and “severe illness,” as in “His heart died
(va-yamot) within him, and he became as a stone” (1 Sam. xxv. 37), that
is, his illness was severe. For this reason it is stated concerning the
son of the woman of Zarephath, “And his sickness was so sore, that
there was no breath left in him” (1 Kings xvii. 17). The simple
expression va-yamoth would have given the idea that he was very ill,
near death, like Nabal when he heard what had taken place.

Some of the Andalusian authors say that his breath was suspended, so
that no breathing could be perceived at all, as sometimes an invalid is
seized with a fainting fit or an attack of asphyxia, and it cannot be
discovered whether he is alive or dead; in this condition the patient
may remain a day or two.

The term ḥai has also been employed in reference to the acquisition of
wisdom. Comp. “So shall they be life (ḥayyim) unto thy soul” (Prov.
iii. 22); “For whoso findeth me findeth life” (ib. viii. 35); “For they
are life (ḥayyim) to those that find them” (ib. iv. 22). Such instances
are numerous. In accordance with this metaphor, true principles are
called life, and corrupt principles death. Thus the Almighty says,
“See, I have set before thee this day life and good and death and evil”
(Deut. xxx. 15), showing that “life” and “good,” “death” and “evil,”
are identical, and then He explains these terms. In the same way I
understand His words, “That ye may live” (ib. v. 33), in accordance
with the traditional interpretation of “That it may be well with thee”
[scil. in the life to come] (ib. xxii. 7). In consequence of the
frequent use of this figure in our language our Sages said, “The
righteous even in death are called living, while the wicked even in
life are called dead.” (Talm. B. Berakhoth, p. 78). Note this well.






CHAPTER XLIII


The Hebrew kanaf is a homonym; most of its meanings are metaphorical.
Its primary signification is “wing of a flying creature,” e.g., “Any
winged (kanaf) fowl that flieth in the air” (Deut. iv. 17).

The term was next applied figuratively to the wings or corners of
garments; comp. “upon the four corners (kanfoth) of thy vesture” (ib.
xxii. 12).

It was also used to denote the ends of the inhabited part of the earth,
and the corners that are most distant from our habitation. Comp. “That
it might take hold of the ends (kanfoth) of the earth” (Job xxxviii.
13); “From the uttermost part (kenaf) of the earth have we heard songs”
(Isa. xxiv. 16).

Ibn Ganaḥ (in his Book of Hebrew Roots) says that kenaf is used in the
sense of “concealing,” in analogy with the Arabic kanaftu alshaian, “I
have hidden something,” and accordingly explains, Isaiah xxx. 20, “And
thy teacher will no longer be hidden or concealed.” It is a good
explanation, and I think that kenaf has the same meaning in Deuteronomy
xxiii. 1, “He shall not take away the cover (kenaf) of his father”;
also in, “Spread, therefore, thy cover (kenafeka) over thine handmaid”
(Ruth iii. 9). In this sense, I think, the word is figuratively applied
to God and to angels (for angels are not corporeal, according to my
opinion, as I shall explain). Ruth ii. 12 must therefore be translated
“Under whose protection (kenafav) thou art come to trust”; and wherever
the word occurs in reference to angels, it means concealment. You have
surely noticed the words of Isaiah (Isa. vi. 2), “With twain he covered
his face, and with twain he covered his feet.” Their meaning is this:
The cause of his (the angel’s) existence is hidden and concealed; this
is meant by the covering of the face. The things of which he (the
angel) is the cause, and which are called “his feet” (as I stated in
speaking of the homonym regel), are likewise concealed; for the actions
of the intelligences are not seen, and their ways are, except after
long study, not understood, on account of two reasons—the one of which
is contained in their own properties, the other in ourselves; that is
to say, because our perception is imperfect and the ideals are
difficult to be fully comprehended. As regards the phrase “and with
twain he flieth,” I shall explain in a special chapter (xlix.) why
flight has been attributed to angels.






