CHAPTER XXXIX


We have given the definition of prophecy, stated its true
characteristics, and shown that the prophecy of Moses our Teacher was
distinguished from that of other prophets; we will now explain that
this distinction alone qualified him for the office of proclaiming the
Law, a mission without a parallel in the history from Adam to Moses, or
among the prophets who came after him; it is a principle in our faith
that there will never be revealed another Law. Consequently we hold
that there has never been, nor will there ever be, any other divine Law
but that of Moses our Teacher. According to what is written in
Scripture and handed down by tradition, the fact may be explained in
the following way: There were prophets before Moses, as the patriarchs
Shem, Eber, Noah, Methushelah, and Enoch, but of these none said to any
portion of mankind that God sent him to them and commanded him to
convey to them a certain message or to prohibit or to command a certain
thing. Such a thing is not related in Scripture, or in authentic
tradition. Divine prophecy reached them as we have explained. Men like
Abraham, who received a large measure of prophetic inspiration, called
their fellow-men together and led them by training and instruction to
the truth which they had perceived. Thus Abraham taught, and showed by
philosophical arguments that there is one God, that He has created
everything that exists beside Him, and that neither the constellations
nor anything in the air ought to be worshipped; he trained his
fellow-men in this belief, and won their attention by pleasant words as
well as by acts of kindness. Abraham did not tell the people that God
had sent him to them with the command concerning certain things which
should or should not be done. Even when it was commanded that he, his
sons, and his servants should be circumcised, he fulfilled that
commandment, but he did not address his fellow-men prophetically on
this subject. That Abraham induced his fellow-men to do what is right,
telling them only his own will [and not that of God], may be learnt
from the following passage of Scripture: “For I know him, because he
commands his sons and his house after him, to practise righteousness
and judgment” (Gen. xix. 19). Also Isaac, Jacob, Levi, Kohath, and
Amram influenced their fellow-men in the same way. Our Sages, when
speaking of prophets before Moses, used expressions like the following:
The bet-din (court of justice) of Eber, the bet-din of Methushelah, and
in the college of Methushelah; although all these were prophets, yet
they taught their fellow-men in the manner of preachers, teachers, and
pedagogues, but did not use such phrases as the following: “And God
said to me, Speak to certain people so and so.” This was the state of
prophecy before Moses. But as regards Moses, you know what [God] said
to him, what he said [to the people], and the words addressed to him by
the whole nation: “This day we have seen that God doth talk with man,
and that he liveth” (Deut. v. 21). The history of all our prophets that
lived after Moses is well known to you; they performed, as it were, the
function of warning the people and exhorting them to keep the Law of
Moses, threatening evil to those who would neglect it, and announcing
blessings to those who would submit to its guidance. This we believe
will always be the case. Comp. “It is not in the heavens that one might
say,” etc. (ibid. xxx. 12); “For us and for our children for ever”
(ibid. xxix. 28). It is but natural that it should be so. For if one
individual of a class has reached the highest perfection possible in
that class, every other individual must necessarily be less perfect,
and deviate from the perfect measure either by surplus or deficiency.
Take, e.g., the normal constitution of a being, it is the most proper
composition possible in that class; any constitution that deviates from
that norm contains something too much or too little. The same is the
case with the Law. It is clear that the Law is normal in this sense;
for it contains “Just statutes and judgments” (Deut. iv. 8); but “just”
is here identical with “equibalanced.” The statutes of the Law do not
impose burdens or excesses as are implied in the service of a hermit or
pilgrim, and the like; but, on the other hand, they are not so
deficient as to lead to gluttony or lewdness, or to prevent, as the
religious laws of the heathen nations do, the development of man’s
moral and intellectual faculties. We intend to discuss in this treatise
the reasons of the commandments, and we shall then show, as far as
necessary, the justice and wisdom of the Law, on account of which it is
said: “The Law of God is perfect, refreshing the heart” (Ps. xix. 8).
There are persons who believe that the Law commands much exertion and
great pain, but due consideration will show them their error. Later on
I will show how easy it is for the perfect to obey the Law. Comp. “What
does the Lord thy God ask of thee?” etc. (Deut. x. 12); “Have I been a
wilderness to Israel?” (Jer. ii. 31). But this applies only to the
noble ones; whilst wicked, violent, and pugnacious persons find it most
injurious and hard that there should be any divine authority tending to
subdue their passion. To low-minded, wanton, and passionate persons it
appears most cruel that there should be an obstacle in their way to
satisfy their carnal appetite, or that a punishment should be inflicted
for their doings. Similarly every godless person imagines that it is
too hard to abstain from the evil he has chosen in accordance with his
inclination. We must not consider the Law easy or hard according as it
appears to any wicked, low-minded, and immoral person, but as it
appears to the judgment of the most perfect, who, according to the Law,
are fit to be the example for all mankind. This Law alone is called
divine; other laws, such as the political legislations among the
Greeks, or the follies of the Sabeans, are the works of human leaders,
but not of prophets, as I have explained several times.






CHAPTER XL


It has already been fully explained that man is naturally a social
being, that by virtue of his nature he seeks to form communities; man
is therefore different from other living beings that are not compelled
to combine into communities. He is, as you know, the highest form in
the creation, and he therefore includes the largest number of
constituent elements; this is the reason why the human race contains
such a great variety of individuals, that we cannot discover two
persons exactly alike in any moral quality, or in external appearance.
The cause of this is the variety in man’s temperament, and in accidents
dependent on his form; for with every physical form there are connected
certain special accidents different from those which are connected with
the substance. Such a variety among the individuals of a class does not
exist in any other class of living beings; for the variety in any other
species is limited; only man forms an exception; two persons may be so
different from each other in every respect that they appear to belong
to two different classes. Whilst one person is so cruel that he kills
his youngest child in his anger, another is too delicate and
faint-hearted to kill even a fly or worm. The same is the case with
most of the accidents. This great variety and the necessity of social
life are essential elements in man’s nature. But the well-being of
society demands that there should be a leader able to regulate the
actions of man; he must complete every shortcoming, remove every
excess, and prescribe for the conduct of all, so that the natural
variety should be counterbalanced by the uniformity of legislation, and
the order of society be well established. I therefore maintain that the
Law, though not a product of Nature, is nevertheless not entirely
foreign to Nature. It being the will of God that our race should exist
and be permanently established, He in His wisdom gave it such
properties that men can acquire the capacity of ruling others. Some
persons are therefore inspired with theories of legislation, such as
prophets and lawgivers; others possess the power of enforcing the
dictates of the former, and of compelling people to obey them, and to
act accordingly. Such are kings, who accept the code of lawgivers, and
[rulers] who pretend to be prophets, and accept, either entirely or
partly, the teaching of the prophets. They accept one part while
rejecting another part, either because this course appears to them more
convenient, or out of ambition, because it might lead people to believe
that the rulers themselves had been prophetically inspired with these
laws, and did not copy them from others. For when we like a certain
perfection, find pleasure in it, and wish to possess it, we sometimes
desire to make others believe that we possess that virtue, although we
are fully aware that we do not possess it. Thus people, e.g., adorn
themselves with the poems of others, and publish them as their own
productions. It also occurs in the works of wise men on the various
branches of Science, that an ambitious, lazy person sees an opinion
expressed by another person, appropriates it, and boasts that he
himself originated it. The same [ambition] occurs also with regard to
the faculty of prophecy. There were men who, like Zedekiah, the son of
Chenaanah (1 Kings xxii. 11, 24) boasted that they received a prophecy,
and declared things which have never been prophesied. Others, like
Hananiah, son of Azzur (Jer. xxviii. 1–5), claim the capacity of
prophecy, and proclaim things which, no doubt, have been said by God,
that is to say, that have been the subject of a divine inspiration, but
not to them. They nevertheless say that they are prophets, and adorn
themselves with the prophecies of others. All this can easily be
ascertained and recognized. I will, however, fully explain this to you,
so that no doubt be left to you on this question, and that you may have
a test by which you may distinguish between the guidance of human
legislation, of the divine law, and of teachings stolen from prophets.
As regards those who declare that the laws proclaimed by them are their
own ideas, no further test is required; the confession of the defendant
makes the evidence of the witness superfluous. I only wish to instruct
you about laws which are proclaimed as prophetic. Some of these are
truly prophetic, originating in divine inspiration, some are of
non-prophetic character, and some, though prophetic originally, are the
result of plagiarism. You will find that the sole object of certain
laws, in accordance with the intention of their author, who well
considered their effect, is to establish the good order of the state
and its affairs, to free it from all mischief and wrong; these laws do
not deal with philosophic problems, contain no teaching for the
perfecting of our logical faculties, and are not concerned about the
existence of sound or unsound opinions. Their sole object is to
arrange, under all circumstances, the relations of men to each other,
and to secure their well-being, in accordance with the view of the
author of these laws. These laws are political, and their author
belongs, as has been stated above, to the third class, viz., to those
who only distinguish themselves by the perfection of their imaginative
faculties. You will also find laws which, in all their rules, aim, as
the law just mentioned, at the improvement of the material interests of
the people; but, besides, tend to improve the state of the faith of
man, to create first correct notions of God, and of angels, and to lead
then the people, by instruction and education, to an accurate knowledge
of the Universe: this education comes from God; these laws are divine.
The question which now remains to be settled is this: Is the person who
proclaimed these laws the same perfect man that received them by
prophetic inspiration, or a plagiarist, who has stolen these ideas from
a true prophet? In order to be enabled to answer this question, we must
examine the merits of the person, obtain an accurate account of his
actions, and consider his character. The best test is the rejection,
abstention, and contempt of bodily pleasures; for this is the first
condition of men, and a fortiori of prophets; they must especially
disregard pleasures of the sense of touch, which, according to
Aristotle, is a disgrace to us; and, above all, restrain from the
pollution of sensual intercourse. Thus God exposes thereby false
prophets to public shame, in order that those who really seek the truth
may find it, and not err or go astray; e.g., Zedekiah, son of Maasiah,
and Ahab, son of Kolaiah, boasted that they had received a prophecy.
They persuaded the people to follow them, by proclaiming utterances of
other prophets; but all the time they continued to seek the low
pleasures of sensual intercourse, committing even adultery with the
wives of their companions and followers. God exposed their falsehood as
He has exposed that of other false prophets. The king of Babylon burnt
them, as Jeremiah distinctly states: “And of them shall be taken up a
curse by all the captivity of Judah, which are in Babylon, saying, The
Lord make thee like Zedekiah, and like Ahab, whom the king of Babylon
roasted in the fire. Because they have committed villainy in Israel,
and have committed adultery with their neighbours’ wives, and have
spoken lying words in my name, which I have not commanded them” (Jer.
xxix. 22, 23). Note what is meant by these words.






