CHAPTER XLII


We have already shown that the appearance or speech of an angel
mentioned in Scripture took place in a vision or dream; it makes no
difference whether this is expressly stated or not, as we have
explained above. This is a point of considerable importance. In some
cases the account begins by stating that the prophet saw an angel; in
others, the account apparently introduces a human being, who ultimately
is shown to be an angel; but it makes no difference, for if the fact
that an angel has been heard is only mentioned at the end, you may rest
satisfied that the whole account from the beginning describes a
prophetic vision. In such visions, a prophet either sees God who speaks
to him, as will be explained by us, or he sees an angel who speaks to
him, or he hears some one speaking to him without seeing the speaker,
or he sees a man who speaks to him, and learns afterwards that the
speaker was an angel. In this latter kind of prophecies, the prophet
relates that he saw a man who was doing or saying something, and that
he learnt afterwards that it was an angel.

This important principle was adopted by one of our Sages, one of the
most distinguished among them, R. Ḥiya the Great (Bereshit Rabba,
xlviii.), in the exposition of the Scriptural passage commencing, “And
the Lord appeared unto him in the plain of Mamre” (Gen. xviii.). The
general statement that the Lord appeared to Abraham is followed by the
description in what manner that appearance of the Lord took place;
namely, Abraham saw first three men; he ran and spoke to them. R. Ḥiya,
the author of the explanation, holds that the words of Abraham, “My
Lord, if now I have found grace in thy sight, do not, I pray thee, pass
from thy servant,” were spoken by him in a prophetic vision to one of
the men; for he says that Abraham addressed these words to the chief of
these men. Note this well, for it is one of the great mysteries [of the
Law]. The same, I hold, is the case when it is said in reference to
Jacob, “And a man wrestled with him” (Gen. xxxii. 25); this took place
in a prophetic vision, since it is expressly stated in the end (ver.
31) that it was an angel. The circumstances are here exactly the same
as those in the vision of Abraham, where the general statement, “And
the Lord appeared to him,” etc., is followed by a detailed description.
Similarly the account of the vision of Jacob begins, “And the angels of
God met him” (Gen. xxxii. 2); then follows a detailed description how
it came to pass that they met him; namely, Jacob sent messengers, and
after having prepared and done certain things, “he was left alone,”
etc., “and a man wrestled with him” (ibid. ver. 24). By this term “man”
[one of] the angels of God is meant, mentioned in the phrase, “And
angels of God met him”; the wrestling and speaking was entirely a
prophetic vision. That which happened to Balaam on the way, and the
speaking of the ass, took place in a prophetic vision, since further
on, in the same account, an angel of God is introduced as speaking to
Balaam. I also think that what Joshua perceived, when “he lifted up his
eyes and saw, and behold a man stood before him” (Josh. v. 13) was a
prophetic vision, since it is stated afterwards (ver. 14) that it was
“the prince of the host of the Lord.” But in the passages, “And an
angel of the Lord came up from Gilgal” (Judges ii. 1); “And it came to
pass that the angel of the Lord spake these words to all Israel” (ibid.
ver. 2); the “angel” is, according to the explanation of our Sages,
Phineas. They say, The angel is Phineas, for, when the Divine Glory
rested upon him, he was “like an angel.” We have already shown (chap.
vi.) that the term “angel” is homonymous, and denotes also “prophet,”
as is the case in the following passages:—“And He sent an angel, and He
hath brought us up out of Egypt” (Num. xx. 16); “Then spake Haggai, the
angel of the Lord, in the Lord’s message” (Hagg. i. 13); “But they
mocked the angels of God” (2 Chron. xxxvi. 16).—Comp. also the words of
Daniel, “And the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the
beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time of
the evening oblation” (Dan. ix. 11). All this passed in a prophetic
vision. Do not imagine that an angel is seen or his word heard
otherwise than in a prophetic vision or prophetic dream, according to
the principle laid down:—“I make myself known unto him in a vision, and
speak unto him in a dream” (Num. xii. 6). The instances quoted may
serve as an illustration of those passages which I do not mention. From
the rule laid down by us that prophecy requires preparation, and from
our interpretation of the homonym “angel,” you will infer that Hagar,
the Egyptian woman, was not a prophetess; also Manoah and his wife were
no prophets; for the speech they heard, or imagined they heard, was
like the bat-kol (prophetic echo), which is so frequently mentioned by
our Sages, and is something that may be experienced by men not prepared
for prophecy. The homonymity of the word “angel” misleads in this
matter. This is the principal method by which most of the difficult
passages in the Bible can be explained. Consider the words, “And an
angel of the Lord found her by the well of water” (Gen. xvi. 7), which
are similar to the words referring to Joseph—“And a man found him, and
behold, he was erring in the field” (ibid. xxxvii. 15). All the
Midrashim assume that by man in this passage an angel is meant.






CHAPTER XLIII


We have already shown in our work that the prophets sometimes prophesy
in allegories; they use a term allegorically, and in the same prophecy
the meaning of the allegory is given. In our dreams, we sometimes
believe that we are awake, and relate a dream to another person, who
explains the meaning, and all this goes on while we dream. Our Sages
call this “a dream interpreted in a dream.” In other cases we learn the
meaning of the dream after waking from sleep. The same is the case with
prophetic allegories. Some are interpreted in the prophetic vision.
Thus it is related in Zechariah, after the description of the
allegorical vision—“And the angel that talked with me came again and
waked me as a man that is awakened from his sleep. And he said unto me,
‘What dost thou see?’” etc. (Zech. iv. 1–2), and then the allegory is
explained (ver. 6, sqq.).

Another instance we find in Daniel. It is first stated there: “Daniel
had a dream and visions of his head upon his bed” (Dan. vii. 1). The
whole allegory is then given, and Daniel is described as sighing that
he did not know its interpretation. He asks the angel for an
explanation, and he received it in a prophetic vision. He relates as
follows: “I came near unto one of those that stood by, and asked him
the truth of all this. So he told me, and made me know the
interpretation of the things” (ibid. ver. 16). The whole scene is
called ḥazon (vision), although it was stated that Daniel had a dream,
because an angel explained the dream to him in the same manner as is
mentioned in reference to a prophetic dream. I refer to the verse: “A
vision appeared to me Daniel, after that which appeared to me at the
first” (ibid. viii. 1). This is clear, for ḥazon (vision) is derived
from ḥaza, “to see,” and mareh, “vision,” from raah, “to see”; and ḥaza
and raah are synonymous. There is therefore no difference whether we
use mareh, or maḥazeh, or ḥazon, there is no other mode of revelation
but the two mentioned in Scripture: “In a vision I make myself known to
him, in a dream I will speak unto him” (Num. xii. 6). There are,
however, different degrees [of prophetic proficiency], as will be shown
(chap. xlv.).

There are other prophetic allegories whose meaning is not given in a
prophetic vision. The prophet learns it when he awakes from his sleep.
Take, e.g., the staves which Zechariah took in a prophetic vision.

You must further know that the prophets see things shown to them
allegorically, such as the candlesticks, horses, and mountains of
Zechariah (Zech. iv. 2; vi. 1–7), the scroll of Ezekiel (Ezek. ii. 9),
the wall made by a plumb-line (Amos vii. 7), which Amos saw, the
animals of Daniel (Dan. vii. and viii.), the seething pot of Jeremiah
(Jer. i. 13), and similar allegorical objects shown to represent
certain ideas. The prophets, however, are also shown things which do
not illustrate the object of the vision, but indicate it by their name
through its etymology or homonymity. Thus the imaginative faculty forms
the image of a thing, the name of which has two meanings, one of which
denotes something different [from the image]. This is likewise a kind
of allegory. Comp. Makkal shaked, “almond staff,” of Jeremiah (i.
11–12). It was intended to indicate by the second meaning of shaked the
prophecy, “For I will watch” (shoked), etc., which has no relation
whatever to the staff or to almonds. The same is the case with the
kelub ḳayiẓ, “a basket of summer fruit,” seen by Amos, by which the
completion of a certain period was indicated, “the end (ha-ḳeẓ) having
come” (Amos viii. 2). Still more strange is the following manner of
calling the prophet’s attention to a certain object. He is shown a
different object, the name of which has neither etymologically nor
homonymously any relation to the first object, but the names of both
contain the same letters, though in a different order. Take, e.g., the
allegories of Zechariah (chap. xi. 7, sqq.). He takes in a prophetic
vision staves to lead the flock; he calls the one Noʻam (pleasure), the
other ḥobelim. He indicates thereby that the nation was at first in
favour with God, who was their leader and guide. They rejoiced in the
service of God, and found happiness in it, while God was pleased with
them, and loved them, as it is said, “Thou hast avouched the Lord thy
God,” etc., and “the Lord hath avouched thee,” etc. (Deut. xxvi. 17,
18). They were guided and directed by Moses and the prophets that
followed him. But later a change took place. They rejected the love of
God, and God rejected them, appointing destroyers like Jeroboam and
Manasse as their rulers. Accordingly, the word ḥobelim has the same
meaning [viz., destroying] as the root ḥabal has in Meḥabbelim keramim,
“destroying vineyards” (Song of Sol. ii. 15). But the prophet found
also in this name Ḥobelim the indication that the people despised God,
and that God despised them. This is, however, not expressed by the word
ḥabal, but by a transposition of the letters Ḥet, Bet, and Lamed, the
meaning of despising and rejecting is obtained. Comp. “My soul loathed
them, and their soul also abhorred me” [baḥalah] (Zech. xi. 8). The
prophet had therefore to change the order of the letters in ḥabal into
that of Baḥal. In this way we find very strange things and also
mysteries (Sodot) in the words neḥoshet, Kalal, regel, ʻegel, and
ḥashmal of the Mercabah, and in other terms in other passages. After
the above explanation you will see the mysteries in the meaning of
these expressions if you examine them thoroughly.






