CHAPTER III


When Ezekiel recalled to memory the form of the Chariot, which he
described in the beginning of the book, the same vision presented
itself to him a second time; in this vision he was borne to Jerusalem.
He explains in describing it things which have not been made clear at
first, e.g., he substitutes the term “cherubim” for Ḥayyot, whereby he
expresses that the Ḥayyot of the first vision are likewise angels like
the cherubim. He says, therefore: “Where the cherubims went, the
Ofannim went by them: and when the cherubims lifted up their wings to
mount up from the earth, the same Ofannim also turned not from beside
them” (x. 16). By these words he shows how closely connected the two
motions are [viz., that of the Ḥayyot and that of the Ofannim]. The
prophet adds, “This is the Ḥayyah that I saw under the God of Israel by
the river of Chebar; and I knew that they were cherubims” (ver. 20). He
thus describes the same forms and the same motions, and states that the
Ḥayyot and the cherubim are identical. A second point is then made
clear in this second description, namely, that the Ofannim are
spherical; for the prophet says, “As for the Ofannim, it was cried unto
them in my hearing, O sphere” (ver. 13). A third point concerning the
Ofannim is illustrated here in the following words: “To the place
whither the head looked they followed it: they turned not as they went”
(ver. 11). The motion of the Ofannim is thus described as involuntary,
and directed “to the place whither the head looketh”; and of this it is
stated that it moves “whither the spirit is to go” (i. 20). A fourth
point is added concerning the Ofannim, namely, “And the Ofannim were
full of eyes round about, even the Ofannim that they four had” (x. 12).
This has not been mentioned before. In this second description there
are further mentioned “their flesh, and their backs, and their hands,
and their wings” (ibid.), whilst in the first account none of these is
mentioned; and it is only stated that they are bodies. Though they are
endowed in the second account with flesh, hands, and wings, no form is
given to them. In the second account each ofan is attributed to a
cherub, “one ofan by one cherub, and another ofan by another cherub.”
The four Ḥayyot are then described as one Ḥayyah on account of their
interjoining: “This is the Ḥayyah that I saw under the God of Israel by
the river of Chebar” (ver. 20). Also the Ofannim, though being four in
number, as has been mentioned, are called “one ofan upon the earth”
(ver. 15), because they interjoin, and “they four have one likeness”
(ver. 16). This is the additional explanation which the second vision
gives of the form of the Ḥayyot and the Ofannim.






CHAPTER IV


It is necessary to call your attention to an idea expressed by
Jonathan, the son of Uzziel. When he saw that the prophet says in
reference to the Ofannim, “It was cried unto them in my hearing, O
gilgal” (“sphere”) (x. 13), he assumed that by Ofannim the heavens are
meant, and rendered ofan by gilgal, “sphere,” and ofannim by gilgelaya,
“spheres.” I have no doubt that he found a confirmation of his opinion
in the words of the prophet that the Ofannim were like unto the colour
of tarshish (ver. 16), a colour ascribed to the heavens, as is well
known. When he, therefore, noticed the passage, “Now as I beheld the
Ḥayyot, behold one Ofan upon the earth” (i. 15), which clearly shows
that the Ofannim were upon the earth, he had a difficulty in explaining
it in accordance with his opinion. Following, however, his
interpretation, he explains the terms ereẓ, employed here as denoting
the inner surface of the heavenly sphere, which may be considered as
ereẓ (“earth” or “below”), in relation to all that is above that
surface. He therefore translates the words ofan eḥad ba-areẓ as
follows: “One ofan was below the height of the heavens.” Consider what
his explanation of the passage must be. I think that he gave this
explanation because he thought that gilgal denotes in its original
meaning “heaven.” My opinion is that gilgal means originally “anything
rolling”; comp. “And I will roll thee (ve-gilgaltika) down from the
rocks” (Jer. li. 25); “and rolled (va-yagel) the stone” (Gen. xxix.
10); the same meaning the word has in the phrase: “Like a rolling thing
(gilgal) before the whirlwind” (Isa. xvii. 13). The poll of the head,
being round, is therefore called gulgolet; and because everything round
rolls easily, every spherical thing is called gilgal; also the heavens
are called gilgallim on account of their spherical form. Thus our Sages
use the phrase, “It is a wheel (gilgal) that moves round the world”;
and a wooden ball, whether small or large, is called gilgal. If so, the
prophet merely intended by the words, “As for the Ofannim, it is cried
to them in my hearing, O sphere” (gilgal), to indicate the shape of the
Ofannim, as nothing has been mentioned before respecting their form and
shape; but he did not mean to say that the Ofannim are the same as the
heavens. The term “like tarshish” is explained in the second account,
in which it is said of the Ofannim: “And the appearance of the ofannim
was like the colour of tarshish.” This latter passage is translated by
Jonathan, the son of Uzziel, “like the colour of a precious stone,”
exactly in the same manner as Onkelos translates the phrase ke-maʻase
libnat ha-sappir, “like the work of the whiteness of sapphire” (Exod.
xxix. 10). Note this. You will not find it strange that I mention the
explanation of Jonathan, son of Uzziel, whilst I gave a different
explanation myself; for you will find many of the wise men and the
commentators differ sometimes from him in the interpretation of words
and in many things respecting the prophets. Why should it be otherwise
in these profound matters? Besides, I do not decide in favour of my
interpretation. It is for you to learn both—the whole of his
explanation, from what I have pointed out to you, and also my own
opinion. God knoweth which of the two explanations is in accordance
with that which the prophet intended to say.






