CHAPTER XXXVII


It is necessary to consider the nature of the divine influence, which
enables us to think, and gives us the various degrees of intelligence.
For this influence may reach a person only in a small measure, and in
exactly the same proportion would then be his intellectual condition,
whilst it may reach another person in such a measure that, in addition
to his own perfection, he can be the means of perfection for others.
The same relation may be observed throughout the whole Universe. There
are some beings so perfect that they can govern other beings, but there
are also beings that are only perfect in so far as they can govern
themselves and cannot influence other beings. In some cases the
influence of the [Active] Intellect reaches only the logical and not
the imaginative faculty; either on account of the insufficiency of that
influence, or on account of a defect in the constitution of the
imaginative faculty, and the consequent inability of the latter to
receive that influence: this is the condition of wise men or
philosophers. If, however, the imaginative faculty is naturally in the
most perfect condition, this influence may, as has been explained by us
and by other philosophers, reach both his logical and his imaginative
faculties: this is the case with prophets. But it happens sometimes
that the influence only reaches the imaginative faculty on account of
the insufficiency of the logical faculty, arising either from a natural
defect, or from a neglect in training. This is the case with statesmen,
lawgivers, diviners, charmers, and men that have true dreams, or do
wonderful things by strange means and secret arts, though they are not
wise men; all these belong to the third class. It is further necessary
to understand that some persons belonging to the third class perceive
scenes, dreams, and confused images, when awake, in the form of a
prophetic vision. They then believe that they are prophets; they wonder
that they perceive visions, and think that they have acquired wisdom
without training. They fall into grave errors as regards important
philosophical principles, and see a strange mixture of true and
imaginary things. All this is the consequence of the strength of their
imaginative faculty, and the weakness of their logical faculty, which
has not developed, and has not passed from potentiality to actuality.

It is well known that the members of each class differ greatly from
each other. Each of the first two classes is again subdivided, and
contains two sections, namely, those who receive the influence only as
far as is necessary for their own perfection, and those who receive it
in so great a measure that it suffices for their own perfection and
that of others. A member of the first class, the wise men, may have his
mind influenced either only so far, that he is enabled to search, to
understand, to know, and to discern, without attempting to be a teacher
or an author, having neither the desire nor the capacity; but he may
also be influenced to such a degree that he becomes a teacher and an
author. The same is the case with the second class. A person may
receive a prophecy enabling him to perfect himself but not others; but
he may also receive such a prophecy as would compel him to address his
fellow-men, teach them, and benefit them through his perfection. It is
clear that, without this second degree of perfection, no books would
have been written, nor would any prophets have persuaded others to know
the truth. For a scholar does not write a book with the object to teach
himself what he already knows. But the characteristic of the intellect
is this: what the intellect of one receives is transmitted to another,
and so on, till a person is reached that can only himself be perfected
by such an influence, but is unable to communicate it to others, as has
been explained in some chapters of this treatise (chap. xi.). It is
further the nature of this element in man that he who possesses an
additional degree of that influence is compelled to address his
fellow-men, under all circumstances, whether he is listened to or not,
even if he injures himself thereby. Thus we find prophets that did not
leave off speaking to the people until they were slain; it is this
divine influence that moves them, that does not allow them to rest in
any way, though they might bring upon themselves great evils by their
action. E.g., when Jeremiah was despised, like other teachers and
scholars of his age, he could not, though he desired it, withhold his
prophecy, or cease from reminding the people of the truths which they
rejected. Comp. “For the Word of the Lord was unto me a reproach and a
mocking all day, and I said, I will not mention it, nor will I again
speak in His name; but it was in mine heart as a burning fire, enclosed
in my bones, and I was wearied to keep it, and did not prevail” (Jer.
xx. 8, 9). This is also the meaning of the words of another prophet,
“The Lord God hath spoken, who shall not prophesy?” (Amos iii. 8) Note
it.






CHAPTER XXXVIII


Every man possesses a certain amount of courage, otherwise he would not
stir to remove anything that might injure him. This psychical force
seems to me analogous to the physical force of repulsion. Energy varies
like all other forces, being great in one case and small in another.
There are, therefore, people who attack a lion, whilst others run away
at the sight of a mouse. One attacks a whole army and fights, another
is frightened and terrified by the threat of a woman. This courage
requires that there be in a man’s constitution a certain disposition
for it. If man, in accordance with a certain view, employs it more
frequently, it develops and increases, but, on the other hand, if it is
employed, in accordance with the opposite view, more rarely, it will
diminish. From our own youth we remember that there are different
degrees of energy among boys.

The same is the case with the intuitive faculty; all possess it, but in
different degrees. Man’s intuitive power is especially strong in things
which he has well comprehended, and in which his mind is much engaged.
Thus you may yourself guess correctly that a certain person said or did
a certain thing in a certain matter. Some persons are so strong and
sound in their imagination and intuitive faculty that, when they assume
a thing to be in existence, the reality either entirely or partly
confirms their assumption. Although the causes of this assumption are
numerous, and include many preceding, succeeding, and present
circumstances, by means of the intuitive faculty the intellect can pass
over all these causes, and draw inferences from them very quickly,
almost instantaneously. This same faculty enables some persons to
foretell important coming events. The prophets must have had these two
forces, courage and intuition, highly developed, and these were still
more strengthened when they were under the influence of the Active
Intellect. Their courage was so great that, e.g., Moses, with only a
staff in his hand, dared to address a great king in his desire to
deliver a nation from his service. He was not frightened or terrified,
because he had been told, “I will be with thee” (Exod. iii. 12). The
prophets have not all the same degree of courage, but none of them have
been entirely without it. Thus Jeremiah is told: “Be not afraid of
them,” etc. (Jer. i. 8), and Ezekiel is exhorted, “Do not fear them or
their word” (Ezek. ii. 6). In the same manner, you find that all
prophets possessed great courage. Again, through the excellence of
their intuitive faculty, they could quickly foretell the future, but
this excellence, as is well known, likewise admits of different
degrees.

The true prophets undoubtedly conceive ideas that result from premisses
which human reason could not comprehend by itself; thus they tell
things which men could not tell by reason and ordinary imagination
alone; for [the action of the prophets’ mental capacities is influenced
by] the same agent that causes the perfection of the imaginative
faculty, and that enables the prophet thereby to foretell a future
event with such clearness as if it was a thing already perceived with
the senses, and only through them conveyed to his imagination. This
agent perfects the prophet’s mind, and influences it in such a manner
that he conceives ideas which are confirmed by reality, and are so
clear to him as if he deduced them by means of syllogisms.

This should be the belief of all who choose to accept the truth. For
[all things are in a certain relation to each other, and] what is
noticed in one thing may be used as evidence for the existence of
certain properties in another, and the knowledge of one thing leads us
to the knowledge of other things. But [what we said of the
extraordinary powers of our imaginative faculty] applies with special
force to our intellect, which is directly influenced by the Active
Intellect, and caused by it to pass from potentiality to actuality. It
is through the intellect that the influence reaches the imaginative
faculty. How then could the latter be so perfect as to be able to
represent things not previously perceived by the senses, if the same
degree of perfection were withheld from the intellect, and the latter
could not comprehend things otherwise than in the usual manner, namely,
by means of premiss, conclusion, and inference? This is the true
characteristic of prophecy, and of the disciplines to which the
preparation for prophecy must exclusively be devoted. I spoke here of
true prophets in order to exclude the third class, namely, those
persons whose logical faculties are not fully developed, and who do not
possess any wisdom, but are only endowed with imaginative and inventive
powers. It may be that things perceived by these persons are nothing
but ideas which they had before, and of which impressions were left in
their imaginations together with those of other things; but whilst the
impressions of other images are effaced and have disappeared, certain
images alone remain, are seen and considered as new and objective,
coming from without. The process is analogous to the following case: A
person has with him in the house a thousand living individuals; all
except one of them leave the house: when the person finds himself alone
with that individual, he imagines that the latter has entered the house
now, contrary to the fact that he has only not left the house. This is
one of the many phenomena open to gross misinterpretations and
dangerous errors, and many of those who believed that they were wise
perished thereby.

There were, therefore, men who supported their opinion by a dream which
they had, thinking that the vision during sleep was independent of what
they had previously believed or heard when awake. Persons whose mental
capacities are not fully developed, and who have not attained
intellectual perfection, must not take any notice of these [dreams].
Those who reach that perfection may, through the influence of the
divine intellect, obtain knowledge independent of that possessed by
them when awake. They are true prophets, as is distinctly stated in
Scripture, ve-nabi lebab ḥokmah (Ps. xc. 12), “And the true prophet
possesseth a heart of wisdom.” This must likewise be noticed.






