CHAPTER VI


The two Hebrew nouns ish and ishshah were originally employed to
designate the “male and female” of human beings, but were afterwards
applied to the “male and female” of the other species of the animal
creation. For instance, we read, “Of every clean beast thou shalt take
to thee by sevens,” ish ve-ishto (Gen. vii. 2), in the same sense as
ish ve-ishshah, “male and female.” The term zakar u-nekebah was
afterwards applied to anything designed and prepared for union with
another object. Thus we read, “The five curtains shall be coupled
together, one (ishshah) to the other” (aḥotah) (Exod. xxvi. 3).

It will easily be seen that the Hebrew equivalents for “brother and
sister” are likewise treated as homonyms, and used, in a figurative
sense, like ish and ishshah.






CHAPTER VII


It is well known that the verb yalad means “to bear,” “they have born
(ve-yaledu) him children” (Deut. xxi. 15). The word was next used in a
figurative sense with reference to various objects in nature, meaning,
“to create,” e.g. “before the mountains were created” (yulladu) (Ps.
xc. 2); also, “to produce,” in reference to that which the earth causes
to come forth as if by birth, e.g., “He will cause her to bear
(holidah) and bring forth” (Isa. lv. 10). The verb further denotes, “to
bring forth,” said of changes in the process of time, as though they
were things which were born, e.g., “for thou knowest not what a day may
bring forth” (yeled) (Prov. xxvii. 1). Another figurative use of the
word is its application to the formation of thoughts and ideas, or of
opinions resulting from them; comp. “and brought forth (ve-yalad)
falsehood” (Ps. vii. 14); also, “and they please themselves in the
children (yalde) of strangers” (Isa. ii. 6), i.e., “they delight in the
opinions of strangers.” Jonathan the son of Uzziel paraphrases this
passage, “they walk in the customs of other nations.”

A man who has instructed another in any subject, and has improved his
knowledge, may in like manner be regarded as the parent of the person
taught, because he is the author of that knowledge; and thus the pupils
of the prophets are called “sons of the prophets,” as I shall explain
when treating of the homonymity of ben (son). In this figurative sense,
the verb yalad (to bear) is employed when it is said of Adam, “And Adam
lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat (va-yoled) a son in his
own likeness, in his form” (Gen. v. 3). As regards the words, “the form
of Adam, and his likeness,” we have already stated (ch. i.) their
meaning. Those sons of Adam who were born before that time were not
human in the true sense of the word, they had not “the form of man.”
With reference to Seth who had been instructed, enlightened and brought
to human perfection, it could rightly be said, “he (Adam) begat a son
in his likeness, in his form.” It is acknowledged that a man who does
not possess this “form” (the nature of which has just been explained)
is not human, but a mere animal in human shape and form. Yet such a
creature has the power of causing harm and injury: a power which does
not belong to other creatures. For those gifts of intelligence and
judgment with which he has been endowed for the purpose of acquiring
perfection, but which he has failed to apply to their proper aim, are
used by him for wicked and mischievous ends; he begets evil things, as
though he merely resembled man, or simulated his outward appearance.
Such was the condition of those sons of Adam who preceded Seth. In
reference to this subject the Midrash says: “During the 130 years when
Adam was under rebuke he begat spirits,” i.e., demons; when, however,
he was again restored to divine favour “he begat in his likeness, in
his form.” This is the sense of the passage, “Adam lived one hundred
and thirty years, and he begat in his likeness, in his form” (Gen. v.
3).






CHAPTER VIII


Originally the Hebrew term makom (place) applied both to a particular
spot and to space in general; subsequently it received a wider
signification and denoted “position,” or “degree,” as regards the
perfection of man in certain things. We say, e.g., this man occupies a
certain place in such and such a subject. In this sense this term, as
is well known, is frequently used by authors, e.g., “He fills his
ancestors’ place (makom) in point of wisdom and piety”; “the dispute
still remains in its place” (makom), i.e., in statu quo [ante]. In the
verse, “Blessed be the glory of the Lord from His place” (mekomo)
(Ezek. iii. 12), makom has this figurative meaning, and the verse may
be paraphrased “Blessed be the Lord according to the exalted nature of
His existence,” and wherever makom is applied to God, it expresses the
same idea, namely, the distinguished position of His existence, to
which nothing is equal or comparable, as will be shown below (chap.
lvi.).

It should be observed that when we treat in this work of any homonym,
we do not desire you to confine yourself to that which is stated in
that particular chapter; but we open for you a portal and direct your
attention to those significations of the word which are suited to our
purpose, though they may not be complete from a philological point of
view. You should examine the prophetical books and other works composed
by men of science, notice the meaning of every word which occurs in
them, and take homonyms in that sense which is in harmony with the
context. What I say in a particular passage is a key for the
comprehension of all similar passages. For example, we have explained
here makom in the sentence “Blessed be the glory of the Lord from His
place” (mekomo); but you must understand that the word makom has the
same signification in the passage “Behold, a place (makom) is with me”
(Exod. xxxiii. 26), viz., a certain degree of contemplation and
intellectual intuition (not of ocular inspection), in addition to its
literal meaning “a place,” viz., the mountain which was pointed out to
Moses for seclusion and for the attainment of perfection.






