CHAPTER XXIX


The term ʻeẓeb is homonymous, denoting, in the first place, pain and
trembling; comp. “In sorrow (be-ʻeẓeb) thou shalt bring forth children”
(Gen. iii. 16). Next it denotes anger; comp. “And his father had not
made him angry (ʻaẓabo) at any time” (1 Kings i. 6); “for he was angry
(neʻeẓab) for the sake of David” (1 Sam. xx. 34). The term signifies
also provocation; comp. “They rebelled, and vexed (ʻiẓẓebu) his holy
spirit” (Isa. lxiii. 10); “and provoked (yaʻaẓibahu) him in the desert”
(Ps. lxxviii. 40); “If there be any way of provocation (ʻoẓeb) in me”
(ib. cxxxix. 24); “Every day they rebel (yeʻaẓẓebu) against my words”
(ib. lvi. 6).

In Genesis vi. 6 the word has either the second or the third
signification. In the first case, the sense of the Hebrew va-yitʻaẓẓeb
el libbo is “God was angry with them on account of the wickedness of
their deeds”; as to the words “to his heart” used here, and also in the
history of Noah (ib. viii. 21) I will here explain what they mean. With
regard to man, we use the expression “he said to himself,” or “he said
in his heart,” in reference to a subject which he did not utter or
communicate to any other person. Similarly the phrase “And God said in
his heart,” is used in reference to an act which God decreed without
mentioning it to any prophet at the time the event took place according
to the will of God. And a figure of this kind is admissible, since “the
Torah speaketh in accordance with the language of man” (supra c.
xxvi.). This is plain and clear. In the Pentateuch no distinct mention
is made of a message sent to the wicked generation of the flood,
cautioning or threatening them with death; therefore, it is said
concerning them, that God was angry with them in His heart; likewise
when He decreed that no flood should happen again, He did not tell a
prophet to communicate it to others, and for that reason the words “in
his heart” are added.

Taking the verb in the third signification, we explain the passage
thus: “And man rebelled against God’s will concerning him”; for leb
(heart) also signifies “will,” as we shall explain when treating of the
homonymity of leb (heart).






CHAPTER XXX


In its primary meaning akal (to eat) is used in the sense of taking
food by animals; this needs no illustration. It was afterwards observed
that eating includes two processes—(1) the loss of the food, i.e., the
destruction of its form, which first takes place; (2) the growth of
animals, the preservation of their strength and their existence, and
the support of all the forces of their body, caused by the food they
take.

The consideration of the first process led to the figurative use of the
verb, in the sense of “consuming,” “destroying”; hence it includes all
modes of depriving a thing of its form; comp. “And the land of your
enemies shall destroy (lit. eat) you” (Lev. xxvi. 38); “A land that
destroyeth (lit. eateth) the inhabitants thereof” (Num. xiii. 32); “Ye
shall be destroyed (lit. eaten) with the sword” (Isa. i. 6); “Shall the
sword destroy (lit. eat)” (2 Sam. ii. 26); “And the fire of the Lord
burnt among them, and destroyed (lit. ate) them that were in the
uttermost parts of the camp” (Num. xi. 1); “(God) is a destroying (lit.
eating) fire” (Deut. iv. 24), that is, He destroys those who rebel
against Him, as the fire destroys everything that comes within its
reach. Instances of this kind are very frequent.

With reference to the second effect of the act of eating, the verb “to
eat” is figuratively used in the sense of “acquiring wisdom,”
“learning”; in short, for all intellectual perceptions. These preserve
the human form (intellect) constantly in the most perfect manner, in
the same way as food preserves the body in its best condition. Comp.
“Come ye, buy and eat” (Isa. lv. 1); “Hearken diligently unto me, and
eat ye that which is good” (ib. 2); “It is not good to eat much honey”
(Prov. xxv. 27); “My son, eat thou honey, because it is good, and the
honeycomb, which is sweet to thy taste; so shall the knowledge of
wisdom be unto thy soul” (ib. xxiv. 13, 14).

This figurative use of the verb “to eat” in the sense of “acquiring
wisdom” is frequently met with in the Talmud, e.g., “Come, eat fat meat
at Raba’s” (Baba Bathra 22a); comp. “All expressions of ‘eating’ and
‘drinking’ found in this book (of Proverbs) refer to wisdom,” or,
according to another reading, “to the Law” (Koh. rabba on Eccl. iii.
13). Wisdom has also been frequently called “water,” e.g., “Ho, every
one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters” (Isa. lv. 1).

The figurative meaning of these expressions has been so general and
common, that it was almost considered as its primitive signification,
and led to the employment “of hunger” and “thirst” in the sense of
“absence of wisdom and intelligence”; comp. “I will send a famine in
the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing
the words of the Lord”; “My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God”
(Ps. xlii. 3). Instances of this kind occur frequently. The words,
“With joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation” (Isa. xii.
3), are paraphrased by Jonathan son of Uzziel thus: “You will joyfully
receive new instruction from the chosen of the righteous.” Consider how
he explains “water” to indicate “the wisdom which will then spread,”
and “the wells” (maʻayene) as being identical with “the eyes of the
congregation” (Num. xv. 24), in the sense of “the chiefs,” or “the
wise.” By the phrase, “from the chosen of the righteous,” he expresses
his belief that righteousness is true salvation. You now see how he
gives to every word in this verse some signification referring to
wisdom and study. This should be well considered.






