CHAPTER XLVII


It is undoubtedly clear and evident that most prophecies are given in
images, for this is the characteristic of the imaginative faculty, the
organ of prophecy. We find it also necessary to say a few words on the
figures, hyperboles, and exaggerations that occur in Scripture. They
would create strange ideas if we were to take them literally without
noticing the exaggeration which they contain, or if we were to
understand them in accordance with the original meaning of the terms,
ignoring the fact that these are used figuratively. Our Sages say
distinctly Scripture uses hyperbolic or exaggerated language; and quote
as an instance, “cities walled and fortified, rising up to heaven”
(Deut. i. 28). As a hyperbole our Sages quote, “For the bird of heaven
carries the voice” (Eccles. x. 20); in the same sense it is said,
“Whose height is like that of cedar trees” (Amos ii. 9). Instances of
this kind are frequent in the language of all prophets; what they say
is frequently hyperbolic or exaggerated, and not precise or exact. What
Scripture says about Og, “Behold, his bedstead was an iron bedstead,
nine cubits its length,” etc. (Deut.), does not belong to this class of
figures, for the bedstead (eres, comp. arsenu, Song of Sol. i. 16) is
never exactly of the same dimensions as the person using it; it is not
like a dress that fits round the body; it is always greater than the
person that sleeps therein; as a rule, it is by a third longer. If,
therefore, the bed of Og was nine cubits in length, he must, according
to this proportion, have been six cubits high, or a little more. The
words, “by the cubit of a man,” mean, by the measure of an ordinary
man, and not by the measure of Og; for men have the limbs in a certain
proportion. Scripture thus tells us that Og was double as long as an
ordinary person, or a little less. This is undoubtedly an exceptional
height among men, but not quite impossible. As regards the Scriptural
statement about the length of man’s life in those days, I say that only
the persons named lived so long, whilst other people enjoyed the
ordinary length of life. The men named were exceptions, either in
consequence of different causes, as e.g., their food or mode of living,
or by way of miracle, which admits of no analogy.

We must further discuss the figurative language employed in Scripture.
In some cases this is clear and evident, and doubted by no person;
e.g., “The mountains and hills shall break forth in song before you,
and all the trees of the wood clap their hands” (Isa. lv. 12); this is
evidently figurative language; also the following passage—“The
fir-trees rejoice at thee,” etc. (ibid. xiv. 8), which is rendered by
Jonathan, son of Uzziel, “The rulers rejoice at thee, who are rich in
possessions.” This figure is similar to that used in the phrase,
“Butter of kine and milk of sheep,” etc. (Deut. xxxii. 14).

And these figures are very frequent in the books of the prophets. Some
are easily recognised by the ordinary reader as figures, others with
some difficulty. Thus nobody doubts that the blessing, “May the Lord
open to thee his good treasure, the heavens,” must be taken
figuratively; for God has no treasure in which He keeps the rain. The
same is the case with the following passage—“He opened the doors of
heaven, he rained upon them manna to eat” (Ps. lxxviii. 23, 24). No
person assumes that there is a door or gate in heaven, but every one
understands that this is a simile and a figurative expression. In the
same way must be understood the following passages—“The heavens were
opened” (Ezek. i. 1); “If not, blot me out from thy book which thou
hast written” (Exod. xxxii. 32); “I will blot him out from the book of
life” (ibid. ver. 33). All these phrases are figurative; and we must
not assume that God has a book in which He writes, or from which He
blots out, as those generally believe that do not find figurative
speech in these passages. They are all of the same kind. You must
explain passages not quoted by me by those which I have quoted in this
chapter. Employ your reason, and you will be able to discern what is
said allegorically, figuratively, or hyperbolically, and what is meant
literally, exactly according to the original meaning of the words. You
will then understand all prophecies, learn and retain rational
principles of faith, pleasing in the eyes of God who is most pleased
with truth, and most displeased with falsehood; your mind and heart
will not be so perplexed as to believe or accept as law what is untrue
or improbable, whilst the Law is perfectly true when properly
understood. Thus Scripture says, “Thy testimonies are righteousness for
ever” (Ps. cxix. 144); and “I the Lord speak righteousness” (Isa. xlv.
19). If you adopt this method, you will not imagine the existence of
things which God has not created, or accept principles which might
partly lead to atheism, or to a corruption of your notions of God so as
to ascribe to Him corporeality, attributes, or emotions, as has been
shown by us, nor will you believe that the words of the prophets are
false; for the cause of this disease is ignorance of what we have
explained. These things belong likewise to the mysteries of the Law;
and although we have treated them in a general manner, they can easily
be understood in all their details in accordance with the above
remarks.






CHAPTER XLVIII


It is clear that everything produced must have an immediate cause which
produced it; that cause again a cause, and so on, till the First Cause,
viz., the will and decree of God is reached. The prophets therefore
omit sometimes the intermediate causes, and ascribe the production of
an individual thing directly to God, saying that God has made it. This
method is well known, and we, as well as others of those who seek the
truth, have explained it; it is the belief of our co-religionists.

After having heard this remark, listen to what I will explain in this
chapter; direct your special attention to it more than you have done to
the other chapters of this part. It is this: As regards the immediate
causes of things produced, it makes no difference whether these causes
consist in substances, physical properties, freewill, or chance—by
freewill I mean that of man—or even in the will of another living
being. The prophets [omit them and] ascribe the production directly to
God and use such phrases as, God has done it, commanded it, or said it;
in all such cases the verbs “to say,” “to speak,” “to command,” “to
call,” and “to send” are employed. What I desired to state in this
chapter is this: According to the hypothesis and theory accepted, it is
God that gave will to dumb animals, freewill to the human being, and
natural properties to everything; and as accidents originate in the
redundancy of some natural force, as has been explained [by Aristotle],
and are mostly the result of the combined action of nature, desire, and
freewill: it can consequently be said of everything which is produced
by any of these causes, that God commanded that it should be made, or
said that it should be so. I will give you instances, and they will
guide you in the interpretation of passages which I do not mention. As
regards phenomena produced regularly by natural causes, such as the
melting of the snow when the atmosphere becomes warm, the roaring of
the sea when a storm rages [I quote the following passages], “He
sendeth his word and melteth them” (Ps. cxlvii. 18); “And he saith, and
a storm-wind riseth, and lifteth up its waves” (ibid. cvii. 25). In
reference to the rain we read: “I will command the clouds that they
shall not rain,” etc. (Isa. v. 6). Events caused by man’s freewill,
such as war, the dominion of one nation over another, the attempt of
one person to hurt another, or to insult him, [are ascribed to God, as]
e.g., in reference to the dominion of Nebuchadnezzar and his host, “I
have commended my holy ones, also I have called my heroes for my anger”
(Isa. xiii. 3); and “I will send him against a hypocrite nation” (ibid.
x. 6); in reference to Shimei, son of Gera, “For God said to him, Curse
David” (2 Sam. xvi. 10); in reference to the deliverance of Joseph, the
righteous, from prison, “He sent an angel and loosed him” (Ps. cv. 20);
in reference to the victory of the Persians over the Chaldees, “I will
send to Babylon scatterers, and they shall scatter it” (Jer. li. 2); in
reference to the providing of food to Eliah, “I have commanded there a
woman, a widow, to maintain thee” (1 Kings xvii. 9); and Joseph, the
righteous, says: “Not ye have sent me hither,” etc. (Gen. xlv. 8). The
case that the will of an animal or its desire for some of its natural
wants is the cause of some event, may be illustrated by the following
instance: “And God spake unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah” (ii.
11). The act is ascribed to God, because He gave the fish the will, and
not because He made it a prophet or endowed it with a prophetical
spirit. Similarly it is said of the locusts that appeared in the days
of Joel, son of Pethuel, “Mighty is he that accomplishes his word”
(Joel ii. 11); or of the beasts that took possession of the land of
Edom when destroyed in the days of Sennacherib, “He cast lot for them,
and his hand divided it unto them by a line” (Isa. xxxiv. 17). Although
here the verbs “to say,” “to command,” “to send,” are not used, the
meaning is evidently the same, and you must explain all passages that
are analogous to it in a similar manner. Events evidently due to chance
are ascribed to God; e.g., in reference to Rebecca, “Let her be a wife
to the son of thy master, as the Lord spake” (Gen. xxiv. 51); in
reference to David and Jonathan, “Go, for the Lord has sent thee.” (1
Sam. xx. 22); in reference to Joseph, “God sent me before you” (Gen.
xlv. 7). You see clearly that the providing of a cause, in whatever
manner this may take place, by substance, accident, freewill, or will,
is always expressed by one of the five terms, commanding, saying,
speaking, sending, or calling. Note this, and apply it everywhere
according to the context. Many difficulties will thereby be removed,
and passages apparently containing things far from truth will prove to
be true. This is the conclusion of the treatise on Prophecy, its
allegories and language. It is all I intend to say on this subject in
this treatise. We will now commence to treat of other subjects, with
the help of the Most High.








