CHAPTER XXII


In Hebrew, the verb bo signifies “to come” as applied to a living
being, i.e., its arrival at a certain place, or approach to a certain
person, as “Thy brother came (ba) with subtilty” (Gen. xxvii. 35). It
next denotes (with regard to a living being) “to enter” a certain
place, e.g., “And when Joseph came (va-yabo) into the house” (Gen.
xliii. 26); “When ye come (ta-boü) into the land” (Exod. xii. 25). The
term was also employed metaphorically in the sense of “to come” applied
to a certain event, that is, to something incorporeal, as “When thy
sayings come to pass (yabo)” (Judg. xiii. 17); “Of that which will come
(yaboü) over thee” (Isa. xlvii. 13). Nay, it is even applied to
privatives, e.g., “Yet evil came (va-yabo)” (Job iii. 26); “And
darkness came (va-yabo)” Now, since the word has been applied to
incorporeal things, it has also been used in reference to God—to the
fulfilment of His word, or to the manifestation of His Presence (the
Shechinah). In this figurative sense it is said, “Lo, I come (ba) unto
thee in a thick cloud” (Exod. xix. 9); “For the Lord the God of Israel
cometh (ba) through it” (Ezek. xliv. 2). In these and all similar
passages, the coming of the Shechinah is meant, but the words, “And the
Lord my God shall come (u-ba)” (Zech. xiv. 5) are identical with “His
word will come,” that is to say, the promises which He made through the
Prophets will be fulfilled; therefore Scripture adds “all the holy ones
that are with thee,” that is to say, “The word of the Lord my God will
be performed, which has been spoken by all the holy ones who are with
thee, who address the Israelites.”






CHAPTER XXIII


Yaẓa (“he came out”) is the opposite of ba (“he came in”). The term
yaẓa is applied to the motion of a body from a place in which it had
previously rested, to another place (whether the body be a living being
or not), e.g., “And when they were gone out (yaẓeü) of the city” (Gen.
xliv. 4); “If fire break out (teẓe)” (Exod. xxii. 5). It was then
figuratively employed to denote the appearance of something
incorporeal, as, “The word went out (yaẓa) of the king’s mouth” (Esth.
vii. 8); “When this deed of the queen shall come abroad (yeẓe) unto all
women” (Esth. i. 17), that is to say, “the report will spread.” Again,
“For out of Zion shall go forth (teẓe) the Law” (Isa. ii. 3); further,
“The sun had risen (yaẓa) upon the earth” (Gen. xix. 23), i.e., its
light became visible.

In this figurative sense we must take every expression of coming out
when applied to the Almighty, e.g., “Behold, the Lord cometh out (yoẓe)
of his place” (Isa. xxvi. 21), i.e., “The word of God, which until now
has been in secret, cometh out, and will become manifest,” i.e.,
something will come into being which had not existed before; for
everything new emanating from God is ascribed to His word. Comp. “By
the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by
the breath of his mouth” (Ps. xxxiii. 6). This is a simile taken from
the conduct of kings, who employ the word as the means of carrying
their will into effect. God, however, requires no instrument wherewith
to operate in order to perform anything; the effect is produced solely
by His will alone. He does not employ any kind of speech, as will be
explained further on (chap. lv.).

The verb “to come out” is thus employed to designate the manifestation
of a certain work of God, as we noticed in our interpretation of the
phrase, “Behold, the Lord cometh out of his place.” In a similar manner
the term shub, “to return,” has been figuratively employed to denote
the discontinuance of a certain act according to the will of God, as in
“I will go and return to my place” (Hosea v. 15); that is to say, the
Divine presence (Shechinah) which had been in our midst departed from
us, the consequence of which has been the absence of Divine protection
from amongst us. Thus the Prophet foretelling misfortune says, “And I
will hide my face from them, and they shall be devoured” (Deut. xxxi.
17); for, when man is deprived of Divine protection he is exposed to
all dangers, and becomes the butt of all fortuitous circumstances; his
fortune and misfortune then depend on chance. Alas! how terrible a
threat!—This is the idea contained in the words, “I will go and return
to my place” (Hos. v. 15).






CHAPTER XXIV


The term halak is likewise one of the words which denote movements
performed by living beings, as in “And Jacob went (halak) on his way”
(Gen. xxxii. 1), and in many other instances. The verb “to go” was next
employed in describing movements of objects less solid than the bodies
of living beings, comp. “And the waters were going on (halok)
decreasing” (Gen. viii. 5); “And the fire went along (va-tihalak) upon
the ground” (Exod. ix. 23). Then it was employed to express the
spreading and manifestation of something incorporeal, comp. “The voice
thereof shall go like a serpent” (Jer. xlvi. 22); again, “The voice of
the Lord God walking in the garden” (Gen. iii. 8). It is “the voice”
that is qualified by “walking.”

Whenever the word “to go” is used in reference to God, it must be taken
in this figurative sense, i.e., it applies to incorporeal things, and
signifies either the manifestation of something incorporeal, or the
withdrawal of the Divine protection, an act corresponding in lifeless
beings to the removal of a thing, in living beings to the departure of
a living being, “walking.” The withdrawal of God’s protection is called
in the Bible “the hiding of God’s countenance,” as in Deuteronomy xxxi.
18, “As for me, I will hide my countenance.” On the same ground it has
been designated “going away,” or moving away from a thing, comp. “I
will depart and return to my place” (Hos. v. 15). But in the passage,
“And the anger of the Lord was kindled against them, and he went” (Num.
xii. 9), the two meanings of the verb are combined, viz., the
withdrawal of the Divine protection, expressed by “and he went,” and
the revelation, manifestation, and appearance of something namely, of
the anger which went forth and reached them, in consequence of which
Miriam became “leprous, white as snow.” The expression “to walk” was
further applied to conduct, which concerns only the inner life, and
which requires no bodily motion, as in the following passages, “And
thou shalt walk in his ways” (Deut. xxviii. 9); “Ye shall walk after
the Lord your God” (Deut. xiii. 5); “Come ye, and let us walk in the
light of the Lord.” (Isa. ii. 5).






