CHAPTER XX


According to Aristotle, none of the products of Nature are due to
chance. His proof is this: That which is due to chance does not
reappear constantly nor frequently, but all products of Nature reappear
either constantly or at least frequently. The heavens, with all that
they contain, are constant; they never change, as has been explained,
neither as regards their essence nor as regards their place. But in the
sublunary world we find both things which are constant and things which
reappear frequently [though not constantly]. Thus, e.g., the heat of
fire and the downward tendency of a stone are constant properties,
whilst the form and life of the individuals in each species are the
same in most cases. All this is clear. If the parts of the Universe are
not accidental, how can the whole Universe be considered as the result
of chance? Therefore the existence of the Universe is not due to
chance. The following is, in short, the objection which Aristotle
raises against one of the earlier philosophers who assumed that the
Universe is the result of chance, and that it came into existence by
itself, without any cause. Some assume that the heavens and the whole
Universe came into existence spontaneously, as well as the rotation and
motion [of the spheres], which has produced the variety of things and
established their present order. This opinion implies a great
absurdity. They admit that animals and plants do not owe their
existence or production to chance, but to a certain cause, be that
cause Nature, or reason, or the like; e.g., they do not assume that
everything might be formed by chance of a certain seed or semen, but
that of a certain seed only an olive-tree is produced, and of a certain
semen only a human being is developed. And yet they think that the
heavens, and those bodies which appear divine among the rest of bodies,
came into existence spontaneously, without the action of any such cause
as produces plants and animals. Having thus examined this theory,
Aristotle then proceeds to refute it at greater length. It is therefore
clear that Aristotle believes and proves that things in real existence
are not accidental; they cannot be accidental, because they are
essential, i.e., there is a cause which necessitates that they should
be in their actual condition, and on account of that cause they are
just as they in reality are. This has been proved, and it is the
opinion of Aristotle. But I do not think that, according to Aristotle,
the rejection of the spontaneous origin of things implies the admission
of Design and Will. For as it is impossible to reconcile two opposites,
so it is impossible to reconcile the two theories, that of necessary
existence by causality, and that of Creation by the desire and will of
a Creator. For the necessary existence assumed by Aristotle must be
understood in this sense, that for everything that is not the product
of work there must be a certain cause that produces it with its
properties; for this cause there is another cause, and for the second a
third, and so on. The series of causes ends with the Prime Cause, from
which everything derives existence, since it is impossible that the
series should continue ad infinitum. He nevertheless does not mean to
say that the existence of the Universe is the necessary product of the
Creator, i.e., the Prime Cause, in the same manner as the shadow is
caused by a body, or heat by fire, or light by the sun. Only those who
do not comprehend his words attribute such ideas to him. He uses here
the term necessary in the same sense as we use the term when we say
that the existence of the intellectus necessarily implies that of the
intellectum, for the former is the efficient cause of the latter in so
far as intellectum. Even Aristotle holds that the Prime Cause is the
highest and most perfect Intellect; he therefore says that the First
Cause is pleased, satisfied, and delighted with that which necessarily
derives existence from Him, and it is impossible that He should wish it
to be different. But we do not call this “design,” and it has nothing
in common with design. E.g., man is pleased, satisfied, and delighted
that he is endowed with eyes and hands, and it is impossible that he
should desire it to be otherwise, and yet the eyes and hands which a
man has are not the result of his design, and it is not by his own
determination that he has certain properties and is able to perform
certain actions. The notion of design and determination applies only to
things not yet in existence, when there is still the possibility of
their being in accordance with the design or not. I do not know whether
the modern Aristotelians understood his words to imply that the
existence of the Universe presupposes some cause in the sense of design
and determination, or whether, in opposition to him, they assumed
design and determination, in the belief that this does not conflict
with the theory of the Eternity of the Universe.

Having explained this, I will now proceed to examine the opinions of
the modern philosophers.






CHAPTER XXI


Some of the recent philosophers who adhere to the theory of the
Eternity of the Universe hold that God produces the Universe, that He
by His will designs and determines its existence and form; they reject,
however, the theory that this act took place at one certain time, and
assume that this always has been the case, and will always be so. The
circumstance that we cannot imagine an agent otherwise than preceding
the result of its action, they explain by the fact that this is
invariably the case in all that we produce; because for agents of the
same kind as we are, there are some moments in which they are not
active, and are only agents in potentia; they become agents when they
act. But as regards God there are no moments of non-action, or of
potentiality in any respect; He is not before His work, He is always an
actual agent. And as there is a great difference between His essence
and ours, so is also a great difference between the relation of His
work to Him and the relation of our work to us. They apply the same
argument to will and determination; for there is no difference in this
respect whether we say He acts, wills, designs, or determines. They
further assume that change in His action or will is inadmissible. It is
therefore clear that these philosophers abandoned the term “necessary
result,” but retained the theory of it; they perhaps sought to use a
better expression, or to remove an objectionable term. For it is the
same thing, whether we say in accordance with the view of Aristotle
that the Universe is the result of the Prime Cause, and must be eternal
as that Cause is eternal, or in accordance with these philosophers that
the Universe is the result of the act, design, will, selection, and
determination of God, but it has always been so, and will always be so;
in the same manner as the rising of the sun undoubtedly produces the
day, and yet it does not precede it. But when we speak of design we do
not mean it in this sense; we mean to express by it that the Universe
is not the “necessary result” of God’s existence, as the effect is the
necessary result of the efficient cause; in the latter case the effect
cannot be separated from the cause; it cannot change unless the cause
changes entirely, or at least in some respect. If we accept this
explanation we easily see how absurd it is to say that the Universe is
in the same relation to God as the effect is to the efficient cause,
and to assume at the same time that the Universe is the result of the
action and determination of God.

Having fully explained this subject, we come to the question whether
the cause, which must be assumed for the variety of properties noticed
in the heavenly beings, is merely an efficient cause, that must
necessarily produce that variety as its effect, or whether that variety
is due to a determining agent, such as we believe, in accordance with
the theory of Moses our Teacher. Before I discuss this question I will
first explain fully what Aristotle means by “necessary result”; after
that I will show by such philosophical arguments as are free from every
fallacy why I prefer the theory of Creatio ex nihilo. It is clear that
when he says that the first Intelligence is the necessary result of the
existence of God, the second Intelligence the result of the existence
of the first, the third of the second [and so on], and that the spheres
are the necessary result of the existence of the Intelligences, and so
forth, in the well-known order which you learnt from passages dealing
with it, and of which we have given a résumé in this part (ch. iv.)—he
does not mean that the one thing was first in existence, and then the
second came as the necessary result of the first; he denies that any
one of these beings has had a beginning. By “necessary result” he
merely refers to the causal relation; he means to say that the first
Intelligence is the cause of the existence of the second; the second of
the third, and so on to the last of the Intelligences; and the same is
also the case as regards the spheres and the materia prima; none of
these preceded another, or has been in existence without the existence
of that other. We say, e.g., that the necessary result of the primary
qualities are roughness [and] smoothness, hardness [and] softness,
porosity and solidity; and no person doubts that heat, cold, moisture,
and dryness are the causes of smoothness and roughness, of hardness and
softness, porosity and solidity, and similar qualities, and that the
latter are the necessary result of those four primary qualities. And
yet it is impossible that a body should exist with the primary
qualities without the secondary ones; for the relation between the two
sets of qualities is that of causality, not that of agent and its
product. Just in the same way the term “necessary result” is used by
Aristotle in reference to the whole Universe, when he says that one
portion is the result of the other, and continues the series up to the
First Cause as he calls it, or first Intellect, if you prefer this
term. For we all mean the same, only with this difference, that
according to Aristotle everything besides that Being is the necessary
result of the latter, as I have already mentioned; whilst, according to
our opinion, that Being created the whole Universe with design and
will, so that the Universe which had not been in existence before, has
by His will come into existence. I will now begin in the following
chapters my proofs for the superiority of our theory, that of Creatio
ex nihilo.






