CHAPTER XLII


The precepts of the seventh class are the civil laws enumerated in the
Section on Judgments, and part of the Section on Property. The object
of these precepts is obvious. They define the ways of equity in the
various transactions which must take place between man and man. Those
that are engaged in such transactions must mutually promote each
other’s interests; neither of the parties must strive to increase only
his own profit, and that he alone should enjoy the whole benefit of the
transaction. In the first place, no overcharge is permitted; only the
ordinary and known rate of profit may be taken. The law fixes the
limits of profits within which the transaction is valid. Even
imposition in mere words [where no material harm is inflicted] is
forbidden, as is well known. Next comes the law of the four kind of
bailees; the fairness of the law is evident. If one keeps the property
of his neighbour for nothing, without deriving therefrom any benefit
for himself, and is only obliging his neighbour, he is free from all
responsibility, and if any injury is done to the property, the owner
alone must bear the loss. He who borrows a thing keeps it only for his
own advantage, whilst the owner lends it to him to oblige him; he is
therefore responsible for everything; any loss in the property must be
borne by the borrower. If one takes wages for keeping the property or
pays for using it, he as well as the owner profit thereby; the losses
must therefore be divided between them. It is done in this manner; the
bailee pays for any loss caused through want of care, namely, when the
property is stolen or lost; for this happens only when the bailee does
not take sufficient precaution. The owner, on the other hand, bears
such losses as cannot be prevented; namely, if by accident the animal
falls and breaks its limbs, or is carried away by armed men as booty,
or if it dies. The Law further ordains merciful conduct towards hired
workmen because of their poverty. Their wages should be paid without
delay, and they must not be wronged in any of their rights; they must
receive their pay according to their work. Another instance of kindness
to workmen is this: according to the regulations of this law, workmen,
and even animals, must be permitted to partake of the food in the
preparation of which they have been engaged. The laws which relate to
property include laws concerning inheritance. They are based on the
sound principle that man must not “withhold good from those to whom it
is due” (Prov. iii. 27), and when he is about to die, he must not
conceive ill-will against his heirs, by squandering his property, but
leave it to the one who has the greatest claim on it, that is, to him
who is his nearest relation, “unto his kinsman that is next to him of
his family” (Num. xxvii. 11). It is clearly stated that the son has the
first claim, then comes the daughter, then the brother, and then the
father’s brothers, as is well known. The father must leave the right of
the first-born to his eldest son, because his love for this son came
first; he must not be guided by his inclination. He may not make the
son of the beloved first-born before the son of the hated (Deut. xxi.
16). Thus our highly equitable Law preserves and strengthens the virtue
of respecting all kinsmen, and doing well unto them, as the prophet
says: “He that is cruel troubleth his own flesh” (Prov. xi. 17). The
Law correctly says, “Thou shalt open thine hand wide unto thy brother,
unto thy poor” (Deut. xv. 11). Our Sages bestow much praise upon him
who is kind to his relatives, and him who marries the daughter of his
sister. The Law has taught us how far we have to extend this principle
of favouring those who are near to us, and of treating kindly every one
with whom we have some relationship, even if he offended or wronged us;
even if he is very bad, we must have some consideration for him. Thus
the Law says: “Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite, for he is thy brother”
(ibid. xxiii. 7). Again, if we find a person in trouble, whose
assistance we have once enjoyed, or of whom we have received some
benefit, even if that person has subsequently done evil to us, we must
bear in mind his previous [good] conduct. Thus the Law tells us: “Thou
shalt not abhor an Egyptian, because thou wast a stranger in his land”
(ibid.), although the Egyptians have subsequently oppressed us very
much, as is well-known. See how many moral lessons we have derived from
these precepts. The last two precepts do not belong to the seventh
class; but the discussion of the preference due to relatives as regards
inheritance led us to speak of the Egyptians and the Edomites.






CHAPTER XLIII


The precepts of the eighth class are enumerated in “the Section on
Seasons” (Sefer zemannim). With a few exceptions, the reasons for all
of them are stated in the Law. The object of Sabbath is obvious, and
requires no explanation. The rest it affords to man is known;
one-seventh of the life of every man, whether small or great, passes
thus in comfort, and in rest from trouble and exertion. This the
Sabbath effects in addition to the perpetuation and confirmation of the
grand doctrine of the Creation. The object of the Fast of Atonement is
evident. The Fast creates the sense of repentance; it is the same day
on which the chief of all prophets came down [from Mount Sinai] with
the second tables, and announced to the people the divine pardon of
their great sin; the day was therefore appointed for ever as a day
devoted to repentance and true worship of God. For this reason all
material enjoyment, all trouble and care for the body, are interdicted,
no work may be done; the day must be spent in confession; every one
shall confess his sins and abandon them.

Other holy days are appointed for rejoicing and for such pleasant
gathering as people generally need. They also promote the good feeling
that men should have to each other in their social and political
relations. The appointment of the special days for such purposes has
its cause. The reason for the Passover is well known. It is kept seven
days, because the period of seven days is the unit of time intermediate
between a day and a month. It is also known how great is the importance
of this period in Nature, and in many religious duties. For the Law
always follows Nature, and in some respects brings it to perfection;
for Nature is not capable of designing and thinking, whilst the Law is
the result of the wisdom and guidance of God, who is the author of the
intellect of all rational beings. This, however, is not the theme of
the present chapter; let us return to our subject.

The Feast of Weeks is the anniversary of the Revelation on Mount Sinai.
In order to raise the importance of this day, we count the days that
pass since the preceding festival, just as one who expects his most
intimate friend on a certain day counts the days and even the hours.
This is the reason why we count the days that pass since the offering
of the Omer, between the anniversary of our departure from Egypt and
the anniversary of the Lawgiving. The latter was the aim and object of
the exodus from Egypt, and thus God said, “I brought you unto myself”
(Exod. xix. 4). As that great revelation took place only on one day, so
we keep its anniversary only one day; but if the eating of unleavened
bread on Passover were only commanded for one day, we should not have
noticed it, and its object would not have been manifest. For it
frequently happens that we take the same kind of food for two or three
days. But by our continuing for a whole period [of seven days] to eat
unleavened bread, its object becomes clear and evident.

New-Year is likewise kept for one day; for it is a day of repentance on
which we are stirred up from our forgetfulness. For this reason the
shofar is blown on this day, as we have shown in Mishneh-torah. The day
is, as it were, a preparation for and an introduction to the day of the
Fast, as is obvious from the national tradition about the days between
New-Year and the Day of Atonement.

The Feast of Tabernacles, which is a feast of rejoicing and gladness,
is kept seven days, in order that the idea of the festival may be more
noticeable. The reason why it is kept in the autumn is stated in the
Law, “When thou hast gathered in thy labours out of the field” (Exod.
xxiii. 16); that is to say, when you rest and are free from pressing
labours. Aristotle, in the ninth book of his Ethics, mentions this as a
general custom among the nations. He says: “In ancient times the
sacrifices and assemblies of the people took place after the
ingathering of the corn and the fruit, as if the sacrifices were
offered on account of the harvest.” Another reason is this—in this
season it is possible to dwell in tabernacles, as there is neither
great heat nor troublesome rain.

The two festivals, Passover and the Feast of Tabernacles, imply also
the teaching of certain truths and certain moral lessons. Passover
teaches us to remember the miracles which God wrought in Egypt, and to
perpetuate their memory; the Feast of Tabernacles reminds us of the
miracles wrought in the wilderness. The moral lessons derived from
these feasts is this: man ought to remember his evil days in his days
of prosperity. He will thereby be induced to thank God repeatedly, to
lead a modest and humble life. We eat, therefore, unleavened bread and
bitter herbs on Passover in memory of what has happened unto us, and
leave [on Succoth] our houses in order to dwell in tabernacles, as
inhabitants of deserts do that are in want of comfort. We shall thereby
remember that this has once been our condition; [comp.] “I made the
children of Israel to dwell in booths” (Lev. xxiii. 43); although we
dwell now in elegant houses, in the best and most fertile land, by the
kindness of God, and because of His promises to our forefathers,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who were perfect in their opinions and in
their conduct. This idea is likewise an important element in our
religion; that whatever good we have received and ever will receive of
God, is owing to the merits of the Patriarchs, who “kept the way of the
Lord to do justice and judgment” (Gen. xviii. 19). We join to the Feast
of Tabernacles the Feast of the Eighth Day, in order to complete our
rejoicings, which cannot be perfect in booths, but in comfortable and
well-built houses. As regards the four species [the branches of the
palm tree, the citron, the myrtle, and the willows of the brook] our
Sages gave a reason for their use by way of Agadic interpretation, the
method of which is well known to those who are acquainted with the
style of our Sages. They use the text of the Bible only as a kind of
poetical language [for their own ideas], and do not intend thereby to
give an interpretation of the text. As to the value of these Midrashic
interpretations, we meet with two different opinions. For some think
that the Midrash contains the real explanation of the text, whilst
others, finding that it cannot be reconciled with the words quoted,
reject and ridicule it. The former struggle and fight to prove and to
confirm such interpretations according to their opinion, and to keep
them as the real meaning of the text; they consider them in the same
light as traditional laws. Neither of the two classes understood it,
that our Sages employ biblical texts merely as poetical expressions,
the meaning of which is dear to every reasonable reader. This style was
general in ancient days; all adopted it in the same way as poets [adopt
a certain style]. Our Sages say, in reference to the words, “and a
paddle (yated) thou shalt have upon thy weapon” [azeneka, Deut. xxiii.
14]: Do not read azeneka, “thy weapon,” but ozneka, “thy ear.” You are
thus told, that if you hear a person uttering something disgraceful,
put your fingers into your ears. Now, I wonder whether those ignorant
persons [who take the Midrashic interpretations literally] believe that
the author of this saying gave it as the true interpretation of the
text quoted, and as the meaning of this precept; that in truth yated,
“the paddle,” is used for “the finger,” and azeneka denotes “thy ear.”
I cannot think that any person whose intellect is sound can admit this.
The author employed the text as a beautiful poetical phrase, in
teaching an excellent moral lesson, namely this: It is as bad to listen
to bad language as it is to use it. This lesson is poetically connected
with the above text. In the same sense you must understand the phrase,
“Do not read so, but so,” wherever it occurs in the Midrash. I have
departed from my subject, but it was for the purpose of making a remark
useful to every intellectual member of the Rabbanites. I now return to
our theme. I believe that the four species are a symbolical expression
of our rejoicing that the Israelites changed the wilderness, “no place
of seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates, or of water to
drink” (Num. xx. 5), with a country full of fruit-trees and rivers. In
order to remember this we take the fruit which is the most pleasant of
the fruit of the land, branches which smell best, most beautiful
leaves, and also the best of herbs, i.e., the willows of the brook.
These four kinds have also those three purposes: First, they were
plentiful in those days in Palestine, so that every one could easily
get them. Secondly, they have a good appearance, they are green; some
of them, viz., the citron and the myrtle, are also excellent as regards
their smell, the branches of the palm-tree and the willow having
neither good nor bad smell. Thirdly, they keep fresh and green for
seven days, which is not the case with peaches, pomegranates,
asparagus, nuts, and the like.






