PART III


INTRODUCTION


We have stated several times that it is our primary object in this
treatise to expound, as far as possible, the Biblical account of the
Creation (Maʻaseh bereshit) and the description of the Divine Chariot
(Maʻaseh mercabah) in a manner adapted to the training of those for
whom this work is written.

We have also stated that these subjects belong to the mysteries of the
Law. You are well aware how our Sages blame those who reveal these
mysteries, and praise the merits of those who keep them secret,
although they are perfectly clear to the philosopher. In this sense
they explain the passage, “Her merchandise shall be for them that dwell
before the Lord, to eat sufficiently” (Isa. xxiii. 18), which concludes
in the original with the words ve-li-me-kasseh ʻatik, i.e., that these
blessings are promised to him who hides things which the Eternal has
revealed [to him], viz., the mysteries of the Law (Babyl. Talmud,
Pesaḥim 119a). If you have understanding you will comprehend that which
our Sages pointed out. They have clearly stated that the Divine Chariot
includes matters too deep and too profound for the ordinary intellect.
It has been shown that a person favoured by Providence with reason to
understand these mysteries is forbidden by the Law to teach them except
vivâ voce, and on condition that the pupil possess certain
qualifications, and even then only the heads of the sections may be
communicated. This has been the cause why the knowledge of this mystery
has entirely disappeared from our nation, and nothing has remained of
it. This was unavoidable, for the explanation of these mysteries was
always communicated vivâ voce, it was never committed to writing. Such
being the case, how can I venture to call your attention to such
portions of it as may be known, intelligible, and perfectly clear to
me? But if, on the other hand, I were to abstain from writing on this
subject, according to my knowledge of it, when I die, as I shall
inevitably do, that knowledge would die with me, and I would thus
inflict great injury on you and all those who are perplexed [by these
theological problems], I would then be guilty of withholding the truth
from those to whom it ought to be communicated, and of jealously
depriving the heir of his inheritance. I should in either case be
guilty of gross misconduct.

To give a full explanation of the mystic passages of the Bible is
contrary to the Law and to reason; besides, my knowledge of them is
based on reasoning, not on divine inspiration [and is therefore not
infallible]. I have not received my belief in this respect from any
teacher, but it has been formed by what I learnt from Scripture and the
utterances of our Sages, and by the philosophical principles which I
have adopted. It is therefore possible that my view is wrong, and that
I misunderstood the passages referred to. Correct thought and divine
help have suggested to me the proper method, viz., to explain the words
of the prophet Ezekiel in such a manner that those who will read my
interpretation will believe that I have not added anything to the
contents of the text, but only, as it were, translated from one
language into another, or given a short exposition of plain things.
Those, however, for whom this treatise has been composed, will, on
reflecting on it and thoroughly examining each chapter, obtain a
perfect and clear insight into all that has been clear and intelligible
to me. This is the utmost that can be done in treating this subject so
as to be useful to all without fully explaining it.

After this introductory remark I ask you to study attentively the
chapters which follow on this sublime, important, and grand subject,
which is the pin upon which everything hangs, and the pillar upon which
everything rests.






CHAPTER I


It is well known that there are men whose face is like that of other
animals; thus the face of some person is like that of a lion, that of
another person like that of an ox, and so on; and man’s face is
described according as the form of his face resembles the form of the
face of other animals. By the expressions, “the face of an ox,” “the
face of a lion,” “the face of an eagle” (Ezek, i. 10), the prophet
describes a human face inclining towards the forms of these various
species. This interpretation can be supported by two proofs. First, the
prophet says of the Ḥayyot in general that “their appearance is this,
they have the form of man” (ver. 5), and then in describing each of the
Ḥayyot he attributes to them the face of a man, that of an ox, that of
a lion, and that of an eagle. Secondly, in the second description of
the Chariot, which is intended as a supplement to the first, the
prophet says, Each hath four faces; the one is the face of a cherub,
the second a man’s face, the third a lion’s face, and the fourth that
of an eagle (ibid. x. 14). He thus clearly indicates that the terms
“the face of an ox” and “the face of a cherub” are identical. But
cherub designates “a youth.” By analogy we explain the two other
terms—“the face of a lion” and “the face of an eagle” in the same
manner. “The face of the ox” has been singled out on account of the
etymology of the Hebrew term shor (ox), as has been indicated by me. It
is impossible to assume that this second description refers to the
perception of another prophetic vision, because it concludes thus:
“This is the Ḥayyah which I saw at the river Chebar” (ibid. ver. 15).
What we intended to explain is now clear.






