CHAPTER XXXV


Do not think that what we have laid down in the preceding chapters on
the importance, obscurity, and difficulty of the subject, and its
unsuitableness for communication to ordinary persons, includes the
doctrine of God’s incorporeality and His exemption from all affections
(πάθη). This is not the case. For in the same way as all people must be
informed, and even children must be trained in the belief that God is
One, and that none besides Him is to be worshipped, so must all be
taught by simple authority that God is incorporeal; that there is no
similarity in any way whatsoever between Him and His creatures; that
His existence is not like the existence of His creatures, His life not
like that of any living being, His wisdom not like the wisdom of the
wisest of men; and that the difference between Him and His creatures is
not merely quantitative, but absolute [as between two individuals of
two different classes]; I mean to say that all must understand that our
wisdom and His, or our power and His do not differ quantitatively or
qualitatively, or in a similar manner; for two things, of which the one
is strong and the other weak, are necessarily similar, belong to the
same class, and can be included in one definition. The same is the case
with all other comparisons; they can only be made between two things
belonging to the same class, as has been shown in works on Natural
Science. Anything predicated of God is totally different from our
attributes; no definition can comprehend both; therefore His existence
and that of any other being totally differ from each other, and the
term existence is applied to both homonymously, as I shall explain.

This suffices for the guidance of children and of ordinary persons who
must believe that there is a Being existing, perfect, incorporeal, not
inherent in a body as a force in it—God, who is above all kinds of
deficiency, above all affections. But the question concerning the
attributes of God, their inadmissibility, and the meaning of those
attributes which are ascribed to Him; concerning the Creation, His
Providence, in providing for everything; concerning His will, His
perception, His knowledge of everything; concerning prophecy and its
various degrees; concerning the meaning of His names which imply the
idea of unity, though they are more than one; all these things are very
difficult problems, the true “Secrets of the Law” the “secrets”
mentioned so frequently in the books of the Prophets, and in the words
of our Teachers, the subjects of which we should only mention the
headings of the chapters, as we have already stated, and only in the
presence of a person satisfying the above-named conditions.

That God is incorporeal, that He cannot be compared with His creatures,
that He is not subject to external influence; these are things which
must be explained to every one according to his capacity, and they must
be taught by way of tradition to children and women, to the stupid and
ignorant, as they are taught that God is One, that He is eternal, and
that He alone is to be worshipped. Without incorporeality there is no
unity, for a corporeal thing is in the first case not simple, but
composed of matter and form which are two separate things by
definition, and secondly, as it has extension it is also divisible.
When persons have received this doctrine, and have been trained in this
belief, and are in consequence at a loss to reconcile it with the
writings of the Prophets, the meaning of the latter must be made clear
and explained to them by pointing out the homonymity and the figurative
application of certain terms discussed in this part of the work. Their
belief in the unity of God and in the words of the Prophets will then
be a true and perfect belief.

Those who are not sufficiently intelligent to comprehend the true
interpretation of these passages in the Bible, or to understand that
the same term admits of two different interpretations, may simply be
told that the scriptural passage is clearly understood by the wise, but
that they should content themselves with knowing that God is
incorporeal, that He is never subject to external influence, as
passivity implies a change, while God is entirely free from all change,
that He cannot be compared to anything besides Himself, that no
definition includes Him together with any other being, that the words
of the Prophets are true, and that difficulties met with may be
explained on this principle. This may suffice for that class of
persons, and it is not proper to leave them in the belief that God is
corporeal, or that He has any of the properties of material objects,
just as there is no need to leave them in the belief that God does not
exist, that there are more Gods than one, or that any other being may
be worshipped.






CHAPTER XXXVI


I shall explain to you, when speaking on the attributes of God, in what
sense we can say that a particular thing pleases Him, or excites His
anger and His wrath, and in reference to certain persons that God was
pleased with them, was angry with them, or was in wrath against them.
This is not the subject of the present chapter; I intend to explain in
it what I am now going to say. You must know, that in examining the Law
and the books of the Prophets, you will not find the expressions
“burning anger,” “provocation,” or “jealousy” applied to God except in
reference to idolatry; and that none but the idolater called “enemy,”
“adversary,” or “hater of the Lord.” Comp. “And ye serve other gods,
... and then the Lord’s wrath will be kindled against you” (Deut. xi.
16, 17); “Lest the anger of the Lord thy God be kindled against thee.”
etc. (ib. vi. 15); “To provoke him to anger through the work of your
hands” (ib. xxxi. 29); “They have moved me to jealousy with that which
is not God; they have provoked me to anger with their vanities” (ib.
xxxii. 21); “For the Lord thy God is a jealous God” (ib. vi. 15); “Why
have they provoked me to anger with their graven images, and with
strange vanities?” (Jer. viii. 19); “Because of the provoking of his
sons and of his daughters” (Deut. xxxii. 19); “For a fire is kindled in
mine anger” (ib. 22); “The Lord will take vengeance on His adversaries,
and he reserveth wrath for his enemies” (Nah. i. 2); “And repayeth them
that hate Him” (Deut. vii. 10); “Until He hath driven out His enemies
from before Him” (Num. xxxii. 21); “Which the Lord thy God hateth”
(Deut. xvi. 22); “For every abomination to the Lord, which He hateth,
have they done unto their gods” (ib. xii. 31). Instances like these are
innumerable; and if you examine all the examples met with in the holy
writings, you will find that they confirm our view.

The Prophets in their writings laid special stress on this, because it
concerns errors in reference to God, i.e., it concerns idolatry. For if
any one believes that, e.g., Zaid is standing, while in fact he is
sitting, he does not deviate from truth so much as one who believes
that fire is under the air, or that water is under the earth, or that
the earth is a plane, or things similar to these. The latter does not
deviate so much from truth as one who believes that the sun consists of
fire, or that the heavens form a hemisphere, and similar things; in the
third instance the deviation from truth is less than the deviation of a
man who believes that angels eat and drink, and the like. The latter
again deviates less from truth than one who believes that something
besides God is to be worshipped; for ignorance and error concerning a
great thing, i.e., a thing which has a high position in the universe,
are of greater importance than those which refer to a thing which
occupies a lower place;—by “error” I mean the belief that a thing is
different from what it really is; by “ignorance,” the want of knowledge
respecting things the knowledge of which can be obtained.

If a person does not know the measure of the cone, or the sphericity of
the sun, it is not so important as not to know whether God exists, or
whether the world exists without a God; and if a man assumes that the
cone is half (of the cylinder), or that the sun is a circle, it is not
so injurious as to believe that God is more than One. You must know
that idolaters when worshipping idols do not believe that there is no
God besides them; and no idolater ever did assume that any image made
of metal, stone, or wood has created the heavens and the earth, and
still governs them. Idolatry is founded on the idea that a particular
form represents the agent between God and His creatures. This is
plainly said in passages like the following: “Who would not fear thee,
O king of nations?” (Jer. x. 7); “And in every place incense is offered
unto my name” (Mal. i. 11); by “my name” allusion is made to the Being
which is called by them [i.e., the idolaters] “the First Cause.” We
have already explained this in our larger work (Mishneh Torah, I. On
Idolatry, chap. i.), and none of our co-religionists can doubt it.

The infidels, however, though believing in the existence of the
Creator, attack the exclusive prerogative of God, namely, the service
and worship which was commanded, in order that the belief of the people
in His existence should be firmly established, in the words, “And you
shall serve the Lord,” etc. (Exod. xxiii. 25). By transferring that
prerogative to other beings, they cause the people, who only notice the
rites, without comprehending their meaning or the true character of the
being which is worshipped, to renounce their belief in the existence of
God. They were therefore punished with death; comp. “Thou shalt save
alive nothing that breatheth” (Deut. xx. 16). The object of this
commandment, as is distinctly stated, is to extirpate that false
opinion, in order that other men should not be corrupted by it any
more; in the words of the Bible “that they teach you not,” etc. (ib.
18). They are called “enemies,” “foes,” “adversaries”; by worshipping
idols they are said to provoke God to jealousy, anger, and wrath. How
great, then, must be the offence of him who has a wrong opinion of God
Himself, and believes Him to be different from what He truly is, i.e.,
assumes that He does not exist, that He consists of two elements, that
He is corporeal, that He is subject to external influence, or ascribes
to Him any defect whatever. Such a person is undoubtedly worse than he
who worships idols in the belief that they, as agents, can do good or
evil.

Therefore bear in mind that by the belief in the corporeality or in
anything connected with corporeality, you would provoke God to jealousy
and wrath, kindle His fire and anger, become His foe, His enemy, and
His adversary in a higher degree than by the worship of idols. If you
think that there is an excuse for those who believe in the corporeality
of God on the ground of their training, their ignorance or their
defective comprehension, you must make the same concession to the
worshippers of idols; their worship is due to ignorance, or to early
training, “they continue in the custom of their fathers.” (T. B.
Hullin, 13a) You will perhaps say that the literal interpretation of
the Bible causes men to fall into that doubt, but you must know that
idolaters were likewise brought to their belief by false imaginations
and ideas. There is no excuse whatever for those who, being unable to
think for themselves, do not accept [the doctrine of the incorporeality
of God] from the true philosophers. I do not consider those men as
infidels who are unable to prove the incorporeality, but I hold those
to be so who do not believe it, especially when they see that Onkelos
and Jonathan avoid [in reference to God] expressions implying
corporeality as much as possible. This is all I intended to say in this
chapter.






